30 of 1934. 
AJ:, INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
/ 
BID N~ 43 of I,,, 
fHE PETROLEUM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Petroleum Act, 1934. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as followt:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Petroleum (Amendment) Act, 1969. Slsort 
title and 
. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government commen-
S may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. cemeJlt • 
10 
15 
2. In the Petroleum Act, i934 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Amend. 
Act). in the long title and preamble, the words "and other inflammable ment 
substances" shall be omit oed of IOD, • . title and 
pre. 
amble. 
Amend-3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (b), the following 
namely:-
. ment of 
clauses shall be substItuted, seetion 2. 
• (b) "petroleum Class A" means petroleum having a tJash-
point below twenty-three t1egrees Centigrade; 
(bb) "petroleum Class B" means petroleum having a fta.h· 
point of twenty-three degrees Centi8l'ade and above but below 
tlQrty.ftve deil"ees Centigradej 

Amend-
ment of 
section 3. 
(bbb) "petroleum Class C means petroleum having a flash-
point of sixty-five degrees Centigrade and above but below 
ninety-three degrees Centigradej'; 
(b) in clause (c), for the word "flashing-point", the word "flash-
pOint" shall be substituted; 
(c) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
5 
• (d) "to transport petroleum" means to move petroleum from 
one place to another in India and includes moving from one 
place to another in India across a territory which is not part of 10 
India;'. 
4. In sub-section (2) of section 3 of the principal Act, for the wonis 
"any dangerous petroleum", the words and letter "petroleum Class A" 
shall be substituted. 
Amend_ 5. In section 4 of the principal Act, for the words "dangerous petro- IS 
ment of leum" wherever they occur, the words and letter "petroleum Class A" 
section 4. . shall be SUbstituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 6. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
sections 
for sec-
tions 7 
and 8. 
No licence 
needed for 
transport 
or storale 
of limited 
quantities 
of petro-
leum 
Cla!;sBor 
petroleum 
ClaIR C. 
No licence 
needed for 
import, 
transport 
or storage 
of small 
quantities 
of petro-
leum 
Cla88 A. 
•. In clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 5 of the principal Act. 
for the words "dangerous petroleum", the words and letter "petroleum 
Clas. A" shall be substituted. 20 
'1. In section 6 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "dangerous petroleum" wherever they occur, 
the words and letter "petroleum Class A" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (a) of the proviso, for the words "two gallons",· 
the word~ "ten litres" shall be SUbstituted. 25 
8. For sections 7 an~ 8 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be substituted, namely:- .. 
««7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, a 
perSon need not obtain a licence for the transport or storage of-
(i) petroleum Class B if the total quantity in his possession 30 
at anyone place does not exceed two thousand and five hundreti 
Utres and none of it is contained in a receptacle exceeding one 
thousan~ Utres in capacity; or 
(ti) petroleum Class C if the total quantity In ills possession 
at anyone place does not exceed forty-five thousand litres and ~ 
such petroleum is transported or stored in accor~ance wIth the 
rules made umier section 4. 
8. (1) Notwithstandin~anything contained in this Chapter, a 
person need not obtain a licence for the import, transport or storage of 
petroleum Class A not intended for SAle if the total quantity in his 40 
possession does not el{ceed thirty litres. 
(2) Petroleum Class A possess"'n without a licence un~er this 
section shall be kept in securely stoppered receptacles of glass, stone-
ware or metal. which shall not, in the case of receptacles of glass or 
, 

5 
3 
stoneware, exceed one litre in capacity or, in the case of receptacles 
of metal, exceed twenity-five litres in capacity.". 
9. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) for the words "dangerous petroleum" in both places 
where they occur, the words and letter "petroleum Class A" shall 
be substituteti; 
(ii) for the words "twenty gallons" in both places where 
they occur, the words "one hundred litres" shall be substituted; 
Amend-
ment of 
section 9. 
10 (b) in sub~ection (2) ,-
(i) for the words "The dangerous petroleum", the words 
and letter ''Petroleum Class A" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the wortis "six gallons", the words "thirty litres" 
shall be substituted. 
15 10. For section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shal1 be Substitu_ 
substituted, namely:- hon ot 
new 
sectJon 
tar sec-
tion 11. 
"11. Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any petroleum which Exemp.. 
has its Hash-point not below ninety-three degrees Centigrade.". ~::v;t 
oils. 
11. In sub-section (1) of section 15 of the principal Act, for the word Amend_ 
'0 "tlashing-point", the word "Hash-point" shall be substituted.. ment of 
section 15, 
2S 
3S 
12. In sub-section (1) of section 16 of the principal Act, for the word Amend-
"flashing-point", the word "flash-point" shall be substituted. ment of 
section 16. 
13. In section 19 of the principal Act,- Amend_ 
, " ment of (4) for sub-section (1), the followmg sub-seetlon shall be .ub- section 19. 
stituteti, namely:-
.. (1) The testing ofticer after testing samples of petroleum 
shall make out a certificate in the prescribed form, stating whe-
ther the petroleum is petroleum Class A or petroleum Class B 
or petroleum Class C, and if the petroleum is petroleum Class B 
or petroleum Class C, the flash-point of the petroleum."; 
(b) for sub-eection (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
,. (3) A certificate given under this section shall be admitted 
as evidence in any proceedings which may be taken under this 
Act in respect of the petroleum from which the samples were 
taken, and shall, until the contrary is provel:i, be conclusive 
proof, that the petroleum is petroleum Class A or petroleum 
Class B or petroleum Class C, and, if the petroleum is petroleum 
Class B or petroleum Class C, of its Bash-point.". 
j 
.. ~ , 

Amend. 
mentof 
section 23. 
Sub,-tltu-
tion of 
new 
section' 
for sec-
tion 27. 
Notice of 
accidents 
with 
petro-
leWD. 
14. In section 23 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees", the words "with simple imprisonment which 
may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with bOth" shall be substituted; 5 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "with fine which may ex-
tend to two thousand rupees", the words "with simple imprisonment 
which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees, or with both" shall be SUbstituted. 
15. For section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 10-
substituted, namely:-
"27. Whenever there occurs in or about, or in connection with, 
any place in which petroleum is refined, biended or kept, or any car-
riage or vessel either conveying petroleum or on or from which 
petroleum is being loaded or unloaded, any accident by explosion or 15 
by fire as a result of the ignition of petroleum or petroleum vapour 
attended with loss of human life or serious injury to person or pro-
perty, or of a description usually attended with such loss or injury, 
the occupier of the place or the person for the time being in charge 
of the petroleum or the person in charge of the carriage or t.he master 20 
of the vessel, as the case may be, shall, within such tim~ and in such 
manner as may be prescribed, give notice thereof and of the attendant 
loss of human life, or injury to person or propert.y, if any, to the nearest 
Magistrate or to the officer in charge of the nearest police station and 
to the Chief Inspector of Explosives in India.". 25 
Amend- 16. In sub-section (3) of section 28 of the principal Act, the words "in 
ment of a Presidency-town" shall be omitted. section 28. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASoNS 
The Petroleum Act, 1934 (30 of 1934), which relates to the import, 
transport, storage, production, refining and blending of petroleum is based 
on Foot-Pound-Second system. As a result of the introduction of the 
metric system of weights and measures, it is essential to revise the refe-
rences to the Foot-Pound-Second system. 
The nomenclature used in the Act for different grades of petroleum is 
not very satisfactory and it is considered desirable -to rationalise and sim-
plify the nomenclature in accordance with the practice obtaining in other 
advanced countries. 
Opportunity is also being taken to enhance the penalty for the viola-
tion of the provisions of the Act and remove other minor lacunae observ-
ed in the administration of the Act. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 
NEW DZLHI; TRIGUNA SEN. 
The 5th March, 1969. 
& 

Import, 
traDaport 
andato-
r ... of 
petro-
leum. 
Rul. 
for the 
import. 
transport 
and.to-
rap of 
petr0-
leum. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PETROLEUM AcT, 1934 
AcT No. 30 OF 1934 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the import, 
transport, storage, production, refining and blending of petroleum and 
other inflammable substances. 
• • • • • 
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to 
. 'he import, transport, storage, prodUction, refining and blending of petro-
leum and other inflammable substances; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
• • • • • • 
(b) "dangerous petroleum" means petroleum having its flashing-
point below seventy-six degrees Fahrenheit; 
(c) "flashing-point" of any petroleum means the lowest tempera-
ture at which it yields a vapour which will give a momentary flash 
when ignited, determined in accordance with the provisions of Chap-
ter II and the rules made thereunder ; 
(d) "to transport petroleum" means to move ,r>etroleum from one 
place to another inlndia; 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER I 
CON'l'ROL OVER PETRoLEUM 
3. (1) • • • • • 
,(2) Save in accordance with the conditions of any licence for the 
purpose which he may be required to obtain by rules made under section 
4, no one shall import any dangerous petroleum, and no one shall trans-
port or store any petroleum . 
•. The Central Government may make rules-
(0) prescribing places where petroleum may be imported and 
prohibiting its import elseWhere; 
(b) regulating the import of petroleum; 
(c) prescribing the periods within which licences for the import 
of dangerous petroleum shall be applied for, and providing for the 
disposal, by confiscation or otherwise, of any dangerous petroleum in 
6 

7 
respect of which a licence has not. been applied foI' within the pres-
cribed period or has been refused and which has not been exported ; 
(d) regulating the transport of petroleum; 
(e) specifying the nature and condition of aU receptacles and 
pipe-lines in which petroleum may be transported; 
<f) regulating the places at which and prescribing the conditions 
subject to which petroleum may be stored; 
(g) specifying the nature. situation and condition of all recep~ 
ades in which petroleum may be stored; 
(h) prescribing the form and conditions of licences for the import 
of dangerous petroleum, and for the transport or storage of any pet-
roleum, the manner in which applications for such licences shall be 
made, the authorities which may grant such li('ences and the fees 
which may be charged for such licences; 
(i) determining in any class of cases whether a licence for the 
transport of petroleum shall be obtained by the consignor, consignee 
or carrier; 
(j) providing for the granting of combined licences for tlie 
import, transport and storage of petroleum, or for any two of such 
purposes; 
(k) prescribing the proportion in which any speclfied poisonous 
substance may be added to petroleum, and prohioiting the import, 
transport or storage of petroleum in which the proportion of any spe-
cified poisonous substance exceeds the prescribed proportion; and 
(1) generally, providing for any matter which in its opinion is 
expedient for proper control over the import, transport and storage of 
petroleum. 
S. (1)· • • • • 
(2) The Central Government may make rules-
• • • • • 
Produe. 
t1oD, 
reftninl 
and 
bleDdfn, 
of petro-
(b) regulating the removal of petroleum from places where it is lewn. 
produced, reftned or blended and preventing the storage therein and 
removal therefrom, except as dangerous petroleum, of any petroleum 
which has not satisfied the prescribed tests. 
6. All receptacles containing dangerous petroteum shan have a stamp- Reeept. 
ed, embossed, painted or printed warning. either on the receptacle Itself aelea of 
or, where that is impracticable. displayed near the receptacle, exhibiting dante-roUi in conspicuous characters the words "Petrol" or "Motor Spirit", or an petroleum 
equivalent warning of the dangerous nature of the petroleum: to show 
Provided that this section shall not apply to-
(a) any securely stoppered glass, stoneware or meta1 receptacle 
of Ies..<; than two gallons capacity containing dangerous petroleum 
which is not for sale, or . 
(b) a tank incorporated in a motor conveyance. or attached to an 
Internal combustion enqine. and containing petroleum intended to be 
. used to generate motive power for the motor conveyanee or engine. or 
a warn. 
in,. 

8 
(e) a pipe-line for the transport of petroleum, or 
(d) any tank which is wholly under ground, or 
(e) any class of receptacles which the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt from the operation of 
this Bection. 
No licence 7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, a person need 
needed for not obtain a licence for the transport Or storage of non-dangerous petro-
:~~ of leum if the total quantity in his possession at anyone place does not ex-
non. ceed five hundred gallons and none of it is contained in a receptacle ex-
dange- ceeding two hundred gallons in capacity. 
foUl 
petroleum 
not in 
bulk. 
No licence 
needed fOr 
small 
quantities 
afd.Dle~ 
rous 
petro_ 
leum. 
Exemp-
tions for 
motor 
conveyan-
cesand 
station-
ary 
en,ines. 
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, a person 
need not obtain a licence for the import, transport or storage of danger-
ous petroleum not intended for sale if the total quantity in his possession 
does not exceed six gallons. 
(2) Dangerous petroleum possessed without a licence under this sec-
tion shall be kept in securely stoppered receptacles of glass, .toneware 
or metal which shall not in the case of receptacles of glass or stoneware 
exceed one quart in capacity or in the case of receptacles of metal five 
gallons in capacity. 
9. (1) The owner of a motor conveyance, who complies with the 
requirements of the law for the time being in force relating to the re-
gistration and licensing of such conveyance and its driver or pilot and 
the owner of any stationary internal combustion engine, shall not be 
required to obtain a licence-
(a) for the import, transport or storage of any petroleum contain-
ed in any fuel tank incorporated in the conveyance or attached to the 
internal co~bustion engine, or 
(b) for the transport or storage of dangerous petroleum, not 
exceeding twenty gallons in quantity in addition to any quantity 
possessed under clause (a), 
provided the petroleum is intended to be used to generate motive power 
for the motor conveyance or engine: 
Provided further that the total quantity of dangerous petroleum 
which may be stored without a licence under clause (b) shall not exceed 
twenty gallons, notWithstanding that such owner may possess other 
motor conveyances or engines. 
(2) The dangerous petroleum transported or stored without a licence 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be kept as provided in sub-
section (2) of section 8. and. if it exceeds six gallons in quantity, shall 
,be stored in an isolated place which does not communicate with any 
room where any person resides or works or in any room where pel'lOnl 
assemble. 
• • • • • 

Exemp-
tion of 
heavy 
oils. 
"'" ""'il''!-' f" ·,:t1i·; : . .';~l;iJr( t~, ~":~_~, /; 
Hi 2~flJ·.~~)O 1,_1 .'iJJ(irJ_I·,~J !(" .. :'I!{Y~J: .• q ':<~ :-d;.;'Jl'),!Jq,'! 'il) It()!fl[t:D; 'Ij.! !~; .:i':~ .. , .. 
B~)~)rrr)j?rrfIJ~:n['j fl'~lI\;I"·~.':~~ j;.};i ~~~j.,·d(: :l')l( ·)l~)'rl' .. · 'Y)i,~q !.~ J~' !f' '1\J 
10) nOc'!IJq >'Jd.1 .(i(I~:ii ;.' .ti'·d~, .~(.. ~!rli' _,-; ",,-;,; :"l:VI J! J::dt 'i: 1.~.: .. r Ji ~~rL';;i.:r;j 
·Elrtil~[(il)J·~. s1fahdatd,!al1>~J:l·!l",$.;~J~t~»ing:ijw! IJlasJ,V.ngpQiO~ ',\Jf Standard 
patl:lUleunnrrsl1lalb~*-~tieposited7IWah' an ~O@; to bei~ppoiuUtd·., ijljs(~ Test 
half by the Cent.ral Government, by notification in the Offiet.l tau~t.t~. t]:;para-
.. • • • • • (,I .1-:'.: 
(,; ti!' "(~ r 'l'tl~:o'fficet appointed under;:scction 11) aQall~l oni :payltl~t of 
rtheh·pre9Ct.<~d '!be; tif:tiliy,! compllrewWl the SIlaiIdard,rr-esi!!~ppaT'atU8 
any apparatus for determining the flashing-point of peJtrol~w:n; !L\\iliicfl 
may be submitted to him for this purpose. 
... • • 
CettiftM"': 
Hon of·:" 
oth..,,,!· 
tftt!J~I: 
pa'!'at Ili#; .,'. 
:t~ ; I ;:,. 
I!). (/) The testing officC'r after testing samples of petroleum shall Certi. 
m~il\C out a c('rtific(] If' jn tile prescribed form, stating whether the petro- Ilc!l~e of 
leum J, danr:erous or ,)',d-dangerous, and, jf the petroleum is non-dange- testmg. 
rOllS. the flashing-point <)f th,.' petroleum. 
'" * ... * '" • 
(3) A certificate given under this sectlOn shall be admitted as evi-
dence in any proceedings which may be taken under this Act in respect 
of the petroleum from which the samples were taken, and shall, until 
the contrary is proved, be cOJ1clusive proof that the petroleum is dan-
gerous or non-dangerous, as the case may be, and, if the petroleum is 
non-danger()us, of its flashing-point. 
• • • • ... • 
CHAPTER III 
PANALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
23. (1) Whoever- General 
penalty 
(a) in contravention of any of the pr0V1810ns of Chapter I or of for 01-
any of the rules made thereunder, imports. transports, stores, pro- fences 
duces, refines or blends any petroleum, or ~~:er 
Act . 
• • • • • • 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend t(1 flve hundred rupees. 

Reportl of 
acc1dents 
wtthpet-
roleurn. 
Inquirk!s 
into 
lerious 
accidents 
wtthpet-
roleum. 
10 
(2) If any person, having been convicted of an oftence punishable 
under sub-section (1), is again guilty of any offence punjshable uuder 
that sub-section, he shall be punishable for every such subsequent 
offence with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees . 
• • • • • 
27. Where any accident by explosion or fire, which is attended with, 
loss of human l1fe or serious injury to person or property, occurs al the 
result of the ignition of petroleum or petroleum vapour, or occurs in 
or near any place where petroleum is kept and under circumstancea 
making it likely that it was the result of such ignition, the person for 
the time being in charge of the petrcleum shall -forthwith give informa-
tion to the nearest Magistrate or to the oftlcer in charge or me neax.w; 
police station. 
28. (1) • • • • 
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2) a Commissioner of Police in 
a Presidency-town shall be deemed to be a Magistrate empowered to. 
hold an inquest. 
.. • • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to]amend the Petroleu:n Act, Ij34. 
(Dr. trlguna Sill, 
Mirtlmr oj Petroleum & 
Cltemical and Min.s &' Mllals) 