LOK SABBA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE GOVERN1'1Em' (LIABILITY IN TORT) BILL, 1967 
. J • t 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
t. Page 12, line 6 from bottom,-
~or It l'·tichell" .:r:eA~ It Hi tchell" 
2. Page 13, line 15 from bottom,-
.:tQ.I.: 1132nd. Ed., at ,.33." 
!:.ea<!.\ It 2nd. Ed., at p. 333." 
3. Page 13, lines 7 and 6 from bottom,-
!9.."!. II res",onsiable ll read "responsible" 
---1:..~ 19~J_9.2.7 ____ :\~ 
Vaisakha 9. 1889 (SakaJ 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
------~-.-
2 2 - -) ' • ., •• 
8W No.4' ·of 1961 
THE GOVERNMENT (LIABILITY IN TORT) 
BILL, 1967 
A 
BILL 
to define and amend the law with respect to the liability of the 
Government in tort and to provide for certain matters connected 
therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government (Liability in Tort) Short 
A t 1967 title, c , . extent 
S (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and com· mence-
and Kashmir. ment. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

Defini-
tions. 
Liability 
of Gov-
ernment 
in tort. 
2 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "agent", in relation to the Government, means a person 
(other than an employee of the Government) who being em-
ployed to do any act for the Government is, in doing the act, 
under the order or control of the Government; S 
(Ib) "employee of the Goveroment" means any person 
who-
(i) is a member of a defence service or of a civil ser-
vice of the Union or of an all-India service or holds any post 
connected with defence or any civil post under the Union; 10 
or 
(ii) is a member of a civil service of a State or holds 
any civil post under a State; 
(c) "Government", in relation to any liability imposed 
under this Act, means- J S 
(i) where a tort is committed by an employee of the 
Government while acting in connection with the affairs of 
the Union, or by an agent or independent contractor em-
ployed by the Central Government, the Central Government; 
(ii) where a tort is committed by an employee of the 20 
Government while acting in connection with the affairs of 
a State, or by an agent or independent contractor employed 
by a State Government, the State Government; 
(d) "independent contractor", in relation to the Government, 
means a person who contracts to do an act for the Government, 25 
but who in doing the act is not under the order or control of 
the Government. 
3. Subject to tbe provisions of tbis Act, the Government sball be 
liable in respect of any tort-
(Ia) committed by an employee of the Government or an 30 
agent employed by the Government,-
(i) while acting in the course of his cm))loyment; or 
I 
(ii) while acting beyond the course of his employment 
if the act constituting the tort was done by the employee or 
agent on bebaU of the Government and is ratified by the 3S 
Govemment; 
(b) committed by an independent contrador employed by 
the Government or any of his servants or workmen in doing the 

5 
Jo 
15 
20 
25 
aet contracted to be done for the Government in any of the 
following cases (and in no others), namely:-
(i) where the Government assumes control of the ad 
contracted. to be done by the independent contractor; 
(ii) where the Government has authodsecl or ratified 
the act of the independent contractor alleged to constitute 
the tort; 
(iii) where the act contracted to be done although law-
ful is of such a nature that unless reasonable care is taken, 
it is likely in the ordinary course of events to cause per-
sonal injury or damage to property in the doing thereof and 
such care has not been taken: 
Provided. that tile Government shall not be liable under 
this sub-clause if there is an express stipulation in the con-
tract between the Government and the independent contrac-
tor that-
(a) reasonable care in the doing of the act shall 
be taken by the independent contractor and not by the 
Government, and 
(b) the independent contractor shall, and the Gov-
ernment shall not, be liable for any personal injury or 
any damage to properly caused in the doing of the act 
by the failure on the part of the independent contractor 
to take such care; 
(iv) where the Government is under a legal obHeation 
to do the act itself; 
(v) where any law for the time being in force imposes 
upon the Government an abeolute duty to ensure the safety 
of persons Or property in the doing of the act contracted to 
be done and there has been a failure to comply with that 
duty. 
4. Where the Government is the owner of any immovable pro- Liability 
perty, or is in possession or occupation of, or exercises control over, of Gov-
any immovable property, the Government shall be liable in respect ~rnment 
35 of any breach of duty attaching by law to the ownership, possession, In tort as owner or occupation or control of such property in the same manner and to occupier 
the same extent as a private person of full age and capacity: of immov-
able pro-
Provided that where any such property vests in the Government perty. 
by virtue of any rule of law whieh operates independently of the 
40 acts or intentions of the Government, the Government shall not, 

Liability 
of Gov-
ernment 
in tort in 
respect of 
escape of 
dangerous 
things. 
Liability 
of Gov-
ernment 
in respect 
of breach 
of duties 
to its 
emplo-
yees. 
Statu-
tory 
limits 
as to the 
amount 
of liabi-
lity to 
apply to 
claims 
against 
Govern-
ment 
a18o. 
De'fencetl 
open to 
Govern-
ment. 
4 
by virtue of this section, be subject to any liability in tort hy reason 
only of the property being So vested, but the provisions of this sec-
tion shall be without prejudice to the liability of the Government 
tiaereunder in respect of any peried after the Government or any 
person actiDg _ the Gcwernm8llt has, in fact, taken pell8e8Sion or 5 
CODtroI of any such property, or entered into occupation thereof. 
5. The Government shalt be liable in respect of any personal in-
jury or any damage to property caused by any dangerous tliing in 
the pGllle8Iion of the Govel11lJleat or over which the Government 
e~ coatrol in the AIlDle menner and to the same exten.t as a 10 
pivate penon of full age and capaciJty would be liable in similar 
cUcumstauces if he WeJe in potISe8Sion of, or exercised control over, 
such t:hiDg. 
6. The Govemmeat shaH be suhjeet to all those liabilities in tort 
to which, if it WePe a Pl'iwte pel'SOn of full age and ~lty, it 15 
woUW be _bjed in respect of any breach of those duties which a 
person owes to his servants or agents under any law for the time 
being in force by reason of being their employer: 
Provided that in awarding compensation to any employee of the 
Government or any agent employed by the Government in respect 20 
of any personal injury or any dlllllqe to property caused by the 
breach of IU\Y such duties, the eourt shall take into account the 
aJDOlIDt, if aD,., paid or required to be paid by the Government, 
wl1ether by way of disablement benefit, compensation or otherwise, 
to such employee or agent under any other law for the time being 25 
in force. 
7. Any enactment which negatives or limits the amount of lia-
bility of an employee of the Government or an agent employed by 
the Go\"crnment in respect of any tort committed by such employee 
or agent shall, in the case of any proceedings against the Government 30 
under this Act in respect of such tort, apply in relation to the 
Government as it would have applied to such employee or agent if 
the proceedings against the Government had been proceedings against 
that employee or agent. 
8. In any proceedings against the Government under this Act, the 35 
Government shall be entitled to raise by way of defence the same 
pleas which a private person would be entitled under law to raise 
if a similar suit had been instituted against such person. 

D. Where the Government is subject to any liability in tort by Indemnity 
virtue of this Act, any law relating to indemnity and contribution and con-
shall be enforcealble by or against the Government in respect of the tribution. 
liability to which it is so subject as if the Government were a pri-
S vate person of full age and capacity. 
10. (1) Any act done by a member of the armed forces of the 
Union while on duty as such or by a member of a police force while 
on duty as such shall not subject either him or the Government to 
liability in tort for causing the death of another person or for 
10 causing personal injury to another person, in SO far as the death or 
personal injury is due to anything suffered by that other person while 
he is a member of the armed forces of the Union or, as the case may 
be, a member of the police force if-
(a) at the time the thing is suffered by that other person he 
15 either is on duty as a member of the armed forces of the Union 
or as a member of the police force or, though not on duty, is 
on any land, premises, ship, aircraft or vehicle for the time being 
used for the purposes of the armed forces of the Union or, as 
the case may be, for the purposes of the police force; and 
20 (b) the Government certifies that his suffering that thing 
has been or will be treated as attributable to service for the pur-
poses of entitlement to any award under any law or scheme re-
lating to the death or disablement of members of the force of 
which he is a member: 
25 Provided that this sub-section shall not exempt a member 
of the armed forces of the Union or a member of a police 
force from liability in tort in any case in which the court is 
satisfied that the act was not connected with the execution of 
his duties as a member of those forces or that force. 
30 (2) No proceedings in tort shall lie against the Government for 
death or personal injury due to anything suffered by a member of 
the armed forces of the Union or a member of a police force if-
35 
(a) that thing is suffered by him in consequence of the 
nature or condition of any such land, premises, ship, aircraft 
or vehicle as aforesaid or in consequence of the nature or condi-
tion of any equipment or supplies used for the purposes of those 
forces or that force; and 
(b) the Government certifies as mentioned in the preceding 
sub-section; 
nor shall any act of an employee of the Government subject him to 
40 liability in tort for death or personal injury in so far as the 
Special 
provisions 
relating 
to armed 
forces of 
the Union 
and police 
'forces. 

Savings. 
& 
death or personal injury is due to anything suffered by a member 
of the armed forces of the Union or by a member of a police force, 
being a thing as to which the conditions aforesaid are satisfied. 
(3) The Government or an officer authorised by the Govern-
ment in this behalf, if satisfied that it is the fact-
(a) that a person was or was not on any particular 
occasion on duty as a member of the armed forces of the Union 
or as a member of a police force; or 
, 
(b) that at any particular time any land, premises, ship, 
aircraft, vehicle, equipment or supplies was or was not or were 10 
or were not used for the purposes of those forces or that force, 
may issue a certificate certifying that to be the fact; and any such 
certificate shall, for the purposes of this section, be conclusive as to 
the fact which is certified. 
(4) In this section, the word "Government" means-
(a) in relation to a member of the armed forces of the 
Union or of a police force maintained by the Central Govern-
ment, the Central Government; 
(b) in relation to a police force maintained by a State 
Government, the State Government. 
11. Nothing contained in this Act shall render the Government 
liable in respect of-
(a) any act of State; 
I, 
20 
(b) any act done by the Government in the discharge of 
its functions in relation to any of the matters enumerated in 2S 
entries 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 of List I in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution; 
(c) any act done by the President of India in the exercise 
and performance of the powers and duties of his office in rela-
tion to the summoning and prorogation of the Houses of 30 
Parliament, the dissolution of the House of the People, the assent 
to, or the withholding of assent from, any Bill, the return of any 
Bill to the Houses for reconsideration of the Bill or any specified 
,provisions thereof or the issue of any Proclamation under the 
Constitution; 3S 
(d) any act done by the Governor of a State in the exercise 
and performance of the powers and duties of his office in relation 
to the summoning and prorogation of the House or Houses 

160f 1947. 
•• 
, 
13 of 1885. 
6 of 1898. 
.-
9 of 1890. 
~ 
10 
I. •. , 
i. J 
7 
of the Legislature of the State, the dissolution of the Legislative 
Assembly, the assent to, or the withholding of assent from, any 
Bill, the reservation of any Bill for the consideration of the Pre-
sident or the return of any Bill to the House or Houses for recon-
sideration of the Bill or 'any specified provisions thereof; 
(e) any act done under a Proclamation issued under the 
Constitution; 
(f) any act authorised by or under the Trading with the 
Enemy (Continuance of Emergency Provisions) Act, 1947; 
(g) any act done in the exercise of the powers vested in 
the Union for the purpose of training, or maintaining the effi-
ciency of, the armed forces; 
h,.. (h) any act done by a member of the armed forces of the 
Union while on active service; 
IS (i) any act done by-
(i) a member of a police force; or 
(ii) a public servant whose duty it is to preserve peace 
and order in any area or place or who is engaged on euard, 
sentry, patrol, watch and ward, or other similar duty in 
20 relation to any area or place, 
for the prevention or suppression of a breach of the peace, or a 
disturbance of the public tranquillity, or a riot, or an affray, or 
for the prevention of any offences against public property; 
(j) any act done or ordered to be done by a judge, 
25 magistrate, or any other person while discharging or purporting 
to discharge any responsibilities of a judicial nature vested in 
him; 
30 
3S 
(k) any act in connection with the execution of lawful 
warrants or orders of a judge, magistrate, or any other person 
discharging or purporting to discharge any responsi'bilities of 
a judicial nature vested in him, done by any person bound to 
execute the warrants or orders; 
(1) any act for which immunity is granted under the 
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the Indian Post Office Act, 1898, or 
under any other enactment for the time being in force; 
(m) any act in respect of which a remedy is provided under 
the Indian Railways Act, 1890, or under any other enactment for 
the time being in force; 

Pending 
proceed-
iogs. 
8 
(n) any personal injury or any damage to property caused 
by an act which by its nature is likely in the ordinary course 
of events to cause such injury or damage, if the doing of the 
act is authorised by any enactment for the time being in force; 
(0) any claim arising out of defamation, malicious prosecu- S 
tion or malicious arrest; 
(p) any claim arising out of the operation of any quarantine 
law; 
(q) any claim arising in a foreign country. 
12. The provisions of this Act shall not affect any proceedings by 10 
or against the Government which have been instituted before the 
commencement of this Act, and such proceedings shall be disposed 
of as if this Act had not been passed. 
Amend- 13. In the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, in section 4, for the words 
~~ni3o~f 'the word "person" shall apply to bodies politic and corporate', the IS 
1855. following, shall be substituted, namely:-
«the word "person" shall apply to bodies politic and corporate 
and the Government', 

§1:'ATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The law relating to the liability of the Government for tor~s or 
civil wrongs is in a state of uncertainty. This uncertainty has been 
occasioned by confliding judicial decisions. In view of this un-
certainty, the matter was referred on the initiative of the' late 
President of India, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, to the Law Commission 
for consideration and report. The Law Commission examined the 
matter in detail and after having made a general survey of the law 
with respect to liability of the Government in tort in various coun-
tries such as the United Kingdom, United States of America, 
Canada, Australia, France, etc., recommended that legislation should 
be undertaken in India for defining the liability of the Government 
in tort and formulated for this purpose certain specific proposals 
based mainly on the U.K. Crown Proceedings Act, 1947. While 
these proposals were under the active consideration of the Govern-
ment, the question of the extent of liability of the Government in 
tort came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in State 
of Rajasthan v. Mst. Vidyawathi-I962, Supp. 2 S.C.R. 987. In that 
case it was held by the Supreme Court that in India, ever since the 
time of the East India Company, the sovereign has been held liable 
to be sued in tort or in contract, and that the Common Law immunity 
never operated in India. But, in a more recent case-Ralia Ram v. 
the State of Uttar Pradesh, 1965, 1 S.C.A. 809, the Supreme Court 
has held that the distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign 
functions of the Government even now obtains in India and that, 
therefore, the State is liable for tortious acts committed by its 
employees only if such acts are committed in the discharge of 
functions which are not sovereign. The Court, however, was not 
satisfied with this state of law and urged that the matter should be 
set right without delay by legislation, as has been done in the United 
Kingdom by the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947. This:aill whi.ch 
seeks to implement, subject to some modifications. the recommenda-
tions of the Law Commission in its Report on the liability of the 
State in tort, is intended to give effect to the suggestion of the 
Supreme Court. It is identical with the Government (Liability) in 
Tort Bill, 1965 which lapsed on the dissolution of the Third Lok Sabha. 
2. The recommendations of the Law Commission, as given effect 
to in the Bill, may be categorised as follows:-
(i) In the first place, there is the liability of the Govern-
ment to third parties for torts committed by its employees and 
9 

10 
agents. Here, the Government, like any private individual, 
should be vicariously liable to third parties for torts committed 
by its employees and agents in the course of their employment 
or for torts committed by its employees and agents on behalf of 
the Government and subsequently ratified by the Government. 
This recommendation has been embodied in clause 3 (a) of the 
Bill. 
(ii) In the second place, there is the liability of the Gov-
ernment to third parties for torts committed by an independent 
contractor employed by the Government and his servants and 
workers. Here, the Government. like any private individual, 
should be liable to third parties only in cases specified in 
clause 3 (b) of the Bill. 
(iii) In the third place, there are Common Law duties 
attaching to ownership, occupation, possession or control of 
property. Here also, the Government, like any private indivi-
dual, should have certain duties when it is the owner of any 
immovable property Or in possession or occupation of, 01 
exercises control over, any immovable property. Clause 4 of the 
Bill gives effect to this recommendation. 
(iv) In the fourth place, there is the liability of the Govern-
ment in klrt in respect of escape of dangerous things. Here 
also, the Government, like any' private individual, should be 
liable in respect of any personal injury or any damage to pro-
perty caused by any dangerous thing in the possession of the 
Government or over which the Government exercises control. 
Clause 5 of the Bill gives effect to this recommendation. 
(v) In the fifth place, there is the liability of the Govern-
ment towards its own employees and agents. Here also, the 
Government, like any private individual, should be liable to its 
own employees 'and agents for any injury caused by the failure of 
the Government to take the requisite care. Clause 6 of the Bill 
gives effect to this recommendation. 
(vi) In the sixth place, the other recommendations of the 
Law Commission which are of an incidental, ancillary or minor 
nature have been incorporated in clauses 7, 8 and 9 of the Bill. 
(vii) Clause 10 of the Bill makes certain special provisions 
as to armed forces of the Union and police forces and clause 11 
provides for a number of savings and exceptions. 
3. The Notes on clauses explain in greater detail the various 
provisions of the Bill and also indicate the deviations made from 

II 
the recommendations of the Law Commission and the reasons for 
the deviations. The Notes also make reference to relevant provi-
sions of the U.K. Crown Proceedings Act and important cases on 
the subject. 
NEW DELlII; P. GOVINDA MENON. 
The 15th May, 1967. 

Notes on clauses 
Cla.use 2.-This clause contains the definitions of important 
words and expressions used in the Bill some of which are based on 
the definitions suggested in paragraph 66.VI of the Report of the 
Law Commission on Li'ability of the State in Tort (hereinafter 
referred to as the "Report"). 
The Law Commission has suggested that "agent" shall have the 
same meaning as in the Indian Contract Act, 1872. But this sugges-
tion has not been accepted as "agent" as defined in the Indian Con-
tract Act is wide enough to include an "independent contractor" 
also. In the law of contract an "independent contractor" may be 
regarded as an "agent" but in the law of tort there is an essential 
difference between 'an "agent" and an "independent contractor", but 
there is no such difference between an lIagent" and a "servant". It 
is thus stated. in Clerk and Lindsell on Torts (11th Ed. at page 116) 
while drawing a distinction between a "servant" and "contractor"-
"Of the former class (servants) those whose employment is 
more or less continuous are usually styled servants while those 
whose employment is intermittent or confined to a particular 
occasion are usually called by the generic name of agents. Bet-
ween servants, however, and other agents over whom the em-
ployer reserves control, there is no distinction in point of law; 
the employer is liable for the torts of the one to the same extent 
and subject to the same conditions as he is liable for the torts 
of the other. For the sake of brevity, therefore, it may be 
convenient to speak of all those classes of agents over whom the 
employer reserves control as servants in contra-distinction to 
contractors over whom such control is not reserved." 
[See also ibid, p. 135. Salmond on the Law of Torts (14th Ed., 
pp. 648 e~ seq.); Pollock's Law of Torts (15th Ed., pP. 62 And 63: 
Fleming. The Law of Torts, (2nd Ed., pP. 325 et seq.; Street, Law of 
Torts (1963), Chap. XXVTI; Performin'! Right Society, Ltd . .". Michell 
(1924), 1 K.B. 762. In this case the distinction between a servant arid 
an independent. contractor has bee'll clearly brought out with reference 
to general principles laid down by well-known authorities: see also 
the case of Honeywill and Stein. Ltd . .". Larkin Brot~ers, Ltd. (1934) 
1 K.B. 191 (C.A.) at pp. 196, 197]. 

The definition of "employee of the Government" is based on 
article 310 of the Constitution. 
-.... 
The definition of "independent contractor" has been explained 
abOve. 
The exact definition of "tort" is well nigh impossible as pointed 
out by the Law Commission, and therefore has not been attempted. 
Cl,ause 3.--Sub-clause (a) gives effect to the recommendation in 
paragraph 66. l(i) of the Report and is modelled on section 2(1) (a) 
of the U.K. Crown Proceedings Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as 
"the U.K. Act"). 
This provision seeks to implement in relation to the Government 
the common law provision that a master is viQariously liable to 
third parties for torts committed by his servants and agents in the 
('ourse of their employment or for torts committed by his servants 
and agents for the mastt~J"s benefit and subs.equently ratified by the 
master. 
Both in relation to an employee of the Government and an agent 
of the Government, the expression "in the course of his employ-
ment" has been used. There is no difference between "course of 
his employment" and "scope of his authority". "Scope of employ-
ment", "course of employment", "scope of authority" and "scope of 
~ervice" mean practically the same thing. As stated in Winfield on 
Tort (Seventh Edition), p. 741, "course of employment seems to 
have supplanted scope of authority". These expressions are the 
formulae which are employed to indicate the outward limits of res-
ponsibility of the employer for the torts of his servants or agents. 
As Fleming states in his "Law of Torts", 32nd. Ed., at p. 33. 
'That phrase (course of employment) like its variants 
"scope" or "sphere of employment". is the formula which is 
employed to indicate the outward limits of rpsponsibility for the 
unauthorised wrongdoing of a servant, and represents the judi-
cial compromise between the "social necessity" of making a 
master answerable for injury occasioned by servants entrusted 
with the power of actin~ in his business and the feeling that it 
would be unjust, and indeed undesirable, to make hi.m responsi-
able for every act which the servant chooses to do.' 
The proviso to section 2(1) (a) of the U.K. Act has been omitted 
for the reasons given in paragraph 19 of the Report. 
Sub-clause (b) implements paragraDh 86. Hili) of the Report 
read with Appendix VI.B thereto. Compare in this connection 
~ectiQn 40(2) (d) of the U.K. Act. See in this connection Clerk 

14 
and Lindsell on Torts (Eleventh Edition), p. 137. The proviso to 
item (iii) of sub-clause (b) is, however, new because it is felt that it 
will not be fair and proper to make the Government liable under 
this item if there is an express stipUlation in the contract between 
the Government and the independent contractor that reasonable 
care in the doing of the act shall be taken by the contractor and not 
by the Government and the independent contractor shall, and the 
Government shall not, be liable for any personal injury or any 
damage to property caused in the doing of the act by the failure 
on the part of the independent contractor to take such care. 
The recommendation of the Law Commission [vide paragraph 
66. I (i) of the Report] that the Government shall be liable for torts 
committed by employees or agents of public corporations or Govern-
ment companies, has not been accepted because Government corpo-
rations or companies are separate juridical persons and there is no 
reason why the Government should be liable for the torts com-
mitted by the employees and agents of such corporations or com-
panies. 
Clause 4.-This clause implements paragraph 66. I (v) of the 
R~port read with Appendix VLE thereto. See also paragraph 24 
of the Report. This clause corresponds to section 2 (1) (c) and 
~ectjon 40(4) of the U.K. Act. See in this connection Clerk and 
Lindsel1 on Torts (Eleventh Edition), Chapter 18, and Winfield on 
Torts (Seventh Edition), Chapter 12. 
Clause 5.-This clause implements paragraph 66.1 (vi) of the 
Report read with Appendix VI.E (4) thereto. 
The recommenaations of the Law Commission in paragraph 
66.II(ii) to (v) have been criticised as being rather too wide. It 
would appear that the poSition would be the same even if these re-
commendations were not implemented. Accordingly, these recom-
mendations have not been included in any clause of the Bill. It 
has, however, been provided by sub ... dause (n) of clause 11 that 
the Government shall not be liable in respect of any personal injury 
or any damage to property caused by an act which, by its nature, is 
likely in the ordinary course of events to cause such injury or 
damage, if the doing of the act is authorised by any enactment for 
the time being in force. This implements paragraph 66.no) of the 
Report. 
Clause 6.-This clause implements paragraph 66.1 (ii) of the RE'-
noTt read with Appendix VI.D thereto and follows section 2(1)(b) of 
the U.K. Act and is based on Clerk Bl1d LindselI on Torts (Eleventh ,. , 

Edition), pp. 390-395. A proviso, has, however, been added that iIi 
awarding compensation to an employee of the Government the court 
shall take into account any amount payable under any other law 
[such as the Extraordinary Pension Rules, the Personal InjUries 
(Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962, the Personal Injuries (Compen-
sation Insurance) Act, 1963, etc.] to such employee by way of com-
pensation, disablement benefit, etc. 
Recommendation of the Law Commission in paragraph 66.1II 
of the Report has not been includEd in the Bill. The Law Com-
mission without assigning any reason has simply recommended that 
a provision may be'made on the lines of section 3 of the U.K. Act. 
In view of the special powers conferred on the Government by 
section 21 of the Patents and Designs Act, 1911 and section 20 of 
the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, in relation to patents, designs, etc., 
there is hardly any practical utility for such a provision. Even in 
regard to section 3 of the U.K. Act, Prof. Glanville L. Williams in 
his booklet on Crown Proceedings, p. 59, observes that there is little 
scope in the case of patents and designs, etc., for infringement actions 
notionaUy given by this clause, to operate. Implementation of this 
recommendation may introduce avoidable uncertainty and compli-
cations in the matter. 
Clause 7.-This clause implements paragraph 66.11 (vi) of the 
Report and is modelled on section 2(4) of the U.K. Act. 
Clause a.-This clause implements the observations at the end 
of paragraph 66.1 of the Report. 
Clause 9.-This clause implements paragraph 66.IV (i) of the 
Report and is modelled on section 4 of the U.K. Act. 
Clause 10.-This clause implements paragraph 66. V (iv) (c) and is 
modelled on section 10 of the U.K. Act, but there is a difference. 
The members of the police forces also have been brought within the 
purview of this clause, the reason being that in principle, the case 
of a police constable is not distinguishable from that of a soldier, 
especially when the police force to which he belongs is maintained 
by the State. Vide Attorney General for New South Wales 'Vs. Per-
petual Trustee & Co. (1955), 1 All E.R. 846 (P.C.) at pp. 857-58. In 
the U.K. Act, the members of the police force have not been brought 
within the purview of section 10 of that Act mainly because the police 
forces there alre maintained by the local authorities, the only excep.-
tion bein'g the Metropolitan police which is under the Secretary of 
State for Home Affairs. 

i6 
C1&tL3e n.-This clause impleme'nts paragraph 66. V of the Report 
aAd saves the Gtwemment from liability in respect of a large number 
of acts detailed therein. 
Clau.se 12.-This clause saves pending proceedings. 
Clame lS.-This clause make-s a consequential and necessary 
amendment in the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to define the liability of Government in tort. It 
is not possible te assess the financial liability which Government 
will incur on the bringing into operation of this Bm when enacted, 
as a result of the torts committed by the Government or its em-
ployees, agents and contractors. That will depend on various' 
factors, such as the number of torts committed, the n~ber of suits 
instituted against .. the Government and the number of decrees for 
compensation passed in those suits against the Government. As it 
janot possible to foresee and visualise any of these mat~rs, no esti-
mate of the expenditure involved out of the Consolida:ted Fund of 
India (In case of the UabiJity of the Central Government> i~ possible. 
17 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACT FROM THE FATAL ACCIDENTS ACT, 1855 
(13 of 1855) 
• • • • 
4. The following words and expressions are intended to have the Interpre-
meanings hereby assigned to them respectively, so far as such meen- tatiOll 
ings are not eXcluded by the context or by the nature of the subject- clause. 
matter; that is to say the word ''person'' shall apply to bodies politic 
and corporate; and the word ''parent'' shall include father and 
mother and grand-father and grand-mother; and the word "chUd" 
shall include son and daughter and grand-son and grand-daughter 
and step-son and step-daughter. 
18 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to define and amend the law with respect to the liability of the 
Government in tort and to provide for certain matters 
connected therewith. 
(Shri P. GorJinda M",on, 
Minister 0/ L_) 