LOK 
SABHA. -
G 
Clr~!G'(,·.NlA 
to 
Th"-~ 
GCAL 
MIN~ 
lABCJ1 
\ELFi~~;;' 
?uN) 
(i1Zi'EAl.) 
BIU., 
1966 
(To 
be/As 
introduced 
in 
10k 
Sabha) 
1. 
raSe 
2, 
in 
the 
marginal 
heading 
to 
clause 
6,-
for 
'~onstitution" 
~ 
't:ontinuation" 
2. 
Page 
4, 
line 
29,-
for 
'tov-a'I'Ulent" 
1: 
~ad 
l~verIlLlent 
It 
-----
--
.. 
mIT 
DJi'U-lI; 
l!.oril 
1 t .. 
1986 
~.,-..;_.,. 
__ 
."1'1 
1n 
"'" 
-,. 
.... 
-~--= 
.... 

3201 19..,. 
As INTBODUcm IN LoK 8ABHA ON 
. _ No. 43 01 1'86 
T~ COAL· MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND (REPEAL) 
BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
to repeal the c-oal Mines Labour WelfClre Fund Act, 1947 Clnd to provide 
for certClin mCltters incidentul thereto.. 
BII it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eeventh Year of the 
Ri!l'ublic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines Labour· Welfare Fund ShOJt 
(Repeal) Act, 1988. tftIe and 
5 . (2) It shaY cOme into force on such date as, the Central Governmen~ ment. 
10 
may, by notilication ~ the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint . 
. 2.. I~, thi~ Act, ~ the. context otherwise requires,-
"(c) "the Al:t" Dl8UJ8 the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund 
.. Act, 1947;, 
',. (b) ~rappoin.~ d~Y'; fueans· the d~te o~ whiCh 'tm~ .~~ ~m~ 
in,tQ force; . '. ' .. ~. -,. . 
(c) "HoUSing Board" meana -tbe·'·Coal-'Nines~ur Hou.,. 
Board constituted under section 6 of the Act. 
Deftni ... 
tiollll:' ~ ... 
-':": '(,' 

'Repeal Of 
Act 32 of 
1947 and 
dissolu-
tion of 
Housing 
Board. 
Conse-
quential 
provisions. 
Power of 
Centnl 
Govern-
ment to 
cUrect 
veetlng 
of rights 
in. 
Govern-
ment 
company. 
CoDstI. 
tutlon of 
IUits, etc., 
.,.at 
the CoD-
tral 
Govern. 
ment. 
2 
, 3. On the appointed day, the Coal Mines Labour Welfare FUnd Act, 
1947 shall stand repealed, and the Coal Mines Labour Housing Board 
shall stand dissolved. 
4. On the dissolution of the HOUSing Board,-
(a) all rights and privileges of the Housing Board shall become 5 
the rights and privileges, respectively, of the Central Govemm~nt; 
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, including cash 
balances, reserve funds, investments and moneys lying to the credit 
of the Housing Board and aU rights and interests in, Or arising out of, 
such properties as were immediately before the appointed day,.in the 10 
owners~p, possession, power or control of the Housing Board, and 
all books of account, registers and recorda and all other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto, shall vest in the Central Govern- ' 
ment; 
(c) all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of the Housing 15 
Board of whatever kind and subsisting immediately before the 
appointed day, shall be deemed on and from such day to be the 
borrOWings, liabilities and' obligations, as the case may be, of the 
Central Government; 
(d) all contracts entered into, and all matters and things engaged 20 
to be done by, with or for, the Housing Board and subsisting imme-
diately before the appointed day shall be deemed, on and from such 
day to have been entered into or engaged. to be done by, with or 
for, the Central Government; , 
(e) all licences and permits gr~ted to the HoUsing Board and 25 
in force immediately before the appointed day shall be deemed on 
and from such day to have been granted to the Central Government 
and shall have effect accordingly. 
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, the Central G0-
vernment may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing So 
to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that 
Government may think fit to impose, direct, by an order in writing, that 
the right, title and interest of the Housing Board in relation to any 
property shall, instead of cOntinuing to vest in it, vest in the Government 
company (hereinafter referred to as the Government company) either 35 
on the date of publication of the direction or on such earlier or later date 
(not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in 
the direction, and on such vesting, the Uability or obligation, as the cue 
may be, of the Housing Board, in relation to such property shall, instead of 
continuing to be the pability or obligation of the Central Government, 40 
become the liability or obligation, as the case may be, of the Government 
coonpany. ~ 
8. (1) If, on the appointed day, any 8uit,- appeal or other p~g 
of whatever nature in relation to the Housing Board is pending by or 
against such Board, the same shall not abate, be c:Uscontinued or be in 45 
any way prejudiclally affected by reason, of the d~lu.tion of the Housing 
Board; but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, pr0-
secuted and enforced by or against th,e Central Government or the Go-
evernment company, as the case may be. 

3 
(2) Where,before the' appointed day, any cause of action for any 
suit or proceeding or any right to appeal arose in favour of, or against, 
the Housing Board, and the institution of any suit or proceeding on such 
cause' of action or the filing of tluch appeal was 'not- barred ~ore the 
5 appointed day, such suit or proceeding may be instituted or appeal may 
be filed by or against the Central Government or the :novemment com-
pany as the case may be. 
7. On the appointed day, all moneys and cash balances lying in the 
credit of the housing account and the general welfare account of the Coal 
10 Mines Labour Housing and General Welfare Fund constituted under sec-
tion 4 of the Act, shall become part of, and be credited to, the Consolidated 
Fund of India. 
8. Notwi~hstanding the repeal of the Act, the proceeds of duty levied 
before the appointed day under section 3 of the Act,-
15 (i) if collected by the collecting agencies but not paid into the 
Reserve Bank of India; aDd 
(ii) if not collected by the collecting agencies,-
shall be paid or, as the case may be, collected and paid.. iDte 
the Reserve Bank of India for being credited to the COD80lidated 
20 Fund of India. . ~ 
Moneys, 
etc., of 
the FuDd 
to be 
credited 
to the 
ConsoU-
dated 
Fund Of 
IndiL 
Collection 
and pay-
ment Of 
arre ... 
of duty. 

.. 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Coal Mines Labour Welf~e Fund 'Act, 1947 was enacted in the 
year 1947 when the coal mines were almost entirely in the priva~ sector. 
It principally provides for th~ levy and colle::tion of a duty of excise, as 
a cess, on all despatchea Qf coal and coke and for utilising the proceeds of 
the cess for the welfare, of the labour employed in the coal mining 
industry by providing housing, water supply, medical, educational, re-
creational and transpo.rt facilities. The W'oceeds of the cess constituted 
a Fund called the Coal Mines l.abour Housing and General Welfare Fund 
• which is apportioned under two separate accounts, namely, the hoU'Sing 
account and the general welfare account. The Act also provides for the 
constitution of a Coal Mines Labour Housing Board to prepare and carry 
out schemes financed from the hOUSing account and other works to be 
financed. from the general welfare account of the Fund. 
2. Raising funds through a cess, for various measures of labour welfare 
unde.r the Act was conceived when the coal mines were in the private 
sector and the' private sector did not attach much importance to the 
welfare Qf miners. 
,3. With the nationalisation of the coal industry in 1973, the context 
has materially changed and the coal companies in the public sector have 
rlssumed respoll'8ibility for looking after the welfare of their emp!oyees. 
It is, therefore, p.roposed to repeal the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund 
Act, 1947 and thereby to abolish the levy of cess under the Act. Conse-
quent on such repeal, it is also proposed to dissolve the Housing Board 
established under section 6 of that Act. On such dissolution of the 
Housing Beard, it is also proposed to vest all the assets, rights, liabilities, 
obligations, etc., of the How.ing Board in the Central Government and 
furth~ to empower the Central Government to vest such assets, rights, 
liabilities, obligations, etc., in a Covernment company. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
Nsw DELHI; , VASANT SATHE. 
The 11th MArch, 1986. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1l02111185-CSW, dated the 24th March, 1986 from 
Shri Vasant Sathe, Minister of Energy to the Secretary-General, Lok 
Sabha.] 
The President of India, having been informed of the subject matter 
of the Bill to provide for the repeal of the Coal Mines Labour Welfare 
Fund Act, 1947 and for matters connected therewith, reeommends the 
introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under articl~ 117 (1) of the Cons· 
titution of India. 

·LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to repeal the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, UM7 and to provide 
for certain matters incidental thereto. 
(Shri Vas_ Sathe: 
JlmiBter 01 hergy.) 