J::r \...-./"" As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA,ON 
},"" 
l~J~) i' ,.~, 
~. 
; .. 
• 1 AUC ~66 
(,. 
. ' 
,", 
.. ·~' .. iW·l ·r~ if' '~I 
":r;~nll! I I . ',., 
.f' ' 
.. ;'t,.. 
'I.:C":· . 
• ~i'Jlr 
'; { , " ' 
, 
1""\ :. ~ C . " :- J 
, 
',1.-: • 
, " • I, _ J . J 
Bill No. 43 of 1966 
THE ADVOCATES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961. 
it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
of India as follows:-
, 1. This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1966. Short title. 
2. For section 8 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred Amend-
as the principal Act), the following section shall be, and shall be ment of 
;i1:;'''~nled always to have been, substituted, namely:- section 8. 
"8. (1) The term of office of an elected member of a State Term of 
Bar Council (other than an elected member thereof referred to office of 
in section 54) shall be four years from the date of publication ~e~i::rs 
of the result of his election. :ar Co::n. 
(2) An outgoing member shall continue in office until the cil. 
publication of the result of the election of his successor.". , 

2 
I 
Amend- 3. In section 15 of the principal Act, clau~e (e) of su'b-section (2) 
ment of shall be,,aad sheP bf d~emed always to have been, oplitted. 
section 15. 
Transi- 4. Where before the commencement of the Advocates (Amend-
tional pro- ment) Ordinance, 1966, any member of a State Bar Council has 
vision. retired under section 8 of the principal Act, such member shall be S 
deemed never to have retired, and shall continue to hold office for a 
period of four years from the date of publication of the result of his 
election as a member of the State Bar Council (re-constituted on the 
expiry of the term of office of the elected members of the State Bar 
Council under section 54). and accordingly no act of the State Bar 10 
Council or any Committee thereof shall be called in question on the 
ground merely that such member having ceased to be a member of 
the State Bar Council on such retirement sat or voted or otherwise 
took part in the proceedings of the Council or the Committee there-
of. I I~ 
Repeal and 5. (1) The Advocates (Amendment) Ordinance, 1966 is hereby 
;aving. repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 14th 2 
day of June, 1966. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
, Under section 3 of the Advocates Act, 1961, every State Bar 
Council shall consist of members (except in the case of ex officio 
members.) who are elected from amongst advocates on the electoral 
roll of the Bar Council. Section 8 of the Act provides that the term 
of oftlce of the elected members shall be six years and that as nearly 
as possible, one-third of the members first elected to the Council 
,', 'sball retire on the expiration of every second year and the vacancies 
·IO' .. -eaused Ehall be filled by the election of new members. 
2. Representations ~ere received from the -Bar Council of India 
. and some State Bar Councils th~t the provi$ions ~f, section 8 of the 
~ct for retirement of one-third of the elected members at the end of 
. ' , second year and for biennial elections to ~L the vacancies 
' .... 1C!~ by such retirement were likely 'to. involve considerable 
besides adding to the work of the Bar Councils. It was 
.. h ........ T,n"'... proposed that section 8 of the Act; should be amended so 
t to, proyide for retii'ement of one-half of. the elected. members 
_,:l1"V, third year in the place of the existing provision for retirement 
one-third members every second year. Accordingly provision 
made in clause 4 of the Advpcates (Amendment) Bill, 1965 to 
lI.IIlf~na section 8 of the Act with retrospective effect so that persons 
to retire at the end of the second year could continue for one 
year. The Bill was passed by the Rajya Sabha but could ngt 
; passed by the Lok Sabha for want of time. 
3. In anticipation of the enactment' of the Advocates (Amend-
t) Bill, 1965" some of the State Bar Councils in respect of which 
period of twb years had expired did not take necessary steps for 
holding of the elections in time to fill the . vacancies. As, the 
of one-third of the members had expired and as the Bill had 
been passed into law, doubts were expressed as to whether these 
Councils could carry on their normal functions under the Act. 
order to overcome the difficulty created by this situation, the 
tes (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 1966 was made by the 
Government on 10th January, 1966 under section 59 of the 
This Order was, however. struck down by the Madras High 
by its judgment dated 8th April, 1966 in C.M.P. No. 1446 of 
in Writ Petition No. 4313 of 1965 as being ultra vires of the 
of the Central Government. It was felt that the situation 
by the decision of the Madras High Court and iby the 
3 

4 
non-passage of the amending Bill in the Lok Sabha, unless remedied 
immediately, would give rise to various difficulties and complications 
in relation ,to the f~nctioJling ,of the State Bar Councils. 
_- • or', ,I .. ' ~, .. 1 
4. As the situat:on had to be remedied immediately and as the 
Parliament was not in session, the promulgation of an Ordinance ,by 
the President was co,nsidered most essential. At that stage it, was, 
however, felt that the ,system of retirement of members by rotation, 
apart from being expensive, did not really serve any useful purpose 
and that it' should ,be replaced by a simple provision laying a uni .. 
form term Qf four years. foz:all the elected ,members of~ a State Bar, 
; ~ it, ' 
Council. Sugges~~o~ ~<;> ~pis . eff~ct, had. been received from the' Bar 
Council of India and some State Bar Councils. The Advocates Act 
Review Committee 'app6inted' ~by the Law Minister fo ',review the 
working of. the Act was also- in favour of thiS' vi'ew and the Attorney 
General of India who is the Chairman of the Bar Council of India' 
also approved the same.' The Advocates (Amendment) Ordinance, 
1966 was accordingly pro~ulgated on the 14th June, 1966. Provision' 
has been made thereiri for arriendment of seCtion '8 on these liries' 
and for a consequential change in section 15(2), and for a transi~ 
tional provision'to ,the e~ that where any 'member of a State' 
Bar Council has already retired under section 8, he shall be deemed ' 
never to have retired land' shall continue to hold office for a period 
of four years from the date of publication ~f his election and. that:, 
no act of the State 'Bar Council or any Coinmittee thereof shall be;' 
called in question . merely because such member ,having Ceased to·, 
be a member, had voted or: otherWise taken part in the proceedings" 
of the Council to Committee. ' The Bill seeks to merely replace the 
Ordinance by an Act of; Parliament. 
NEW DELHI; C. R PATTABHI RAMAN. 
The 18th July, 1966. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961 . 
25 OF 1961 
• • * * • 
CHAPTER II 
BAR COUNCILS 
* * * * • Term of 
8. The term of office of the' elected members of a State Bar office of 
-.,v', ... u,," .• '. shall! be !Six I tears, but as neatly as: p6sSilble ione-third of ~f me~­
. members first elected to each such Council (reconstituted on S~~:e °Bar 
expiry of the term of office of the elected members of the State Council. 
Council under section 54) shall retire on the expiration of every 
year in the prescribed manner, and the vacancies so caused 
be filled by the election of new members in the prescribed 
• • III • • 
, (1) A Bar Council may make rules to carry out the purposes Power to 
Chapter, make rule~ 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
. power, such rules may provide for-
• • • * • 
(e) the manner in which the order of retirement by rotation 
the members of the State Bar Council shall be determined; 
• • * • • 
',. '. 
i \ . ~ .. 
. . s 

r 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funhcr to amend the Advocates Act, I96I. 
(Shri C. R. Pattabhi Rama", 
Minister 0/ Stale in the 
Ministry of LQfJJ.) 