}~~' ~' 
l" 
I 
As INTRODUCED IN Lol: SABRA .. 
a 9 APR ~9~ 
/.. 
\ 
"<\. 
'--' •. t-
Bill No. 43 of 'ita'·, 
THE EAST PUNJAB AYURVEDIC AND UNANI 
PRACTITIONERS' (DELHI AMENDMENT) 
BllL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
fu:rther to amend the East Punjab Ayurvedic a1k! Unani Practitioners' 
Act, 1949 as in force in the Union territory of Delhi. 
S BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:'-: 
1. (1) This Act may be called the East Punjab Ayurvedic and SJIoI( title 
Unani Practitioners' (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1964. ==-
(2) It shall cdme into force on such date as the Chief Commissioner . 
10 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. Throughout the East Punjab Ayurvedic and Unani Practi- Am cr1prt 
tioners' Act, 1949, as in force in the Union territory of Delhi (herein- :,r~ •• s 
after referred to as the principal Act), for the word "State", the . 
words "Union territory" shall be substituted. 
I 
3. In sectiqn 2 of the principal Act, after clause (3), the follow- A"""-" 
ISing elaU8eS shall be inserted, namely: _ of IeCtioD a. 
20 
'(3a) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Examining 
Body; 
(3b) "Chief Commissioner" means the administrator of tlae 
Union territory Of Delhi, appointed by the President under 
article 239 of the Constitution; 
(3c) "Examining Body" means the examining Body constitu-
ted under section 31A;'. 

Amendment 
of .cc:tion 3. 4. In sub-section (1) of section 3 of the prinCipal Act, for the 
words "carrying out the provisions of this Act", the words "carry_ 
ing out the functions conferred on the Board by or under the pro.!. 
sions of this Act" shall be substituted. 
Ameoctment 5. In section 21 of the principal Act,-
., aoctiOD 21. 
~--300 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section· shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) The Board shall, by regulations, recognise tnstltu-
tionsasrequired under item (3.) of the Schedule." ; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "by any of the insti· 10 
tutions", the words "by the Examining Body ()t' by any of the 
institutiooa" shan 'be substitutOO. 
6. In sub-section (2) of section 29 of the principal Act, after 
clause (k), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
"(1): the term of office of the members· of the Ex~ I, 
Bodyundet' subo-section(5) of section 3lA; 
'm) the fl!"' and oUter allowances payable tel Qlemhea of 
the Examining Body for attending meetinp un., Sub..-ectloll 
(8) of section 3lA of'. 
7. In section 30 of the principal A:et,- .20 
(i) insuf:HJection (1), clauses (c), (d), (e), (1)' anl!li (g) 
shall be omitted; 
(ii). after sUHection (1), the fonowing sub-.seetidn sh"l be 
~rwnely:-
" (1A) The .Examining Body maYiwithc the; prpiG»l 2S 
unc,tion, of the Chief Commissioner, make regulations tor-
(a) the time. and',place· at wbWbtbe . ~h,,~ 
Body shall hold its meetings; 
(b) the courses of study for training and·~tytn. 
Ql!:aminations including tqe course of training and exam!- 0 
. nations. prior to qU$1ifying examinations; 3 
(c) the language in which the exBJD,1natl~ shaD' 
be con4ucted and instruction shall be imparted; 
(d) the admission of students to tlle bodies 01' 
iutltutionl authorised under section 21; 3' 

LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE EAST PUNJAB AYURVlIDIC AND UNANI PRACTITIONXRS (DELHI 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1964 
(To betAs introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, line 18,-
L.2.!: II examining II ~ II Examining" 
2. Page 2, line 19,-
after n31A" ~ "of" 
3. Pag e 5, line 5,-
befor~ "the words" insert "in the first place where it 
occurs," 
4. Correct line numbers on pages 1 to 5. 
NEW DELHI·· -, 
Anril 28. t~_64 
Va1sakha 8; -1006( Saka) 

10 
3 
(e) the conditions under which students shall be 
admitted to the diploma, licence or certificate course and 
to the qualifying and prior examinations; 
(f) the conditions of appointment of examiners and 
the conduct of examinations; 
'(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may 
be, presc!ri'bed by regulations."; 
(iii) in the first proviso to sub-section (3), for the words, 
brackets and letters "clauses (c) to (g)", the word, bm.ckets, 
ftgure and letter "sub-section (lA)" shall be substituted and far 
the word "Board", the words "Ex,amining. Body" shall be substi-
t1II1II. 
8. After section 31 of the principal Act. the following ·Il!Cttull'shall IDlert1O~ of 
be '''·-ed 1 . ' . . DeW aectiOll J.5 UMIIC.L I. ,name y. - ,IA. 
2J 
30 
,0 
"3IA. (1) The Chief Commissioner may, by notmeatfOn in CQDSt1tu-
the OfRciaJ Gazette, constitute an Examining Body to ·4JeJmown tion and 
.. ""6 Ex..mniGg' Body for Ayurvedie and ,UDBDi Systems of ~:ODII 
MeIIieine, Delhi", for theJHll1l8'!le of holding qualifyiag esumina- ~ 
tions and e~ati&nA prior to '1ualifyillg exannaationl and Body. 
prescribing the courses of study and training for such examina-
tion. and other related matters. 
(2) The. Examining Body shall ,be a body oorporate with the 
name . aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, 
with power to 6cquire, hold and dispose of property and'to con-
tract, and shall by the said.name sue and be sued. 
(3) 'l"he Examining Body shall consist of the following seven 
-..mbers, to be nominated by the Chief Commissioner, namely:-
(a) one member to represent the MinJ.stry of .the Cen-
tral Government dealing with Health; 
'(b) one member to represent the Medical and Health 
t>epartment of the AdminiatnUon of Delhi; 
(e) one member who shall be a Professor of Modern 
l.fed1clne or of Ayurvedic or Unant System of Medicine as 
thflChtef Commissioner may determine; 
(el) one member who shall be a Professor of Ayurvedic 
, I Syaem of Medicine; 
(g) \one member who shall be a Professor of Unani Sys-
tem of Medicine; 
. '(f)a practitioner Of repute of the Ayurvedtc Systenl of 
··Jbc1icinei 

t 
-r-"~ 1 l,. .. -
4 
(g) a' practitioner of repute of the Unani System of 
Medicine; 
and the Chief Commissioner shall nominate one of the members 
to be the Chairman of the Examining Body. 
(4) The provisions of sections 11, 12 and. 18 shall apply to S 
the Examining Body as they apply in relation to the Board, 
subject to the modifications that references to the President 
therein shall be construed as references to .the Chairman and the 
reference to five members in sulHlection (3) of section 13 shall 
be construed as a reference to three members. 
10 
(5) A member of the Examining Body shall hold oftice for 
such period as may be prescribed Iby rules by the Chief Com .. 
miari<mer: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, remOVe any member before the expiry of 
such term' IS , 
Provided fUl"ther that no order for such removal shall be 
made unless the member concerned bas been given a reaeonable 
opportunity to show cause against such removal. 
(6) A easual vacancy in the oftlee of a member of the 20 
Examining Body shall be filled by fresh nomination and the 
member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall hold ofBee only 
so long as the member in whose place he is nominated woulcl 
have held oftice if the vacancy had not oceurred. 
(1) Any memlber of 'the Examining Body may, at any time, 2, 
resign his oftice by letter addressed to the Chief CommJss1oner 
and the resignation shall take effect from the date on which it 
is accepted by the Chief Commissioner. 
(8) There shall be paid to the members of the ExamlntDg 
Body such fees and allowances for attending meetings as may be 30 
preseribed by rules by the Chief Commissioner. 
(9) The Examining Body shall, with the previous approval 
of the Chief Commissioner, appoint a secretary and such number 
of other employees a8 it may deem necessary and they shall 
receive such salary and allo"18nces and be subject to such. COD- 35 
clitions of service as the Examining Body DtDy, with the previous 
approval of the Chief Commissioner, prescribe by J'eIUlatlOlls. 
(10) The secretary and other employees of the Examtntng 
Body shall be deemed to be public servants within the mean.tn, 
of section 21 of ;be Irldian Penal Code. '40 

s 
S 
(11) In the performance of its functions under this Act, the. 
Examining Body shall Ibe bound by such directions as the Chief 
Commissioner may give to it in writing from time to time.", 
t. In the Schedule to the principal Act, in item (2), for the word AaleDdmlllt 
"Board", the words "Examining Body" shall be'substituted. ~~ulc. 

STATENIENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Boanl at ~ ,:and Uaani. Systeme of MecUciIte, ~ 
ereated under the East Punjalb Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners' 
Act, 1949 as in force in the Union territory' at Delhi has been in exist-
ence since the year 1950 and is charged with dual functions of regia-
tering Vaids and Hakims and. holding qualifying and preparatory 
examinations. Experience lOver all these years has shown that tha 
arrangement is not satisfactcxry. It is, 'therefore, proposed, to entrust 
the functions of holding examinations and prescribing courses to a 
separate Examining Body leaving the Board with the task of rep 
tration, recognition of institutions and other related matters. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the 'above object. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 22nd April, 1964. 
SUSHILA N~ Y AB. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No, 22-24/64-RIJM, dated the 24th April, 1964 from 
Dr. Sushila Nayar, Minister of Health to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
East Punjab Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners' (Delhi Amendment) 
Bill, 1964, recommends under article 117 (3) of the Constitution the 
consideration of the pid Bill in the Lok Sabha. 

!be' prop>sed. 'Bill provides for theeonstttution at a ' aeparate 
!lftm.fmng 'Body to' comiuet· eeminatiens in' Ayurvdc' and, U_l 
S'yatemS ''f!Jf. MaBefne- ift Defhi W'h.icl1is-at' prl8l!lnt' eoaduetedby, tIM 
Board. of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Delhi. : !'.be 
pr,oposed section '3lA sought to ,be inserted by clause 8 of the Bill 
cont,emplates ,*e, constitution of. an Examining Body. SuJb..eection 
'(8' Qf that section prOvides for payment of fees and 8ll()Wmces to 
m,embers of the Exaniining Body. Sub-section ,(9)' of that section 
prOvideS for payinent CJf &oala~es aDd allowances, to the employees of 
the Examining Body. It is not possible to estimate exactly the 
8D¥)1mt Of expenditure involv~ but it i$ antieipated ,that an expen-
ditu~ ot~approJti.mately as. 30,000 perannwn is likely, to .. be incurred. 
However, there will be some reduction in the expenditure on the 
existing Board. The net additional expenditure on the Examining 
Body may be to the extent of Rs. 15,000 to Rs. 20,000 per annum . 
• 
7 

MEMORANDuM REGARDING DELE(lATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Chief Commissioner to make 
rules after previous publieation in respect of the term of the mem-
bers of the Examining Body and fees and allOW'8DCel payable to 
them. ., 
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Examining Body to make, 
with the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner, regulation. In 
respect of the courses of study for training and qualifying examina-
tions, conduct of qualifying and prior examinations, etc. which func-
I tions were so far being perfonned by the Board. 
These are matters of detail and the delegation of legislative power 
with respeet to the matters aforesaid is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EAsT PuNJAB AYURVEDIC AND UNANI PRACTITIONERS' 
ACT, 1949 
(EAsT PuNJAB AcT 14 OF 1949) 
• • • • • 
Establishment, constitu.tion and incorporation of the Board 
3. (1) The Chief Commi~oner shall, by notification in the om-
cial Gazette, establish a Board to be called the Board of Ayurvedic 
and Unani Systems of Medicine, State of Delhi for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. Such Board shall be a body 
corporate, having perpetua'l succesSoion and a common seal with 
power to acquire or hold property, both movable and immovable, and 
shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
• • • • • 
Qualifying Examination 
21. (1) The Board shall by regulations-
(4) recognis~ institutions as required under paragraph 3 
of the Schedule; 
(b) prescribe the course of training and qualifying exami-
nations, including the course of training and examinations prior 
to qualifying examinations. Such regulations shall provide that 
instruction and examinations shall, as far as possible, be given 
or held in the languages specified therein. 
(2) A qualifying examination shall be an examination in the 
Indian Systems of Medicine, including Ayurvedic and Unani Sys-
tems, held for the purpose of granting a diploma, degree or certi-
ficate conferring the right of registration under this part, by any 
of the institutions which, on the recommendations of the Board, 
may be spec~ by the Chief Commissioner by 8 notification in the 
official Gazette 8S being authorised to hold a qualifying examina-
tion. 
• • • • • 
9 
... 

10 
Regulations 
30. (1) The Board may with the previous, sanction of the Chief 
Commissioner, make regulations not inconsistent with this part of 
the rules for any.of the following matters, namely:-
'" '" '" '" • 
(c) The course of study for training and qualifying exami-
nations. 
(d) The language in which the· examinations shall be 
conducted and instruction shall be imparted. 
(e) The admission of s.tudents to the bodies or institutions 
authorised under section 21. 
(f) The conditions under which students shall be admitted 
to the diploma, licence or certificate course and to the quali-
fying and prior examinations. 
(g) The conditions of appointment of examiners and the 
conduct of examinations; and 
'" '" '" '" . 
(3) The Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the oftl-
cial Gazette, cancel any regulation: 
Provided that in submitting regulations under clauses (c) 
to (g) for sanction of the Chief Commissioner under this sec-
tion, the Board shall send a copy of its proceedings relating to 
the passing of such regulatioos and shall state the number of its 
members representing either system of Indian Medicine who 
have voted for or against such regulations or not voted in res-
pect of such regulations: 
• • • • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
Persons who are entitled to have their names entered in the Re-
gister of Vaidyas and Hakims:-
• '" • • • 
(2) Vaidyas and HaldmB who have pused the ftnal aami~ 
nation held by the Boaro of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of 
Medicine Delhi. from any institution aftlUated to the Board or 
by a Bo~rd or Faculty of lyurvedic alid Unani ~ystems of 
Medicine established by law anywhere in Indian Union. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the East Punjab Ayurvedic and U nani 
Practitioners' Act, 1949 as in force JD the Union territory 
of Delhi. 
(Dr. Sushila Nayar, 
Minister of Health.) 