THE CONSTITUTION (TENTH AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABHA 
ON lIm AUGUST, 1961) 

BUI No. 43 of 1"1 
THE CONSTITUTION (fENTII AMENDMENT) BILL, 
I9l)I 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
furth~r to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:--
1. (1) This Act m&y oC! called the Constitution (Tenth Amendment) Short title 
Act, 1961. and com-mencement. 
~ (2) It shall be deemed to hav~ come into force on the 11th day of 
August, 1961. ' 
2. In the First Schedule to the Constitution under the headin, Amendment 
"THE UNION TBBIUTOIUES" after entry 6, the following entry s~~Jeirat 
shall be inserted namely:- to the. . , ConstitutlOD. 
10 "Dadl" and Nagar Baveli. . ... The territory which immediately 
before the eleventh day of 
August, 1961 was comprised in 
I'ne Dadr. ud Nagar Haveli". 
3. In article 240 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after entPy (b). Amendment 
[5 the following entry shall be inserted, namely: - of article . 240-
"(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The people and the Varishta Panchayat of Free Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli have repeatedly affirmed their request to the Government 
of India for integration of their territories with the Unicn of India 
to which they rightly belong. Their request was recently embodied 
in a formal Resolution adopted by the Varishta Panchayat on the 
12th June, 1961. 
In deference to the desire and request of the people of Free 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli for integration of their territories with the 
Union of India, the Government of India have decided that these 
territories should form part of the Union cf India. 
It is proposed to specify these areas expresdy as the Union 
territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli by amending the First Schedule 
to the Constituticn. It is further proposed to amend clause (1) of 
article 240 of the Constitution to include therein the Union territory 
of Dadra and Nalar Haveli in order to enable the President to make 
regulations for the peace, progress and good government of the terri-
tory. 
The Bill seeks to giv ~ effect to these proposals. 
NEW DI:Lm:. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 

, 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
On the integration of Dadra and Nagar Haveli with the Union of 
India and its inclusion as a specific Union territory in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, the entire administration of the territory 
will become the responsibility of the Central Government. This will 
necessarily involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India . 
. This will also, however, involve the amalgamation of the revenues 
derived in the territory with the Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. During the current budget year, the revenue is expected to be 
about R$. 18 lakhs and ordinary expenditure about Rs. lliakhs, leaving 
a sur-plus of approximately Rs. 7 lakhs. With their integration, these 
areas will also be brought within the scope of the Development Plan 
of the Union of India and the anticipated surplus will ~ availed of 
for special development schemes for these areas, supplemented jf 
necessary by additional amounts from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
3. Over the past few years, the Administration of Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli have accumulated sUi'pluses amounting to Rs. 30 lakhs. On 
the integration of these areas with the Union of India, these 
accumulated surpluses will accrue to the Consolidated F.und of India . 
• 
3 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS I"ROM TtiJ: CONSTITUTION or INDIA 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
• • • • • • 
II. TIlE UNION TERRITORIES 
Name 
I. Uclhi 
2. Himachal Pradesh 
3. Manipur 
'4. Tripura 
• 
'i. The Andaman and Nico-
. bar Islands. 
Extent 
The territory which immediately hefore 
the commencement of this Constitution 
was comprised in the Chief <;Ommis-
sioner's Province of Delhi. 
The territories which immediately before 
the commencment of this Constitution 
were being administered as if they were 
Chief Commissioners' Provinces under the 
names of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur. 
The territory which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution 
was being administered as if it were a 
Chief Commissioner's Province under the 
name of Manipur. 
The territory which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution 
was being administered as if it were a 
Chief Commissioner's Province under 
the namel-of Tripura . 
The Territory which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution was 
comprised in the Chief Commissioner's 
Province of the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands. 
6. The Laccsdive, Minicoy The territory specified in section 6 of the 
and Amindivi Islands. States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
• • • • • • H8. (1) The President may make regulations for the 
progress and good government of the Union territory of-
peace Pow~r of , Preudenl to 
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 
(b) the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands. 
• • • • 
4 
GMGIPND-L9I-7zo=(B) L.S.-9-8-61-1340. 
• • 
make re~­
JadODI for 
c:ertaiD 
Umoo 
territorica. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
fUrther to ar.lend the Constitution of India • 
• 
(Shri JarDahtlr/aJ Nlhnl, 
Minister of Eztmuri 
Affairs) 