10 of 1152. 
AJj INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA ON 
1 9 u ;"I~,: .': ,," ,,,.J" ~b:" w 
".,~ .. -.".,,~' 
'Bill No. 43 of 1"3 
THE REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISITION OF 
IMMOVABLE PROPERTY (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
ftl.:rther to am~d the Requilitioning and Aequiaitioft of' Immoo-
able Propert'JI Act, 1952. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Requisitioning and Acquisition Short title. 
of Immovable Property (Amendment) Act, 1963. 
5 Z. In section 1 of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Amendment ! 
Property Act, 1952, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section of section 1. J 
10 
shall be substituted, namely:- ',' 
cc (3) It shall ceMe to have efteet on the 14th day of March, 
1970, except as respects things done or omitted to be dbne before 
such cesser of operation of this Act, and section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon such cesser of operation as if 
it had then been repealed by a Central Act.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Propery Ad, 
i952, which empowers the ~ntral Government to requisition im-
movable property for the purposes of the Union and to acquire 
requisitioned property under certain circumstanges 19 due to expire 
on the 14th March, 1964. 
It is common knowledge that with the continued expansion of 
developmental activities of the Government there has been an 
appreciable inc:rease in the demand for ofllce and residential accom-
modation. As at present, the shortage estimated is approximately 
59 lakh sq. ft. of office accommodation and 74,000 units of residential 
accommodation in Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta and Madras. Any step 
to release the property held under requisition at this .tege will only· 
aggravate the existing shortuge. At the same time, it may not be 
possible to acquire that property in view of the expenditure involved 
which may run into several crores of rupees. The conversion of 
existing requisitioning into leases, besides beini expensive, is frauibt 
with much difficulty as landlords are generally averse- to making 
leases in favour of Government. Under the present circumstances, 
therefore, the need to requisition or continue under requisition pro-
perty for essential Union purposes is likely to persist for some time 
to come. Accordingly, it is proposed that the life of the existing Act 
be extended far a further period of six years i.e. up to the 13th day 
of March, 1970. . 
)4ED CHAND KHANNA. 
NEW DfLln; 
The 4th Novemlter, 1_. 
~- ..... ... 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
1'he R~ut.itionin, and Aequisition of Immovable Property Act; 
1952, which empowers the Central Govemmoent to requisition im-
movable property for the purposes of the Union and "to acquire 
requisitioned property under certain circumstances is due to .xpire 
on the 14th March, 1964. This Bill seeks to extend tht! life of the 
existin, Act for a further period of liz yean i .•. u, to tke l1tk day 
of March, 1970. The power of the Central Government to requisition 
immovable property for tht! purposes of the Union and to aequire 
requisitioned property will continue and some of the property which 
is subject to :requisition at present may continue to be subject to 
requisition for some time more. The continuance of the Act does 
not, howewr, necessarily involve any additional expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. On the contrary if the Government 
releaS'es the property held at present under :requisition, it ,ould 
have to take lease of other property and pay rent in respect thereof 
which in the conditions now prev.nina would be much areater. AI 
the number of requisitioned property varies from time to time and 
as requisitioned property can also be acquired, it is extremely difll-
cult to ,ive an estimate of the amount of compensation that may be 
payable in respect of requisitioned property for any future period. 
At the present moment, however, it is eatimated that the amount of 
annual expenditure on account of payment of compenaation for 
requisitioned propllrty would be of the order ot Rs. 50 lakha . 
• 

ANNUUIUC 
~CT .. '"" 'l\IlQlnsl'l'IOlmlG AIID ~QVJlllTlQlll ",~ 
hoRan Ar:r. 1952 ' 
(Ie ,. 11ft} 
•• • • •. 
Short tlUe. 1. V) ~ Act me, be callad the Bequili.tiontnl' and Acquisition 
aWnto aDd of IDUDDvable Property Act, 1852. 
durat101L 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and ~a8hmir. 
(3) It Iball remain in foree for a period of twelve years from 
the c1.\e of the commencement of this Act . 
• • • • • • 

I '. 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Requisitioning and Acquisitioo of 
Immovable Property Act, 1952. 
(Sh,; Mehr Chand Khanna, 
Minister of Works, Housing and Rehabilitation.) 