As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
8W No. 43 of 1184. 
TIlE ESTATE DUTY (DISTRIBUTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 1984 
A 
BILL 
furtlier to amend the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
9f India as follows:-
1. (1) 'Ibis Act may be called the Estate Duty ~Distribution) 
Amendment Act, 1984. 
Short 
title 
and com-
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the lst day of April, 1984. mence-
z. In the long title of the Estate duty (Distribution) Act, 1962 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act>, for the words figures and let-
ters "report dated the 28th day of October, 1978", the words figures and let-
I~ ters "interim report dated the 14th day of November, 1983" shall be substi-
tuted. "1' .. : 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1 ),-
(a) for the words figures and letters "each of the financial years 
commencing on and after the 1st day of ApriJ, 1979", the words, figures 
and letters, "the financial year comqaencing on the ist day of ApriJ, 1984" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "be distributed", the words "be distributed, 
provisionally," shall be substituted. -
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
long 
title ot 
Act 90t 
1962. 
Amend_ 
ment ot 
section 3. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The net proceeds of estate duty in respect of property other than 
agricultural land levied and collected by the Government of India are to 
be assigned to the States within which the duty is Leviable, and distributed 
among them in accordance with such principles of distribution as may 
be formulated by Parliament by law in terms of article 269 of the Consti-
tution. The distribution of net proceeds of the duty levied a~d collected 
under the Estate Duty Act, 1953 is at present made in tenn.s of the Estate 
Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962 as amended by the Estate Duty (Disn,i-
bution) A.mendment Act, 1979 on the basis of the recommendations of 
the Seventh Finance Commission. The Eighth Finance Commission, in 
its inte,rim report dated 14th November, 1983 has 'recommended that the 
existing arrangements in tespect of the distribution between the Union and 
the States of the net proceeds of estate duty may continue provisionaRy 
during the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1984. 
This provisional distribution would, however, be subject to such re-
adjustments as may be necessary on the basis of the final report of the 
Commission. This Bill seeks to amend the Estate Duty (Distribution) 
Act, 1962 to give effect to the interim recommendations of the Eighth 
Finance Commission regarding the provisional distribution of the net pro-
ceeds of the estate duty of property other than agricultural land, except 
the proceeds attributable to the Union territories, among the States. 
NEW DELm; 
The 23rd April 1984. PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EZTATE DUTY (DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 1962 
(9 OF 1962) 
• • • • 
An. Act to provide for the distribution of the net proceeds of the estate 
duty among the States in pursuance of the principles of distribution 
fonnulated and the recommendations madi by the Finance Commis-
sion in its report dated, the 28th day of October, 1978. 
3. (1) During each of the financial years commencing on and after 
the lst day of April, 1979, the net proceeds of estate duty levied and col-
lected during that financial year shall, after deducting therefrom the net 
proceeds attributable to Union territories, be distributed among 'he States 
in proportion to the gross value of all property situated in the respective 
States and brought j~ assessment in that financial year. 
• • • • • 
Distribu_ 
tion of 
net pro-
ceeds' 
of estate 
dutya&9ig-
Ded to the 
Slates . 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962. 
(Sh,.i Pranab Kuma,. Mukhe"jee, 
Minister of Finance.) 