BlB No. 13 of 1'55 
O~M P LllJ1t..AlCY. 
THE INDIAN COCONUT 
CO~TTEE (~NDMENT) 
BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LolC SABRA) 

VII of 
J~J3 
Bill No. 43 of 1,55 
THE INDIAN COCONUT COMMITTEE (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 19S5 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Coconut Committee Act, 1944. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Coconut Committee ho tl S rt tie (Amendment) Act, 1955. and commen-
cement. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
10 
" 
2. In section 2 of the Indian Coconut Committee Act, 1944 (here- Am elm 
after in this Act referred to as the principal Act).- of 8~onen!1 
Act X of 
(i) after clause (bb), the following clause shall be inserted, 1944. 
namely:-
"(bbb) 'managing agent' has the meaning assigned to it in 
the Indian Companies Act, 1913."; 
(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted .. 
namely:-
"(cc) 'occupier' in relation to any mill, means the person 
who has ultimate control over the affairs of the mill 
and where the said affairs are entrusted to a managing 
agent, such agent shall be deemed t~ be the occupier 
of the mill.". 

Amendment 
of 5CClion 4, 
Act X 01 
1944. 
• 
2 
3. In section 4 of the principal Act,·-
(a) in clause (b),-
(i) for the words "ten PCrsO.1S".' the words "twelve persons" 
shall be substituted; and 
(ii) for the words "two shall be nominated by the Govt>rn· 5 
ment of Mac:tras, three by the Government of the State 
" 
of 'fravancore-Cochin", the words "three shall be 
nominated by the Government of Madras, fom by the 
Government of Travancore-Cochin" shall be substI-
tuted; 10 
-_ .. - --(b) In clause (c), for the word "Association", the word 
.. ,' "Chaffi'aeF~' shall be substkuted; . 
(c) in clause (d),-
(i) for the words "five persons", the words "eight persons" 
shall be substituted; and J 5 
(ii) for the word "Madras", the words "Bombay, _Madra~, 
Orissa, West Bengal,", shall be substituted: 
(d) in clause (1), for the words "one person", the words "five 
persons" shall be substituted; 
(e) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, ,.0' 
. namely:-
"(g) three other persons, of whom. two shall be elected 
from among themselves by the members of the House 
of the People and one shall be elected from among 
themselves by the members of the Council of States.". 25. 
Amendment 4. In sections 9A, 10. 11, 12 and 13 of the principal Act, for the 
;~,-;~0:'i., word "owner" wherever it occurs, the word "occupier" shall be 
12, and 13, substituted ActXof . 
1944, 

STATEMENT OF' .o.&JEC'fS· ANQ REASONS 
The question of l'econstitutin~f the- Indian Central CocOnut 
Committee has been under consideration of the Government of 
India for some time. Section 4(b) of the Indian Coconut Committee 
Act, 1944 provided for nine representatives of growers of coconut 
in India. Under the Andhra (Adaptation of Laws on Union S\.:bje~ts) 
Or-der, 1954, this number was raised to ten thereby. giving representa-
tion to the State of Andhra. The representation of growers on the 
Committee is even now considered inadequate and it hlu; been decid~ 
ed to increase the number of growers' representatives to twelve and 
allot these two seats to the representatives of growers in Madras and 
Travancore-Cochin. ' 
The representation given to the State Governments on the Com-
mittee is also not considered adequate. The Commit.tee have been' 
running some schemes in the States of Bombay, Orissa~_and West 
Bengal and these States do not have any representation on:. the Com-
mittee. It has' therefore been decided to give them rppresentation 
on the Committee by amending section 4(d) of the Act. 
Under section 4(f) of the Act one person is appointed by the' 
Central Government as a member of the Committee. It has been 
decided-to increase the number of members to be apPointed by the' 
Government under the above section from one to five. . . 
The word "owner" in relation to a mill has been used in several 
pla~es in the Act, but has not been defined. It is proposed to 
substitute the word "'occupier" for the word "owner" throughout the' 
Act ~nd to insert a comprehensive definition of "occupier" so that 
action under the Act may be effective. 
A.. P. JAIN. 
NEW DELHI;' 
The 6th AugUst, 1955. 
,,~ .. ............. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN CocoNUT CoMWTl'EE Ar:r. 1944 
lAr:r No. X OF 1944) 
Constitution· f. As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the-
~ Central Government shall cause to be constituted a Committee con-
mittee. sisting of the following members to receive for credit to the Fund 
the proceeds of the duty and any other moneys received by it and to-
administer the Fund, namely:-
• • • • • 
(b) ten persons representing the growers of coconut in India, 
of whom two shall be nominated by the Government of 
Madras, three by the Government of the State of 
Travanoore-Cochin and one each by the Government of 
Bombay, the Government of West Bengal, the Government 
of Orissa, the Government of the State of Mysore, and 
the Government of Andhra; 
(c) five persons representing the coconut oil industry, two of 
whom shall be nominated by the Government of the State 
of Travancore-Cochin and one each by the Government of 
Madras, the Indian Merchants Association, Bombay, and 
the Bombay Chamber of Commerce, Bombay. 
(d) five persons representing, respectively, the Governments~ 
of Andhra, Assam, Madras, Mysore and Travancore·Cochin,. 
appointed in each case by the State Government concerned; 
• • • • • 
(f) one person appointed by the Central Government; 
(g) six other persons, of whom two shall ,be elected from among-
themselves by the members of the House of the People, 
one shall be elected from among themselves by the mem-
bers of the Council of States, one shall be nominated by 
. the Government of the State of Mysore and two shall be-
nominated by the Government of the State of Travancore-
Cochin. 
• * • • • 
4 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BIll 
further to amend the Indian Coconut Committee AI;t, 
1944. 
(Shri Ajit PrQMUJ Jain, 
M.". of PtJDd ttnd ~) 