Bill No, 43 of 1953. 
trUE ANDHRA Sl'ATE BILL, IOf)3 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
I 
BnJ. 
to pTovide for the formation of the State of Andhra, the increasing 
of the area of the State of Mysore and the diminishing of the 
area of the Statp ()f Madras, and for matteTs connected there-
with. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called 
the Andhra State Act, 1953. 6 
(!), This Part and sections 43, 54, 58, 61, 62, 63, 6;, 66 and 69 shall 
come mto force at once, and all other provisions of this Act shall 
come into force on the 1st day of October, 1953. 
Z. Deftn1tloDS.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,- 10 
(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of October, 1953: 
(b) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(c) "Assembly constituency", "Council constituency" and 
"Parliamentary constituency" have the same meaning as 
in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950); 15 
(d) "law" includea any enactment, ordinance, regulatiOn, 
order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument 
having the force of law in the whole or in any part of the State 
of Madras or Mysore as constituted immediately befctre the 
appointed day; 20 
(e) "Order" means an Order published in the Official 
Gazette; 
<f) "sitting member", in relation to either House of 
Parliament or of the Legi-.;iature of a State, means a person 
who immediately befctre the appointed day is a member of 25 
that House; 
(g) "transferred territory" means the territory added to the 
State of Mysore by sub-section (1) of section 4. 

PARTll 
FORMATION 01' ANDHRA STATE AND TRANSFER OF TERRITORY FROII 
.MADRAS TO MYSORE 
3. FonnatioD of ADdhra State.-(l) As from the appointed day. 
S there shall be formed a Part A State to be known as the State of 
Andhra comprising the territories which immediately before that 
day were comprised in Srikakulam, Visakbapatnam, East Godav~. 
West Godavari, Krishna, Guntur, Nellore, Kurnool, Anantapur. 
Cuddapah and Chittoor districts and in the Alur, Adoni and Raya-
10 drug taluks of Bellary district in the State of Madras and the sail! 
territories shall thcreupon cease to form part of the State of Madra& 
(2) Without pre.judice to the power of the State Government to 
alter hereafter the extent, boundaries and names of districts, the 
said taluks of Alllr <:nd Arion; shall be included in, and become part 
15 of, Kurnool ciistrict, I:1r·d the said taluk of Rayadrug shall be in-
cluded in, and become part of, Anantapur district. 
30 
85 
40 
4. Transfer of territory from Madras to Mysore.-(l) As from the 
appointed day, there shall be added' to the State of Mysore the.: 
territory which immediately before that day was comprised in the 
taluks of Bellary district other than Alur, Adoni and Rayadrug m 
the State of Madras, and the said territory shall thereupon cease 
to form part of the State of Madras. 
(2) Without prejudice to the power of the State Government to 
alter hereafter the extent, boundaries and names of districts, the 
transferred territOlY shall form a separate district to be known AI 
Bcllary district. 
5. AmeMment of the First Schedule to the CoutItuitoD.-In the 
First Schedule to the Constitution-
(a) in Part A, entries 1 to 9 shall be renumbered as 
entries 2 to 10 respectively, and before entry 2 as so re-
numbered, the entry "1. Andhra" shall be inserted; 
(b) in Part A, in the description of the territories CIf States-
(i) before the paragraph relating to the territory of the 
State of Assam, the following paragraph shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"The territory of the State of Andhra shall com-
prise the territories specified in sub-sec~ion (1) of section 
3 of the Andh,ra State Act, 1953."; and 
(ii) at the end of the last paragraph, the following ahRll 
be added, namely:-
"but in the case of the State of Madras shall not 
include the territories specified in sub-section (1) of sec-

3 
tion 3 and sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Andhra 
State Act, 1953."; and 
(c) in Part B, at the end of the paragraph containing thP 
-description of the Territaries of States, the following shall be 
..added, namely: - 5 
"and in the case of the State of Mysore shall also com-
prise the territory specified in sub-section (1) of section 4 of 
the Andhra State Act, 1953." 
PART III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 10 
Council of States 
6. Representation in the Council of States.-The number of seats 
:8Ilotted to the State of Madras in the Council of States shall be 
£educed from 27 tC1 18, and there shall be allotted 12 seats to the 
.State of Andhra in the said Council. 15 
"I. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the ConstitUtlOD.-In 
the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution-
(a) in the Table of Seats relating to the States specified in 
Part A of the First Schedule-
(i) entries 1 to 9 shall be renumbered as entries 2 to sa 
10 respectively; 
(ii) before entry 2 as so renumbered, the entry 
"1. Andhra ............ 12" shall be inserted; 
(iii) in column 2, for the figures "27" and "145" tbe 
figures "18" and "148" shall respectively. be substituted; S5 
(b) at the end of the Table of Seats, fcJr the figures "204" the 
figures "207" shall be substituted. 
8. Allocation of sitting members.-The nine sitting members of 
"the Council of States representing the State of Madras whose names 
are specified in Part I of the First Schedule shall be deemed to have 80 
been elected by the elected Members of the Legislative Assembly 
.of Andilra to fill nine of the seats allotted to the State of Andhra 
d.n the Council of States; and the remaining eighteen sitting members 
-whose names are specified in Part II of that Schedule shall continue 
to be members of the Council of States representing the State of 81 
Madras. 
t. Bye-electlon to fill vaeanefes.-As soon as may be after the 
,appointed day, there shall be held a bye-election to fill the vacancies 
existing on the appointed day in the seats allotted to the State of 
..Andhra in the Council of States. 40 

6 
10 
11 
10 
ao 
• 
4 
18. Term of omce.-(l) E~cept as provided in sub-section (2)" 
the terms of office of the members specified in the First Schedul~ 
shall remain unaltered, that is to say, as indicated in that Schedule. 
(2) The term of office-
(a) of one of the two members specified against serial num-
bers 4 and 5 in Part I of the First Schedule shall be increased. 
so as to expire on the 2nd day of April~ 1958, and 
(b) of one of the seven members specified against serial 
numbers 7 to 13 in Part II of that Schedule shall be reduced so-
as to expire on the 2!ld April, 1954. 
(3) The member whose term of office is to be increased under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2) and the member whose term of office 
is to be reduced under clause (b) of that sub-section shall be deter-
mined as soon as may be after the appointed day by lot drawn in. 
such manner as the Chairman of the Council of States may direct. 
(4) The term of office of each of the three members to be elected: 
by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra under 
section 9 shall expire on the 2nd day of April, 1956. 
Home of the People 
11. Representation in the House of the PeopJe.-(l) The numb~r' 
of seats allotted in the House of the People to the State of Madras-
shall be reduced frdm 75 to 46, the number of seats allotted to the 
State of Mysore shall be increased from 11 to 12, and there shall },&. 
apotted 28 seats to the State of Andhra in that House. 
(2) In the First Schedule to the Representation of the People-
Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950)-
(a) in the Part relating to Part A States,-
(i) entries 1 to 9 shall be renumbered as entries 2 to' 
10 respectively, and before entry 2 as sa renumbered, the 
following entry shall be inserted, namely:-
"1. Andhra ...... 28"; and 
(ii) for the entry in column 2 against Madras, the entry 
"46" shall be substituted; and 
(b) in the Part relating to Part B States, for the entry iJl, 
column 2 against Mysore. the entry "12" shall be substituted. 
lZ. DeUmltatiOll 01 constttuenctes.-The Delimitation of Parlia-
mentary and Assembly Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951 and 
the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
(Mysore) Order, 1951 shall, until other provision is made by law, 
have effect subject to the modifications directed by the Second 
Schedule. 
13. Provision as to sittinr members.-Every sitting member of the-
House of the People representing a constituency which on the appoint.. 

~ 
-ed day by virtue of the provisions of section 12 stands transferred, 
1rhether with or without alteration of boundaries, to the State at. 
Andhra or to the State of Mysore, shall be deemed to have been 
-elected to the House of the People by that constituency as so traDS-
;ferred. 5 
14. Electoral rolls for modUled Parliamentary constltuencles.-
Where by virtue of the provisions of section 12, the extent of • 
. Parliamentary constituency has altered, the electoral roll for that 
·eanstituency as so altered shall, as from the appointed day and 
until it is revised in accordance with law, be deemed to consist of 1. 
-so much of the electoral roll or rolls for any Parliamentary 
~stituency or constituencies as relate to the areas comprised 
'within the constituency as so altered. 
Legislative A3semblies . 
15. Strenlth of Legislative AssembHes.-(l) The total number of 1. 
cleats to be filled by persons chosen by direct election-
(a) in the Legislative Assembly of Andhra, shall be 140, 
(b) in the Legislative Assembly of Madras, shall be 
reduced from 375 to 230, and 
(c) in the Legislative Assembly of Mysore shall be increased 20 
~m~to~ . 
(2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People 
.Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950)-
(a) in the Part relating to Part A States,-
(i) entries 1 to 9 shall be renumbered as entries 2 to 10 25 
respectively, and before entry 2 as so renumbered, the 
fullowing entry shall be inserted, namely:-
"1. Andhra ..................... 140"; and 
(ii) for the entry in column 2 against Madras, the entry 
'230' shall be substituted; and 81 
(b) in the Part relating to Part B States, for the entry in 
column 2 against Mysore, the entry '104' shall be substituted. 
16. AlIocatioll of members.-(l) Every sitting member of the 
'l..eeis~ative Assembly of Madras representing a constituency which 
<In the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 12 stands 36 
transferred, whether with or withaut alteration of boundaries, to 
the State of Andhra or to the State of Mysore shall, as from the 
appointed day, cease to be a member of the Legi3lative Assembly 
of Mad~·as and shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legisla-
tive Assembly of Andhra or, as the case may be, of Mysare by that 40 
-C)nstituency as so transferred. 

6 -
(2) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of MadraS:. 
nominated to that Assembly under article 333 to represent the-
Anglo-Indian community shall, notwithstanding the diminution in 
the area of that State, c<tntinue to represent the said community in 
& that Assembly under that article. 
17. Duration of Legislative AssembUes.-(l) The period of five-
years referred to in clause (1) of article 172 shall, in the case of the 
Legislative Assembly of Andhra, be deemed to have commenced on-
the date on which it actually commenced in the case of the-
10 Legislative Assembly of Madras. 
(2) The changes in the composition df the Legislative Assembli~­
of Madras and Mysore shall not affect the duration of either of those--
Assemblies as provided under clause (1) of article 172. 
18. Electoral rolls for modiJled Assembly coDstituencies.- Wher~-
16 by virtue of the provisions of section 12 the extent of an Assembly 
constituency has altered, the electoral roll for that constituency as-
so altered shall, as from the appointed day and until it is revised-
in accordance with law, be deemed to consist of so much of the 
electoral roll or rolls for any Assembly constituency or constituen-
80 cies as relate to the areas comprised within the constituencyas 0-
altered. 
Legislative Councils 
19. Madras Legislative Councll.-( 1) In the Legislative Council 
of Madras there shall be 51 seats of which-
15' (a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the elec-
torates referred to in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) 
of article 171 shall be 14, 4 and 4 respectively; 
(b) the number to kx> filled by persons elected by the mem-
bers of the Legislative Assembly of Madras in accordance with 
ao the provisions of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be 18; 
and 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the-
Governor of Madras in accordance with the provisions of sub-
clause (e) of the said clause shall be 11: 
85 Provided that as from the 22nd day of April, 1954-
(a) the number of seats to be filled by persons elected by 
the electorates refen"ed to in sub-clause (b) of clause (3) of 
article 171 shall be increased to 6, and 
(b) the number of seats to be filled by persons referred to-
40 in clause (c) of this sub-section shall be reduced to 9. 
(2) The two additional seats allotted under clause (a) of the-
proviso to sub-section (1) shall, for the purpose of filling them for-

7 
the first time, be deemed to be seats rendered vacant by the members 
of the Legislative Council of Madras retiring on the expiration of 
their terms of office on the 21st day of April, 1954. 
(3) The Third Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 
1950 (XLIII of 1950) shall,- 5 
(a) as from the appointed day and until the 22nd day of 
April, 1954, ~tand amended as follows:-
For the entry relating to Madras, the entry-
"3. Madras 51 14 4 4 18 11" 
shall be substituted; and 10 
(b) as from the 22nd day of April, 1954, stand amended as 
follows:-
For the entry relating to Madras, the entry-
"3. Madras 51 14 6 4 18 9" 
shall be substituted. 15 
ZOo Madras Council constituencles.-The Delimitation of Council 
Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951, shall, until other provision is 
made by law, have effect subject to the modifications directed 15y the 
Third Schedule: 
Provided that as from the 22nd day of April, 1954, the Table 20 
appended to paragraph 2 of that Order shall have effect subject to 
the further modification that for the entry in column 3 thereof 
against "Madras (Graduates)" constituency the entry "6" shall be 
substituted. 
21. Members of the Madras Legislative Councll aIld their tenns 25 
Of ollce.-(l) The sitting members of the Legislative CounCil of 
Madras whose names are not specified in the Fourth Schedule shall, 
on the apPointed day, cease to be members of that Council. 
(2) The sitting members of the Legislative Council represepting 
the Madras South (Graduates) constituency and the Madras South 80 
(Teachers) constituency shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed 
to have been elected to the Legislative Council of Madras by the 
Madras (Graduates) constituency and the Madras (Teachers) 
constituency, respectively. 
(3) The terms of office of those sitting members who do not 36 
eea!.Ze td be members of the Legislative Council on the appointed day 
shall be determined in accordance with the provisions contained in 
the Fourth Schedule. 
ZZ. Mysore Legislative CouncU.-(l) The Delimitation of Council 
Constituencies (Mysore) Order, 1951, shall, until other provision is 40 
made by law, have effect subject to the moarlication directed by the 
.Fifth Schedule. 

8 
(2) Any reference in the said Order to the State of Mysore shall 
be construed as including the territory added to that State by sub-
section (1) of section 4. 
(3) The sitting members of the Legislative Council of Mysore 
5 representing the Chitaldrug (Local Authorities) constituency shall, 
as trom the appointed day, be deemed to have been elected to that 
Council by the Chitaldrug-cum-Bellary (Local Authorities) 
constituency. 
(4) Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of Mysore 
10 representing the Mysore (Graduates) constituency or the Mysore 
(Teachers) constituency, the boundaries of which are by virtue of 
the provisiO'lls of sub-section (2) altered, shall, as from the appointed 
day, be deemed to have been elected to the said Council by that 
cO'llstituency as so altered. 
15 23. Electoral rolls for modifled CouneU constltuencies.-As soon 
as may be after the appointed day, the electoral rolls for the Mysore 
(Graduates) constituency and the Mysore (Teachers) constituency 
shall be revised and an electoral roll shall be prepared for the 
Chitaldrug-cum-Bellary (Local Authorities) constituency of the 
20 Mysore Legislative Cctuncil in accordance with the provisions of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), and the rolls 
so revised or prepared shall come into force immediately upon their 
final publication in accordan<;:e with the rules made under that Act. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
25' 24. Revision of the Sebeduled Castes aDd Scheduled Tribes 
Orders.-The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, and the 
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, shall have effect subject 
to the modifications directed by the Sixth Schedule. 
2.5. Rules of Procedure of the ADdhra Legislative Assembly.-
30 The rules as to procedure and conduct of business in force 
immediately before the appointed day with respect to the Legisla-
tive Assembly of the State of Madras shall, until rules are made 
under clause (1) of article 208, have effect in relation to the Legisla-
tive Assembly of the State of Andhra subject to such modifications 
36 and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof. 
40 
26. Amendment of section 2, Act XLID of 1958.-Section 2 of the 
rtepresentation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), shall be re-
numbered a~: sub-section (1) of section 2 and to the said section as 
so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:-
"(2) Any reference in this Act to an order made under 
section 6, section 9 or section 11 shall, unless the context other-
wise requires, be construed as including a refereM8 to uy suell 

9 
order as modified under section 12, section 20 or section 22, as 
the case may be, of the Andhra State Act, 1953." 
2'7. Amendment of section 9, Act LXXXI of 1952.-In sub-section 
0(3) of section 9 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1952 (LXXXI 
.of 1952), for the words "and the orders made under either of the 5 
said Acts" the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"the Andhra State Act, 1953, and the orders made under 
any of the said Acts". 
PART IV 
HIGH COURTS 
28. High Court for Andhra.-(1) As froIl1- the 1st day of January, 
1956, or such earlier date as may be appointed under sub-section (2), 
there shall be a separate High Court for the State of Andhra (here-
inafter referred to as "the High Court of Andhra"). 
10 
(2) The President may, if a resolution recommending the estab- 16 
lishment of a separate High Court for the State of Andhra has, after 
having been adopted by the Legislative Assembly of that State, been 
.submitted to him, appoint, by notification in the Official Gazette, a 
date earlier than the 1st day of January, 19GB, for the purpose of sub-
section (1). 10 
(3) The date mentioned in sub-section (1) or, if an earlier date is 
.appointed under sub-section (2), the date so appointed is hereinafter 
referred to as the "prescribed day". 
%9. Judie! of the Awlhra Hleh Court-( 1) Such of the Ju.dces 
·()f the High Court at Madras holding office immediately before the 21 
;prescribed day as may be determined by the President shall on that 
day cease to be Judges of the High Court at Madras and become 
.Judges of the High Court of Andhra. 
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub-section (1) become Judges 
· of the High Court of Andhra shall, except in the case where any 80 
such person is appointed to be the Chief Justice of that High Court, 
rank in that Court according to the priority of their respective 
arnni'1tmentR as Judges of the High Court at Madras. 
(3) Any person who by virtue of sub-section (1) becomes a Judge 
'of the High Court of Andhra shall, except in the case where a Judge 85 
other than the Chief Justice of the High Court at Madras is appoint-
· ed to be the Chief Justice of the High Court of Andhra, continue 
to be entitl~d to receive in respect of time spent on actual service 
as a Judge of the High Court of Andhra the special pay which he 
· was drawing immediately before the prescribed day under sub-para- .. 
:graph (2) of paragraph 10 of the Second Schedule to the ConstitutioD. 

10 
38. Jurlsdletlon of Andhra HIgb Com.-The High Court of 
Andhra s~all have, in respect of the territories for the time being. 
included In the State of Andhra, all such original, appellate and 
other jurisdiction as, uneer the law in force immediately before the 
Ii prescribed day, is exercisable in respect of the said territories or any 
part thereof by the High Court at Madras. 
31. Power to enrol advocates, etc.-(l) The High Court of Andhra 
shall have the like power to approve, admit, enrol, remove and 
suspend advocates and attorneys, and to mRke rules with respect to 
10 advocates and attorneys, as are, under the law in force immediately 
before the prescribed day, exercisable by the High Court at Madras. 
(2) The right of audience in the High Court of Andhra shall be 
regulated in accordance with the like principles as, immediately 
before the prescribed day, are in force with respect to ihe right df 
16 audience in the High Court at Madras: 
Provided that, subject to any rule made or direction given by the 
High Court of Andhra in the exercise of the powers conferred by. 
this section, any person who immediately before the prescribed day 
is an advocate entitled to practise or an attorney entitled to act in 
10 the High Court at Madras shall be recognised as an advocate or an. 
attorney entitled to practise or to act, as the case may be, in the 
High Court of Andhra. 
32. Practice and procedure in And.bra High Court.-Subject to 
the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately before the 
U prescribed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High 
,Court at Madras shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in. 
relation to the High Court of Andhra, and accordingly that High Court. 
shall have all such powers to make rules and orders with respect to· 
practice and procedure as are immediately before the prescribed! 
ao day exercisable by the High Court at Madras: 
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately 
before the prescribed day with respect to practice and procedure in 
the High Court at Madras shall, until varied or revoked by rules or' 
orders made by the High Court of Andhra, apply with the necessary 
85 modifications in relation to practice and procedure in the High Court-
of Andhra as if made by that Court. 
33. Custody of the Seal of the Andhra High Court.-The law in 
force immediately before the prescribed day with respect to the· 
custody of the Seal of the High Court at Madras shall, with the 
40 necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the Seal 
of the High Court of Andhra. 
It. Form of wrlts and other processes.-The law in force· 
immediately before the prescribed day with respect to the form or-
writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court. 

11 
at Madras shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect 
to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by 
the High Court of Andhra. 
35. Powers of Judges.-The law in force immediately before the 
prescribed day relating to the powers of the Chief Justice, single 5~ 
judges and division courts of the High Court at Madras and wjth 
respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, 
with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court 
of Andhr.a. 
36. Seat of the Court.-The High Court of Andhra. and the judges 10.' 
and division courts thereof, shall sit at such place or places in the 
State of Andhra as the Chief Justice may, \¥ith the approval of the 
Governor of Andhra, appoint. 
3'7. Procedure as to appeals to the Supreme Court.-The law in 
force immediately before the prescribed day relating to appeals to 15· 
the Supreme Court from the High Court at Madras and the judges 
and division courts thereof shall, with the necessary modifications, 
apply in relation to the High Court of Andhra. . 
38. Transfer of proceedingS from Madras High Court to Andhra 
HIgh Court.-( 1) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court at 2(). 
Madras shall, as from the prescribed day, have no jurisdiction in 
respect of the State of Andhra. 
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Madras 
immediately before the prescribed day as are certified, whether 
before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court 25·, 
having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other 
circumstances to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided 
by the High Court of Andhra shall as soon as may be after such 
certification he transferred to the High Court of Andhra. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and 30' 
(2) of this section or in section 30, but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court at Madras shall have, and the High Court of Andhra 
shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, 
applications for leave to appeal including leave to appeal to the 
Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where 85, 
any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed 
by the High Court at Madras before the prescribed day: 
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained 
by the High Court at Madras, it appears to the Chief Justice of that 
High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 40, 
Andhra he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such 
proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly. 

12 
(4) Any order made by the High Court at Madras-
(a) before the prescribed day, in any proceedings transferred 
to the High Court of Andhra by virtue of sub-section (2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court 
·.fi at Madras retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3), 
·30 
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High 
Court at Madras, but also as an order made by the High Court of 
Andhra. 
39. Savlngs.-Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to 
the High Court of Andhra of any provisions of the Constitution, and 
this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made 
on or after the prescribed day with respect to that High Court by 
any Legislature or other authority having power to make such pro-
vision. 
40. TransitIonal provisiODS.-( 1) The provisions of this section 
shall have effect with respect to the period beginning on the appoint-
ed day tlnd ending immediately before the prescribed day. 
I 
(?) The jurisdiction of the High Court at Madras shall extend to 
the State of Andhra.. and the said High Court shall, in relation to the 
territories of that State, continue to have such jurisdiction as it had 
immediately before the appointed day. 
41. High Court for the added areas of Mysore.-(l) Except as 
. hereinafter provided-
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Mysore shall, as 
from the appointed day, extend to the whole of the transferred 
territory, and 
(b) the High Court at Madras shall, as from that day, have 
no jurisdiction in respect of the transferred territory. 
(2) Such proceed:ngs pending in the High Court at Madras im-
mediately before the appointed day as are certified by the Chief 
.Jul"tice of that High Court having regard to the place of accrual of 
the cause of action and other circumstances to be proceedings which 
ought to be heard and decided by the High Court of Mysore shall, 
as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High 
Court of-Mysore. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub·sections (1) and 
(2), bllt save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at MadrRs shall 
have, and the High Court 'of Mysore shall not have, jurisdiction to 
entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal 
including leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for 
review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any 

13 
relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court at Madras 
before the appointed day: 
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entE'rtain-
ed by the High Court at Madras, it appears to the Chief Justice of 
that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court 5;, 
Ilf Mysore he shall order that they shall be so transferred, aad such 
proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly. 
(4) Any order made by the High Court at Madras-
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transfer~'ed 
to the High Court of Mysore by virtue of sub-section (2); or 1. 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court 
at Madras retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (~), 
~hall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High 
Court at Madras, but also as an order made by the High Court of 
Mysore. 1.6. 
(5) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an 
advocate entitled to practise or an attorney entitled to act in the 
High Court at Madras and was authorised to appear or to act in 
any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High Court 
of Mysore under sub-section(2) or the proviso to sub-section (3) .,.. 
shall, on such transfer of the proceedings, have the right to appear 
or to act, as ~hc case may be, in the High Court of Mysore in relation 
to those proceedings as an advocate or an attorney entitled to 
practise or to act in the High Court of Mysore. 
t!. Interpretation.-For the purposes of sections 38 and 41- 25~ 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court 
until that court has disposed of all issues between th(> parties, 
including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs 01 
the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave 
to appeal including leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applica- 30· 
tions for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs; 
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as includ-
ing references to a Judge or division court thereof, and ff>ferences 
to an order made by a court or ,a Judge shall be construed as 
including references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed 85-
or made by that court or Judge. 
PART V 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
G. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by LegisJa-
&are.-( 1) The Governor of Madras may, at any time before the ap- ~ 
pointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of the State of Andhra and the Consolidated Fund of the State of 

1<4 
I 
"Madras as he deems necessary for a period of not more than three 
months beginning with the appointed day pending the sanction of 
such expenditure by the Legislature of the State of Andhra or the 
State of Madras, as the case may be. 
15 (2) The Rajpramukh of Mysore may also, at any time before the 
appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of the State of Mysore as he deems necessary for meeting the 
additional expenditure in respect of the transferred territory for a 
period of not more than three months beginning with the appointed 
-~O day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of 
the State. 
44. Vote on account by the Madras Legislative Assembly.-Any 
grant made by the Legislative Assembly of Madras under sub-clause 
(a) of clause (1) III article 206 in respect of the estimated expenditure 
~5 for a part of the financial year 195~54 and the law made by the 
Legislature of that State authorising the withdrawal of moneys from 
the Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes for which the 
said grant has been made shall. notwithstanding that the procedure 
prescribed in article 203 for the voting of such grant has not been 
'.to completed and the law in accordance with the provisions of article 
204 in relation to such expenditure has not been passed before the 
appointed day, be deemed to be sufficient authority for all expendi. 
ture incurred before that day for the purposes for which the said 
grant has been made and for the withdrawal of moneys before that 
:'t6 day from the Consolidated Fund of the State in relation to such 
expenditure. 
45. Authorisation under the Madras Appropriation Act to ceaae.-
As from the appointed day, any Act passed by the Legislature of. 
Madras before that day for the appropriation of any money out of 
:ao the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet any expenditure in 
respect of any part of the financial year 1953-54 shall cease to have 
effect. 
46. Reports relating to the accounts of Madras state.-The reports 
of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India referred to in 
a clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the State of 
Madras in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be 
submitted to the Governor of each of the States of Andhra and 
Madras w:to shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature at 
the State. 
-40 47. Apportionment of'assets and Ilabllitles.-(l) Subject to the 
other provisions of this Part, the assets and liabilities of the State of 
Madras immediately before the appointed day shall be apport-:. . .:,;: . 
between that State and the States of Andhra and Mysore it\ ~ . 
.cordance with the provisions containe<i in the Seventh Schedule. 

15 
(2) Any dispute relating to, or arising out of, such apportionment 
~all be referred to the President whose decision shall be ftnal. 
48. Oontracts.-(l) Where before the appointed day the State of 
Madras has made any contract in the exercise of the executive power 
~f that State for any purposes of the State, then such contract shall- Ii 
(a) if such purposes are as from that day-
(i) exclusively purposes of the State of Andhra, or 
(ii) partly purposes of the State of Andhra and partly 
purposes of the State of Mysore and not purposes of the State 
of Madras as constituted on the appointed day, 10 
be deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive 
power of the State of Andhra instead of th~ State of Madras; 
(b) if such purposes are as from that day exclusively purpos-
'es of the State of Mysore, be deemed to have been made in the 
~xercise of the executive power of that State instead of the State 15 
of Madras: and 
(c) in any other case, continue to have effect as having been 
made in the exercise of the executive power of the State of 
Madras; 
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued or may accrue SO 
under any such contract shall, to the extent to which they would 
have been rights or liabilities of the State of Madras as cor~stituted 
immediately before the appointed day, be rights or liabilities of the 
State of Andhra, the State of Mysore or the State of Madras. as the 
-case may be. • 
(2) For the purposes of this section there shall be deemed to be 
included in the liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under 
any contract-
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any 
court or other tribunal in proceedings relating to the contract; 80 
and 
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in COD-
nection with any such proceedings. 
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the provisions relating 
to apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other 85 
ftnancial obligations contained in the Seventh Schedule; and bank 
balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake 
of the nature of contractual rights, be dealt with under the Aid 
provisions. 
49. Llablllty in respect of actlODable wrong.-Where immediately 40 
before the appointed day, the State of Madras is subject to any 

16 
liability in respect of an actionable wrong other than breach of 
contract, that liability shall,-
(a) where the cause of action arose-
(i) wholly within·the territories which as from that day 
are the territories of the State of Andhra, or 
(ii) partly within the territories which as from that day 
are the territories of the State of Andhra and partly within 
the transferred territory but not within any part of the-
territories which as from that day are the territories of the-
10 State of Madras, 
be a liability of the State of Andhra; 
(b) where the cause of action arose wholly within the trans--
ferred territory, be a liability of the State of Mysore; and 
(c) in any other case, continue to be a liability of the State of 
11 Madras. 
SO. Llabll1ty as guarantor.-If immediately before the appointed 
day, the State of Madras is liable as guarantor in respect of any 
liability of a Co-operative Society which is registered under the-
Madras Co-operative Societies Act, 1932 (Madras Act VI of 1932) and' 
10 whose area of operations is limited to the whole or any pArt of the-
territories which on the appointed day become the territories of the-
State of Andhra, then as from that day the said liability of the State' 
of Madras in respect of such guarantee shall be a liability of the-
State of Andhra. 
• 51. Power of President to order allocation or adjustment in 
certain cases.-Where by virtue of any of the provisions of sections 
47 to 50 or of the Seventh Schedule, any of the States of Madras,.. 
Andhra and Mysore becomes entitled to any property or ob+.ains any 
other benefits or becomes subject to any liability, and the President 
ao is of opinion that it is just and equitable that that property or those 
benefits should be transferred to or shared with one or both of the· 
other States. or a contribution towards that liability should be made 
by one or both of the other States. the said property or benefits shall 
be allocated in such manner, or the other State or States shall make 
86 to the State primarily subject to the liability such contribution in 
respect thereof. as the President may. after consultation with the 
State Governments concerned, by order determine. 
52. Certain expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund 
Of the State.-All sums p~yable by any of the States of Madras, 
40 Andhra and Mysore to anyone of the other two States or to the 
Central Government by virtue of the provisions of paragraph 12 
or paragraph 17 of the Seventh Schedule, shall be charged on the 
Conso1i~ated Fund of the State by which such sums are payable. 

1'1 
PART VI 
LEGAL PROVISIONS 
53. Terrltorlal extent of laws.-The provisions of Part II shall not 
be deemed to have effected any change in the territories to which 
any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or &; 
applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of 
Madras or of Mysore shall, until otherwise provided by a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority, continue to have the same 
meaning. 
54. Power to adapt laws.-For the purpose of facilitating the 10 
application in relation to the State of Andhra, Madras or Mysore of 
any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government 
may, before the 1st day of April, 1954, by order make sucn adapta-
tions and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or 
amendment, as maybe necessary or expedient, and thereupon every 15 
such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications 
80 made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature 
or other competent authority. 
ExpZanation.-In this section, the expression "appropriate Govern-
ment" means as respects a law relating to a matter enumerated in SO 
I..ist I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central 
Government, and as respects any other law, the State Government of 
Andhra, Madras or Mysore, as the case may be. 
55. Power to construe laws.-Notwithstanding that no provision 
or insufficient provision has been made under section 54 for the II 
adaptation of a law made before the apPOinted day, any court, 
tribunal or authority required or empowered to enforce such law 
may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in relation ~ the 
State of Andhra, Madras or Mysore, construe the law with such 
alterations not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper ao 
to adapt it to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority, as 
the case may be. 
56. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory 
fuo(.1;lons.-The Governor as respects the State of Andhra and the 
Rajpramukh as respects the transferred territory may, by notification 85 
i.n t.he Official Gazette, specify the authority, officer or person who as 
from the appointed qay shall be competent to exercise such functions 
exercisable under any law in force on that day as may be mentioned 
in that notification and such law shall have effect accordingly. 
57. Legal proceedings concerning the State of Madras.- Where, 40 
immediately before the appointed day, the State of Madras is a party 
to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabi-
lities subject to apportionment between the State of Madras and the 

18 
States of Andhra and Mysore under this Act, the State which suc-
ceeds to, or acquires a share in, that property or those rights or 
liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed 
to be substituted for the State of Madras as a party to those pro-
S ceedings or to be added as a party thereto, as the case may be, and 
the proceedings may continue accordingly. 
58. PrevlsloDs as to eertaln peIdIIaa- proeeedJDJI.-( 1) Every 
proceeding pending immediately before the appointed day before 8 
court (other than the High Court), tribunal, authority or officer-
10 (a) in any area which on that day falls within the State of 
Madras or the transferred territory shall, if it is 8 proceeding re-
lating exclusively to any part of the territories which as from 
that day are the territories of the State of Andhra, stand trans-
ferred to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer 
11 in the State of Andhra, or 
(b) in any area which on that day falls within the State of 
Madras or the State of Andhra shall, if it is a proceeding relatine 
exclusively to any part of the transferred territory, stand trans-
ferred to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer 
10 in the State of Mysore. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should 
~nd transferred under sub-section (1), it shall be referred for the 
decision of the Chief Justice of the High Court at Madras and his 
decision shall be final. 
• (3) In this section-
so 
36 
(a) "proceeding" includes any suit, case or appeal, and 
(b) "corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer" in 
relation to a State means-
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which the 
proceeding would have lain if the proceeding had been insti-
tuted after the appointed day, or 
(it) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or 
officer in the State as may be determined, pefore the appoint. 
ed day by the Governor of Madras, and after the appointed 
day by the Governor or Rajpramukh of that State, to be the 
corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer. 
PART VII 
AoIlINISTRATIVE AND IoUSCELLANEOt1S PROVISIONS 
59. ProvisloBs for detention In, and power to commit to, certaltt 
40 JaIII aDd other blsfttatlona.-(l) The Government of Madras and the 
Government of Mysore shall, for a period of five years from the 

19 
appointed day, make available to the Government of Andhra the jails 
and other institutions speciffed in Part I and Part II respectively of 
the Eighth Schedule for the reception and detention of persons com-
mitted to, or ordered to be detained in, such jails or institutions by 
any court, tribunal or other authority in the State of Andhra. 6 
(2) It shall be competent for a court, tribunal or other authority 
In the State of Andhra to order the commitment to, or detention in, 
any of the jails and other institutions specified in the Eighth 
Schedule during the period referred to in sub-section (1) of persons 
convicted and sentenced, or ordered to be detained therein, by such 10 
court, tribunal or other authority notwithstanding that such jail 
or institution is outside the State. 
(3) The terms and conditions subject to which the jails and other 
institutions specified in the Eighth Schedule shall be used by the 
Government of Andhra for the purposes referred to in sub-section 15 
(1) shall be such as may be agreed upon between the Governments 
concerned by the lst day of January, 1954, or, if no agreement is 
reached by the said date, as may be fixed by order of the Prejlident. 
GO. ContlDuance of facUlties In eertaba State InstltutloDs.-The 
Government of Madras and the Government of Mysore, in respect of SO 
the institutions specified in Part I and Part n. respectively, of the 
Ninth Schedule shall provide for the Government and the people 
of the State of Andhra such facilities, for such period and upon such 
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between thf' Govern-
ments concerned by the 1st day of January, 1954, or, if no agreement 26 
is reached by the said date, as may be fixed by order of the President. 
61. Provisions relating to the Indian Administrative Service and 
the Indian Ponee Servlce.-(1) In place of the cadres of the Indian 
Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service existing in the 
State of Madras immediately before the apPOinted day, there shall, 80 
as from that day, be two separate cadres, one for the State of Andhra 
and the other for the State of Madras. in respect of each of these 
Services. 
(2) The President shall, by order, determine the strength and 
composition of, and the allocation of individual officers to, the said 35 
cadres for each of the States of Andhra and Madras. 
(3) Every officer allocated under Bu·b-section (2) to the cadre for 
the State of Andhra who immediately before the appointed day J-
serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Madras shall,-
(a) if immediately before the appointed day he is holding 40 
any post in any area which on that day falls in the State of 
Andhra, be as from that day, deemed to have been duly appoint-
ed to that post by the Government of Andhra; and 

20 
(b) if immediately before the appointed day he is not holding 
any post in any such area, be appointed by the Government of 
Andhra to a post in connection with the affairs of that State. 
62. Provisions relating to the Indian Clvl1 Service, the Indian 
15 Poliee, the indian Service of Englneers and the Indian Forest 
Servlce.-(1) In respect of the members borne on the Madras 
cadre of. the Services known as the Indian Civil Service, the Indian 
Police, the Indian Service of Engineers and the Indian Forest 
Service, the President shall, by order, determine the allocation of 
10 individual officers to the States of Andhra and Madras. 
(2) Every officer allocated under sub-section (1) to the State of 
Andhra, who immediately before the appointed day, is serving in 
connection with the affairs of the State of Madras shall-
(a) if. immediately before the appointed day, he \s holding 
15 any post in any area which on that day falls in the State of 
Andhra, be deemed, as from that day, to have been duly appoint-
ed to that post by the Government of Andhra; and 
, 
(b) if, immediately before the appointed day, he is not hold-
ing any post in any such area, be appointed by the Government 
20 of Andhra to a post in connection with the affairs of that State. 
63. Provisions relating to other Servlces.-(1) The President may 
by general order require all persons who immediately before the 
appointed day are serving in connection with the affairs of the State 
of Madras in the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 
26 or in the transferred territory and who under the terms of their 
appointments or their conditions of service are not normally liable 
to be transferred outside the said territories or territory in which 
they are serving, to serve as from the appointed day in connection 
with the affairs of the State of Andhra or the State of Mysore, as 
80 the case may be, and all allocations so made by the President shall 
be final. 
(2) The President may by special order require any person who is 
serving immediately before the appOinted day in connection with 
the affairs of the State of Madras and to' wl\om the provisions of sub-
81 section (1) do not apply, to serve in connection with the a.ffairs of 
the State of Andhra. 
(3) Every person who is required to serve under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2) in connection with the affairs of the State of 
Andhra or the State of Mysore shall,-
40 (a) if immediately before the appointed clay he is holding 
any post in connection with the affairs of the State of Madras 
in any area which on that day falls in the State in which he is 

21 
so required to serve, be deemed as from that day to have been 
duly appointed to that post by the Government of, or by other 
appropriate authority in, the State concerned in connection with 
the affairs of that State; and 
(b) if immediately before the appointed day he is not hold- Ii 
ing any post in any such area, be appointed by the Government 
of~ or by other appropriate authority in, the State concerned, to 
a post in connection with the affairs of that State. 
(4) All persons who are required by the President under sub-
section (2) to serve in connection with th-e affairs of the State of 10 
Andhra shall be classified by him into the follow.ing two categories, 
namely:-
(i) officers whose allocation to the State of Andhra is final 
(hereinafter referred to in this section as "allotted officers"), and 
(ii) officers required by the President to serve in connection 16 
with the affairs of the State of Andhra for a limited period as 
provided in sub-section (5) (hereinafter referred to in this sec-
tion as "transferred officers"). 
(5) The period for which a transferred officer may be required 
to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Andhra slolall SO 
be three years: 
Provided that the Government of Andhra may return any such 
officer to the State of Madras at any time before the expiration 
of the said period after giving three months' notice to him and to the 
Government orMadras. 26 
(6) An officer shall be classified under sub-section (4) as an allot-
ted officer or a transferred officer according as he is, or is not, in the 
opinion of the President, suitable for final allotment to the State of 
Andhra. 
(7) A transferred officer shall, during the period he is required to 30 
serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Andhra,-
(a) continue to be in the service of the State of Madras and 
be deemed to be on deputation to the State of Andhra, and 
(b) be entitled in addition to the remuneration which he 
would have drawn if he had continued during such period to 36 
serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Madras, to 
such allowances as the President may by general or special order 
determine. 
(8) A transferred officer shall not be dismissed, removed or re-
duced in rank except with the previous concurrence of the Govern- 40 
ment of Madras, and if the Government of Madras does not concur 
in any such proposal of the Government of Andhra, then the Govern-
ment of Andhra shall notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (5) return the officer concerned to the State of Madras. 

22 
(9) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (7) and (&), the 
condi tions of service of a transferred officer shall be the same as they 
would have been if he had continued to serve in connection with the 
affairs of the State of Madras during the period he ls required to 
5 serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Andhra. 
(10) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in re-
lation to any person to whom the provisions of section 61 or section 62 
apply. 
64. Power of President to &ive dlrect1ons.-The President may 
10 give such directions to the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore 
AS may appear to him to be necessary for the purpose of giving 
effect to the provisions of sections 61, 62 and 63 and ensuring the 
proper division of services among those States. 
65. Report of the Madras Public Service OollUll1sslon.-The report 
15 of the Madras Public Service Commission as to the work done by the 
Commission in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall 
be presented under clause (2) of article 323 to the GovenlOrs of 
Andhra and Madras, and the Governor of Madras shall on receipt of 
such report cause a copy thereof together with a n,emorandum 
20 explaining, as far as possible, as respects the cases, if any, where the 
advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such 
non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of the State of 
'Madras and it shall not be necessary to cause such report or any such 
memorandum to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State 
25 of Andhra. 
66. Speeial provJslons with regard to Tunpbhadra Project.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act but subject to 
the provisions of paragraph 12 of the Seventh Scliedule, all rights 
and liabilities of the State of Madras in relation to the Tunga-
30 bhadra Project or the administration thereof shall, on the appointed 
day, be the rights and liabilities of the States of Andhra and 
Mysore subject to such adjustments as may be made by agreement 
entered into by the said States after consultation with the President 
or, if no such agreement is entered into within two years from the 
35 appointed day, as the President may by order determine having 
due regard to the purposes of the Project, and any such order may 
provide for the management of the Project jointly by the said States 
or otherwise: 
Provided that the order so made by the President may be varied 
40 by any subsequent agreement entered into by the States of Andhra 
and Mysore. 

23 
(2) An agreement or order referred to in sub-section (}) shall, if 
there bas been an extension or further development of the Project 
after the appointed day, provide also for the rights and liabilities of 
the States of Andhra and Mysore in relation to such extension or 
further development. 6 
(3) The rights and liabilities referred to in sub-sections (1) and 
(2) shall include-
(a) the rights to receive and to utilise water which may be 
available for distribution as a ~sult of the Project, 
(b) the rights to receive and to utIlise the power generated 10 
as a result of the Project, 
(c) the rights and liabilities in respect of the administration 
of the Project and the construction, maintenance and operation 
thereof, 
but shall not include the rights and liabilities under any contract 15 
entered into before the appointed day by the Government of Madras 
with any person other than Government. 
(4) The President may from time to time give such directions as 
may appear to him to be necessary generally in regard to any of the 
matters specified in the foregoing provisions c:Jf this section and, in 20 
particular, for the completion of the Project and its operation and 
maintenance thereafter: • 
Provided that no such direction shall be issued or have effect 
after an agreement has been entered into by the States of Andhra 
and Mysore under sub-section (1) or after an order has been made 25 
by the President under that sub-section, whichever is earlier. 
(5) In this section, the expression "Tungabhadra Project" or "the 
Project" means the project agreed to between the Government of 
Madras and the Government of Hyderabad before the appointed day 
and, so far as the State of Madras is concerned, intended for the 30 
supply and, distribution of water from the Tungabhadra river by 
means of high level and low level canals to the districts of Bellary, 
Anantpur, Cuddapah and Kurnool, and for the generation of electric 
,energy, both hydrd-electric and thermal, and its transmission and 
distribution to the said districts and includes any extension or further 35 
development after that day of that project for the said purposes. 
67. Allowances and privUeges of the Governor of Andhra.-
The allowances and privileges of the Governor of Andhra shall, 
until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under 
dause (3) of article 158, be such as the President may, by order, • 
determine. 

24 
68. Effeet of provisions of the Act iDeoDslstent with other 
laws.-The- provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law. 
69. Power to remove cWIlculties.-If any difficulty arises in giving 
Ii effect to the provisions of this Act, the President may by order do 
anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the 
difticul ty. 
10 
• • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
(See sections 8 and 10) 
PART I 
Andhra Members of the Council of State, 
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1958, 
1~ Sri Puchalapalli Sundarayya. 
15 2. Sri Pydah Venkatanarayana. 
3. Sri G. Ranganayakulu alias N. G. Ranga. 
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1956. 
4. Sri Kommareddi Suryanarayana. 
5. Sri S. Sambhu Prasad. 
20 Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1954 • 
• 6. Sri Kotamraju Rama Rao. 
7. Sri Nakkineni Basavapunnaiah. 
8. Sri Neelam Sanjiva Reddy . ., 
9. Sri K. N. Rahimatullah. 
25 PART II 
Madras Members of the Council of State. 
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1958. 
1. Sri T. Bhaskar Rao. 
2. Sri M. Mohamed Ismail. 
30 3. Sri K. L. Narasimham. 
4. Sri G. Rajagopalan. 
5. Sri H. D. Rajah. 
6. Sri V. M. Surendra Ham. 
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 195&. 
35 7. Sri B. V. Kakkilaya. 
8. Sri V. K. Krishna Menon .. 
9. Srimati Mona Hensman. 
10. Sri V. M. Obaidullah Sahib. 
11. Sri T. S. Pattabiraman. 
40 12. Sri A. Ramaswami Mudaliar. 
13. Sri S. Venkataraman. 
. . 

25 
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, ·19M. 
14. Sri Ezhukuttikkal Imbichi Bava. 
15. Sri S. Guruswami. 
16. Sri P. S. Rajagopal Naidu. 
17. Sri K. Sadananda Hegde. _ 
18. Sri T. V. Kamalaswamy. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 12) 
I. MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION 0" PARLIAMENT AND 
ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES (MADRAS) ORDER, 1951. 1'" 
1. In paragraph 1, for "Madras" substitute "Andhra and Madras". 
2. In paragraph 2, for "the State of Madras" substitute "each ot 
the States of Andhra and Madras". ' 
3. In Table A,-
(a) above the entry relating to Pathapatnam constituency. 16~ 
insert the sub-heading "Part I-Andhra"; 
(b) for the entry in column 2 relating to Nandyal consti-
tuency, substitute "The Nandyal, Nandikotkur, Markapur, Cum-
bum, Sirvel and Koilkuntla taluks of the Kurnool District"; 
(c) for the entry in column 2 relating to Kurnool constituency, 20' 
substitute "The Kurnool, Dhone, Pattikonda, Alur and Adoni 
taluks and BangunapaUey sub-taluk of the Kurnool district"; 
ld) omit the entry relating to Bellary constituency; 
(e) for the entry in column 2 relating to Anantapur 
constituency, substitute "The Gooty, Kalyandrug, Tadpatri, 26· 
Rayadrug and Anantapur taluks (excluding Bukkacherla firka 
of the Anantapur taluk) of the Anantapur district"; 
(f) for the entry in column 2 relating to Penukonda consti· 
tuency, substitute "The Bukkacherla ftrka of the Anantapur 
taluk, and the Dharmavaram, Penukonda, Madakasira, Hindu- 30' 
pur and Kadiri taluks of the Anantapur District"; and 
(g) a,bove the entry relating to Madras constituency, insert 
the sub-heading "Part II-Madras". 
4. In Table B,-
(a) above the sub-heading "Srikakulam District" insert the 36· 
sub-heading "PART I-ANDHRA"; 
(b) after the entry relating to Kurnoctl constituency, insert 
the following entry. namely:-
"Adoni The Alur and Adoni taluks. 2 1 ... 
... to 

28 
(c) after the entry relating to Anantapur constituen~, insert 
the following entry, namely:-
"Rayadrug The Rayadrug tal uk. 1 n. ... ..., 
(d) omit the sub-heading "Bellary District" and all entries 
relating to Adoni, Siruguppa, Bellary, Rayadrug, Hospet, Kudligt 
and HarpanahaUi constituencies thereunder; anti 
(e) above the sub-heading "Madras City" insert the sub-
heading "PART II-MADRAS". 
5. In the Appendix, omit the whole of item (14). 
10 U. MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY Am) 
:15 
'30 
AsSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES (MYSORE) ORDER, 1951. 
l. In Table A, add the following entry at the end, namely: -
"Bellary The Bellary district 1 _It 
2. In Table B, add the following entries at the end, namely:-
"BeUary District 
Bellary The BeUary taluk 
Siruguppa The Siruguppa taluk 
Hospet 
Kudligi 
Rarpana 
halli. 
The Hospet and Sandur taluks 
The Kudligi taluk, the Chigateri 
firka of the Harpanahalli 
taluk, and the Ittigi firka 
(excluding Hampasagara, 
Yenigi, Bannieal, Yenigi 
Basapur, G. Kodihalll, Kodla-
bal, Byasigideri, Hagari-
bommanahalli and Chintra-
palli villages) of the Hada-
galli taluk. 
The Harpanahalli, Arsikere 
and Teligi firkas of the Har-
panahalli taluk; and the 
Hirehadagalli, HadagaUi and 
Tambarahalli firkas and Ham 
pasagara" Yenigi, Bannical, 
Yenigi Basapur, G. Kodihalli, 
Kodlabal, Byasigideri, Hagar!-
bommanahalli and Chintrapalli 
villages of Ittigi ftrka of 
the Hadagalli talut." 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

27 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 20) 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF CoUNCIL CoNSTITUENCIES 
(MADRAS) ORDER, 1951. 
In the Table- I) 
(a) for the sub-heading "Graduates' Constituencies" substi-
tute "Graduates' Constituency"; 
(b) omit the entry relating to the M~dras North (Graduates) 
Consti tuency; 
(c) in column 1, for "Madras South (Graduates)" substitute 10 
"Madras (Graduates)"; 
(d) for the sub-heading "Teachers' Constituencies" substitute 
"Teachers' Constituency"; 
(e) omit the entry relating to the Madras North (Teachers) 
·Constituency; 16 
(f) in column I, for "Madras South (Teachers)" substitute 
"Madras (Teachers)"; and 
(g) omit the entries relating to the following Local Autho-
d'ities' Constituencies:-
(i) Srikakulam-cum-Visakhapatnam-cum-East Godavari 20 
(Local Authorities); 
(it) West Godavari-cum-Krishna-cum-Guntur (Local 
Authorities); 
(iii) Nellore-cum-Chittoor (Local Authorities); and 
(iv) Ceded Districts (Local Authorities) 26 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 21) 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE MADRAS LEGISLATIVE COUNCn. 
(a) Elected by Local Authorities' constituencies 
:1. Sri Rangaswami Naidu 21st April, 19f)H 30 
~. Sri K. N. Palaniswami Goundar 21st April, 1958. 
::3. Sri P. B. K. Thiagaraja Reddiar 
-4. Sri A. Somasundaram 
"5. Sri C. Marudavanam Pilla! 
0.6. Sri Abdul Salam 
~7. Sri S. O. gp. Odayappa 
21st April, 1958. 
21st April, 1956 
21st April, 1956. 
... 21st April, 1956. 35 
21st April. 1951. 

28 
8. Sri P. Sivasubramania Hadar 
9. Sri T. S. Sankaranarayana Pillai 
10. Sri C. Perumalswamy Reddy 
11. Sri Nathamani Naidu 
6 12. Sri Purushotbaman 
13. Sri S. Narasappayya 
14. Sri Thurutheelakatb Thottinakara 
21st April, 19. 
••• 21st April, 1958. 
21st April, 1954. 
21st April, 19M.. 
21st April, 19M. 
..• 21st April, 1954 .. 
Puthia Purayil Kunnhipocker 21st April, 1954.. 
(b) Elected by the Madru (Groduate.) ccmstitumcy 
10 15. Sri A. Lakshmanaswami Mudaliar 21st April, 1956. 
16. Shri P. V. Cherian 
17. Sri K. Balasubramania Iyer 
18. Sri K. Bhashyam 
21st April, 1958&. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April. 1956. 
(c) Electted by the Madras (Teachet"l) constituency 
16 19. Sri V. R. Ranganathan 21st April, 1956·. 
20. Sri Alexander Gnanamuthu 21st April, 1956. 
21. Sri G. Krishnamurthi 21st April, 1954. 
22. Sri E. H. Parameswaran 21st April, 19M. 
(d) Elected by the Madras Legislative Assembly 
20 23. Sri T. M. Narayanaswami Pillai 
24. Sri B. V. Subrahmanyam 
25. Sri M. Bhaktavatsalam 
26. Sri V. Chakkarai Chetty 
27. Sri V. G. Rao 
25 28. Sri S. B. Adityan 
29. Sri M. P. Govinda Menon 
30. Sri S. Srinivasa Rao 
31. Sri Areot Gajapathi Nayagar 
32. Sri N. Nallasenapathi Sarkarai Manradiar 
80 33. Sri Mohammad Raza Khan 
34. Sri A. M. AlIa Piehai 
35. Sri M. Ethirajulu 
36. Sri N. Annamalai Pillai 
37. Srimati Manjubhashini 
86 38. Sri V. K. John 
39. Sri T. G. Krishnamoorthi 
40. Sri M. P. Sivaghana Gramani 
21st April, 1958. 
21st April, 1958. 
21st April, 1958. 
21st April, 1958. 
21st April, 1958'. 
2h.l APlil 1956. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1954. 
21st April, 195,f. 
21st April, 1954. 
21st April, 1954-
21st April, 1954. 

~ 
(e) Nominated by the Governor 
41. Sri V. Bhashyam Ayyangar 
-~2. Sri O. P. Ramaswamy Reddiar 
43. Srimati R. S. Subbulakshmi AmmaJ 
44. Sri Chakravarthi Rajagopalachari 
45. Sri T. M. Daivasikhamani Achariar 
·46. Sri G. Venkatachalam 
47. Sri M. Satyanarayana 
·48. Sri Muhammad Usman 
49. Dr. S. Muthulakshmi Reddi 
.50. Sri P. M. Marthandam Pillai 
. 51. Mrs. M. N. C1ubwa1a 
21st April, 1958. 
21st April, 1958. 
21st April, 1958. 
21st April, 1956. &S 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1956. 
21st April, 1954. 
21st April, 1954. 10 
21st April, 1954 . 
21st April, 1954 . 
PROVISIONS FOR DETERMINING THE TERMS OF OFFICE OF MEMBERS 
1. Except as provided in the succeeding paragraphs, the term of 
.office of every member shall expire on the date specified against his 16 
.name in the above list. 
2. The term of office of-
(a) one of the six members specified ·against serial numbers 4 
to 9, 
(b) one of the two members specified against serial numbers 19 20 
and 20, and 
(c) two of the eight members specified against serial numbers 
28 to 35, . 
:shall be increased so as to expire on the 21st April, 1958. 
3. The term of office of one of the four members specified against 20 
:serial Nos. 44 to 47 shall be reduced so as to expire on the 21st 
April, 1954. ~ 
4. The members whose terms of office are to be increased under 
:paragraph 2 and the member whose term of office is to be reduced 
under paragraph 3 shall be determined as soon as may be after the 30 
.appointed day by lot drawn in such manner as the Chairman of 
.the Legis1ative CouncH of Madras may direct . 
.. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 22) 
MODIFICATION IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNcn. CONSTITUENCIBS 86 
(MYSORE) ORDER, 1951 
In the Table, for the entry relating to the Chltaldrug (Local 
-Authorities) constituency, substitute the following:-
.. Chitaldrug.cum.Bellary 
(Local Authoritiea). 
Chitaldrug District (includiag DavlIJlgere 
City) and Bellary District. 
2." 40 

:t) 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(S~ section 24) 
I.-MoDIFICATIONS IN THE CONSTITUTION (ScHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 195(P 
1. For paragraph 4, substitute the following:-
5 "4.. Any reference in the Schedule t~ this Order-
(a) to the State of Madras, Andhra or Myaore or to • 
district or other territorial division of any of these States, 
shall be construed as a reference to that State or to that 
district or other territorial division as constituted on the 1st 
10 day of OctQber, 1953; and 
(b) to any other State or to a district or other territorial 
division thereof shall be construed as a reference to that State-
or to that district or other tenitorial division as conatitute6 
on the 26th day of January, 1950." 
16 2. In the Sehedule-
(a) for the sub-heading "Part V-Madru" and for the word! 
"Throughout the State" thereunder. substitute "Part V-Madr~ 
and Andhra" and "Throughout each of the States" respectively; 
(b) for the entry under the sub-heading "Part Xn-Mysore" 
20' substitute the following:-
"1. Throughout the State except in Bellary district:-
1. Adidravida 
2. Adikarnataka 
3. Banjara or Lambani 
25 4. Bhovi 
5. Koracha 
6. Korama 
2. In Bellary distnct-
1. Adi Andhra * 
80 2. Adi Dravida 
3. Adikarnataka 
4. Ajila 
5. Arunthathiyar 
6. Baira 
86 7. Bakuda 
8. Bandi 
9. Bariki 

10. Bavuri 
11. Bellara 
12. Byagari 
13. Chachati 
14. Chakkiliyan 
15. Chalavadi 
16. Chamar 
17. Chandala 
18. Cheruman 
19. Dandasi 
20. Devendrakulathan 
21. Dom or Dombara, 
Paidi, Pano 
22. Ghasi or Haddi. 
Relli Sachandi 
23. Godagali 
24. Godari 
25. Godda 
26. Gosangi 
27. Hasla 
28. Holeya 
29. Jaggali 
30. Jambuvulu 
31. Kadan 
32. Kalladi 
33. Kanakkan 
34. Karimpalan 
35. Kodalo 
36. Koosa 
37. Koraga 
38. Kudubi 
39. Kudumban 
40. Kuravan 
41. Kurichchan 
42. Madari 
43. Madiga 
44. Maila 
10 
• 

32 
-45. Mala (including Agency Malu) 
46. Mala Dasu 
47. Malasar 
48. Matangi 
~ 49. Mavilan 
50. Moger 
51. Muehl 
52. Mundala 
53. N alakeyava 
:10 54. Nayadi 
55. Pagadai 
56. Painda 
57. Paky 
58. Pallan 
:16 59. Pambada 
60. Pamidi 
61. Panan 
62. Panehama 
63. Panniandi • 
:20 64. Paraiyan 
65. Paravan 
66. Pulayan 
67. Puthirai Vannan 
68. Raneyar 
:U 69. Samagara 
70. Samban 
71. Sapari 
72. Semman 
73. Thoti 
:ao {14. Tiruvalluvar 
75. Valluvan 
76. Valmiki 
77. Vettuvan". 

33 
fi. MODmCATIONS IN THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRmu) ORDD, 
1950 
1. For paragraph 3, substitute the following:-
"3. Any reference in the Schedule to this Order-
(a) to the State of Madras. Andhra or Mysore or to a 6 
district or other territorial division of any of these States 
shall be construed as a reference to that State or to that 
district or other territorial division as constituted on the 
1st day of October, 1953; and 
(b) to any other State or to a 'district or other territorial 10 
division thereof shall be construed as a reference to that 
State or to that district or other territorial division as con-
stituted on the 26th day of January, 1950." 
2. In the Schedule-
(a) for the sub-heading "Part V-Madras" and for the wordl rti 
"Throughout the State" thereunder, substitute "Part" V-Madras 
and Andhra" and "Throughout each of the States" respectively; 
(b) for the entry under the sub-heading "Part XI-Myaare". 
substitute the following:-
"'1. Throughout the State except in Bellary district:- 20 
1. Hasalaru 
2. Iruliga 
3. Jenu Kuruba 
4. Kadu-Kuruba 
5. Maleru 26 
6. Soligaru 
2. In Bellary district:-
1. Aranadan 
2. Bagata 
3. Bhottadas-Bodo Bhottada, Muria Bhottada and Sano Bhottada 80 
4. Bhumias-Bhuri Bhumia and Bodo Bhumia 
5. Chenchu 
6. Gadabas-Boda Gadaba, Cerllam Gadaba. Franji Gadaba, 
10dia Gadaba, Olaro Gadaba, Pangi Gadaba and Pranga Gadaba 
7. Gondi-Modya Gond and Rajo Gond 35 
8. Goudus-Bato, Bhirithya Dudhokouria, Hato, Jatako and Joria 
9. Kosalya Goudus-Bosothoriya Goudus, Chitti Goudus, Danga-
yath 'Goudus, Dodd Kamariya, Dudu Kamaro, Ladiya Goudus and 
Pullosoriya Goudus 
10. Magatha Goudus-Bernia Goudu, Boodo Magatha, Dongayatb 40 
, Goudu, Ladya Goudu, Panna Magatha and Sana Magatha 

10 
15 
20 
11. Holva 
12. Jadapus 
13. Jatapus 
14. Kammara 
15. Kattunayakan 
16. Khattis-Khatti, Kommarao and Lohara 
17. Kodu 
18. Kommar 
19. Konda DhoFas 
20. 'Konda Kapus 
21. Kondareddis 
22. Kondhs-Desaya Kondhs, Dongrla Kondhs. Kuttiya Kondha. 
-Tikiria Kandhs and Yenity Kondhs 
23. Kota 
24. Kotia-Bartika Bentho Oriya, Dhulia or Dulia, Holva Paiko. 
Putiya, Sanrona and Sidho Paiko 
25. Koya or Goud, with its subsects-Raja or Rasha Koyas, Linga-
dhari Koyas (ordinary) and Kottu Kayas 
26. Kudiya 
'n. Kurumans 
28. Manna Dbara 
29. Maune 
30. Mukha Dhora -Nooka Dhora 
31. Muria 
82. Paigarapu 
33. Palasi 
34. Paniyan 
35. Porjas-Bodo Bonda, Daruva, Didua, Jodia, Mundili, Pengu~ 
Pydi and Saliya 
80 36. Reddi Dhoras 
37. Savaras-Kapu Savaras, Khutto Savaras and MaUya Savaras 
38. Sholaga 
39. Toda 
40. Inhabitants of the Laccadive, Minlcoy and Amindivi Islands. 
35 who, and both of whose parents, were born in these Islands." 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
[See sections 47(1), 48(3), 51, 52 and 66(1)] 
PRoVISIONS M TO APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIESBETWEEH 
MAJ)lUS, ANoHRA AND M~SORB 
40 1. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Schedule, allianci.and 
all stores, articles and other goo~ shall remain the property of, or. 
as the ease may be,pass to, the State in which they are situated. 

3S 
(2} 1n this paragraph, the expression "land" includes immovable 
property ot every kind and any rights in or over SUCh property, aDC1 
the expreSSIOn "goods" does not include coins, bank notes and 
currency notes. 
2. (1) A sum equivalent to the proceeds of any public IlJan raised 6 
by the Government of Madras between the 1st day of July. 1953 and 
the appointed day, or such portion thereof as the Pres:dent may 
dett:rmine, shall be allocated between the States of Madras and 
Andhra in such proportion as may be fixed by the President having 
regard to the terms on which the loan was raised. 10 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph. 
the tot.al of the cash ·balances in all treasuries of the State oi Madras 
and the credit balances with the Reserve Bank of India immediately 
before the appointed day shall be divided between the States of 
Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the proportion of 62~ : 36 : 1!: 15 
Provided that for the purposes of such division there shall be no 
transfer of cash balances from any treasury to any other treasury and 
the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the credit balances 
of the three States in the books of the Reserve Bank of India on the 
appointed day. 20 
Explanation.-In this paragraph, "treasury" includes a sub-treasury. 
3. Any unissued stores of any class shall be divided between the 
States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore in proportion to the totral 
indents fctr \Stores of that class made in the three years immediately 
preceding the 1st day of April, 1953, for the areas respectively 26 
comprised in the States of Madras and Andhra and the transferred 
territory excluding the indents relating to the Secretariat and 
offices of Heads of Departments located in the city of Madras: 
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to stores held 
for specific purposes, such as, for the use or utilisation in particular 30 
institutions. workshops and power houses or on specific works under 
construction. 
4. The State of Andhra shall be entitled to 36/100th share of the 
printing machinery in the Government Press at Madras. This share 
shall, as far as pt'acticable, be given to that State in the form of 36 
machinery which can be removed and utilised by it, and to 
the extent to which this is not practicable, an adjustment shall be 
made in cash on the basis of the book value of the machinery less 
depreciation where such depreciation is adjusted in the accounts of 
~~~ - ~ 
5. The right to recover 81Teal'S of taxes including land revenue 
shall belong to the State in which the taxed property is situate 01 
the taxed transactions took place. 

36 
6. (1) The right to recover any loans or advances made before the 
appointed day by the State of Madras to any local body (other than 
the District Board of Bellary), society, agriculturist or other person 
in an area within the State shall belong to the State in which that 
5 area is included on the appointed day. 
(2) If immediately before the appointed day any sums are due 
from the District Board of Bellary to the State of Madras on account 
of loans or advances made before that day, such part thereof as is due 
on account of any loan or advance utilised in or for the benefit of 
10 Alur and Adoni taluks, or, in or for the benefit of Rayadrug taluk 
shall be a debt due to the State of Andhra by the District Board of 
Kurnool or, as the case may be, of Anantapur, and the remaining part 
shall be a debt due to the State of Mysore by the District Board of 
Sellary. 
15 (3) The right to recover any loans or advances made before the 
appointed day by the State of Madras to any person, firm or insti-
tution outside that State, shall belong to the State of Madras: 
Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan or 
advance shall be divided between the States of Madras. Andhra and 
20 Mysore in the proportion of 62! : 36 : Ii. 
7. (1) The balance of the States' share of the taxes on income and 
of the Union duties of excise payable to the State of Madras in respect 
of the financial year 1953-54 shall be shared between the States of 
. Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the proportion of 621 : 36 : 1~. 
25 Explanation.-The balance referred to in this sub-paragraph shall 
be taken to be one-half of the amount payable to the State of Madras 
as constituted immediately before the appOinted day out of the States' 
share of taxes on income or of Union duties of excise, as the case may 
be, in accordance with the Budget Estimates of the Central Govern-
ao ment in respect of the financial year 1953-54. 
(2) The States' share of the taxes on income or of the Union duties 
of excise payable to the State of Madras as constituted immediately 
before the appointed day in respect of each of the financial years 
commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1954 shall, until other 
85 provision is made by law, be also shared between the States of 
Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the proportion of 621 : 36 : 1 a. 
8. The sums at the credit of the Central Road Fund due to the 
State of Madras immediately before the appointed day shall be 
allocated between the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the 
40 proportion of 621 : 36 : 1 t. 

37 
9. The shares held immediately before the appointed day by the 
State of Madras in the Travancore Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited, 
the Madras Radio and Electricals Limited and the Madras Industrial 
Investment Corporation shall be divided between the States of 
Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the proportion of 62! : 36 : Ii. 6 
10. The securities held in respect of investments made from 
any depreciation reserve fund shall accrue to the State in whose 
area the undertaking for which the depreciation reserve fund is 
maintained is situate. 
11. Subject to the prOVISIons of paragraph 12, the assets and 10 
liabilities relating to commercial or industrial undertakings shall, in 
the case where the undertakings are situate in the transferred terri-
tory, pass to the State of Mysore and. in other cases, pass to the 
, State in which the undertakings are situate. 
12. (1) The public debt of the State of Madras attributable to loans 16 
raised by the issue of Government securities which are outstanding 
with the public immediately before the appointed day shall as from 
such day be the debt of the State of Madras; and the States of 
Audhra and Mysore shall be liable to pay to the State of Madras their 
share of the sums due from time to time for the servicing and repay- 20 
ment of the debt. 
Explanation.-In this sub-paragraph, the expression "Government 
securities" has the same meaning a~ in clause (a) of section 2 of the 
Indian Securities Act, 1920 (X of 1920). 
(2) The public debt referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of this para- 26 
graph and the remaining public debt of the State of Madras. that 
is to say, the debt attributable to loans taken from the Central 
~ Government. the Reserve Bank of India or any other Bank beforE' 
the appointed day, shall be apportioned between the States of 
Madras. Andhra and Mysore in proportion to the total expenditurE' 30 
on all capital works and other capital outlays incurred in thE' 
territories of the States of Madras and Andhra and the transferred 
territory up to the commencement of the appointed day including 
the items dealt with in paragraph 9 of this Schedule: 
Provided that any loan taken from the Central Government be- 36 
fore the appointed day in connection with the construction of build-
Ings, roads or other works for the temporary capital of the State of 
Andhra or for purposes incidental thereto shall to the extent of the 
f expenditure so incurred until that date be wholly the liability of 
the State of Andhra: 40 
Provided further that the liability for any public loan or portion 
~ thereof referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 of this 
,. Schedule shall be apportioned between the Government of Andhra 
and the Government of Madras in the same proportion as may be 

38 
fixed under that sub-paragraph in regaro to the allocation of the 
proceeds of such loan or portion thereof. 
(3) For the purposes of the allocation under sub-paragraph (2) of 
this paragraph, only expenditure on assets for which capital accounts 
6 have been kept (excluding the Buckingham Canal and any buildings 
for which such accounts have been kept) shall be taken into account: 
Provided that the amount of public debt on account of the ex-
penditure on the Tungabhadra Project referred to in section 66 
shall be reallocated on such basis as may be agreed upon between 
10 the States concerned, or, if no agreement is entered into within two 
years from the appointed day, as may be fixed by order of the 
President. 
(4) All sinking funds for loans raised before the apPointed cay by 
~he Government of Madras shall remain with the State of Madras and 
1fi ;be net amount of such funds shall be taken into consideration in 
clocating the dues on account of such loans between the States of 
Madl"H, Andhra and Mysore 
(5) In order to compensate the State of Andhra finally for ita 
relatively smaller share of buildings, its share in the liability on 
• account of debt to be apportioned between the States of Andhra and 
Madras under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph shall be reduced 
by 230'4 lakhs of rupees and the share of the State of Madras in 
such liability shall be correspondingly increased. 
13. Civil deposits and local fund deposits shall pass to the State 
26 in whose area the deposits have been made, and the liabilitv to pay 
them shall also fall on that State. 
14. The securities held in the Zamindari Abolition Fund shall 
be allocated between the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore in • 
proportion to the estimated amount of compensation pay~b]e in the 
30 territories comprised within the State of Madras as constituted on 
the appointed day, in the territories forming the State of Andhra 
and the transferred territory. 
15. The liability in respect of the undisbursed amounts in the 
Madras Road Fund as they stand immediately before the appointed 
36 day shall be taken over by the State in which the local bodies to 
whom they ate payable exist. 
16. Each State shall take over the liabilities in respect of the 
Provident Fund accounts of the Government servants permanently 
allotted to it. 
40 17. (1) Subject to the adjustment mentioned in sub-paragraph (:~) 
of this paragraph, each State shaU, in respect of pensions granted by 
the State of Madras before the appointed day, pay the pensions drawr.""{ 
in ~ts treasuries and sub-treasuries. 

• 
(2) Subject to tfte said adjustment, the liability in respect of 
pensions of officers serving in connection with the affairs of the State 
of Madras who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement 
before the appointed day but whose claims for pensions are outstand-
ing immediately before that day shall be the liability of the State of' 6 
Madras. 
(3) There shall be computed in respect of the part of the financial 
year 1953-54 commencing on the appointed day, and in respect of each 
subsequent financial year, the total payments made in each State in 
respect of pensions referred to in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) of this 10 
paragraph; and each of the States of Andhra and Mysore shall receive 
from, or pay to, the State of Madras the amount by which the total 
payments in the State of Andhra or the State of Mysore, as the case 
may be, for that part of the year or for that year exceeds or, as the 
case may be, faU short of 36 per cent. in the case of the State of Andhra 16 
and It per cent. in the case of the State of Mysore, of the total pay-
ments made in the States of Andhra, or, as the case may be, Mysore 
and Madras for that part of the year or for that year. 
£xplanation.-The reference in this sub-paragraph to pensions shall 
be construed as including the reference to the commuted value of 20 
such pensions. 
(4) The liability in respect of pensions of officers retiring on or 
after the appointed day shall be that of the State granting the pen-
sion. The portion of the pension attributable to the service of any 
such officer before the appointed day shall be allocated between the 26 
States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the proportion of 621: 36 : 
11, and the State which has granted the pension shall be entitled to 
receive from the other two States their shares of this liability. 
In respect of any officer whose services after the appointed day 
were partly in one of the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore 30 
as granted the pension and partly in one or both of the other two 
States, such other State or each of such other States, as the case may 
be, shall reimburse the State by which the pension is granted an 
amount which bears to the PQrtion of the pension of such officer 
attributable to his service after the appointed day the same ratio 35 
a:; the period of qualifying service of that officer after the appointed 
day under that State bears to the total qualifying service of such 
officer after the appointed day reckoned for the purposes of pension. 
18. If and in so far as any item in suspense is ultima~ely found to 
affect an asset or liability of the nature referred to in the foregoing 40 
paragraphs, it shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of 
the relevant paragraph. 
19. The benent or burden of any assets or liabilities not dealt with 
in the foregoing paragraphs or in section 48 or section 49 or section 50 
or section 66 shall be apportioned between the State of Madras and 45 

40 
the States of Andhra and Mysore in such manner as the President 
may by order direct: 
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be taken as prohibit-
ing the apportionment of such benefit or burden in any otlaer manneJ 
6 if the States concerned so agree. 
10 
16 
20 
30 
86 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 59] 
Part I 
Jails and other institutions in the State of Madras:-
(1) The Presidency Jail for Women, Vellore. 
(2) The Senior Certified School, Chingleput. 
Part II 
Jails and other institutions in the transferred territory:-
(1) The Junior Certified School, Bellary. 
(2) The Central Jail, Bellary. 
(3) The Alipuram Jail. Bellary. 
(4) The Borstal School, Bellary. 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 60] 
Part I 
Institutions in the State of Madras:-
(1) The King Institute, Guindy. 
(2) The Irrigation Research Station, Peondi. 
(3) The Police Training College, Vellore. 
(4) The Finger Print Bureau, Vellore. 
(5) The Government Press, Madras. 
(6) The Government Textile Institute, Madras. 
(7) The Government College of Indigenous Medicine, Madra ... 
(8) The Madras Fire Services State Training School, Madras: 
(9) The Veterinary College, Madras. 
(10) The Serum Institute, Ranipet. 
(11) The Barnard Institute of Radiology, Madras. 
(12) The Chemical Examiner's Department, Madras. 
(13) The Central Survey Office, Madras. 
(14) The Government Lady Willingdon Leprosy Sanatorium,. 
Tirumani. 
Part II 
Institutions in the transferred territory:-
(1) Rayalaseema Polytechnic, Bellary. 
to (2) The Government Wellesley Tuberculosis SanatoriUlDr 
Bellary. 

41 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On the 19th December, 1952, the Prime Minister informed 
Parliament that the Government of India had decided to-
establish an Andhra State consisting of the Telugu speaking areas 
of the present Madras State, but not including the city of Madras. 
Mr. Justice Wanchoo was appointed to consider and report on the-
financial and other implications of thi,s decision and the questions 
to be considered in implementing it. On the 25th of March, 1953, the 
Prime Minister announced the decisions reached \by Government 
after careful consideration of Mr. Justice Wapchoo's report and of 
the other matters connected with the establishment of the Andhra' 
State. As regards the district of Bellary, it was then announced 
that three of the ten taluks should form paJ;t of the Andhra State and 
six Kannada speaking taluks should form part of the Mysore State~ 
~ the decision regarding the tenth taluk was reserved for further 
consideration. 
IP 
2. On the 20th May, 1953, the Government of India lnnounced 
their decision regarding the Bellary taluk after consideration of the 
report of Mr. Justice Misra. 
3. This Bill is designed to give effect to the aforesaid decisions of 
Government. The views of the Legislatures of the States of Madras 
and Mysore both with respect to the proposal to introduce the Bill 
&nd with respect to the provisions thereof have been ascertained as 
required under the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution. The 
notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the provisions thereoL 
K. N. KATJU. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th August, 1953. 

.2 
Notes em Clauso 
Clause 1 (2): It is proposed to bring into force Part I and clauses 
43, 54, 58, 61, 62, 63 M, 66 and 69 as soon as the Bill is enacted so as 
to enable certain preparatory action to be taken before the 1st 
October, 1958 on which date the new State of Andhra will come into 
existence and certain areas of the State of Madras will be transferred 
to the State of Mysore. All the remaining provisions of the Bill 
will come into force on the 1st October, 1953. 
Clause 3: Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides for the forma-
tion of the new State of Andhra. 
The Alur, Adoni and Rayadrug taluks which are at present in-
cluded in the Bellary district will, as from the 1st October, 1953, cease 
to form part of that district. It is, therefore, necessary to include these . 
taluks in some district in the new State of Andhra of which they 
would form part. It has accordingly been provided in sub-clause (2) 
that Aluteand Adoni taluks shall be included in, and become part of, 
Kurnool district and the Rayadrug taluk shall be included in, and 
become part of, Anantapur district. 
Clause 4: Sub-clause (1) of this clause makes provision for the 
transfer of all the taluks of the Bellary district except Adoni, Alur and 
Rayadrug to the State of Mysore. Sub-clause (2) provides that the 
territory so transferred to the State of Mysore shall form a separate 
district to be known as Bellary district. 
Clause 5 seeks to make certain consequential amendments in the 
First Schedule to the Constitution. 
Clause 6 deals with the representation of the new State of 
Andhra and the residuary State of Madras in the Council of States. 
The allocation of seats in the Council of States as shown in the 
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution was made on the basis of the 
population of each State according to the 1941 census and the 
number of seats to which each State would be entitled was determin· 
ed according to the following formula, viz.:-
For the first five millions of the population-l seat for every 
one million. 
For every succeeding two millions or any fraction thereof 
exceeding one-half-l seat. 
According to the 1941 census, the population of the areas which 
will comprise the residuary State of Madras and the new State of 
Andhra was 30'996 and 18'197 millions respectively. On the basis 
of the aforesaid formula the residuary State of Madras and the Statt' 
of Andhra will therefore be entitled to 18 and 12 seats respectively. 
The population of the State of Mysore including the areas sought to 
be transfer:ed thereto from the State of Madras is according to the 
said census 7 ·96 millions, and therefore on the basis of the aforesaid'~ 

48 
IDrmula the State d Mysore will not be entitled to more than 6 seats 
which is the present number of seats allotted to that State in the 
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. 
Clause 7 seeks to make certain consequential amendments in the 
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. 
Clause 8 and the First Schedule: There are at present 27 mem-
\)ers representing the State of Madras in the Council of States, and 
()f these 9 belong to Andhra areas and 18 belong to non-Andhra 
areas. Clause 8 seeks to allocate the said 9 members to the State 
of Andhra and the remaining 18 members .. to the residuary State of 
Madras. The names of all these 27 members are specified in the First 
Sch€'dule. 
Clause 9: After the allocation of 9 sitting members to the State 
of Andhra and the remaining 18 sitting members to the State (If 
Madras, there will be 3 vacancies in the total number of seats 
allotted to the State of Andhra in the Council of States. These will 
be filled by a bye-election held .soon after the appointed day, that is, 
the 1st October, 1953. 
Clause 10: Under clause (1) of article 83 of the Constitution, as 
nearly as may be one-third of the members of the Council of States 
shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of every second 
year in Clccordance with the provisions made fn that benalf by Parlia-
ment hv law. Sub-section (2) of section 154 of the Representation of 
the People Act, 1951 (XLIII of 1951) provides that the term of office 
<>f a member of the Council of States other than a member chosen 
to fill a casual vacancy shall be six years, but upon the first constitu-
tion of the Council of States the President shall, after consultation 
with the Election Commission, make by order such provision as he 
thinks fit for curtailing the term of office of some of the members 
then chosen in order that, as nearly as may be, one-third of thf' 
members holding seats of each class shall retire in every second year 
thereafter. Under the Council of States (Term of Office of Members) 
Order, 1952 made by the President under that sub-section, the terms 
of office of the 27 sitting memhel'li rtlpresentmg the State of Madras 
in :ne Council of States have been determined and they have been 
jndicated in the First Schedule. It appears that out of the 9 sitting 
Andhra members, 3 have a six-year term, 2 a four-year term and 4 
a two-year term. In order that one-third of the members who will 
represent Andhra may retire every second year, it is proposed to 
:select by lot one of the two sitting members having· a four-year 
term and to give him a six-year term and then to give to each of 
the three new members to be elected to the Council of States by 
the elected. members of the Andhra Legislative Assembly a four-
year term. Of the remaining 18 sitting Madras members, 6 have 
a six-year term, 7 a four-year term and 5 a two-year term. In this 

case also in order that one-third of the members who will represent 
the residuary State of Madras may retire in every second year, it 
is proposed to select by lot one of the 7 sitting members having a 
four-year term and to reduce his term to 2 years. The terms of 
office of aU the other sitting members will remain unaltered. 
- Clause 11 deals with the representation of the new State of 
Andhra, the residuary State of Madras and the State of Mysore in the-
House of the People. The number of seats in the House of the-
People at present allotted to the State of Madras has been calculated: 
on the basis of the population of that State as determined in accord-
ance with the order of the President issued under article 387 of the' 
Constitution. On the same basis the new State of Andhra, the resi-
duary State of Madras and the State of Mysore will be entitled to 28~ 
46 and 12 seats respectively. Sub-clause (2) of this clause seeks to-
make the necessary modifications in the First Schedule to the Repre-
sentation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950). 
Clause 12 and the Second Schedul.e: Clause 12 seeks to make-
modifications in the Madras and Mysore Delimitation of Parlia-
mentary and Assembly Constituencies Orders in view of the forma-
tion of the new State of Andhra and the transfer of certain areas 
from the State of Madras to the State of Mysore. A composite Andhra 
and Madras Order providing for the constituencies for the State of 
Andhra and the State of Madras in two separate parts has been pro-
posed in place of the existing Delimitation of Parliamentary and 
Assembly Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951. The Alur and Adoni 
taluks of the Bellary district have been shown as forming part of the 
Kurnool district and the Rayadrug taluk of the Bellary district has 
been shown as forming part of the Anantapur district in the revised 
lists of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies for the State of 
Andhra and certain modifications have been proposed in the entries 
relating to Kurnool and Anantapur Parliamentary constituencies. 
It is also proposed to modify the Delimitation of Parliamentary and 
Assembly Constituencies (Mysore) Order, 1951 to include therein 
constituencies comprising the taluks of the BeUary district sought 
to be added to the State of Mysore by sub-clause (1) of clause 4. 
All these modifications have been set out in the Second Schedule. 
Clause 13 provides for the allocation of the sitting members of the 
House of the People representing the constituencies which are trans-
ferred, whether with or without alteration of boundaries, to the new 
State of Andhra or the State of Mysore on the appointed day, to the 
constituencies as so transferred. Of the existing 75 members in the 
House of the People representing the various constituencies in the 
State of Madras, 28 members have been allotted to the new State 
of Andhra, 46 to the residuary State of Madras and 1 to the State of 
Mysore. 

45 
Clause 14 deals with electoral rolls for the modified Parliamentary 
constituencies. It is proposed that the electoral roll for a modified 
Parliamentary constituency will be made up of so much of the elec-
toral roll or rolls for any Parliamentary constituency or constitu-
encies as relate to the areas comprised within the modified consti-
tuency. 
Clause 15 provides for the strength of the Legislative Assemblies 
uf the new State of Andhra, the residuary State of Madras and the 
State of Mysore. Of the existing 375 seats in the Legislative Assem-
bly of Madras, 140 seats have been allotted to the Legislative Assem-
bly of Andhra, 230 to the Legislative Assembly of the residuary State 
()f Madras and the remaining 5 seats have been added to the existing 
number of seats in the Legislative Assembly· of Mysore. Sub-clause 
(2) of this clause seeks to make the necessary modifications in the 
Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII 
of 1950). 
Clause 16 provides for the allocation of certain sitting members 
of the Legislative Assembly of Madras to the Legislative Assemblies 
of the new State of Andhra and the State of Mysore. It is proposed 
that every sitting member who represents any constituency which is 
on the appointed day transferred, whether with or without alteration 
of boundaries to the new State of Andhra or the State of Mysore will 
cease to be a member of the Legislative Assembly of Madras and shall 
be deemed to represent the constituency as so transferred in the 
Legislative Assembly of Andhra or of Mysore, as the case may be. It 
has also been made clear that the member nominated to the Legis-
lative Assembly of Madras before the appointed day to represent the 
Anglo-Indian community will continue to represent that community 
in the Legislative Assembly of the residuary State of Madras. 
Clause 17 deals with the duration of the Legislative Assemblies 
of the three States. As there will be no general election to 
constitute the Legislative Assembly of the new State of Andhra and 
that Assembly will be composed of members transferred from the 
Legislative Assembly of the undivided State of Madras, it is proposed 
that the life of the Andhra Legislative Assembly should not be longer 
than that of the Madras Legislative Assembly. It has also been 
made clear that the duration of the Legislative Assemblies of Madras 
and M),sore will not be affected by the changes in their composition. 
Clause 18 contains provisions in respect of electoral rolls for the 
modified Assembly constituencies on the lines similar to those contain-
ed in clause 14 in respect of electoral rolls for modified Parliamentary 
consti tuencies. 
CLause 19r-1t is proposed to reduce the number of seats in the 
Legislative Council of Madras from 72 to 51. The distribution of 
these 51 seats among the'" categories referred to in sub-clauses (a). 

., 
(b), (c), (d) and (e) of clause (3) of article 171 of the Constitution 
will, until the 22nd day of April, 1954, be 14, 4, 4, 18 and 11 respective-
ly, and, as from the 22nd day of April, 1954, be 14, 6, 4, 18 and 9 
respectively. The distribution of seats in the manner referred to 
above has been proposed to ensure that no sitting member belonging 
to any of the areas which will form part of the residuary State of 
Madras is eliminated. The change in the distribution of seats as 
from the 22nd day of April, 1954, is intended to reduce the number 
of nominated seats from 11 to 9 and to increase the number of seats 
allotted to the Madras (Graduates) Constituency from 4 to 6 and 
thereby to ensure the retirement of, as far as possible, one-third of 
the members of each category on the expiration of every second 
year. Although the distribution of the seats in the manner stated 
above will not be in conformity with the provisions ·of clause (3) of 
article 171, it would be competent for Parliament to make such 
changes in the composition of the Council under clause (2) of that 
article. It is also proposed that at the time of the biennial election 
to fill the seats of members of the Council retiring on the 21st day of 
April, 1954, the Madras (Graduates) Constituency will elect two 
more members in order to make the total of 6 members. 
Clause 20 and the Third Schedule.-Clause 20 seeks to make 
certain modifications in the Delimitation of Council Constituencies 
(Madras) Order, 1951 in view of the diminution of the area of the 
State of Madras as a result of transfer of territories therefrom to 
form the new State of Andhra and to the State of Mysore. These 
'modifications have been indicated in the Third Schedule. The pro-
viso to this clause seeks to make a further modification in the said 
Order to give effect to the increase in the number of seats allotted 
to the Madras (Graduates) Constituency as from the 22nd day of 
April, 1954. 
Clause 21 and the Fourth Schedule.-The Legislative Council of 
Madras has at present 72 members of whom 21 belong to the Andhra 
area and the area sought to be transferred to the State of Mysore. 
As there will be no Legislative Council in the State of Andhra and 
as also no addition to the existing number of seats in the Legislative 
Council of Mysore is possible in view of the provisions of clause (1) 
of article 171 of the Constitution, all these 21 members will have to 
cease to be members of the Council on the appointed day. The 
names and tenns of office of the remaining 51 members have been 
Rpecified in the Fourth Schedule. 
In order that, as nearly ,as poSSible, one-third of the members may 
retire on the expiration of every second year as required under 
clause (2) of article 172 of the Constitution, it is necessary to revise 
the terms of office of 'Some of the memb.tn;. Necessary provisions 
in that behalf have been included in the Fourth Schedule. It will 

47 
appear from those provisions that, except in the case of one nomi-
nated member having a 4-year term, the term of office of no member 
has been reduced. As the number of nominated members in the 
Council will be reduced from 11 to 9 as from the 22nd day of April, 
1954, only three persons will be nOUlinated in place of the five 
nominated members retiring on the 21st day of April, 1954. ,. 
Clause 22 and the Fifth Schedule: Sub-clause (1) of clause 22 seeks 
to make certain modifications in the entry relating to the Chitaldrug 
(Local Authorities) constituency ill the Delimitation of Council Con-
stituencies (Mysore) Order, 1951, so as to include therein the areas 
of the Bellary district sought to be added to the State of Mysore by 
sub-clause (1) of clause 4. These modifications have been indicated 
in the Fifth Schedule. The object of sub-clause (2) is to ensure that 
the area sought to be added to the State of Mysore by sub-clause (1) 
of clause 4 is included in the Mysore (Graduates) constituency and 
the Mysore (Teachers) constituency, each of which extends over the 
whole of the State. 
Sub-clauses (3) and (4) seek to continue the representation of the 
modified constituencies in the Legislative Council of Mysore by the 
sitting members who represented those constituencies before they 
were modified. 
Clause 23: In view of the inclusion of certain areas of the Bellary 
district in the Chitaldrug (Local Authorities) constituency of the 
Mysore Legislative Council, it will be necessary to prepare a fresh 
electoral roll for the modified constituency especially as the Local 
Authorities specified in the Fourth Schedule to the Representation of 
the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950) in relation to the State of 
Madras are not the same as those specified in that Schedule in relation 
to the State of Mysore. It will be also necessary to revise the elec-
toral rolls of the Mysore (Graduates) constituency and the Mysore 
(Teachers) constituency in view of the alteration of the extent of 
those constituencies. All these have been provided for in this clause. 
Clause 24 and the Sixth Schedule: In view of the formation of 
the State of Andhra and the transfer of certain areas {)f the Bellary 
district to the State of Mysore, it will be ~cessary to make certain 
modifications in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and 
the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. Clause 24 seeks to-
provide for these modifications which are set out in the $ixtb 
Schedule. 
Clause 25 seeks to apply the rules of procedure with respect to the 
Madras Legislative Assembly to the Andhra Legislative Assembly, 
subject to necessary modifications and adaptations pending the mak-
ing of rules by the Andhra Legislative Assembly under clause (1) of 
article 208 of the Constitution. 

48 
Clauses 26 and 27 seek to make certain consequential amendments 
in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950) and the 
Delimitation Commission Act, 1952 (LXXXI of 1952). 
Clauses 28 to 39 provide for the establishment of a separate High 
Court for the State of Andhra .• The separate High Court will come 
into existence on the 1st January, 1956, or on such earlier date as 
the President may fix if a resolution recommending the establish-
ment of such a High Court at an earlier date is adopted by the Andhra 
Legislative Assembly and submitted to him. 
Clause 40 provides that until a separate High Court is established 
for the State of Andhra, the jurisdiction of the Madras High Court 
shall extend to that State and the said High Court shall in relation 
to that State continue to have the jurisdiction it had immediately 
before the appointed day. 
Clause 41 seeks to confer jurisdiction on the High Court of Mysore 
in relation to the territories sought to be added to that State by sub-
clause (1) of clause 4. Provisions similar to those contained in 
clause 38 with regard to the transfer of proceedings from the Madras 
High Court to the Andhra High Court have also been included in 
this clause for the transfer of proceedings from the Madras High 
Court to the Mysore High Court. Under these provisions such of 
the proceedings pending in the High Court of Madras as are certified 
by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place 
of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be pro-
,ceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court of 
Mysore will be transferred to that High Court. Powers have however 
been reserved to the Madras High Court to entertain, hear and dis-
pose of proceedings seeking any relief in respect of any judgment, 
decree or order passed by that High Court before the appointed day. 
But even in respect of such proceedings after 'they have been enter-
tained by the Madras High Court, power has been conferred on the 
Chief Justice of that High Court to transfer such proceedings to the 
Mysore High Court if he considers appropriate. A provision has also 
been included in this clause for enabling the advocates who are 
authorised to appear or act in proceedings pending before the Madras 
High Court which are transferred to the Mysore High Court to 
appear or act in relation to these proceedings before the Mysore 
High Court. 
Clause 43 confers power on the Governor of Madras for the 
authorization of expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the 
State of Andhra and the Consolidated Fund of the residuary State of 
Madras to enable the administration of these States to be carried on 
untll the Legislatures of the respective States sanction such expendi-
ture. It also confers power on the Rajpramukh of Mysore for the 
authorization of expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of that 

49 
State to enable the State to meet the additional expenditure in res-
pect of the territory added to that State pending the sanction of such 
expenditure by the Mysore Legislature. The powers so conferred 
are to be exercised before the appointed day and the amount of ex· 
penditure which may be sanctioned has been limited to expenditure 
for a period of not more than three mqnths. 
Clause 44.-1t appears that the Budget of the Madras Government 
for 1953--54 has been presented to the Houses of the Madras Legisla-
ture but the Madras Legislative Assembly has not so rar voted on 
the grants. It is unlikely that the Assembly will vote on the grants 
and 'follow this up by the passing of an Appropriation Bill as con-
templated in articles 203 and 204 of the Constitution before the 1st 
October, 1953. This clause accordingly seeks to regularise the position 
by providing that notwithstanding the failure of the Madras Legisla-
tive Assembly to vote on the grants and of the Madras Legi~ture 
to pass the necessary Appropriation Bill, the vote on account passed 
by that Assembly and the consequent Appropriation Bill passed 
by that Legislature will be sufficient authority for the incurring of 
expenditure covered by thE' said vote on account and for the with-
drawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State in relation 
to such expenditure before the appointed day. 
Clause 45.-In view of the transfer of territories from the State 
of Madras, any Appropriation Act passed before the date of such 
transfer for authorising expenditure for the undivided State of 
Madras in respect of any part of the financial year 1953--54 will not 
hold good after that date. It is accordingly provided in this clause 
that as from the appointed day any such Appropriation Act shall 
cease to have effect. 
Clause 46.-Under clause (2) of article 151 of the Constitution the 
reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to 
the accounts of a State are to be submitted to the Governor or 
Rajpramukh of the State who is to lay them before the Legislature 
(tf the State. The audit reports relating to the accounts Of the un-
divided State of Madras in respect of any period prior to the appoint-
ed day would really concern the State of Andhra and the residuary 
State of Madras. The State of Mysore to which only a small portion 
of the State of Madras is being transferred will hardly be concerned 
with such reports. It is accordingly proposed that the said reports 
shall be submitted to the Governor of each of the States of Andhra 
and Madras who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of 
the State. 
Cla,,-,* 41 provides for the apportionment of the assets and 
Jiabilities of the undivided State of Madras between the residuary 
State of Madras and the States of Andhra and Mysore. The detailed 

50 
provisions as to apportionment are laid down in the Seventh 
Schedule. A provision for settlement by the President of any dw. 
pute as to apportionment has been included. 
Clause 48 deals with the apportionment of rights and liabfiities 
I)f the State of Madras as constituted immediately before the appoint-
ed day accruing under any cofttract. It is based mainly on articleS 
of the Indian Independence (Rights, Property and Liabilities) Order, 
1947. It is intended mainly to apply to contracts between the exist-
ing Madras State and private parties. As it is worded, it will also 
apply to inter-State contracts to which the 'existing Madras State 
is a party. If as a result of the division of the M;adras State there 
is any difficulty in giving effect to any such inter-State contract, the 
proper course appears to be for the States concerned to enter into 
fresh contracts after the appointed day. 
Clause 49 deals with the apportionment of liability of the State of 
Madras as constituted immediately before the appointed day in respect 
of an actionable wrong other than breach of contract. It is based 
mainly on article 10 of the Order referred to in the note regarding 
clause 48. 
Clause 50 seeks to transfer the liability of the undivided State of 
Madras as guarantor in respect of any liability of a co-operative 
society operating only within the territories which are to form the 
State of Andhra to the State of Andhra. 
Clause 51 confers power on the President to rectify any inequity 
which may result from the apportionment of the' assets and liabili-
ties in accordance with the principles sought to be laid down in the 
Bill. ' 
Clause 52 seeks to provide that any mo.ney,payable by one of the 
States of Madras, Andhra.and.Mysore' to any: of 'the other two States 
or to the Central Government in -respect;Of any liability'of the un-
divided State of Madras for debt charges or pensionary charges shall 
be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State by which the 
amount is so payable. 
Clause S3.-The formation of the State of Andhra and the addition 
of territory to the State I)f Mysore are brought about under the 
Constitution. The laws in force immediately before the appointed 
day in the State of Madras will not lapse on the splitting up of that 
State. This clause makes it clear that the tenitorial extent or appli-
cation of any such law will not be affected by any changes in the 
territories of the States of Madras and Mysore.lt has been also 
made clear that the territorial references in any such law to the 
State of Madras or of Mysore may be repealed or 'amended by a 
competent Legislature or other cO,mpetent authoritY: 

51 
Clawe 54 provides power for the adaptation of laws for facilitating 
!heir application in relation to the State of Andhra, the residuary 
State of Madras or the State of Mysore. Powers have been conferred 
on the Central Government as respects the adaptation of laws relat-
ing to matters enumerated in List I of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution ~md on .the State Governments as respects the adapta-
tion of other laws. The powers so conferred are to be exercised 
before the 1st April, 1954. 
Clawe 55 confers power on every court, tribunal and other autho-
rity required or empowered to enforce any law to construe such law 
with necessary adaptations. 
Clause 56 confers power on the Governor of Andhra and the 
Rajpramukh of Mysore to speCify the authority, officer or person who 
is to exercise, as from the appointed day, in the State of Andhra or 
the territory sought to be added to the State of Mysore by sub-
clause (1) of clause 4 any functions exercisable under any law in force 
on that day. This provision will enable such authority, officer or 
person to be named without having recourse to the powers for the 
adaptation of laws provided in clause 54 whenever necessary. 
Clause ~7 provides for the substitution or addition of parties in 
legal proceedings concerning the undivided State of Madras in the 
case where any property, right or liability of that State or any part 
of such property, right or liability is transferred to any or both of 
the States of Andhra and Mysore. 
Cla1Ufe 58 provides for the transfer of certain proceedings pending 
immediately before the appointed day before a court (other than the 
High Court), tribunal, authority or officer to the corresponding CO\lt't, 
tribunal, authority or officer in the State of Andhra if it relates 
exclusively to Andhra territory, and to the corresponding court, tri-
bunal, authority or officer in the State of Mysore if it relates exclu-
sively to the territory sought to be added to that State by sub-
clause (1) of clause 4. 
Clause 59 and· the Eighth Schedu1Je: In the areas which will form 
the State of Andhra there is at present no jail for women or borstal 
institutbn. This clause accordingly seeks to make available to the 
Government of Andhra for a period of five years certain jails and 
institutions in the residuary State of Madras and the territory sought 
to be added to the State of Mysore as a transitory arrangement. 
These jails and institut~ns are specitied in the Eighth Schedule. 
As these jails and institutions are ouside the territories which will 
form the State of Andhra, a provision has been also included for 
authorising committal to, and detention in, such jails and institutions. 
ClatL8e 60 and the Ninth Schedule: Clause 60 makes provision 
for the continuance of facilities in respect of certain institutions 

52 
situated in the State of Madras or in the territory sought to be 
added to the State of Mysore, to the Government and the people of 
the Sta~ of Andhra. All these institutions are specified in the 
Ninth Schedule. 
Clause 61 provides for two separate cadres-one for the State of 
Andhra and the other for the State of Madras-in respect of the 
Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service in place 
':If the existing cadres in respect of those services in the State of 
Madras. It also confers power on the President to determine the 
strength and composition of the new cadres and to allocate indivi-
dual officers thereto. A provision has been also included so as to 
obviate the necessity of issuing fresh orders of appointment of 
officers allocated to the cadres for the State of Andhra except in the 
cases where such officers are not already in position in posts in the 
areas which will form the State of, Andhra. In the case where the 
officers are immediately before the appointed day in position in 
certain posts in those areas they shall on that day be deemed to have 
been duly appointed to those posts. 
Clause 62 provides for the allocation of officers borne on the 
Madras cadre of the Indian Civil Service, the Indian Police, the Indian 
Service of Engineers and the Indian Forest Service to the States of 
Andhra and Madras as clause 61 will not cover the allocation of such 
officers. A provision similar to that made in sub-clause (3) of clause 
'61 has also been included in this clause. 
Clause 63 provides for the allocation of officers of the State and 
Subordinate Services of the undivided State of Madras in a manner 
which would be fair and equitable and in the interests of the States 
concerned as well as of the officers. 
:'" Sub:-clause (1) -of this-clause ~nablesthe President to jesue ge~ral 
orders finally allocating ,to the Andhra State the non-gazetted staff in 
District establishments lying within the Andhra territory. Such staff 
is generally recruited locally and is not normally liable to be trans-
ferred outside the districts or areas in which their offices lie. 
Sub-clause (2) of this clause will enable the President to make 
special orders to provide for service in Andhra the necessary number 
of ga.t.etted officers and members of the State Services who are ordi-
narily liable to serve in any part of the State. The Officers specified 
in sueh orders will be required to serve in Andhra. 
Sub-clause (3) of this clause will obviate in as many cases as possi-
ble the necessity for the Andhra Government to issue formal orders 
of appointments which come into effect on the 1st October. It is 
intended before that date to ensure that as many as possible. of the 

53 
officers required under sub-clause (2) to serve iii Andhra are trans-
ferred to posts located in the Andhra territory. They will be covered 
by paragraph (a) of this sub-clause . • 
:;;ub-clause (4) of this clause provides for the classification of th~ 
officers who are required under sub-clause (2) to serve in ADdhr. 
into two categories, namely: - . 
(i) officers whose allocation to Andhra is final, and 
(ii) officers whose services will be at the disposal of the 
Andhra Government for a limited period to enable that Goveri1~ 
ment to make proper arrangements for theit replacement. Such 
officers will, thereafter, return to the residuary Stat~. 
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that the period of depllta-
tion of any of the officers falling in the secondo! the tWQ categories 
mentioned in sub-clause (4) will be three Yeanl, but tile;-Andhra 
Government may return any such officer to the St~t.e, of Madras 
before the expiration of three years after giving three m~mths' not~ 
to him and to the Madras Government. 
Sub-clause (6) of this clause empowers the President to make -the 
classification contemplated in sub-clause (4) in accordance with his 
opinion as to the suitability of particular officers for filial'allotment 
to serve in ADdhra. 
Sub-clause (7) of this clause is intended to ,mak~ it, clear ,that 
officers falling in the second of the two categories meiltipned tn _ su~ 
clause (4) will 'be treated as officers of the re.siduary ,St,ate whose 
services are placed at the disposal of the Andhra State'on dE!putation 
for a limited period. . -.' _ __ .' _ ' -" .. ~ , ~. ~ 
Sub-clauses (8) and (9) of.-this clause are designeci:to pr~tve the 
legitimate ri${hts and interests of officers, of -th~, ;'l'QIlki, ~c~ 
CRtegory. ' ,-, ~";" 
Sub-clause (10) of this clause expressly saves trom' the operation 
of this clause the officers of the new and former AlI-India Services. 
ClausE: 64 empowers the President to issue directions for the pur-
pose of giving effect to the provisions of clauses 61, 62 and 63 and 
for ensuring the proper division of services among the States of 
Madras. Andhra and Mysore. 
Cla.use 65: Under clause (2) of article 323 of the Constitution, 
the State Public Service Commission has to -present annually' to the 
Governor or Rajpramukh of the State a repbrt 'as to the work done 
by t~ Commission and on receipt ofsuehn!portthe Governor or 
the Rajpramukh is required to cause a copy thereof together with a 
memorandum explaining as respects the cases, if any, where ,·the 

54 
idvice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such 
non-acceptance, to be laid before the Legislature of the State. The 
report as to the work done by the Madras Public Service Commission 
in respect of any period prior to the appointed day would really 
concern the States of Andhra and residuary Madras. The State of 
Mysore would hardly be concerned with it as it is not likely that the 
report will deal specially with any cases relating to the territory 
sought to. be added to that State by sub-clause (1) of clause 4. 
It is accordingly proposed that the report for any such period shall 
be presented to the Governors of Andhra and Madras only. It is 
further .proposed that any such report or the memorandum which is 
toacccmipany it under clause (2) of the said article 323 need not be 
laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra as the 
Goy:~rnmentof that State can hardly be expected to explain the 
r.~Sons lor non-acceptance of the recommendations of the Madras 
Public Service Commission by the Government of the undivided State 
of Madras but both the report and the memorandum will have to be 
laid before the Legislature of the residuary State of Madras. 
Clause 66 seeks to make suitable arrangements in respect of 
the Tungabhadra Project and its administration. The residuary 
State of Madras will hardly be concerned with this Project after the 
appointed day as Beither that State will derive any benefit from the 
Project nor will any of the distributaries or other works of the 
'Project be located in its territory. The new State of Andhra and 
the State of Mysore will have to undertake all responsibilities in 
relation to this Project after the appointed day. It has accordingly 
been: provided in this clause that all rights and liabilities of thtl 
Madras Government which will include not only the rights and 
liabilities in respect of the construction, administration, operation 
and mAIntenance of the Project but also the right to receive and 
utilise- water and electric energy shall devolve on both the States 
of Andhra and Mysore, and they will be adjusted by agreement 
entered into by the two States after consultation with the President. 
Such agreement will also provide for any adjustment required in 
respect of the extension or further development of the Project after 
the appointed day. It is further proposed that if the said two States 
fail to enter into an agreement within two years after the appointed 
day, the President shall by order determine how the aforesaid rights 
and liabilities will be adju,sted between them and the order of the 
President may be varied by a subsequent agreement entered into by 
them. In order to ensure the completion of the Project and its ope-
ration. and maintenance thereafter, power has been given to the 
President to issue directions from time to time to the States concerned 
until an agreement is entered into by them or until the 

55 
President issues an order determining. the adjustment· Of the rights 
and liabilities of the two States, whichever is earlier .. 
cZau.se 67 seeks to confer power on the President to' detetmirie 
the allowances and privileges of the Governor of the new· State ()f 
Aadhra until Parliament makes provision in that behalf under olause 
(3) of article 158 of the Constitution to avoid any difficulties Which 
may arise in determining such allowances and privileges under: para-
graphs 2 and 3 of the Second Schedule to the Constitution. 
Clause 68 seeks to make it clear that the provisions of the Bill 
after it is enacted shall have effect notwithstanding anything in· 
consistent therewith contained in any other law. 
Clause 69 provides power for the removal of any difficwty which 
.) may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill after -it 18 
enacted. . . 
Seventh Schedule: This Schedule contains the provisions· as to 
apportionment of assets and liabilities between the States of Andhra, 
residuary Madras and Mysore. Paragraphs 1 to 10 deal with assets, 
paragraphs 12 to 17 deal with liabilities and paragraphs l1, 18 and 
19 deal with both assets and liabilities. The provisions as to appor-
tionment embodied in the Schedule are based generally on the re-
commendations of Mr. Justice Wanchoo contained in his Repori on 
the Formation of Andhra State. The proportions' mentioned· in 
paragraphs 2, 6(3), 7(1), 7(2), 8, 9,17(3) and 17(4) have been: cal.: 
culated on the basis of the population of the residuary ,State of 
Madras, the State of Andhra and the territory sought·to be. (ldded' 
to the State of Mysore by sub-clause (1) ()f clause 4 . of the'. Bill: 
According to the 1951 ce~sus-- . . 
the total po!>ulatidn Of the 'uridivided State 'Of; '. 
Mad'ras·is&7.016,00%; 
the population of the areas which will fonn the 
residuary State of Madras is 35.734,489 
the population of the areas which will form the 
State of Andhra is . 20,lJ01,801 
the population of the territory to be added to the 
State of Mysore by sub-clause (1) of clause 4 
(i.e., all the taluks of BeUary district other 
than Alur, Adoni and Rayadrug) is. 773,712 
Thus the population of the residuary Madras, Andhra and Mysore 
will respectively be 621 per cent., 36 per cent. and l! per cent. of 
• the total population of the undivided State of Madras. 

SIt 
In_~gard. to.Uocation _of debt dealt with in paraaraph 12 of this 
Schedule,· the report of Mr. Justice Wanchoo contemplated a set-off 
in favour of each of the three States of a debt equal to the sum 
~rable from local bodies, etc. at the first stage. But this pro-
cedure: has DDt been follow.ed in the Schedule as it may not secure 
8D.: equitable allocation in view of the uncertainty about the extent 
~ wQich. the outstandiDgs may prove to be bad debts. 
-It has been made clear in the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) o(para-
graph 12 of this Schedule that the allocation of the debt relating to 
the Tungabhadra Project is provisional and the final allocation will 
be made on such basis as may be agreed upon between the States 
concerned or, in default of such agreement, as may be fixed by 
order of the President. 
. - PrQvision has been made in paragraph 2 of this Schedule for the 
special aTIocatiori of the proceeds of any public loan that may be 
raised by the undivided State of Madras between the 1st July 1953 
and the.appo~ted day, and in paragraph 12 of this Schedule for the 
apportionment in a _ special way of such loan and of any loaD that 
may ~ taken from the Central Government before the appointed day 
for the temporary capital of the State of Andhra or for purposes in-
Cidental thereto. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the formation of the State of Andhra, the increasing 
of the area of the State of Mysore and the diminishing of the 
area of the State of Madras, and for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of article 3 and clause (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the House 
of the People the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
(Shri Kail'a8 Nath Katju, 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secret4ry. 
Minister for Home Affairs.) 