Bill No. 43 of 1957 
THE DHOTIES (ADDITIONAL EXCISE 
DUTY) AMENDMENT BILL, I9S7 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No. U of 1957 
THE DHOTIES (ADDITIONAL EXCISE DUTY) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Dhoties (Additional Excise Duty) Act, 1953. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Dhoties (Additional Excise Duty) Short title. 
Amendment Act, 1957. 
S 39 of 19S3. 2. In section 1 of the Dhoties (Additional Excise Duty) Act, 1953 Amendment 
(hereinafter referred to as 'the principal Act), in sub-section Of.leCtlOD. J. 
(2), the words "except the State of Jammu and Kasbmir'l Idlall· be 
10 
15 
omitted. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, after clause (a), the follow- Amendment 
ing clause shall be inserted, namely: - of section l. 
"(aa) 'group of mills' means two or more mills under com-
mon ownership or management;". 
4. In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the Amendment 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: _ ofsc:ction 3· 
"(3) The permissible quota of dhoties which may be issued 
. J ,.~ 
out of any group of mills as a whole during any quarter in 
any case 'where an application is made in that behalf by that 
group, shall be such as the Textile Commissioner to the Govern-
ment of India may fix, but such permissible quota shall in no 

Amendment 
of section 4-
Amendment 
of lection S. 
2 
case exceed the total of the permissible quotas under sup-section 
(1) or, as the case may be, under sub-section (2), for all the 
mills included in that group. 
(4) Where an application for the fixation of a permissible 
quota under sub-section (3) is rejected, the Textile Commis- S 
sioner sb311 record in writing a brief statement of his reasons for 
such rejection.". 
5. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the figures u1953", the words 
uor out of any group of mills," shall be inserted; 10 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
U (1A) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared 
that where a duty of excise has been levied under sub-sec-
tion (1) on any quantity of dhoties issued in excess of the 15 
permissible quota fixed under sub-section (3) of section 3 
for any group of mills, no duty of excise shall be levied 
separately under the said sub-section (1) on any quantity of 
dhoties issued out of any mill included in that group on 
the ground that such quantity is in excess of the permissible 20 
quota for that mill". 
6. In section 5 of the principal Act, after the words uin particular", 
the word~ "the form and manner of applications for fixation of 
permissible quotas for groups of mills, the procedure to be foH9wed 
in relation to such fixation and" shall be inserted. 2S 
Au_la'_ 'I. In the Schedule to the prindpal Act. after the words ~mv of the Sche- ," dale. 1Iill1", ·the·w0rd8 fIOl'.·anysroup of mUJ,i" shall be ~ 

STA'TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In order to. assist the handloom induatry, the Government of 
Inclta had issued: in December, 1'52, a notification unde1" the Cf)tton 
Tdt'iles· (Control) Order, 1948, restricting the produetim of dhCilCies 
by a mill or a group of mills to Dot more than 60 per ,cent. of the 
average qwmuUes 'Of· dhoties packed for sale per month for intemal 
coDRmption during the year April, 1951 to March, 1952. It was, 
however, not always possible under this notification to penaUse the 
offender for infringement of its provisions. To remove this dis-
ability, the Dhoties (Additional Excise Duty) Act, 1953, was passed 
providing for the imposition of a penal excise duty on a regulated 
scale on mills infringing this restriction. 
Z. In order to clarify beyond doubt that Q group of mills under 
the same ownership or common management could combine their 
quotas of dhoties fixed under section 3, it is proposed to amend the 
said Act to enable the Government to fix a collective quota where-
ever necessary for a group of mills under the same ownership or 
common management. The Bill is designed to achieve this object. 
, MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 4th July, 1957. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 of the principal Act 
to emble the Central Government to make rules to provide for the 
form and manner of application for the fixation of permissible quota 
for any group of mills and the procedure to be followed in relation 
to such fixation. These are matters of procedure and minor detail 
which may be entrusted to the rule making power of the Central 
Government. . The proposed delegation of legislative power is 
of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
~ 
- ExTRACTS FROM THE DHOTIBS (ADDmONAL ExCISE DUTY) ACT, 1953 
(39 OF 1953) 
• • • • • 
Short title, 1. 
~xtent and 
commence-
m~t. 
(1) 
• • • • • 
Levy of 
additional 
duty of 
excise on 
dhoties. 
ower to 
... lte rules. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
• • • • • 
. 4. (1) Where the quantity of dhoties issued out of any mill on 
or after the 26th day of October, 1953, exceeds in any quarter the 
permissible quota for that quarter, there shall be levied and collected 
on that quantity of dhoties so issued which is in excess of the permis-
sible quota a duty of excise at the rate or rates which may be appli-
cable thereto as specified in the Schedule . 
• • • • • • 
5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act, in-
cluding, in particular, the submission of returns or other informa-
tion relating· to the manufacture or issue of dhoties by mills to such 
authority as may be specified in this behal£. 
• • • • • • 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 4] 
. Where the quantity of dhoties issued out of any mill during any 
quarter is in excess of the permissible quota for that quarter-
(1) in respect of the quantity which does 
not exceed the permissible quota by more than 
12!% thereof 
5 -- . .. 
Rate of duty 
TWO ann .. 
per yard. 

6 
(2) in respect of the quantity which exceeds 
the permissible quota by more than 121% thereof 
but does not exceed it by more than 25% 
(3) in respect of the quantity which exceeds 
the·permissibie quota by more than 25% thereof 
but does not exceed it by, more- thaD 50ro 
(4) in respect of the quantity which exceeds 
the permissible quota by more than 50% thereof 
iuteot duty 
Three IDDAi 
per ,ard. 
Four IIDDIlI 
per yard, 
Biaht IIDDIlI 
per yard, 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Dhoties (Additional Excise Duty) Act, 1953. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to 
Lok Sabha, the introduction and consideration of the BilL 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, Minister of Commerce and Industry.) 