AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

4

ais,
हर
iy
Bd
डर

Bill No. 43 of 2005

THE COMMUNAL VIOLENCE (PREVENTION, CONTROL AND
REHABILITATION OF VICTIMS) BILL, 2005

By
SHRI AyiT SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the creation of a National Commission Jor Inter-Community Peace and
Justice to tackle communal strife in the country and to ensure lasting peace in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1, (/) This Act may be called the Communal Violence (Prevention, Control and
shabilitation of Victims) Act, 2005.

_ (2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
inthe Official Gazette, appoint.

Pe. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(i) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;

and Justice; and

(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

(ii) "Commission" means the National Commission for Inter-Community Peace -

Short title,
extent and
Commencement.

Definitions.


Offences
punishable

under the Aci.

Punishment
for those
conspiring or
abetting the
offences.

Other
offences
punishable
under the Act.

Responsibility
of public
servants.

2

3. (/) Whoever commits the following offences or any of them with the intent to
destroy, in whole or in part, any ethnic, racial, religious, linguistic, geographical or caste
group on account of ill will or group hatred by:

(7) killing members of any group;
(ii) causing Serious bodily or mental harm to the members of any group; and

(iii) destroying properties, dwelling places, places of worship, shops, factories
and other means of livelihood and cultural facilities with an intent to cripple the member/
members of the group shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to life
imprisonment and shall also be liable to a fine which may extend to rupees five lakh.

(2) Whoever commits the offences mentioned in sub-section (/) for the second time
shall be punished with death or life imprisonment.

4. Whoever conspires, abets, encourages, aids and organizes the offences mentioned
in section 3 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
and a fine which may extend to rupees five lakh.

5. (1) Whoever malignantly or wantonly promotes or causes to promote enmity between
different groups of people on ground of religion, race, caste, place of birth, language or
otherwise; commits or causes to commit acts prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony by
spoken or written words or by Signs or visible presentation or otherwise shall be punishable -

with imprisonment which may extend to three years and a fine which may extend to rupees
two lakh.

(2) whoever organises or causes to organise any exercise, drill, militant, political or
other group movement, arms training and similar activities, with the knowledge that the
participants in such activity may use or may be trained to indulge in violence or intimidation
against a religious, caste, racial, linguistic, cultural, political or geographical group or with
the knowledge that such an act is going to create fear or alarm in such a group or groups,
Shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years and shall also be
liable to fine which may extend to rupees two lakh.

6. (1) Any public servant who is responsible for maintaining law and order, but fails to
control the group/communal violence and/or fails to perform a legally assigned act which
results or may result in offences mentioned in section 3 to 5 shall be liable to imprisonment
which may extend to two years. 3

(2) If convicted for the said offence, such public servant shall also be dismissed from
public service.

(3) No sanction from any authority shall be required for prosecuting a public servant,
if his/her prosecution is recommended by an inquiry commission constituted on the
recommendation of the Commission for Inter-Community Peace and Justice set up under
section 11 of this Act.

(4) The appropriate Government, in addition to its own power to appoint Commission
of inquiry, shall constitute an Inquiry Commission headed by a person not lower than the
rank of a judge of a High Court to examine the circumstances of the failure of public servants
on law and order duty in every case of group violence where the National Commission for
Inter-Community Peace and Justice so recommends.

(5) The Inquiry Commission constituted under sub-section (4) shall complete its inquiry
within two months of its constitution and its report shall be made public within one month of
its submission. |



10

20

30

35

=——

45

3

7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Representation of the People Act, 1951,
any person found guilt of an offence mentioned in sections 3 to 5 shall be disqualified from
voting in an election, contesting election to any local or legislative body or holding any
office under the Government. |

8. The appropriate Government shall pay compensation of not less than rupees two

lakh in lumpsum to a dependant/dependants ofa person killed in any communal violence in
any part of the country.

9. Ifany person killed in a communal violence was the sole earning member of his
family, the appropriate Government shall provide suitable employment to at least one eligible
and dependent member of the family of the victim within a period of eight months from the
occurrence of such violence.

10. If an injury is caused to a person in the course of a communal violence, the
appropriate Government shall pay compensation to the said person as recommended by the
National Commission for Inter-Community Peace and Justice.

Explanation. For the purpose of sections 8, 9 and 10 “Dependant” means any of the
following relatives of a deceased, namely:—

(i) a widow, a minor legitimate or adopted son, an unmarried legitimate or adopted
daughter or a widowed mother;

(ii) if wholly dependant on the earnings of the deceased at the time of his death,
a son or a daughter who has attained the age of eighteen years and who is infirm; and

(iii) if wholly or in part dependant on the earnings of the deceased at the time of
his death or injury—

(a) a widower,
(8) a parent other than a widowed mother,

(c) aminor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a daughter,
legitimate or illegitimate or adopted, if married and a minor or if widowed and a
minor, |

(d) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed sister if a minor,
(९) a widowed daughter-in-law,
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased son,

(2) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no parent of the child
is alive, or

(h) a paternal grandparent if no parent is alive.

Explanation. For the purpose of sub-section (ii) and items (f) and (g) of sub-section
(iii), references to a son, daughter or child include an adopted son, daughter or child
respectively.

11. (1) The Central Government shall estabiish a National Commission for Inter-
Community Peace and Justice consisting of a Chairman and four members.

(2) The Commission shall be headed by a retired judge of the Supreme Court or a
retired Chief Justice of a High Court and the members of the Commission shali be appointed
from amongst the following:—

(i) one senior jurist possessing the qualifications required for becoming a
judge of the High Court;

(ii) one retired officer of the Central Government who has retired from the
rank of Secretary to the Central Government;

Disqualification
for those
convicted
under the
Act.

Compensation.

Employment
to dependants.

Compensation
to those
injured.

National
Commission
for Inter-
Community
Peace and
Justice.



Powers and
functions of
the
Committee.

Right of
victims to
appeal.

Report of the.

Commission.

Commission
to call
reports from
appropriate
Government.

Power to
make rules.

4

(iii) one retired police officer who has retired from the rank of Director General
of Poiice; and

(iv) one human rights activist who has at least twenty years of experience of
service in the field of Human Rights.

Provided that the members of the Commission shall be nominated by the Central
Government after consulting a panel consisting of Chief Justice of India, the Leader of
Opposition in the Lok Sabha and the Chairman of National Human Rights Commission.

12. (1) The Commission may—

(i) inquire, cause to inquire, investigate and cause to investigate any incident of
offences mentioned in sections 3 to 5 of this Act

(ii) call for a report from the District Magistrate/Chief Secretary of the State
concerned, on such incidents

(iii) issue public notice requesting citizens and Non-Governmental Organisations
to depose before it in the course of an inquiry.

(iv) use the services of any investigating agency of the State or the Union
Government.

(v) supervise investigation and prosecution.

(2) The Commission shall fix responsibility of the public servants for maintaining law

and order duty and shall recommend to the appropriate Government for such departmental

actions/punishment and/or prosecution of such public servant, as it may deem fit.

(3) The Commission shall invite claims from all persons who are entitled to claim
compensation for loss of life, limb, serious injury and/or loss of property and otherwise.

(4) The Commission shall decide the quantum of compensation over and above the
sum mentioned in section 8 of this Act as well as the person/persons to whom it shall be

13. The victims of communal violence shall have the right to appeal to civil courts
against the decision of the Commission in matters of compensation.

14. (1) The Commission shall, in its report, record its views regarding timely response
or failure of the political executive of the State in handling the offences mentioned in sections
3 to 5 of this Act.

(2) The report of the Commission shall be made public within two months of the
occurrence of the crime.

15. (1) The Commission on receipt of an information or otherwise, shall call for report
from the appropriate Government in cases of tension arising between the groups/classes
and shall also suggest appropriate measures for reconciliation and maintenance of peace
between the groups and classes.

(2) The correspondence with the appropriate Government may be kept confidential if
the Commission so decides.

(3) The Commission shall constitute a Committee of experts to monitor the
community/group relations.

16. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Communalism has become a major threat to Indian civil society and polity. We all are
of the horrible forms of communal riots as well as politics based on communalism
haunting the country in the past several years. It has posed a serious challenge to the
fundamentals of our Constitution and the rule of law. Even the highest court of the land had
to intervene many a times to protect the principle of natural justice.

India has clearly reached a stage where the existing laws have failed to prevent
communal violence and politics based on hate. The only way out is to work in right earnestness
for the prevention of communal violence rather than dealing with it after it occurs. Any such
attempt needs to be based on a national awareness campaign. But in addition, certain short
term legal and administrative measures, too, are necessary to nip the communal violence in
the bud itself.

That is why it is necessary for Government of India to immediately constitute a full-
time commission to monitor and prevent communal and sectarian violence and also a fresh
set of laws must be enacted giving judicial teeth to the proposed commission to act for the
prevention of communal violence, to monitor and enhance inter-community faith, peace and
harmony to act and intervene independently both as a preventive and fire fighting body to
deal with the victims of sectarian violence.

The proposed commission should be empowered to initiate legal action against the
perpetrators of communal/sectarian violence and should have legal powers to work for the
compensation as well as rehabilitation of the communal/sectarian victims.

Hence the Bill.

New DELHI; AJIT SINGH.
February 17,2005


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 8 of the Bill provides for compensation to be paid to next of kins of those
in communal riots. Clause 9 provides for provision of employment to one member ofa family
whose sole earning member has been killed in communal violence. Clause 10 provides for
compensation to be paid to those injured in incidents of communal violence. Clause 11
provides for the creation of a National Commission for Inter-Community Peace and Justice.
Clause 12 provides that Commission shall fix the quantum of compensation to be paid to the
victims of communal riots. Clause 15 provides for the constitution of a committee of experts
to monitor inter-community relations. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is, likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees twenty crore and a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore.



_ MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION ©

Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The matters, in respect of which rules may be made are matters of
procedure and detail. The delegation of legislative powers, therefore, is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the creation of a National Commission for Inter-Community Peace and
Justice to tackle communal strife in the country and to ensure lasting peace in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Ajit Singh, 3४.72)

MGIPMRND—4939LS—15-03-2005(S5)