Bill No. 43 of  2006
 THE DELHI  LAWS (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
to make special provisions  for the areas of Delhi for a period of one year and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS phenomenal increase in the population owing to migration has put tremendous
pressure on land and infrastructure in  Delhi resulting in developments which are not in
consonance with the Master Plan of Delhi 2001 and the building bye-laws;
A
ND WHEREAS keeping in view the perspective for the year 2021 and emerging new
dimensions in urban development, the Central Government has proposed extensive
modifications in the Master Plan of Delhi, which have been published and suggestions and
objections have been received in respect thereof from the public, and the finalisation of the
Master Plan 2021 is likely to take some more time;
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND WHEREAS the Central Government has constituted a Committee of Experts to look
into the various aspects of unauthorised construction and misuse of premises and suggest
a comprehensive strategy to deal with them;
A
ND WHEREAS a revised policy for relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers in
Delhi is also under consideration of  the Central Government;
AND WHEREAS a strategy is proposed to be prepared by the local authorities in Delhi in
accordance with the National Policy for Urban Street Vendors;
AND WHEREAS action for violation of the provisions of the Master Plan, 2001  and
building bye-laws, before a final view is taken in the matter by the Government, is causing
avoidable hardship and irreparable loss to a large number of people;
A
ND WHEREAS some time is required for making orderly arrangements in terms of the
proposed Master Plan 2021;
AND WHEREAS it is expedient to have a law to provide temporary relief to the people of
Delhi against such action for a period of one year within which various policy issues referred
to above, are expected to be finalised;
 B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to Delhi.
(3) It shall cease to have effect on  the expiry of one year from the date of its
commencement, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such  cesser,
and upon such cesser section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply as if this Act
had then been repealed by a Central Act.
2.  (1)  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “building bye-laws” means bye-laws made under section 481 of the Delhi
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 or the bye-laws made under  section 188, sub-section
(3) of section 189 and sub-section (1) of section 190 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911,
as in force in New Delhi or the regulations made under sub-section (1) of section 57 of
the Delhi Development Act, 1957, relating to buildings;
(b) “Delhi” means the entire area of the National Capital Territory of Delhi except
the Delhi Cantonment as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the Delhi Municipal
Corporation  Act, 1957;
(c) “encroachment”  means unauthorised occupation of Government land or
public land by way of putting temporary, semi-permanent or permanent structure for
residential use or commercial use  or any  other use;
(d) “local authority” means the Delhi Municipal Corporation established under
the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, or the New Delhi   Municipal Council
established under the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 or the Delhi Development
Authority established under the Delhi Development Act, 1957, legally entitled to exercise
control in respect of the areas under their respective jurisdiction;
(e) “Master Plan” means the Master Plan for Delhi 2001 notified under the Delhi
Development Act, 1957;
(f) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette.
(g) “punitive action” means action taken by a local authority under the relevant
law against unauthorised development and shall include demolition, sealing of premises
and displacement of persons or their business establishment from their existing location,
whether in pursuance of Court orders or otherwise;
Short title,
extent and
duration.
Definitions.
10 of 1897.
66 of 1957.
Punjab Act
3 of 1911.
61 of 1957..
66 of 1957.
44 of 1994.
61 of 1957.
66 of 1957.
61 of 1957.
5
10
15
20
2525
30

3
(h) “relevant law” means in case of—
(i) the Delhi Development Authority, the Delhi Development  Act, 1957;
(ii) the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the Delhi Municipal Corporation
Act, 1957; and
(iii) the New Delhi Municipal Council, the New Delhi Municipal Council
Act, 1994.
(i) “unauthorised development” means use of land  or use of building or
construction of building carried out in contravention of the sanctioned plans or without
obtaining the sanction of plans, or in contravention of the land use as permitted under
the Master Plan or  Zonal Plan or layout plan, as the case may be, and includes
encroachment.
(2)      The words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the Delhi Municipal
Corporation Act, 1957 and the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994.
3.   (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any relevant law or any rules, regulations
or bye-laws made thereunder, the Central Government shall within a period of one year of the
coming into effect of this Act, take all possible measures to finalise norms, policy guidelines
and feasible strategies to deal with the problem of unauthorised development with regard to
the under-mentioned categories, namely:—
(a) mixed land use not conforming to the Master Plan;
(b) construction beyond sanctioned plans; and
(c) encroachment by slum and Jhuggi-Jhompri dwellers and hawkers and street
vendors,
so that the development of Delhi takes place in a sustainable and planned manner.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1) and without prejudice to
any judgment, decree or order of any court, status quo as on the 1st day of January, 2006
shall be maintained in respect of the categories of unauthorised development mentioned in
sub-section (1).
(3) All notices issued by any local authority for initiating action against the categories
of unauthorised development referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall be deemed to have been
suspended and no punitive action shall be taken during the said period of one year.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Act, the Central Government
may, at any time before the expiry of one year, withdraw the exemption by notification in the
Official Gazette in respect of one or more of the categories of unauthorised development
mentioned in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may be.
4. During the period of operation of this Act, no relief shall be available under the
provisions of section 3 in respect of the following categories of unauthorised development,
namely :—
(a) any construction unauthorisedly started or continued on or after the 1st day
of January, 2006;
(b) commencement of any commercial activity in residential areas in violation of
the provisions of the Master Plan of Delhi 2001 on or after the 1st day of January, 2006;
(c) encroachment on public land on or after the 1st day of January, 2006 except
in those cases which are covered under  clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 3;
61 of 1957.
61 of 1957.
66 of 1957.
44 of 1994.
The provi-
sions of this
Act not to
apply in
certain cases.
Enforcement
to be kept in
abeyance.
44 of 1994.
66 of 1957.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
(d) removal of slums and Jhuggi-Jhompri dwellers and hawkers and street
vendors, in accordance with the relevant policies approved by the Central  Government
for clearance of land required for specific public projects.
5. The Central Government may, from time to time, issue such directions to the local
authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act and it shall be the
duty of the local authorities, to comply with such directions.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Being a major centre for economic growth, the National Capital Territory of Delhi
attracts large number of people from across the country, estimated at about 5 lakh immigrants
every year.   This has resulted in a huge growth in demand for housing and commercial
space.   However, a number of factors such as restricted density norms, slow pace of acquisition
and development of land, low supply of built up accommodation and commercial space and
inadequate enforcement have resulted in creating a growing gap between demand and supply
of both shelter and commercial space.
2. All development in Delhi is governed by the Master Plan notified under the Delhi
Development Act, 1957 and provisions of the Unified Building Bye Laws 1983.  In order to
provide for the needs of the increasing population of Delhi with a perspective of 2021, the
Master Plan of Delhi 2001 has been taken up for extensive revision.  With the approval of
Government, draft Master Plan of Delhi 2021 has been notified by the Delhi Development
Authority on 16th March, 2005.  Nearly 7000 suggestions and objections were received from
the public and other stake holders and the same are under examination by a Board of Inquiry
and Hearing.  Finalisation of the Master Plan is likely to take some time.  Meanwhile, in
various ongoing matters, Hon’ble Courts have issued directions for immediate action against
unauthorised constructions and misuse of premises including demolition and sealing.
Considering the extent and magnitude of the problem, a Committee of experts has been
constituted by the Central Government on 14th February, 2006 to suggest a comprehensive
strategy to deal with the issue. The recommendations of the Committee shall be considered
by Government for policy options and strategy to deal with the matter.
3. The gap in the demand and supply of shelters has also given rise to a large number
of unauthorised colonies on both public and private land as well as the growth of slums on
public land.  It is estimated that there are around 1400 unauthorised colonies in Delhi and
over 6 lakh families living in slums and jhuggi-jhompri.   The Government had earlier finalised
guidelines for regularisation of unauthorized colonies existing as on 31st March, 2002 under
certain specific terms and conditions.  Based on the representations received in this regard,
further revision in the guidelines for regularisation of unauthorised colonies is under the
consideration of the Central Government.
4. As regards the  slums and  jhuggi-jhompri existing in Delhi, the Slum  and  JJ Wing
of Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the Delhi Development Authority have been relocating
the eligible slum families by providing alternate plots under the current policy for relocation
of slum dwellers.  In view of the growing scarcity of land in Delhi and in order to counter
alleged alienation and speculative transfer of such relocation plots, a revised policy for
rehabilitation of slum dwellers in multi-storied tenements as well as through in situ
regularisation, is under consideration.   In the meantime, various orders and directions have
been issued by the Hon’ble Courts for removal of slums irrespective of the availability of
land for their relocation.  It is difficult for the agencies to implement directions of the Courts
in a rigid time limit for removal of slums, within the framework of current policy due to non-
availability of land.  The removal of slum dwellers who are otherwise eligible for relocation
under the policy require protection from their displacement pending finalisation of the revised
policy.
5. There are also a large number of street vendors in different parts of Delhi.  In
pursuance to the National Policy of Urban Street Vendors, Court has issued directions to the
local bodies to frame specific scheme for street vendors.  While the local bodies are formulating
schemes in pursuance of the Court’s directions, it has to be ensured that the schemes are
realistic and take into consideration not only the concerns of hawkers and squatters but also
citizens’ right on the public places.  This would also require some time for finalisation.
6. While a large number of persons would be affected by the decisions relating to such
unauthorised development, at the same time, there is wide divergence of public opinion and
5

6
views on the best way to deal with these issues. These have to be taken into account while
finalising a comprehensive and balanced strategy, on each of these complex issues.   This
process would involve ground level survey, collection of requisite data, its analysis,
consultation with Residents Societies and Residents Welfare Associations by the local
bodies. Professional expert organisations may also have to be involved to formulate a
sustainable strategy.  This will take sometime.
7. Therefore, it has become necessary to take all possible measures for the finalisation
of the norms, policy guidelines and feasible strategies in respect of problems relating to the
unauthorised development in respect of the mixed land use, construction beyond the
sanctioned plans and encroachment by slum dwellers, JJ dwellers, hawkers and street vendors
in Delhi within a definite time frame. While this exercise is taken up by Government and its
relevant agencies, it has become necessary to maintain status quo  in respect of these
categories of unauthorised development existing as on the 1st January, 2006.  For this
purpose, it is proposed to enact a law to enable the Government to take a balanced and well-
considered view on policies involving such unauthorised development so that the
development of Delhi takes place in a sustainable and planned manner, and also provide
temporary relief to the persons residing or carrying out commercial activities or otherwise
dependent upon such unauthorised development, till such time as the policy or strategy is
finalised. The Government, therefore, considers it necessary and desirable to make a special
law for this purpose for the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
8. In view of the above, it has become necessary in larger public interest to make
special provisions providing inter alia for taking of all measures to finalise norms, policy
guidelines and strategies in respect of the aforesaid categories of unauthorised developments
and for maintenance of status quo for one year from punitive action against such unauthorised
development, in order to meet the aforesaid objects.
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
S. JAIPAL REDDY.
N
EW DELHI;
The 10th May, 2006.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to make special provisions  for the areas of Delhi for a period of one year and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri S. Jaipal Reddy, Minister of Urban Development)
MGIPMRND—426LS(S-5)—11-05-2006.