1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI JAYANT SINHA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
2.  The Tenth Schedule to the Constitution shall be omitted.
Bill No. 43 of 2022
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.
Omission of the
Tenth Schedule.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Constitution (Fifty-Second) Amendment Act, 1985 inserted the Tenth
Schedule into the Constitution of India. Also known as the Anti-Defection Law, it
was enacted to curtail the instability in the legislature caused due to continued
defection.
In the last 37 years, the Tenth Schedule has attempted to reduce the occurrences
of defection. As the political environment of India has evolved with time, it has
become essential to strengthen the Constitution to make it more adept in countering
the new-found challenges caused due to the Law.
At present, an inherent drawback of the Schedule is the restriction it places on
the freedom of expression of Legislators. Over time, the scope of the Law has
expanded to curtail their autonomy of thought. It has disincentivised Legislators
from discussing matters of public importance in the House and effectively performing
their duties.
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, in his speech to the Constituent Assembly of India on 4
November, 1948, had differentiated between the Parliamentary and Presidential
system of Government. While substantiating India’s position to adopt the former, he
identified a trade-off in a democracy between stability and responsibility of the
Legislature. He believed that India requires a system of continuous accountability
over stability. At present, the Anti-Defection Law threatens the accountability, and
in the long run, the stability of our legislative system.
Once repealed, the Tenth Schedule shall create room for a more responsible,
productive, and efficient legislative system that respects the mandate of the people.
It will pave the way for Legislators to remain accountable only to their constituents
and the people of India, without fear or favour from political parties.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provides for
a complete repeal of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                        JAYANT SINHA
16 February, 2022.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
TENTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)]
* * * * *
1. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “House” means either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assem-
bly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;
(b) “legislature party”, in relation to a member of a House belonging to any
political party in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 or paragraph 4,
means the group consisting of all the members of that House for the time being
belonging to that political party in accordance with the said provisions;
(c) “original political party”, in relation to a member of a House, means the
political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of
paragraph 2;
(d) “paragraph” means a paragraph of this Schedule.
* * * * *
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5, a member of a House
belonging to any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the
House—
(a) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party; or
(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any
direction issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any person or
authority authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in either case, the
prior permission of such political party, person or authority and such voting or
abstention has not been condoned by such political party, person or authority
within fifteen days from the date of such voting or abstention.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,—
(a) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to the
political party, if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such
member;
(b) a nominated member of a House shall,—
(i) where he is a member of any political party on the date of his
nomination as such member, be deemed to belong to such political party;
Interpretation.
Disqualification
on ground of
defection.
3

(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political party of
which he becomes, or, as the case may be, first becomes, a member before
the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat after
complying with the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be,
article 188.
* * * * *
4. (1) A member of a House shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1)
of paragraph 2 where his original political party merges with another political party
and he claims that he and any other members of his original political party—
(a) have become members of such other political party or, as the case
may be, of a new political party formed by such merger; or
(b) have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a separate
group, and from the time of such merger, such other political party or new
political party or group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political
party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2
and to be his original political party for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.
(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger of
the original political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have taken
place if, and only if, not less than two-thirds of the members of the legislature party
concerned have agreed to such merger.
* * * * *
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, a person who has
been elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of
the People or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or the Chairman or the
Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State or the Speaker or the Deputy
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State, shall not be disqualified under this
Schedule,—
(a) if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluntarily gives up the
membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before
such election and does not, so long as he continues to hold such office
thereafter, rejoin that political party or become a member of another political
party; or
(b) if he, having given up by reason of his election to such office his
membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before
such election, rejoins such political party after he ceases to hold such office.
* * * * *
6. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become
subject to disqualification under this Schedule, the question shall be referred for the
decision of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of such House and his
decision shall be final:
Disqualification
on ground of
defection not
to apply in
case of
merger.
Exemption.
Decision on
questions as to
disqualification
on ground of
defection.
4

  Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the
Chairman or the Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualification,
the question shall be referred for the decision of such member of the House as the
House may elect in this behalf and his decision shall be final.
 (2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation to
any question as to disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule
shall be deemed to be proceedings in Parliament within the meaning of article 122
or, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature of a State within the meaning
of article 212.
* * * * *
7. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, no court shall have any
jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected with the disqualification of a member
of a House under this Schedule.
* * * * *
8.(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph, the
Chairman or the Speaker of a House may make rules for giving effect to the provisions
of this Schedule, and in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing, such rules may provide for—
(a) the maintenance of registers or other records as to the political parties,
if any, to which different members of the House belong;
(b) the report which the leader of a legislature party in relation to a member
of a House shall furnish with regard to any condonation of the nature referred
to in clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 in respect of such member,
the time within which and the authority to whom such report shall be furnished;
(c) the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to admission
to such political party of any members of the House and the officer of the
House to whom such reports shall be furnished; and
(d) the procedure for deciding any question referred to in sub-paragraph (1)
of paragraph 6 including the procedure for any inquiry which may be made for
the purpose of deciding such question.
(2) The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House under sub-
paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be laid as soon as may be after they are made
before the House for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions and shall take effect upon the expiry
of the said period of thirty days unless they are sooner approved with or without
modifications or disapproved by the House and where they are so approved, they
shall take effect on such approval in the form in which they were laid or in such
modified form, as the case may be, and where they are so disapproved, they shall
be of no effect.
(3) The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to the
provisions of article 105 or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any other power
Bar of
jurisdiction
of courts.
Rules.
5

which he may have under this Constitution direct that any wilful contravention by
any person of the rules made under this paragraph may be dealt with in the same
manner as a breach of privilege of the House.
* * * * *
* * * * *
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the constitution of India .
—————
(Shri Jayant Sinha, M.P .)