THE STATES AND UNION TERRITORIES REORGANISATION
COMMISSION  BILL, 2008
By
SHRI BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the reorganisation of States and
Union territories in the country and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  States and Union territories Reorganisation Commission
Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(i) ‘Commission’ means the Commission set up for the reorganisation of States
and Union territories under section 3;
(ii) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(iii) ‘States’ mean the States specified in the first schedule to the constitution;
and
(iv) ‘Union territories’ mean the Union territories specified in the first schedule
to the constitution.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. 43 of  2008
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
Commission to be known as the States and Union territories Reorganisation Commission
to study and report on reorganisation of States and Union territories in the country.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of  the following:—
(i) a retired judge of the Supreme Court, who shall be the Chairman of the
Commission;
(ii) five persons, to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst
persons having special knowledge or practical experience in the field of constitutional
law or administration or centre-state relations, as members; and
(iii) one representative from each State Government and Union territory, as
members.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairman and members of the Commission, shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(3) The Commission shall have its office at New Delhi.
(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Commission as are required for its efficient functioning.
5. (1) The Commission shall perform such functions with regard to reorganisation of
States and Union territories as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Commission
shall also consider the following:—
(i) the demand of various groups for creation of new States;
(ii) allocation of assets to the proposed States and Union territories.
(iii) allocation of Government employees and officers to the proposed States
and Union territories;
(iv) delimitation of constituencies for elections to Lok Sabha and State Legislative
Assemblies; and
(v) allocation of water and natural resources to the proposed new States and
Union territories.
6. (1) The Commission shall submit its report to the Central Government within a
period of two years from the date of its first sitting.
(2) The Commission may appoint sub-committees from amongst its members to examine
and study any specific issue in detail.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
8. The Commission shall have the power to call upon and secure the assistance of any
office or agency of the Central Government or a State Government or an Union territory
administration for carrying out the functions assigned to it under this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
States and
Union
territories
Reorganisation
Commission.
Composition
of the
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Report of the
Commission.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
Power of the
Commission
to call upon
or secure
assistance.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a democratic Republic. It was in 1956 when the first exercise to reorganize the
States and Union territories was carried out. The States Reorganization Act, 1956 led to the
creation of fourteen States and six Union territories. Later on some more States were created
due to popular demand and the requirements of different States and Union territories. The
latest exercise in reorganization was carried out in the year 2000 when three new States,
namely, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Uttarakhand were created.
Demands and representations are, however, being made from time to time for creation
of new States. These include Telangana region in Andhra Pradesh, Vidarbha in Maharashtra,
Bundelkhand in Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, Bhojpuri speaking areas of eastern
Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Bihar, Saurashtra in Gujarat, Coorg in Karnataka,
Koshalanchal region in Western Orissa, Darjeeling Hills, Terai and Dooars in West Bengal,
Maithili-speaking areas of North Bihar, six districts of North Bengal, and various regions of
Uttar Pradesh for creation of new States like Purvanchal, Harit Pradesh, Braj Pradesh and
Awadh Pradesh, etc.  This is because of the fact that these regions of the States are feeling
that they are being neglected by the State administration. Such demands would perhaps go
on increasing in the near future because of the fact that the population of the country has
increased manifold. The density of population has since increased, which is posing law and
order problems. Increasing population has burdened the administration of the States which
are having difficulties in equitable distribution of resources available in the State.
Development of certain States having hilly terrain and other special geographical
features is also hampered because of uneven distribution of natural resources.
Equitable allocation of funds for development, arrangement of adequate facilities for
technical education and vocational training, and providing adequate employment
opportunities in services in the organized sectors under the Government would be possible
if an exercise for reorganization of all States and Union territories is undertaken now. This is
the only solution to ensure speedy and equitable development and prosperity of the country.
This Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL.
April 28, 2008.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Commission for the reorganisation
of States and Union territories of the country. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the salary and
allowances of the Chairman and Members of the Commission. Clause 7 provides for grant of
adequate funds to the Commission by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees twenty crore would be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the reorganisation of States and Union
territories in the country and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2331LS(S-5)—15.07.2008.