1
THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES SUB PLANS
(BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND SPECIAL SCHEMES)
BILL, 2017
By
DR. UDIT RAJ, M.P.
A
BILL
to ensure speedy removal of social and economic disparity through targeted expenditure
on special schemes for the welfare and development of the persons belonging  to the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes Sub
Plans (Budgetary Allocation and Special Schemes) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 43 of 2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(b) “Scheduled Castes Sub Plan” means the process of funds allocation,
identification and preparation of exclusive schemes, the expenditure on such schemes
and the analysis of its final outcome, for the Scheduled Castes;
(c) “special schemes” means schemes which focus on individual beneficiary
schemes, family oriented cum income generation schemes for development of persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes families and schemes for improving the physical and social
infrastructure of localities and community infrastructure like special schools for girls
and boys, coaching centers, working womens’ hostel, special libraries, health and
employment; and
(d) “Tribal Sub Plan” means the process of funds allocation, identification and
preparation of exclusive schemes, the expenditure on such schemes and the analysis
of its final outcome, for the Scheduled Tribes.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, make separate budgetary allocation for the welfare and development of
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, in proportion to their
population.
(2) The budgetary allocations so earmarked under sub-section (1) shall be spent only
on special schemes in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) The budgetary allocations under the Scheduled Castes Sub Plan and Tribal Sub
Plan shall not be diverted for any other purposes or allowed to lapse.
(4) For the purposes of this Act, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment,
Government of India shall be the nodal Ministry for the Scheduled Castes Sub Plan and the
Ministry of the Tribal Affairs shall be the nodal Ministry for Tribal Sub Plan.
(5) The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and the Ministry of Tribal
Affairs shall present separate Annual Budgets and Performance Budgets for the Scheduled
Castes Sub Plan and Tribal Sub Plan, respectively.
4. Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-sections (2) or (3) of section 3 shall be
guilty of wilful and deliberate act of dereliction of duty and shall be punished under section
4 of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 after
fixing the individual responsibility.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions contained in this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Budgetary
allocation for
Scheduled
Castes and the
Scheduled
Tribes.
Penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
40
45
50
33 of 1989.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The legislative efforts undertaken to close the development gap between Dalits and
Adivasis and other date back to 1950, when the Constitution provided opportunities for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the areas of education, employment in public
services and electoral seats through the policy of reservation. From economic point of view,
the most important policies approved so far are the Tribal Sub Plan (STP) and the Special
Component Plan (SCP), now called Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP), executive budget
policies, according to which funds and resources are to be reserved across Central Ministries
and Departments in the State Governments in proportion to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes population at the National, as per the current census data.
However, close scrutiny of the current situation reveals that these two policies have
not been implemented effectively. The money earmarked under these policies is diverted for
general scheme and does not go for funding of the schemes, exclusively for the benefit of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. It is not surprising that Dalits and Adivasis still
remain far away from mainstream development in the country. The literacy gap is still quite
high and the dropout rate is still high. The rate of infant mortality and child mortality under
five is higher among the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes than among other
social group; the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are still less equipped with the
basic requirements for human survival like water and power supply facilities, latrines, sewarage,
houses, etc. and poverty is still very rampant among them.
In fact, positive and substantial changes require making appropriate allocation of
funds compulsory, their distribution timely and focused and effective management of the
funds for the welfare of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes. Hence, there is a need to
introduce a new piece of legislation with the objective of achieving the holistic and speedy
economic development of these communities. In order to ensure speedy economic
development of the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, it
is proposed to give statutory back up to the SCSP and STSP and a strict monitoring on their
implementation, without diversion of funds earmarked for welfare of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; UDIT RAJ
April 13, 2016.
————
PRESIDENT'S  RECOMMENDATION  UNDER  ARTICLES  117(1)  AND  117(3)
OF  THE  CONSTITUTION
————
[Copy of letter No. 16014/01/2016-SCD-II dated 20 February, 2017 from
Shri Thaawarchand Gehlot, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment to the Secretary
General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes Sub Plans (Budgetary Allocation and Special Schemes) Bill, 2017 by
Dr. Udit Raj, Member of Parliament, recommends to the House for introduction under article
117(1) and consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
3

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a separate budgetary allocation by the Central
Government for the welfare and development of the persons belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the expenditure
likely to be incurred.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to ensure speedy removal of social and economic disparity through targeted expenditure
on special schemes for the welfare and development of the persons belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Udit Raj, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—316LS(S3)—15.03.2017.