Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE COUNCIL FOR ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION BILL, 2009
By
SHRI K.C. SINGH 'BABA', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Council at the Centre and in each State and Union
Territory for the protection of environment and ecology.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Council for Environment Protection Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "acts harmful to the environment" shall mean and include all acts and things
done by individuals, institutes, Government bodies, and others that pollute or are
likely to pollute the environment or cause changes in ecology, flora and fauna of a
region to an extent that harms mankind or materially changes the existing environment
or leads to the extinction of any species of plants or animals; and
Bill No.  43  of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
10
5

2
(b) "environment" means and includes water, both surface and underground, air
and land including the surface of the earth, subsoil and the forests (the flora and the
fauna) and the inter-relationship which exists amongst and between water, air and
land, and human beings, other living creatures and plants.
3. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Central Council for Environment
Protection (hereinafter referred to as the Central Council), consisting of five members
who are experts in the field of environmental protection, ecology preservation, geology,
ornithology, zoology and botany.
(2) The Central Council shall have its office at New Delhi.
(3) The Central Government shall establish a State Council for Environment
Protection (hereinafter referred to as the State Council), consisting of three members who
are experts in the field of environment or in such field as may be determined by the Central
Government in every State and Union Territory.
(4) The State Councils shall have their offices at the respective capital of each State
and Union Territory.
(5) The Councils shall function under the control of Union Ministry of Environment
and Forests.
4. The Central Council shall have the following powers and functions—
(a) to study, enquire and conduct research into problems of environmental
protection or preservation of ecology involving subjects under the Central Government
or involving more than one State or Union Territory;
(b) to enquire into any matter relating to environment or ecology which any
State Council deems urgent or extensive enough to necessitate deeper enquiry/study;
(c) to study and enquire into problems of pollution of oceans within our territorial
waters;
(d) to recommend to the Central Government or State Government concerned the
steps to be taken for the environmental/ecological protection;
(e) to aid and advise the State Councils in the matters of research, environment
studies and connected matters;
(f) to receive Reports of State Councils and to decide upon further course of
action; and
(g) to issue orders of injunction suo motu or at the request of any State Council,
against any person, institute or Government body in respect of acts deemed to be
harmful to the environment or ecology and the order issued shall be final unless an
order vacating the injunction is obtained within six months from any High Court
having jurisdiction over the subject-matter or area or a major portion thereof.
5. Every State Council shall have the following powers and functions—
(a) to study, enquire into and do research upon the problems of environment
and ecology in the respective State/Union Territory;
(b) to study and do research upon causes and effects of natural calamities;
(c) to study and do research into pollution of water, air, land (sand), agriculture,
marine and dairy produce or any such matter which is likely to harm human health;
(d) to recommend to the respective Government of the State and Union Territory
the steps to be taken for environmental protection and preservation of ecology; and
(e) to issue orders of injunction against any person, institute or Government
body in respect of acts deemed harmful to the environment or ecology and the order of
Establishment
of Councils
for
Environment
Protection.
Powers and
functions of
Central
Council.
Powers and
functions of
State Councils.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
injunction issued by such State Council shall take effect immediately and shall become
final and binding on the expiry of six months from the date of order unless the person,
institute or Government body, against whom the order is passed, obtains an order of a
competent Court, not below the rank of District Judge, vacating the injunction within
that period:
Provided that the State Council and/or the aggrieved party may file appeal against the
order of the District Judge before the High Court.
6. The members of Central and State Councils shall be appointed for a period of five
years and on expiry of such period any member thereof may be re-appointed for such further
period or periods, not exceeding two years at a time, as the Central Government deems fit.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session on in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Tenure of
Councils.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Urgent steps to protect environment and maintain ecological balance have become
essential in view of  increasing environmental pollution.
The Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of Councils at the Centre and in every
State and Union Territory for study, enquiry, research and making recommendations on
matters relating to protection of environment and preservation of ecology.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; K.C. SINGH 'BABA'
June 22, 2009
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of  the Bill provides for the establishment of Council for Environment Protection
at the Centre and in every State and Union Territory. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It will involve a minimum annual expenditure of about rupees fifty lakhs by way of
salaries, etc. for members of the Councils and other staff.
It will also involve a non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crores from the
Consolidated Fund of India for office infrastructure at the Centre and in every State/Union
Territory.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Council at the Centre and in each State and Union
Territory for the protection of environment and ecology.
————
(Shri K.C. Singh 'Baba', M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2504LS(S-5)—06.07.2009.