THE PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS (CONTROL OF NON-PERFORMING
ASSETS) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P .
A
BILL
to deal  with the non-performing assets of public sector banks and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Public Sector Banks (Control of Non-Performing
Assets) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "bank" means a scheduled bank included in the Second Schedule to the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 43 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
2 of 1934.
5

2
(b) "non-performing assets" means any loans or advances in respect whereof
the repayment of principal or the payment of interest has remained overdue for not less
than ninety days;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "public sector bank" means a scheduled commercial bank in which the Central
Government, or one or more State Governments, or the Central Government and one or
more State Governments jointly hold not less than fifty-one per cent. of its paid up
equity share capital.
3. (1) Every public sector bank shall constitute a Committee to be known as the
Stressed Assets Management Committee to identify, monitor and for overall management of
the cases of non-performing assets;
(2) The Committee shall,—
(i) look into the specific cases of non-performing assets of every bank where the
amounts of assets involved exceeds such amount as may be specified by notification
issued by the Central Government and suggest ways and means for recovery of such
assets;
(ii) remit such cases to the Restructure Committee constituted under section 5
where it is satisfied that the stressed assets cannot be recovered in accordance with
the terms of the existing agreement with the borrower;
(iii) report to the management of the bank in cases where it believes that an
officer of the bank has failed to exercise due diligence in sanctioning any loans or
advances which has resulted in creating non-performing assets; and
(iv) recommend initiation of legal proceedings under the Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 or
the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 or any other
law for the time being in force for recovery of stressed assets by a bank, if it is satisfied
that such action is necessary for such recovery.
4. It shall be the duty of every Branch Manager to report every case of non-performing
assets to the Stressed Assets Management Committee constituted under section 3 in such
manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Each public sector bank or two or more public sector banks shall jointly constitute
a Restructure Committee.
(2) The Committee shall consist of such number of members as may be nominated by
the bank or banks concerned.
(3) The Committee shall examine every case remitted to it by the Stressed Assets
Management Committee and recommend suitable restructuring of loans and advances keeping
in view the operational sustainability and profitability of the underlying projects and such
other factors as it may deem fit.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a Committee to be
called the Debt Advisory Committee.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and four other members.
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the Committee shall be eminent economists
having experience of not less than ten years in the filed of banking, finance or economics.
(4) The Committee shall appoint such officers and employees as are necessary for
effective discharge of its functions under this Act.
Stressed
Assets
Management
Committee.
Reporting of
non-
performing
assets.
Restructure
Committee.
Debt Advisory
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
54 of 2002.
51 of 1993.

3
(5) The Committee shall frame guidelines and principles governing the following:—
(a) pre-sanction appraisal of solvency of prospective borrowers and liquidity
and profitability aspects of the purpose for which loan or advance is sought;
(b) post-disbursement monitoring of projects by lender bank;
(c) sectoral aspects of risk assessment for projects and provisioning requirements
for loans and advances to different sectors; and
(d) such other matters as may be referred to it by the Reserve Bank of India or the
Central Government or any public sector bank.
7. (1) A borrower shall be deemed to be a wilful defaulter if he defaults in payment of
any amount due to a public sector bank in respect of any loans or advances, when he is
capable, in terms of available liquidity and expected cash flows, of making such payment or
where he has utilized the amount of loan for a purpose other than the purpose for which it
was sanctioned.
(2) Every case, where the amount of loans or advances involved exceeds such amount,
as may be prescribed, of wilful defaulters shall be reported by each public sector bank to the
Debt Advisory Committee.
(3) The Debt Advisory Committee shall maintain a Central Repository of Information
on wilful defaulters with a view to disseminate the same to all public sector banks.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
Wilful default
by borrowers.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The global recessionary trends have insidiously made their way into the Indian
economy. Among the foremost indicators of slowdown in Indian economy is the rising
proportion of non-performing assets in the banking sector. The public sector banks, which
are largely funded by public money, have seen escalating exposure to non-performing assets.
In the interest of security of public money invested in public sector banks, it is necessary
that a dedicated mechanism is evolved to check the rise of non-performing assets of these
banks.
2. In view of the above, the Bill seeks to—
(a)  provide for separate mechanism to deal with non-performing assets;
(b) constitute a joint mechanism by public sector banks to consider restructuring
of loans and advances;
(c) provide for periodic reporting of non-performing assets;
(d) provide for fixing responsibility of individual bank officers in cases where
due diligence is not exercised by them;
(e) provide for constitution of Debt Advisory Committee to frame guidelines and
principles governing sanctioning of loans and advances and monitoring of underlying
projects; and
(f) maintaining a Central Repository of Information on wilful defaulters for
disseminating the same among bankers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI  MAHTAB
June 26, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Debt Advisory Committee
consisting of a Chairperson and four other members. It also provides for appointment of
officers and employees for effective discharge of functions by the Committee. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely
to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore per annum on account of salaries
and other administrative expenses of the Committee.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by notification in the
Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of administrative details.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—776LS(S3)—01-07-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to deal  with the non-performing assets of public sector banks and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)