1
THE MATERNITY BENEFIT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maternity Benefit (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 3 of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act),—
(a) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) ‘doctor’ means registered gynaecologist practicing in registered
hospital or maternity centre of the appropriate Government;”;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 43 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 3.
53 of 1961. 5

2
(b) after clause (g), the  following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(g) ‘laboratory’ means registered laboratory having facility of pathology
tests, blood tests, ultrasounds and related facilities;”;  and
(c) after clause (k) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ka) ‘pregnant woman’ means a woman who at the time of pregnancy has
either no living child or only one living child; and
‘‘(kb) ‘pregnancy period’ means period of time before delivery;”.
3. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“4A. (1) Every pregnant woman during the pregnancy period shall be entitled to
avail half day paid leave as pre-meternity benefit for every routine health check-up or
undergoing medical tests prescribed by a doctor subject to a maximum of five half
days paid leave in a month:
Provided that if a pregnant woman undergoes medical tests prescribed by doctor
on the day of routine health check-up, such woman shall be eligible to avail two half
days paid leave on the same day.
(2) Every pregnant women entitled to payment of pre-maternity benefit under sub-
section (1) shall furnish the prescription of doctor and payment receipt of laboratory to avail
the benefit.”.
4. After section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“21A. If any employer contravenes the provisions of section 4A, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than three months but which
may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees
but which may extend to five thousand rupees.”.
Insertion of
new section
4A.
Insertion of
new section
21A.
Right to Pre-
Maternity
Benefit.
5
10
15
Penalty for
not providing
pre-maternity
benefit.
20

3
S 3 \F\BILL 2018\LS\3993LS(E)\3993LS
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Every pregnancy is special and every pregnant woman should receive special care.
Any pregnant woman can develop life-threatening complications with little or no advance
warning, so all pregnant women need access to quality antenatal services to detect and
prevent life-threatening complications during childbirth.
With the implementation of several schemes and campaigns like Pradhan Mantri
Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan mortality rate has reduced during pregnancy and delivery, but
the goal of safe mother and safe child is yet to be achieved. In our country Maternity Benefit
Act, 1961 was enacted to provide benefits of continous paid leave pre and post delivery. But
this Act doesn’t cover the paid leave required by a pregnant woman for regular visits for
health checkups and for other related services. In many cases, many working pregnant
women either defer or do not go for regular checkups as they cannot afford half day or day
off or they are denied leaves to undergo visit to doctor.
As per latest data of the Rapid Survey on Children (2013-14), the institutional deliveries
in India are 78.7 per cent. Inspite of this massive increase in the number of pregnant women
coming to institutions for delivery, till date only 61.8 per cent. women receive first ANC IN
FIRST trimester (RSOC) and the coverage of full ANC is as low as 19.7 per cent. (RSOC).
Despite availability of treatment guidelines, mechanisms for monitoring and supportive
supervisions, regular training of  healthcare providers at different levels across the country,
Maternal Mortality Rate with MMR of 167 per 1,00,000 live births still remains. Timely detection
of risk factor during pregnancy and childbirth can prevent deaths due to five preventable
causes. In this context to build a healthy India and to save working mothers life and safe
delivery, it is necessary to provide paid leave to working pregnant woman of our country.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 with a view to
provide for half day paid leave as pre-maternity benefit to every pregnant woman for every
routine health check-up or undergoing medical tests prescribed by a doctor subject to a
maximum of five half days paid leave in a month.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PA TIL
January 17, 2018.

4
S 3 \F\BILL 2018\LS\3993LS(E)\3993LS
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provide for half day paid leave as pre-maternity benefit to every
pregnant woman for every routine health check-up or undergoing medical tests prescribed
by a doctor subject to a maximum of five half days paid leave in a month. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees five hundred crore  may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to involve.

5
S 3 \F\BILL 2018\LS\3993LS(E)\3993LS
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961
(53 OF 1961)
* * * * *
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(c) “delivery” means the birth of a child;
* * * * *
(g) “Inspector” means an Inspector appointed under section 14;
* * * * *
(k) “plantation” means a plantation as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the
Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951);
* * * * *
Definitions.

MGIPMRND—3993LS(S3)—08-02-2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil,  M.P.)