As INTRODUCBD IN LOlt SABHA ON 
. .. 
3 d MAR 1978 
Bill No. " of lint . 
- .... -
THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS OF 
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members oj 
Parliame,nt Act, 19M. 
BIl it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Short 
Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1979. title. 
5 Z. In the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament 
30 of 1964 Act, 1954, after section se, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"6D. A member who is blind or who is, in the ofloion of the Chair-
man of the Council of States or, as the case may be, the Speaker of 
10 the House of the People, so incapadtatecl physically as to require the 
facility of an attendant shall, with respect to each such journey by 
-,. air as is referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 or 
c\ause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 5 or section 8C which he per-
forms along with an attendant, be entitled (in addition to the aDo-
IS wances which he is entitled under section" or section 5 oJ', as the 
case may be, section 6C) to an amount equal to one fare by air for 
such journey l' 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
60. 
Special 
facility to 
blind and 
physically 
incapaci-
tated 
members. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In pursuance of a recommendation of the Joint Committee on Salaries 
and Allowances of Members of Parliament, it is proposed to amend the 
Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954 in 
order to allow a blind Member the facUlty of an attendant while per-
forming journeys by air and also ttl extend the same facility to a Mem-
her who is so incapacitated physically as to require the assistance of an 
attendant. 
", 
2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above objects. 
, RAVINDRA VARMA. 
NEW DELHI; 
TM 19th March, 1979. 
2 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the payment to a blind or physically 
incapacitated Member of Parliament an amount equal to one fare by air 
for each journey performed by him along with an attendant by air in 
addition to the allowances to which he is otherwise entitled under the 
Act. 
ExpencUture towaro. the payments referred to above cannot be esti-
mated precisely. However, the e:lt'penditure may, approximately. be 
fifty thousand rupees per annum. 
There will be no non-recurrini expenditure. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salary, AllowancE:s and Pension of Members of 
Parliament Act, 1954. 
.. . 
(Shri Ravindra Varm8t 
Minister 01 Parliamenta.17I 
Affairs and Labour) 