of 1940. 
of 1947. 
As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA OK 
29 
Bill No. U of I"" 
THE TAXATION LAWS (CONTINUATION~rAND VALI-
DA nON OF RECOVERY PROCEEDINGStBILL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
to provide jor the continuation and validatio.n oj proceedings in 
relation to Government dues and jor matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - . 
1. This Act may be called the Taxation Laws (Continuation and Short title. 
Validation of Recovery Proceedings) Act, 1004. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "assessee", in relation to--
(i) the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940, or the Business 
Profits Tax Act, 1947, means a person ,by whQTIl the tax or 
any other sum is payable under that Act; 
(ii) the Estate Duty Act, 1953, means a person account-
able or an accountable person as defined in that Act; 
(iii) any other schedu1ed Act, means an assessee as 
defined in that Act; \ 
(b) "Government dues", in relation to any scheduled Act, 
means any tax, duty, penalty, fine, interest, annuity deposit or 
any other sum payable to the Government by an assessee under 
that Act; 
(c) "scheduled Act" means an Act specified in the Schedule; 
Deftnltlonl .. 

Continua-
tion anei 
validation 
of certain 
proceed-
inII-
~:7:1'''-,~ .. ', , ~, 
(d) "Taxing Authority", in relation to any scheduled Act, 
means an officer (by whatever name called) empowered to serve 
upon an assessee a notice of demand in respect of any Govern-
ment dues under that Act; 
(e) "Tax Recovery Officer", in relation to any scheduled S 
Act, means a Tax Recovery Oftlcer as defined in that Act and 
where there is no such definition, means an officer (by what-
p.ver name called) to whom a certificate for the recovery of 
arrears of Government dues may be issued under that Act. 
3. (1) Where any notice of demand in respect of any Govern- 10 
ment dues is served upon an assessee by a Taxing Authority under 
any scheduled Act, and any appeal or other proceeding is filed or 
taken in respect of such Government dues, then,-
(a) where such Government dues are enhanced in such 
appeal or proceeding, the Taxing Authority shaN serve upon the IS 
assessee another notice of demand only in respect of the amount 
by which such Government dues are enhanced and any proceed-
ings in relation to such Government dues as are covered by the 
notice or notices of demand served upon him before the disposal 
of such appeal or proceeding may, without the service of any 20 
fresh notice of demand, be continued from the stage at which 
IUch proceedings stood immediately before such disposal; 
(b) where such Government dues are reduced in such ap-
peal or proceeding,-
(i) it shall not be necessary for the Taxing Authority a, 
to serve upon the assessee a fresh notice of demand; 
(ii) the Taxing Authority shall give intimation of the 
fact of such reduction to the assessee, and where a certifi-
cate has been issued to the Tax Recovery Officer for the 
recovery of such amount, also to that officer; 30 
(iii) any proceedings initiated on the basis of the notice 
or notices of demand served upon the assessee before the 
disposal of such appeal or proceeding may be continued in 
relation to the amount so reduced from the stage at which 
such proceedings stood immediately before such disposal;· 3S 
(c) no proceedings in relation to such Government dues 
(including the imposition of penalty or charging of interest) 
shall be invalid by reason only that no fresh notice of demand 
W8I aenred upon the assessee after the disposal of such appeal 
or proceeding·or that such Government dues have been enhanced 40 
or reduced in s.uch appeal or proceeding: 
Provided that if as a result of aD)' final erder .eb, Govern-
... t dUes (other than aDDuity deposit) have been reduced and 

LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE TAXATION UWS (CONTINUJ..TION lJiD V.t.LIDJaoTION OF RlSCOVERY 
PROCEEDINGS) BILL, 1964 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabba) 
1. Page 7, line 1 from bottcm,-
for tlLak Sabha" read "Lok Sabha" 
2. Page 7, line 3 from bottcm,-
~ for "(Continuation of Recovery Proceedings) It read -
· -l "(Continuation and Validation of Recovery Proceedings)" · • .. 
~ 
~ 
~ ::s O'Q 
3. In the docket page,-
!.2!: "proceed-dings" read "proceed-ings" 
NEw DELHI-
lffiril 29. 1964 
Vaisakha 9--; 1886( Saka) 
.•. 

3 
the penalty imposed on the assessee for default in ,payment there-
of exceeCIs the amount so reduced, the excess shall not he re-
covered and jf it has already been recovered, it shall be rerun •• 
ed to the assessee on an application made by him ·to the Taxing 
Authority within such time and in such manner as may be pres-
cribed by rules made under this Ad: 
Provided furthe" that if the amount of nenalty fmpol'led on 
tlle asses!Jee for failure to make any annuity deposit exceeds one-
haH of the amGtmt of the annuity deposit required to be made 
10 as a rerolt of roch order, the excesl'l shan not be recovered, and 
if it ha!l already been recovered, shal1be refunded to the asse!'lsee 
GIl anapptication made by him to th~ Taxing Authority within 
such time and in such manner 85 may be prescribed by rules 
made under this Act: 
IS Provided further that wherp any Govemment dues are re-
duced in !luch anpeal or pr~eedinlt and the asses~e is entitled 
to any refund thereof. !luch refund shall be made in accordance 
with the provisions of that Act. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no fresh 
20 notice of demand shall be neCf'!'lsary in any case where the amount 
of Government dues is not vl'I.rieci as a result of anv order passed in 
any appeal or other proceedin~ under any scheduled Act. 
(.1) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstand-
ing any judgment, decree or order of any court, trihunal or other 
25 authority. 
4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Power to 
Gazette, add the name of any Central Act providing for' the imposf- ~:~~e 
tion or levy of any tax or duty in the Schedule and on the iS6Ue of c e. 
any such notification, the Act so added shall be deemed to be an 
30 Act specified in the Schedule within the meaning of clause (c) of 
section 2. 
5. The provisions of this Act shall apply and shall be deemed always Act to 
to have applied, in relation to ev~ notice of demand served upon have ~­
an assessee br any Taxing Authority under any scheduled Act ~~V. 
3S whether such notice was· or is served before or after the commence- ec . 
ment of this Act. 
6. If any difticulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Oftlcial =~es. 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the purposes of 
40 this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or eXpedient for removing 
the difficulty. 

Power to 
make 
rule •. 
4 
7. (1) The Central Government may make ruleS .for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as'soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 5 
one session or in two successive sessions, and, if before the expiry of 
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, that ru'le shall there-
after have eft'ect, only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 10 
case may be, so however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 

s 
10 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (.c)] 
1. The Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922). 
2. The Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940 (15 of 1940). 
3. The Business Profits Tax Act, 1947 (21 of 1M7). 
4. The Estate Duty Act, 1953 (34 of 1953). 
5. The Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957). 
6. The Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 (29 of 1957). 
7. The Gift-tax Act, 1958 (18 of 1958). 
8. The Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961). 
9. The Super Profits Tax Act, 1963 (14 of 1963). 
IS 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Recently in the case of Income-tax Offi,cer, Kolar and another vs. 
Seghu Buchiah Setty, the Supreme Court had occasion to consider 
the scope of sections 29 and 45 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, 
and it has been held in that case that when a demand levied by the 
Income-tax Officer as a result of an assessment is varied by an 
appellate or revising authority, the original order of the Income-tax 
Officer merges into the order of such authority and consequently in 
all cases of an order varying the as~ment, the original order goes 
and all steps already taken for the recovery of the demand become 
null and void and that in such cases it is the duty of the Income-tax 
Officer to i~e a fresh notice of demand in tlie prescribed form and 
serve it upon the assessee. Though the judgment is with reference 
to the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, which has been Tepealed but kept 
alive only for some limiied purposes, the same interpretation may 
hold good with respect to the corresponding provisions in the In-
eome-tax Act, 1961, and in the other Acts relating to the imposition 
of direct taxes. 
2. The above decision of the Supreme Court will create difficulties 
in the 'collection of income-tax andjother direct taxes. The number 
of assessments involved in the arrear demands of the direct taxes is 
nearly 6 lakhs and recovery certificates have been issued to Collectors 
or Tax Recovery Offtcers in approximately 2,25,000 cases and the 
revenue involved comes to Rs. 157 crores. In view of the above 
decision of the Supreme Court, in mast of these cases, fresh notices 
of demand may have to be served upon the assessees and the 
assessees will have to be allowed a further period for paying the tax. 
It will be only after the expiry of the said periOd that fresh proceed-
ings for recovery can be started. The result would be that recalci-
trant assessees would get sufficient time to withdraw their funds or 
alienate their properties with a view to defeating the c'l.aims of 
revenue. 
3. In order to overcome these difficultIes, it is proposed to provide 
that in such cases, it shall not be necessary to take proceedings afresh 
or to serve fresh notices of demand except that in the case of an 
enhancement of assessment, another notice of demand shall be served 
upon the assessee with respect to the amount by whiah the assess-
ment has been enhanced. Opportunity has also been taken to provide 
for certain matters which are ancillary to the above proposa1. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 23rd April, 1964. 
'-r-" 
L... ••• 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 

PRESIDENT'S REcOMMENI>ATION 'ONnER AATICLES 117 ANt) 
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter dated the 25th April, 1964 from Shri T. T. Kriabnama-
chari, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
• • • • • 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Taxation Laws (Continuation of Recovery Proceedings) Bill, 
1964 has recommended under articles 117 (1) and (3) and 274 (1) of 
the Constitution the introduction of the said Bill in the Lak Sabha. 
7 

The Bill seeks to provide for the continuation and validation of 
recovery proceedings in relation to certain Government dues. Some 
expenditure on the administration of the Act may be involved, the 
extent of which cannot be foreseen at present. 
, ..... ' 
8 

MDlORANDlJM RIXlARDING DELOOAT&D LEGISLATION 
Clauae '1 of the Bill empC>werI the CeDtral Government to make 
ruleI for carryinl out the purpoees of the Act. The matters with 
1'tIIIlpeCt to which rules may be made are only matters of procedure 
aDd administrative detail. The delegation of legislative power is thua 
of • normal character. 
: .. '\ 
9 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the continuation and validation of proceed-
dings in relation to Government dues and fur matters 
connected therewith. 
(Shri T.T. K~ 
M ... t/P ..... ) 