8U1 No. 44 of 1954 
THE CHANDERNAGORE (MERGER) BILL, 1954-
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the merger of Chandernagore into the State of Wen 
Bengal and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called 
the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954. 
(2) It shall come into force on the 2nd day of. October, 1954. S 
2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise re-
quires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 2nd day of Octdber, 1954; 
(b) "Assembly constituency", "Council constituency" and 
"Parliamentary constituency" have the same meanings as in the 10 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950); 
(c) "Chandernagore" means the whole of the territory which 
immediately before the 9th day of June, 1952 was comprised in 
the Free Town of Chandernagore; 
(d) "law" means so much of any enactment, Ordinance, IS 
RegUlation, order, rule, scheme, notification, bye-law or any other 
instrument having the force of law as relates to matters enu-
merated in List I and List III in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution; 
(e) "sitting member", in relation to the House of the People 20 
or either House of the Legislature of the State of West Bengal, 
means a person who immediately before the appointed day is a 
member of the House; 
(f) "State Government" means the Government of West 
Bengal; 2S 
(g) "Union purposes" mean the. purposes of Government 
relatable to any of the matters mentioned in the Union List in 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution 

2 
3. Chaodernagore to form part of West Beoga1.-(l) As from the 
appointed day Chandernagore shall form part of the State of West 
Bengal and the 'boundaries of that State shall be so altered as to 
comprise within them the territory of Chandernagore. 
5 (2) Without prejudice to the power of the State Government to 
alter hereafter the extent, limits and names of districts and sub-
divisions, Chandernagore shall form part of the district of Hooghly 
in the State of West Bengal and the State Government shall, by 
order in the Official Gazette, provide for the administration of 
10 Chandernagore by constituting it into a new sub-division of the said 
district whether with the addition of such areas of that district as 
may be specified in the order or without such addition. 
4. Ameodmea.t of the First Schedule to the Coostltutl.on.-In the 
First Schedule to the Constitution, in Part A, in the description of 
15 the territories of States, in the last paragraph, after the words, "as 
if they fdrmed part of that Province", the following shall be insert-
ed, namely:-
20 
30 
35 
45 
"and in the case of the State of West Bengal shall also com-
prise the territory of Chanciernagore as defined in clause (c) 
of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954,". 
5. Represeatatton ofCb 8JMlenaacore in the BOIISe of the People.-
(l) Until otherwise provided by law, as from the appointed day-
(a) Chandernagore shan be incluaed in, and become part of, 
the Hooghly Parliamentary constituency formed by the Delimi-
tation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (West 
Bengal) Order, 1951 and that Order shall have effect subject to 
the following modifications, namely:-, 
In Table A-
(i) for the entry in column 2 relating to Serampore· 
OOSlItituency, the following entry shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"Bhadreswar, Sillgur, Serampore, Uttarpara, 
Chanditala and Jangipara police stations of Hooghly 
District and Domjur and Bally police stations of 
Howrah District."; 
(ii) for the entry in column 2 relating td Hooghly 
constituency, the following entry shall be substituted. 
aameb:-
"Pandua, Dhaniakhali. Chinsura (excluding Ward 
No.1 of Bansbaria Municipality), Polba, Haripal, 
Tarakeswar Arambagh, Khanakul and Pursura police 
stations of Hooghly District and Chandernagore."; 
(b) the·sitting member of the House of the People represent-
ing the Hooghly Parliamentary constituency shall be deemed 
to h8\l\e been eleeted by that constituency as modified by this Act. 
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the electoral roll 
of, the Hooghly, Parliamentary constituency shall be prepared in 
lCOOrdanoe with the provisions of the Representation of the Peol)l~ 

3 
Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), and the rules made thereunder and the 
roll so prepared shall come into force immediately upon its final 
publication. 
6. Bepresentatlen of Chandernagore In the Legislative Assembly 
of West Bengal.-Until otherwise provided by law,- .s 
(a) there shall be an additional constituency of the Legisla-
tive Assembly of West Bengal (to be known as the Chandernagore 
Assembly constituency) comp~~ing the entire area of Chande~­
nagore, whether with the addlt!on of such .areas of o~her consti-
tuencies as may 'be determined by the PresIdent or wltho~t such 10 
addition and the said constituency shall be represented m that 
Assembly by one member to be chosen by direct election; 
(b) the President shall, as soon as may be after the-appointed 
day and after consulting the Election Commission amend br 
order the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Const!- 15 
tuencies (West Bengal) Order, 1951 so as to include therein the 
Chandernagore Assembly constituency and the particulars relat-
ing thereto as required by section 9 of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950); 
(c) the total number of seats to be filled by direct election 
in the Legislative Assembly of West Bengal shall be increased 20 
from 238 to 239; 
(d) in the Second Schedule to the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), in the part relating to Part A 
States. for the entry in column 2 against 'West Bengal', the entry 25 
'239' shall 'be substituted. 
7. Electoral roll of the Chandemagore Assembly constituency.-
The electoral roll of the Chandernagore Assembly constituency shall 
be prepared and published in accordance with the provisions of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), and the rules 30 
made thereunder and come into force immediately upon as final 
publication. 
S. Election to fill the seat allotted to the Chandernagore Assembly 
constttuencY.-As soon as may be after the delimitation of the 
Chandernagore Assembly constituency under the provisions of clause 35 
(b) of section 6, there shall be held an election to fill the seat allotted 
to the Chandernagore Assembly constituency in the Legislative As-
sembly of West Bengal; and for that purpose the Election Commis-
sion shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, call upon the 
Chandernagore Assembly con~tituency to elect a person for the 40 
purpose of filling that seat before such date as may be specified in 
the notification and the provisions of the Representation of the Peo-
ple Act. 1951 (XLIII. of 1951), and the rules and orders made there-
under shall apply, as far as may be, in relation to such election. 
9. Consequences of alteration in the extent of certain Assembly 45 
eonstituencies.-If in consequence of the addition of areas to Chande!'-
nagore for the purpose of constituting the Chandernagore Assembly 
constituency, the extent of any existing Assembly constituency, is 
altered, then- ' 
(a) the electoral roll of the existing Assembly constituency 50 
as so altered shall. until it is prepared afresh in accordance with 
the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 

4 
(XLIII of 1950), and the rules made thereunder, be deemed to 
consist of so much of the electdral roll as relates to the areas 
comprised within that constituency as so altered; 
(b) every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of 
5 West Bengal representing the existinq Assembly constituency 
shall be deemed to have been elected to that Assembly by tnat 
consti tuency as so altered. 
10. Representation of Chandernagore In the LegWa.tlve Coundl 
of West Bengal.-(l) Until otherwise provided by law, as from th,e 
10 appointed day-
(a) Chandernagore shall be included in, and become part of, 
the following Council constituencies formed by the Delimitation 
of Council Constituencies (West Bengal) Order, 1951, namely:-
(i) the West Bengal South (Graduates) constituency; 
15 (ii) the Burdwan Division (Teachers) constituency; 
(iii) the Hooghly-Howrah (Local Authorities) constitu-
ency; 
(b) any reference in the said order to West Bengal, Burdwan 
Division or Hooghly' District shall be construed as including 
20 therein Chandernagore; 
(cl every sitting member of the West Bengal South 
(Graduates) constituency, the Burdwan Division (Teachers) con-
stituency or the Hooghly-Howrah (Local Authorities) constitu-
ency, the extent of which is by virtue of the provisions of clause 
25 (a) altered, shall be deemed to have been elected to the said 
Council by that constituency as so altered. 
(2) As.soon as may be after the appointed day the electoral rolls 
of the West Bengal South (Graduates) constituency, the Burdwan 
Division (Teachers) constituency and the Hooghly-Howrah (Local 
30 Authorities) constituency shall be prepared in accordance with the 
provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 
1950) and the rules made thereunder and the rolls so prepared shall 
come intd force immediately upon their final pUblication. 
11. Amendment of section 9, Act LXXXI of 1952.-ln section 9 
35 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1952, in sub-section (3), for the 
words "and the orders made under any of the said Acts". the words, 
brackets and figures "the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954 and the 
order made under any of the said Acts" shall be substituted. 
12. Conferment of Indlan citizenship on French citizens domiciled 
40 in Chandemagore.-Subject to the provisions of Article III of the 
Treaty of Cession of the Territory of the Free Town of Chanderna-
gore all French subjects and citizens of the French Union domiciled 
in the said Territory on the 9th day of June, 1952, shall be deemed to 
have become citizens of India on that day. 
45 13. Property and assets.-(l) All property and assets within 
Chandernagore which. immediately before the appointed day, are 
vested in the Central Government for the purposes of the administra-
tion of Chandernagore shall, as from that day, vest in the State Gov-
ernment unless the {:>urposes for which such iProperty or assets are 
$0 held immediatel,Y b~f~u·~ tbat day, are Union purposes. 

S 
(2) A certificate of the Central Government signed by a Secretary 
to that Government shall be conclusive as to whether the purposes 
for which any property or assets are held immediately before the 
appointed day are Union purposes. 
14. Rights, llabUlttes and obl!gations,-(1) All rights, liabilities S 
and obligations of the Central Government arising out of, or in rela-
tion to, the administration of Chandernagore shall, as from the 
appointed day, be rights, liabilities and obligations of the State Gov-
ernment unless such rights, liabilities and obli~ations are relatable 
to Union purposes. 10 
(2) A certificate of the Central Government signed by a Secretary 
to that Government shall be conclusive as to whether any rights, 
liabilities or obligations arising out of, or in relat.ion to, the adminis-
tration of Chandernagore are relatable to Union purposes. 
15. Subordinate courts.-All courts which immediately before the IS 
appointed day are exercising lawful powers, authority and jurisdic-
. tion in Chandernagore under the superintendence and control of the 
High Court at Calcutta shall, until further provision is made by a 
competent legislature or authority, continue to exercise their res-
pective powers, authority and jurisdiction in Chandernagore under 20 
the superintendence and control of that High Court. 
16. Extsting authorities and officers to continue in Chancler-
n8.l'0re.-Without prejudice to the powers of the State Government 
to appoint from time to time such officers as may be necessary fOT 
the administration of Chandernagore, the Administrator of Chander- 2S 
nagore, all judges, magistrates and other officers of Chandernagore 
who, immediately before the appointed day, are exercising lawful 
functions in Chandernagore or any part thereof, shall, until other 
provision is made by the State Government, continue to exercise in 
connection with the administration of Chandernagore their respec- 30 
tive functions in the same manner and to the same extent as ·before 
the appointed day. 
17. Extension of laws to ChaDdemagore.-All laws which 
immediately before the appointed day extend to, or arc ~n force in, 
the State of West Bengal generally shall, as from that day, extend 3S 
to, or, as the case may be, come into force in, Chandernagore. 
18. Repeal of corresponding laws and savings.-(l) Any l&w 
in force in Chandernagore immediately before the appointed day 
(hereafter in this Act referred to as the "corresponding law") which 
corresponds to any law referred to in section 17, whether such cor- 40 
responding law is in force in Chandernagore by virtue of the 
Chandernagore (Application of Laws) Order, 1950 or by virtue of 
any notification issued under the Chandernagore (Administration) 
Regulation, 1952 (Reg. I of 1952) or otherwise, shall; as from that day, 
stand repealed in Chandernagore. 4S 
(2) The repeal by sub-~ection (1) of any corresponding law shall 
not affect-
(a) the previous operation of any such law; or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired, 
aCGruec;i or incurred under any such law; or SO 

6 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in res-
pect of any offence committed against any such law; or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect 
of such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture 
5 or punishment as aforesaid; . 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be 
instituted, continued, or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture, 
or punishment may -be imposed as if this Act had not been passed. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), anything done or 
10 any action taken (including any appointment or delegation made, 
notification, order, instruction or direction issued, rule, form, bye-
law or scheme framed, certificate, patent, permit} or licence granted, 
or registratio'n effected), under such corresponaing law shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provi-
15 sion of the law as extended to, or in force in, Chandernagore on 
and from the appOinted day and shall continue in force accordingly 
unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken 
under such law. 
19. Power to remeve dIJIlculties.-(l) If any difficulty arises in 
20 relation to the transition from any corresponding law to any law 
which by virtue of section 17 shall, as froni the appointed day, 
extend to, or come into force in, Chandernagore, the Central Gov-
ernment may, by order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
~ difficulty. 
(2) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act (otherwise than in relation to the transition from any 
corresponding law) or in connection with the administration of 
Chandemagore as a part of West Bengal, the State Government may, 
30 by order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent 
with the purposes of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty. 
(3) No power under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be 
exercised by the Central Government, or as the case may be, the 
3S State Government after the expiry of one year from the appointed 
day. 
(4) Any order made under sub-section (n or sub-section (2) may 
be made so as to be retrospective to any date not earlier than the 
appointed day. 

7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS· AND REASONS 
On June 8, 1948, the Government of the French Republic, in 
agreement with the Government of India, declared that "it intends 
to leave to the populations of the French Establishments in India 
themselves the right to pronounce their future fate and future 
status". In the referendum held on June 19, 1949, the citizens of 
Chandernagore voted in favour of merger of the territory with India. 
On 2nd May 1950, the de facto administration of Chandernagore was 
transferred to the Government of India. On 2nd February, 1951 the 
Treaty of Cession of the Territory of the Free Town of Chandernagore 
was signed at Paris between the Presidents of India and the French 
Republic. On 9th June, 1952 Chandernagore was transferred de jure 
to the Government of India. 
2. On October 27, 1949, in a Press Note about the future status of 
Chandernagore, the Government of India had declared: 
'Any changes in the administrative set u12 will be ('arried out 
only after consulting local public opinion.' 
3. On 19th November, 1953, in exercise of the powers conferred by 
section 3 of the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952 (LX of 1952), the 
Central Government appointed a Commission consisting of Dr. 
Amarnath Jha to inquire into and ascertain the wishes of the citizens 
of Chandernagore in regard to its future administration. The Com-
mission submitted its report on the 18th December, 1953, recommend-
ing inter alia merger of Chandernagore with the State of West 
Bengal. After consideration of the report and consultation with the 
Government of the State of West Bengal, the Government of India 
announced their decision in Parliament on the 8th' May. This has 
been embodied in the present Bill which provides for the merger of 
Chandernagore with West Bengal and consequential changes. 
4. Under article 3 of the ConstitUtion, the Legislature of West 
Ben~al has been consulted on this Bill and has given upproval to 
both its proVisions and its introduction in Parliament. The recom. 
mendation of the President has also been obtained. 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 
NEW DEUlI; 
The 11th September, 1954. 

8 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OJ' INDIA 
'" '" '" '" '" • 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles 1, 4 and 391] 
• '" '" '" 
TERRITORIES OF STATES 
The territory of the State of Assam shall comprise the territories 
which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution 
were comprised in the Province of Assam. the Khasi States and the 
Assam Tribal Areas. , 
The territory of the State of West Bengal shall comprise the 
territory which immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution was comprised in the Province of West Bengal. 
The territory of each of the other States in this Part shall com-
prise the territories which immediately before the commencement 
of this Constitution were comprised in the corresponding Province 
and the territories which, by virtue of an Order made under section 
:!90 of the Government of India Act, 1935, were immediately before 
such commencement being administered as if they formed part of 
that Province. 
'" '" '" '" 
EXTRACTS FROM Tin: DELIMITATION COMMISSION ACT, 1952 (LXXXI 
OF 1952) 
'" '" '" • 
9. Readjustment of representation and the date of operation of 
such readjustment. 
'" '" '" '" 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the readjustment 
of the representation of the several territorial constituencies in the 
House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State and 
the delimitation of those constituencies provided for in any such 
order shall apply in relation to every election to the House of the 
People or to the Legislative Assembly of such State, as the case may 
be. held after the publication in the Gazette of India of that order, 
and shall so apply in supersession of the provisions "relating to such 
representation contained in the Representation of the People Act, 
1950 (XLIII of 1950), the Government of Part C States Act, 1951 
(XLIX of 1951), the Andhra State Act, 1953, the Himachal Pradesh 
and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954 and the orders made under any 
of the said Acts. 
'" '" '" '" '" • 

EXTRACTS FROM THE TREATY OF CESSION OF THE TERRITORY OF THE 
FREE TOWN OF CHANDERNAGORE • 
• • • • 
ARTICLE II 
French subjects and citizens of the French Union domiciled in 
the territory of the Free Town of Chandernagore on the day on 
which the present Treaty comes into fClrce shall become, subject to 
the provisions of the next succeeding Article III, nationals and citi-
zens of India. 
ARTICLE III 
The persons mentioned in the preceding Article may, by a writ-
ten declaration made within six months following the coming into 
force of the present Treaty, opt for the retention elf their nationa-
lity. 
The declaration of the father or, if the father is dead, that of the 
mother, shall determine the nationality of unmarried children, less 
than 18 years of age, who shall be specified in such a declaration. 
Male children who are married shall be over sixteen years of age to 
be able to exercise the option themselves. 
The declaration of the husband will not determine the nationali-
ty of the wife. 
These declarations, which will be drawn up in duplicate, one in 
French, the other in English, will be addressed to the appropriate 
French authorities who will immediately forward to the a,Ppropriate 
Indian authorities the English copy of the said declaration. 
Persans who will have exercised the option mentioned in the 
preceding paragraphs, will be considered as havina never acquired 
Indian nationality. 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the merger of Chandernagore into the State of 
West Bengal and for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of article 3 of the Consti-
tution of India, recommended to the Lok Sabha the introduc-
tion of the Bill. 
(Shri JafJJaharlal Nehru, 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
Minister for Exte1ml Affairs.) 
GIHD-LAD-709 LS- 14-9-54-1,75 0 