Blll No. 44 of 195_' 
THE SUPREME COURT (NUMBER 
OF JUDGES) BILL~ 1956 
(As lNTRODtTCBD IN LoK SABRA) 

BiU No. 44 of 1956 
THE SUPREME COURT (NUMBER OF]UDGES) 
BILL,195 6. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for an increase in the number of Judges of the Supreme 
Court, excluding the Chief Justice. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
S 1. This Act may be called the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) 
Act, 1956. 
Short title. 2. The maximum number of Juclies of the Supreme Court, 
excluding the Chief Justice of Inaia, shall be ten. 
Maximum 
number of 
Supreme 
Court 
JudiCI , 
Other 
thaD Chief 
JuatiClC. 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS . 
Under article 124 of the Constitution the Supreme Court shall 
consist of a Chief Justice and, until Parliament by law prescribes a 
larger number, of not more than seven other Judges. The present 
strength of this Court is the maximum permissible under this 
article and an increase in the number of Judges is possible only by 
parliamentary legislation. The Chief Justice of India has pointed 
out that in view of the larger number of constitutional appeals 
coming up for decision before the Court it is necessary to have a 
constitutional bench sitting practically all the time and a constitu-
tional bench has to have five Judges in view of the requirement of 
article 145(3). Other benches of the Supreme Court should ordinarily 
consist of a minimum of three Judges, since they will generally be 
hearing appeals from various High Courts disposed of by two or 
more Judges. The increase in the volume of work of the 
Supreme Court requires that there should be two such benches, 
instead of one as at present, functioning throughout the year and 
for this purpose three more Judges require to be appointed. The 
present Bill seeks to meet this end. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 27th July, 1956. 

3 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
This Bill provides for an increase in the strength of the Supreme 
Court by three more Judges. The salary to be paid to each of these 
Judges will be rupees four thousand per mensem and they will also 
be entitled to the use of an official residence without payment of 
rent under sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 9 of Part D of the Second 
Schedule to the Constitution. The total cost on account of these 
Judges will, therefore, be rupees one lakh forty-four thousand per 
annum plus the cost of maintaining three official residences. 
2. The salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Judges 
of the Supreme Court of India are a charge on th6 Consolidated 
Fund of India under article 112(3). 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for an increase in the number of Judges of the 
Supreme Court, excluding the Chief Justice. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 
I 17 of the Constitution of India, recommended to 
Lok Sabba the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Govind BaIlabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 
GIPD-LAO-8 83 LS-J-8-:6-J750 ... ~"".'r: 