Bm Ko.11 011". 
THE PRESIDENT'S PENSION (AMEND-
MENT) BI~ 1962 
(As INftODVCID IN LOK SABRA 
ON 1ST JUNE, 1962) 

BUI '" of 1HZ. 
THE PRESIDENT'S PENSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to 4m.eM the President', Pension. Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the President's Pension (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1962. 
:'i, 
30 of 1951. 2. Section 2 of the President's Pension Act, 1951 (hereinafter :r.c;:t.~ 
referred to as the principal Act) shall be re-numbered as sub-section 
(1) thereof and-
(i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the proviso shall 
be omitted; and 
(ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
u (2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this 
behalf, every such person shall, for the remainder of his 
life, be entitled-
(a) tp secretarial staft and oIlce expeDlel, the 
total expenditure on which shall Dot exceed twelve 
thousand rupees per annum; and 
(b) to medical .ttendance and treatment, &ee of 
charge. 
(3) Where any such person is re-elected to the oftlce 
of President, he shall not be entitled to any benefit under 

2 
this section for the period during which he again holds that 
ofBce.". 
A ......... ' 3. In section 4 of the principal Act, for the word '"pension", the 
01. IIICtl_ 4· word "sum" shall be substituted. 
IDIUtloD of to After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall S 
-;:" 1ICti01l be inserted, namel~:-
Power to "5. The Central Government may, by notification in the 
..... rulea. omcial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the President's Pension Act, 1951, a retiring President of 
India and the last Governor-General are entitled to a pension of 
Rs. 15,000/- per annum for life. A person holding the high ofBce 
of President has even after retirement many public calls on him. It 
is, therefore, considered desirable to provide him with secretarial 
staff and office expenses out of public funds. 
2. During his term of office, the President is entitled to free 
medical care and treatment. It is considered desirable that he should 
be entitled to free medical attendance and treatment even after 
retirement. Hence, the Bill. 
NB'W J)a.m: 
The 21st May, 1962. LAL BAHADUR. 

The Bill provides for secretarial staff and office expenses at a 
oost-flot--exceedingRs. 12,000 a year. It also proVides for free medi-
cal care and attendance for the retiring President. The cost of -such 
mediealeare and treatment cannot naturally be estimated before-
hAnd -aDd-will depend on the advice of the medical authorities from 
tame -totJme. 
,-
4 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The proposed section 5 e~p'~wers . ~he Central Govenunent to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The niles will 
prqvide.fq.r ~, staff which may be engaged for the President and 
t4e.ir ~arie,. . Rt4~ . Will; .al8O. pe .1I;~~~ .• fQr~p~9Y1?~ ,tree" mCfJwal 
attendance and treatment for the retiring President ... 'The d~~,,~qo. i 
of legislative powers is thus of a normal character. . . . 

ANNEXURE 
THE PRESIDENT'S PDSION ACT, 1951 
(30 OF 1951) 
[13th May, 1951] 
An Act to provide for the payment of pensions to retiring 
PresIdents. 
Be it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the President's Pension Act, 1951. Short title. 
Z. There shall be paid to every person who ceases to hold office ~= ~ 
88 President, either by the expiration of his term of office or by licleDtl. 
resignation of his office, a pension of fifteen thousand rupees per 
annum for the remainder of his life: 
Provided that, where any such person is re-elected to that office, 
no pension shall be payable for the period during which he again 
holds office as President. 
3. The provisions of section 2 shall apply to the person who held ~~~ d:-
office as the last Governor-General of India as they shall apply to vemor-Gc-
any person who ceases to hold office as President. DelSt. 
"" Any pension payable under this Act shall be charged on the t:=o 
CQDIOUdated Fund of India. OD the COD-
IOltd.ated 
PuDd of 
IQdJa • 
• 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the President's Pension Act, 1951. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 