DIU No. tf of 1958 @ 
THE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FUND 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 

of 1952. 
Bill No. 44 of 1958. 
THE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FUND (AMENDMENT) 
. BILL, 1958 . 
(To DE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the E1!tployees' Provident }<'unds Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Employees' ~rovident Funds Short title 
(Amendment) Act, 1958. 
5 2. In section 2 of the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952 A d 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for clause (a), the oi~:~ti~e~~ 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
10 
15 
20 
• (a) "appropriate Government" means-
(i) in relation to an establishment belonging to, or 
under the control of, the Central Government or in relation 
to an establishment connected with a railway company, a 
major port, a mine or an oil field or a controlled industry, 
the Central Government; and 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the State 
Government;'. 
3. In section 16 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the Amendment 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- of section 
J6 • 
.. (1) This Act shall not apply to any establishment until the 
expiry of three years from the date on which the establishment 
is, or has been, set up. 
Explanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that an establishment shall not be deemed to be newly set up merely 
by reason of a change in its location.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952, does not apply at 
present to any establishment belonging to the Government or a local 
authority by virtue of section 16 (1) (a) of the Act. It has been felt 
that this exception in favour of the establishments owned by Gov-
ernment or a local authority offends against the principle of unifor-
mity of treatment of the public and the private sectors in the matter 
of application of labour laws. It is, therefore, proposed to omit 
clause (a) of section 16 (1) of the Act. It is also proposed to amend 
the definition of "appropriate Government" in section 2 (a) of the 
Act in order to enable the Central Government under section 17 to 
exempt, in suitable cases, any establishment belonging to, or under 
the control of, the Central Government or connected with a railway 
company or a major port. The present Bill seeks to achieve these 
objects. 
G. L. NANDA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 31st March, 1958. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
This Bill contemplates to bring establishments belonging to Gov-
ernment or a local authority within the purview of the Employees' 
Provident Funds Act and the Scheme framed thereunder. Section 6 
of the Act lays down that the contribution which shall be paid by 
the employer to the Employees' Provident Fund shall be six and a 
quarter per cent. of the basic wages and the dearness allowance 
including the cash value of food concession, if any, for the time being 
payable to each of the employees. Most of the establishments belong-
ing to the Central Government which would be covered under the 
Act have provident funds of their own. 
2. An establishment covered under the Employees' Provident 
Funds Scheme is 'required to pay administrative charges at 3% of 
the total employees' and employers' contributions. 
3. An establishment may seek exemption from the operation of the 
Statutory Scheme and continue to run its own Scheme in case its 
benefits in the nature of provident fund, pension or gratuity, are 
separately or on the whole not less favourable than the provisions of 
the Act and the Statutory Scheme. In that case the establishment 
is required to pay inspection charges at 3/4% of the employees' and 
employers' contribution. It is not likely that any additional expendi-
ture would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India on 
account of contribution to the provident funds but the Bill would 
entail additional expenditure in the matter of payment of administra-
tive or insp~tion charges. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EMPLOYEES' PROVIDENT FUNDS Acr, 1952 
(No. 19 0J0' 1952) 
• • • • • • 
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate Government" means-
• 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory 
engaged in a controlled industry, or a mine or an oil field, 
the Central Government, and 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the State Gov-
ernment; 
• • • • • • • 
Definitions. 
16. (1) This Act shall not apply to- Act not to 
apply to 
(a) any establishment belonging to the Government or a establish-
local authority, and ments be-longing to 
(b) any other establishment, established whether before or Government . or local after the commencement of thIS Act, unless three years have authority 
elapsed from its establishment. ~nd alao to , mfant 
Explanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that the date of the establishment of an establishment shall not be 
deemed to have been changed merely by reason of a change of the 
premises of the establishment. 
• • • • • • • 
4 
factories. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the Employees' provident Funds Act 1952. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, 
the consideration of the Bill, 
M.N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, 
Minister of Labour and 
Employment and Planmng.) 