THE DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI 
BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoE SABRA) 
ON 11TH AUGUST, 1961) 

LOK SABIIA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI DILL. 1961 
(To be/ As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Pa~ I, after the Title, -
for "INTRODUCE" read '1NTRODUCED" 
2. Page 1. line 2L-
afeer "( U" inser, 
3. Pase 1, line 22.-
,. " , 
for 'words, "10' read 'words". to' 
4. Pase 2. saainst line 1.-
for ''43 of 1 1" read "43 of 1951," 
5· Page 2. line a.-
for ·words. "to' read ·words"'. to' 
6. Page 2. in the margin al heading 10 cllUse 4.-
for "Pmchyat" read "Pmcbayat" 
7. Pase 2. line 240-
for "constitution" read "Constitution" 
8. Pase 3. line 39.-
add at the en d "be tilled;" 
9. Correct lin e n umbers on p 1186s 1 an d 2. 
NEW DELHI, 
• ~~~_1961 __ _ 
Sra"ana 18. 1883 (Saka) 
379.-LSRP.-9-8-fil! 1.1«). 
",1, r 
lt1c. 
ind 
ace-
fons. 
~,; , , 

Bill No. 11 of 1961-
THE DADRA AND NAGAR I-lAVELI BILL, 1961 
(~ INDODUao IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to make provision /01' the representation of the Union territory of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli in Parliament and /01' the administration 
of that Umon tcmtory and for matters connected therewith, 
BII: it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of- India as follows: -
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dadra and Nagar Haveli Act. Short titlde. .. - extent an 
1961. commence-
, ment. 
5 (2) It extends to the whole of the Union terntory of Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli. 
(3) It ah.ll be deem.ed to have come into force Oil the lltll nay of 
Augus~r l~t. 
• .. In tlti. Aet, unless the context otherwise requires.- Dctlnitions. 
10 (a) "Administrator" means the Administrator of the Union 
territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli appointed by the President 
under article 239 of the Constitution: 
(b) "appointed day" means the eleventh day of August. 1961; 
(c) "P_a 1lIl4Nagar Ravelll! me~s the Union territory of 
I, Pack. aN;l ~.,ar :aaveli; 
20 
(d) "Variabta Panchayat" means the Varishta Panchayat as 
~ ~~ ~tely before the appointed. day. 
I. (1) There shall be allQtted one s~at to the Union territory 
Dadra and Nagar Havel1 in the House of the People. 
of Representa-. tion in the 
House of 
the People, Ca} IB tlle itepreseatation of the People Act, 1950,-
(.) fa IeCtioa 4. in sub-section (1) after the words "to the 
Leoeadi". lliaicoy and Aminc:livi Islands", the words, "to Dadra 
aad N..rar Ha¥'eli" shall be inBerted.; 
• 
(b) in the First Schedule,-
(i) after entry 21, the following entry shall be inserted. 
naJDely.:-
"22. Dadra and Nagar Haveli .. " .... ' .. ,I"; 
(m entri~s 22 and 23 shall be re-~umber~d as entries 23 
and 24 respectively . 

J 
il 
d 
e 
b 
Varithta 
Pancbyat. 
(3) In the Representation of thE: People Act, 1951, in section 4, after 
the words "to the Laccadiv€, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands", the 
words, "to Dadra and Nagar Haveli" shall be inserted. 
4. (1) Until other provision i~ made bylaw, as (rom 'the c~mmence­
ment of this Act the Varlshta Panehayat shall have the right to dis- S 
cuss ·and make recommendations to the Administrator on, -
(a) matters of administtation involving genera,l po~icy and 
schemes of development; . . 
(b) any other matter referred to it by the Adll1inistrato.r. 
(2) The functions of the Varishta Panchayat referred. to i~ this 10 
section will be advisory only but due regard shall be given to. ,Ruch 
advice by the Administrator in reaching decisions on the, rpattET in 
relation to which the advice is given. . 
(3) No Act or proceeding of the Varishta Panchayat shall be in-. 
valid by rea~n only of the existence of any vacancy- aIOOnist itt! IS 
members or any defect in the constitution thereof. 
(4) Every member of the Varishta Panchayat shall b~fore 'enter-
ing upon his duties under this Act make and subscribe' belore tne 
Administrator an oath or affirmation in tb~, following form, 
namely:-' ~ 
"I, A.B., a member of the Varishta Panchayat of the Union 
territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, do swear in the name·of God 
soIEimnly affirm 
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of as 
India as by law established and that I willfaithfuJIy discharge 
the duty upon which I am about to entet.". 
5. Without prejudice to the powers of the iCenfral GO'vemment to 
appoint from. time to time such officers and authqrities as may be 
necessary for the administra~ of Dadra. an~.N~ Jlaveli, all 30 
judges, magistrates and other officers and authorities who imme-
diately before the appointed day were exercising lawfal funeti .... in 
Free Dadra·and Nagar Havell or any part thereof.ball ia.til other 
provision is made by law, continue to exercise in coRnectlOn with the 
administration of Dadra and Nagar Haveli their respective functions 3S 
in the same manner and to the same extent as before the appointed 
day. 
PropertY and 6. It is hereby declared that all property aUfi assets which imme~ 
uaet.. diately before the appointed day vested in the Varishta Panchayat or 
the Administrator of Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli shall, as from that 40 
day, vest in the Union. 
43 of I ! 

3 
'I. All rights, liabilities and obligations of the Varishta Panchayat RJaht. IDCl 
or the Administrator of free Dadra and Nagar Haveli in relation to obUpdoaa. 
Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli shall, as from the appointed day, be 
the rights, 1iabilities end obligations of the Central Government. 
S 8~ Save as otherwise provided in this Act all laws in force in Free ContinUlDal 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli immediately before the appointed day shall ~w~tilll 
continue to be in for.:!e until repl'al~d Or amended by Parliament or 
other competent authority. 
9. All taxes, du tie." cesses or fees which, immediately before the Con~uuc:e 
10 appointed day, were being lawfully levied in Free Dadra and Nagar:':--
'.' Havelior any part thereof shall continue to be levied and to be 
applied to the same purposes, until other provision is made by Par-
liament' or other competent authority. 
10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Power to 
15 Gazette, extend with such restrictions or modifications as it thinks ~ 
fit, to Dadra and Nagar Haveli any enactment which is in force in a ~o:t:.r 
State at the date of the notification. Have1i. 
11. As from such date as the Central Government may, by notifi· Bxteasion of 
cation in the Official Gazette, specify the jurisdiction of the High :::!j~ic:-
20 Court at Bombay shall extend to Dadra and Nagar Haveli. Bombay H __ b Coun 
to DIdra 
IIldNapr 
Havcli. 
12. For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in Powen of 
Dadra and Nag;tr Haveli, any court or other authority may construe c:c.?~~ and ouu::r au· any such law with such alterations not affecting the substance, as may thoritin for 
be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the court or cc:::.: 
.35 other authority. tbe applic:a-tion of laws. 
13, (1) If any difficulty arise!"> in giving effect to the provisions of Power to 
.this Act or in connection with the administration of Dadra and Nagar ~tics. 
Haveli, the Central Government may, by order, make such further 
provision as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
30 the difficulty. 
(2) Any order under sub-section (1) may be made so as·to be retros-
pective to any date not earlier than the appointed day. 
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Power to 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. make rules. 
35 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to. the generality of the 
foregoing powers, such l'ules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the manner in whic}J casual vacancies in the Varishta 
• Panchayat may 
• 
~' , 
« .r. 
j~ 
. ~ ~.I 
'·i: 
.' of' 
~ .1 • /'; 
, n~.; 
. ' j 
,: .. , 
iF' 
f~·:. :' .. ~ __________________ ... t'./··-',·, 

;4 
{b) the meetings of the Varishts Peeha-yat,'" ~\1bt of 
business and the proceduTe to be followed 'at suchftie'etings; 
(c) any other matter which has to be, or may be prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon -as may 
be after it is made bebre each House of Parliament while it is in S 
session for a total period of thirty days which maybecompriaed in 
one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of 
that session in which it IS ~o laid or the session immediately following 
both Houses agree in making any modification in 'the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 'th~te- I. 
after have effect only in such modified form or beaf no effect, uthe 
Case may be, so however that any sllch modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 

STATEMEN'r OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
At the request of the Varishta Panchayat andilie peop\er'of.FNe 
·Dadra :and Nagar Haveli, it is proposed to integrate the areas ..... Jth 
the Union of India with effect from the 11th August, 1961. The Bill 
,seeks to make provisions relating 10 the representation of the ter»i-
tory in Parliament, for the adminjstration of that territory and fi,r 
matters connected therewith. 
NEW DBLlII. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 
6 
• 
-----------------------=;;;:.==~-----,; ,.' 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
On the integration of Dadra al)d Nagar Haveli with the Union of 
m.tia and. ita inclusion as a specific Union territory in the First 
Sehedule to the Constitution, the entire administration of the terri-
tory will become the responsibility of the Central Government. This 
will necessarily involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India This will also, however, involve the amalgamation. of the reve-
nues derived in the territory with the Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. During the current budget year, the revenue is expected to be 
about Rs. 18 lakhs and ordinary expenditure about Rs. 11 lakba, leav-
iDg • aurplus of approximately Rs. 7 lakhs. With their integration, 
these areas will also be brought within the scope of the Development 
Plan of the Union of India and the anticipated surplus will be avail-
ed of for special development schemes for these areas, supplemented 
if necessary by additional amounts from the Consolidated Fund of 
lDd1a. 
3. Over the past few years, the Administration of Dadra and Nagar 
HaveU have accumulated surpluses amounting to Rs. 30 lakhs. On 
tile integration of thes-; areas with the Union of India, these 
accumulated surpluses will accrue to the Consolidated Fund of India. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Act, details of whicll inter alUl 
have been given in sub-clause (2) of the clause. These are matters of 
detail and accordingly the deJegation of legislative power' is ot a 
normal ty~. 

, .... ,~ 
. 
ANNEXURE 
~TRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEoPLE ACT, 1950(43 OF 1950) 
""' ... ! . ., . 
",) ", 
• • • • .. 
, . . .: 
:~nfn O:-he" .4. (1). Tl;I.eseats allotted under section 3 to ijle. sta~ of.· J,-\I 
House of the and Kashmir, to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, to thft· ~~., 
People. Minicoy and Amindivi Islands and to the Part B tribal areas shall 
be seats to be filled by persons nominated by the President. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951 (43 OF 1951) 
• • • • • 
n. •• llA_ • 4. A person shall not be qualified to be chol'len to fill a seat in ",_tiOna 
for member- the House of the People other than a seat allotted to the State of 
~!U:f c::e Jammu and 'Kashmir, ~o the Andaman and Nicobar Islands to the 
the People. Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands or to the Part B Tribal 
• 
Areas, unless-
• • • 
8 
GMGIPND-LSI-7 19 (B) L.S.-B-B-6I-1340. 
• 
, ...... 
• 

Ja,. ..... 
LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to make provision for the representation of the Union territory 
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli in Parliament and for the 
administration of that Union territory and for matters con-
nected theteWith. 
(Shri Jaroaharlal Nehru, 
Mi'mster of External 
Affairs) 