.~ : . 
. I . 
. ' . ~ . 
. '~" . 
As INTRODUCFJ> IN LOK SABHA ON 
,~1 , HAY l~oS 
BiD No. /tit of l869 
THE PRESIDENT (DISCHARGE OF FUNCTIONS) 
BIli, 1969 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the discharge of the junctions of the Pr~.'1ident in certain 
('onti ngencies. 
BE i't enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Repu~ic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the President (Discharge of Functions) 
Act, 1969. 
Z. In this Act, "President", "Vice-President" and "Second Schedule" 
shall mean the President of lmiia, the Vice-President of Indin and the 
Second Schedule to the Constitution respectively. 
3. (1) In the event (jf the QCcUQ'ence of vacancies in the offices of 
both the President and the Vice.President, by reason in each case of 
death, resignation or removal, or otherwise, the Chief Justiee of India 
or, in his absence, the seniormost Judge of the Supreme Court of India 
available shall discharge the functions of the President until a new 
President e1eeted in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution 
to fill the vacancy in the office of the President enters upon his oftlce 
or a new Vice-President so elected begins to act as President under 
article 65 of the Constitution, whichever is earJier. 
(2) When the Vice-President, while discharging the functions of the 
President. dies, resigns or is removed or otherwiSE' ceases to hold offtce, 
Shart 
title. 
Defini-
tions. 
Discharge 
of Presl. 
dent's 
functions 
in eertaln 
rontin-
gencles. 

2 
the Chief Justice of India or, in his absence, the senior most Judge re-
ferred to in sub-section (1) shall discharge the said fUnctions until the 
President resumes his duties 'Or a new Vice-President is !'lected as 
aforesaid, whichever is earlier. 
(,) When the Vice-President,-
(a) while acting as President, or 
(b) while discharging the functions of the President, 
is unable to discharge the functions of the Presitlent owing to absence, 
illness or any other 'cause, the Chief Justice of IDdia or, in his absence, 
the seniormost Judge l'derred to in sub-!.-ection (1) shall discharge the 
said functions-
(i) in the case referred to in clause (a), until a new Presi-
dent elected as aforesaid enters upon his office Or until the Vice-
President acting as President resumes his dUties, whichever ia. 
earlier; 
(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b), until the President 
resumes his duties, or the Vice-President resumes his duties, which-
ever is earlier. 
(4) The person dischar&ing the {unctions of the President under this 
section shall, during, and in respect of, the period wlaile he is so discharc-
ing the said functions, have aU tbe powers aDd immunities of the PTesi-
dent and be entitled to such emolwnents, allowances and privileges as 
may be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that 
behalf is so made. such emoluments. allowantes and privileges as are 
IIpetified in the Second Schedule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under article 70 of the Constitution, Parliament may make such pro, 
vision as it thinks fit for the discharge of the functions of the Prea1deDt 
in any contingency not provided for in Chapter I of Pert V of the CoDati~ 
tution. Article 65 provides for the Vice-President acting as Presiddnt or 
discharging his functions during casual vacancies in tbe office, Ol' durme 
the absence, oJ the President. The Constitution does not provide for ~ 
where a vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice-President or where the 
Vice-President is unable to discharge his funttions while acting as Presi-, 
dent or discharging the functions of the President. Government, thero-
fore, consider it neces98ry to make provision to cover such cases. The 
Bill accordingly seeks to' provide that in such cases, the Chief Justice of 
India or, in his absence, the seniormost Judge of the Supreme Court avail-
able shall discharge the functions of the President. 
Y. B. CHAVAN. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 10th May, 1969. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
(Copy of letter No. 22110169.POLL.I (A) dated the 11th May, 1969, from 
Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister for Home Aftain to the Secretary, Lot 
Sabha) . 
The Pre&ident having been informed of the subject matter of the 
propo&ecl BtU, recommends under Article 117 (1) and (3) of the CoDsti-
tution of India the introduction of the President (Discharge of Fuac-
tions) Bill, 1969, to the Lok Sabha and also recommends to the Lok 
Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM , . 
Under sub-clause (4) of clause 3 of the Bill, the person discharging the 
funetioris of the President under that clause shall,' during the period while 
~~.' 'is so discharging the' said functions, be enti tied to such emohimen ts, 
alioWances ~nd privileges as may be determined by Parliainentby law 
abd' until provision in that behalf is So made, such emoluments, allow-
'bees and privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule to the Con-
Stitution. In situations contemplated in sub-claUses (l)and (2) of clause 
3~';sinCe both the offices ef the Presidentand the Vice-President Will be 
vacant, DO' additional ~ wU1 be involved by reason of the Chief 
Ju~tice of India or, in his absence, the seniormosi Judge of the Supreme 
Cburt available' discharging the functions of the President. Under sub-
clause' (.3) of clause 3, however, there w1l1 be additional expenditure on 
aCcoimt of the' Chief JUStice or the seniomlost Judge of the Supreme 
Court discharging the functions of the President when the Vice-President 
is unable to tiischarge those functions. It is not possible to give a precise 
e~mate of the additional expenditure involved but the expenditure on 
this account is not likely to exceed Rs. 30,000 in any year in which such 
contingency arises. There wi]] be no non-recurring expenditure. 
. , 
0,. 
4. 

I...OK SABHA 
A 
nIU~ 
to provide for l he discharge of the fUDCtioDS of the President in 
cutaia co~jes. 