Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
THE ERADICATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT BILL, 2010
By
SHRI N.S.V. CHITTHAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for eradication of unemployment by ensuring employment to the youth
and payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Eradication of Unemployment Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 44  of  2010
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "unemployed youth" means a person above the age of eighteen years having
no source of livelihood and whose name is registered in an Employment Exchange.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide employment to
every unemployed youth according to his educational qualifications.
(2) Where an unemployed youth  is  not provided with employment, he shall be entitled
to such monthly unemployment allowance, being not less than rupees five hundred per
month, as may be prescribed, till the time he is provided with employment.
(3) While fixing the rates of unemployment allowance, the appropriate Government
shall take into account the educational qualifications, technical skills, inflation rate and such
other factors, as it may deem necessary.
4.  For the purpose of payment of unemployment allowance to unemployed youth in a
State, the Central Government and the Government of that State shall bear the expenditure
equally.
5. (1) Every unemployed youth who is in receipt of unemployment allowance shall
maintain proper account of the unemployment allowance received by him in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) If any unemployed youth  is found to be engaged in any activity which is prejudicial
to the interest of the State, he shall forfeit his entitlement to unemployment allowance.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should  not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification  or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Definitions.
Provision of
employment/
unemployment
allowance to
unemployed
youth.
Central and
State
Government
to bear
expenditure
equally.
Maintenance
of proper
account of
unemployment
allowance.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The problem of unemployment has assumed serious dimensions in our country. This
is causing frustration amongst the youth and, as a result, their energy is not being utilized for
nation building. Driven by desperation, youth, in certain parts of the country, have taken to
the path of violence. This is not a good sign for our country and is causing incalculable harm.
There is an urgent need for concerted efforts to generate employment opportunities for the
young  men and women. Article 41 of the Constitution provides, inter alia,  that the State
shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provisions
for securing the right to work and to public assistance in case of unemployment.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for providing suitable jobs to the unemployed
youth or alternatively to pay unemployment allowance to those who are not provided with
employment till such time as they are provided with employment.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; N.S.V.  CHITTHAN
February 10, 2010
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every unemployed youth shall be provided with
employment according to his educational qualifications. It further provides for payment of
unemployment allowance to those youth who are not provided with employment till the time
they are provided with employment. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government and the
Government of a State shall bear the expenditure on payment of unemployment allowance to
unemployed youth in that State equally. The expenditure in respect of Union territories shall
also be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, it is difficult to give
an exact estimate of the expenditure likely to be involved. However, it is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore is likely to be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for eradication of unemployment by ensuring employment to the youth
and payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed and for matters
connected therewith.
—————
(Shri N.S.V. Chitthan,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND— 1355LS(S5)—09-04-2010.