5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 44 of 2024
THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Healthcare (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

2. In section 2 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principle Act),–
   (a) after clause (g), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
‘(ga) “counsellor” means a medical practitioner possessing a post-graduate degree 
or post-graduate diploma in counselling psychology awarded by an university 
recognised by the University Grants Commission established under the University 
Grants Commission Act, 1956, or awarded or recognised by the National Board 
of Examination and included in the First Schedule to the National Medical 
Commission Act, 2019 or recognised by the National Medical Commission, 
constituted under the National Medical Commission Act, 2019, and includes, in 
relation to any State, any medical officer who having regard to his knowledge and 
experience in Counselling Psychology, has been declared by the Government of 
that State to be a Counselling Psychologist for the purposes of this Act;
(gb)“establishment” means a shop, a commercial establishment, residential 
hotel, restaurant, eating-house, theatre or other places of public amusement or 
entertainment to which the relevant State’s Shops and Establishment Act applies 
and includes such other establishment as the appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be an establishment for the purpose 
of this Act;’; and
(b) the existing clause (zb) shall be remember as clause (zc) and before the clause 
(zc) as so remembered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
‘(zb) “school” means any recognized school imparting secondary or senior 
secondary education.’.
3.  After Chapter XIII of the principal Act, the following Chapter and section thereunder 
shall be inserted, namely:–
“CHAPTER XIIIA 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF SCHOOLS AND ESTABLISHMENTS
105A. ( 1) Every school or establishment with more than fifty persons either 
employed or enrolled shall have at least one empanelled counsellor to be appointed by 
the school or establishment.
(2) The counsellor shall visit the establishment or school for at least thirty-two hours in 
fifteen days or at such frequency as may be prescribed.
(3) The remuneration of the counsellor shall be as per a formal contract signed between 
the counsellor and the school or establishment.
(4) The counsellor shall not be involved with the school establishment in any other 
capacity, including board membership, share holding, administrative or professional 
responsibilities or in any other capacity that would constitute a conflict of interest with 
respect to his responsibilities as an empanelled counsellor at the school or establishment.”.
4. In section 121 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), after clause (s), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(sa) frequency of visit of counsellor to schools and establishments under  
sub-section (2) of section 105A;”.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Amendment of 
section 2.
10 of 2017
30 of 2019
3 of 1956
30 of 2019
Insertion of new 
Chapter XIIIA.
Responsibilities 
of Schools and 
Establishments.
Amendment of 
section 121.
2

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mental Healthcare Act of 2017 was enacted to recognize, protect and promote the 
rights of persons with mental illnesses and promote their access to mental healthcare in 
the country. The 2011 Census pointed out that there are 15,05,624 persons with mental 
illnesses in the country. Reports by international organizations like WHO and national 
institutes like NIMHANS highlight the severity of the situation in multiple reports in the 
recent years. Today, there is a need to recognize the challenges related to mental health 
at workplace. Issues of workplace discrimination, stress, verbal and sexual abuse etc. are 
being highlighted every now and then. The National Mental Health Survey points out that 
there are an estimated 150 million Indians in need of mental healthcare services. While 
the institutional efforts so far have been aimed at providing access to mental healthcare 
to the common man, a preventive and early identification mechanism would contribute 
significantly in reducing the institutional deficiencies in addressing this challenge.
With this background, the Bill aims to —
(1) make it mandatory for establishments, including schools, institutions and 
corporate offices, to have an empanelled counsellor; and
(2) address a possible conflict of interest for such consellors. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   R A J I V  P R A T A P  R U D Y  
June 18, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides appointment of counsellors in schools or establishments. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India.  It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees One thousand crore  
per annum is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.   
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the State Government to make rules regarding frequency 
of visit of counsellor to schools or establishments. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
5

6
ANNEXURE
Extract from the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 
(10 of 2017)
 * * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
     (a)  * * * * *
  * * * * *
      (g) “clinical psychologist” means a person–– 
(i) having a recognised qualification in Clinical Psychology from an institution 
approved and recognised, by the Rehabilitation Council of India, constituted under 
section 3 of the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992; or 
(ii) having a Post-Graduate degree in Psychology or Clinical Psychology or 
Applied Psychology and a Master of Philosophy in Clinical Psychology or Medical 
and Social Psychology obtained after completion of a full time course of two years 
which includes supervised clinical training from any University recognised by the 
University Grants Commission established under the University Grants Commission 
Act, 1956 and approved and recognised by the Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 
1992 or such recognised qualifications as may be prescribed;
  * * * * *
    (zb) “State Authority” means the State Mental Health Authority established under 
section 45.
  * * * * *
121. (1) * * * * *
(2)   * * * * *
(3)   * * * * *
(4) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
rules made under sub-section (2) may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:—
     (a)  * * * * *
 * * * * *
 * * * * *
    (s) the standard and procedure to which the Central or State Health Authority shall 
confirm under sub-section (6) of section 103;
 * * * * *
Definitions.
Power of Central 
Government 
and State 
Governments to 
make rules.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
(Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P .) 