1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR PROTECTION OF
WATER BODIES IN THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN BILL, 2020
By
SHRI C.P. JOSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the Government of the State of Rajasthan to
meet the costs of repair , renovations, rejuvenation, preservation and protection of
water bodies in the State of Rajasthan.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Protection of Water
Bodies in the State of Rajasthan Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "aquatic ecosystem" means all organic and inorganic matter and all living
organisms living in or located in or on water or the beds or shores of a water body;
Bill No. 44 of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "drain" includes gutters, wastewater canals, sewers and all outlets or flow of
waste water including overflow of rainwater;
(c) "ground water" means all water under the surface of the ground, whether in
solid or liquid form;
(d) "water" means all surface water and ground water, whether solid or liquid
form; and
(e) "water body" means a body of flowing or standing water, whether natural or
artificial and whether the flow or presence of water is continuous, intermittent or
occurs only during a flood, including but not limited to lake, river, creek, stream, tank,
well, pond and wetland.
3. The State Government of Rajasthan shall inform the Central Government:—
(a) about the existence of water bodies in the respective State; and
(b) requirement of financial assistance to protect the water bodies in the State.
4. The State Government of Rajasthan shall, before informing the Central Government
under section 3, make the regulation for the purpose of:—
(a) designating any area as a water quality control zone for the purpose of
protecting water, aquatic eco-system or drinking water source;
(b) governing, regulating or prohibiting any use or activity in a water quality
control zone or any part of a zone;
(c) improving the drainage and sewerage system;
(d) ensuring clear separation between sewerage/waste water and sources of
clean water to avoid contamination; and
(e) ensuring quick absorption or clear flow of rain water for conservation.
5. The State Government of Rajasthan shall, before informing to the Central
Government under section 3, take into consideration the scientific, intrinsic and other
information relating to:—
(a) the physical characteristics of land in the area, including its topography and
soil types;
(b) the ability of the soil or water in the area to assimilate nutrients and other
pollutants;
(c) water bodies or groundwater in the area, including information relating to:—
(i) the quality characteristics of the water;
(ii) the susceptibility of the water to contamination or adverse changes in
level; and
(iii)  the extent to which the water is undisturbed by human activity;
(d) the area's aquatic ecosystems;
(e) whether the area contains a source or a potential source, of drinking water;
(f) whether the area supports species that are sensitive to alterations in water
quality or quantity resulting from human activity;
(g) whether the area provides habitat for endangered species; and
(h) the perception of farmers and native inhabitants of the area regarding quality,
quantity and prospects of water in a particular zone including:—
(i) the possibilities of flood and/or water logging; and
(ii) any other matter which the Government considers relevant.
State
Governments
to inform the
Central
Government.
5
Power of State
Governments
to make
regulations.
State
Government
of Rajasthan
to consider
the scientific,
intrinsic and
other
information
relating to
water bodies.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. The Central Government shall render scientific and technical advice and assistance
to the State Government of Rajasthan if so required to achieve the purposes of this Act.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide financial assistance to the State Government of Rajasthan for
protection of water bodies and for promotion of rain harvesting and watershed management
programmes.
(2) The Central Government before releasing the money shall ensure that State
Government has complied with the provisions of this Act.
Central
Government
to render
scientific and
technical
advice.
Central
Government
to provide
financial
assistance to
State
Government
of Rajasthan.
5

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The State of Rajasthan faces one of the greatest scarcity of water resources in the
country. It has 13.88 per cent. of India's cultivable area, 5.67 per cent. of population and
about 11 per cent. of country's livestock but it has only 1.16 per cent. of surface water and
1.70 per cent. of ground water. Thus Rajasthan is a State with about 10 per cent. of land area
has only around 1 per cent. of country's water resources.
Rajasthan is the driest State with nearly 70 per cent. (2/3rd) of the area classified as
arid and semi arid region. The annual average demand in 2010 in the State was 31333.74
Million Cubic Meter (MCM) with an availability of 10448.59 MCM annual average surface
water (having 75 per cent. dependability) and 10563.01 MCM of annual average ground
water. Hence there is gap of around 30 per cent. in demand and availability. Moreover,
groundwater availability in the State of Rajasthan is highly variable, depending on
hydrological conditions. The limited ground water resources in the State of Rajasthan are
increasingly being exploited for irrigation, industrial and domestic uses.
Water is the most valuable natural resources of a country. However, the scarcity and
supply of clean water is a major concern for the sustenance of human, animal, plant and
ecology. The protection of water resources/water bodies available in the State of Rajasthan
is an endless task to be completed by the Government. The major constraint in this regard
is the lack of financial resources available with the States.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan for
the protection of water bodies and promotion of rain harvesting and watershed management
programmes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; C.P. JOSHI
February  7, 2020.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for rendering of scientific and technical advice and
assistance to the State Government of Rajasthan. Clause 7 provides for financial assistance
to the State Government of Rajasthan for protection of water bodies, etc. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. As the sums of
moneys which will be given to the State of Rajasthan as special financial assistance by
appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the plans to be implemented
by the State Government of Rajasthan with the approval of Government of India as indentified,
it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide special financial assistance to the Government of the State of Rajasthan to
meet the costs of repair, renovations, rejuvenation, preservation and protection
of water bodies in the State of Rajasthan.
________
(Shri C.P. Joshi, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5354LS—22-02-2020.