1
Short title.
THE DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND NEWSPAPERS (PUBLIC
LIBRARIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 2008
By
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries)
Amendment Act, 2008.
2. In section 2 of the Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for clause (b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(b) "public libraries" means the National Library at Kolkata and the Parliament
Library at New Delhi and such other libraries which may be specified by the Central
Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette.".
Amendment
of section 2.
Bill No. 44 of 2008
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
27 of 1954. 5
10

2
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words ‘‘fifty rupees’’, the words ‘‘five thousand rupees’’ shall be
substituted; and
(ii) for the words ‘‘equivalent to the value of the book’’, the words ‘‘five thousand
rupees or hundred times the value of the book, whichever is more,’’ shall be substituted.
4. For section 6, sub-section (1) of the principal Act, after the words ‘‘special order’’,
the words ‘‘or by any user of the public library’’ shall be added.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.
5

SSTATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954 (Act No. 27 of
1954) makes it mandatory for the publishers of books and newspapers to deliver books and
newspapers etc. free of cost at their own expense to the public libraries as defined therein. In
case any publisher fails to do so, he shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to
rupees fifty only and if the contravention is in respect of a book, he shall also be punishable
with fine equivalent to the value of the book. Due to escalation of prices of books, the
amount of fine prescribed in the Act has become meagre and, therefore, the publishers tend
to ignore the provisions of this Act and opt for paying fine rather than complying with the
provisions of the Act. It is, therefore, proposed to enhance the maximum amount of penalty
from existing rupees fifty to rupees five thousand and in case of delivery of books equivalent
to hundred times the value of books, whichever is more. The enhanced penalty will ensure
compliance of the law intended to extend  financial support out of commercial establishments
earnings in discharge of the social obligation, thereby enabling the libraries of national
importance to acquire books etc. without straining their own limited resources.
The existing provision in section 6 of the Act about courts taking cognizance of the
offence only on complaint filed by an officer so empowered by the Central Government has
not been taken recourse to. Therefore, it is proposed to extend the right to make a complaint
to any user of the public library to make the Act more effective.
Moreover, the Parliament Library at New Delhi is a very important library catering to
the needs of public representatives and public at large, it may also be included as a public
library within the definition of ‘‘public libraries’’ in the Act mentioned above so that it could
be enriched further.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
April 30, 2008.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND NEWSPAPERS (PUBLIC LIBRARIES) ACT, 1954.
* * * * *
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) * * * * *
(aa) * * * * *
(b) "public libraries" means the National Library at Calcutta and any three other libraries
which may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf by notification in the
Official Gazette.
* * * * *
5.  Any publisher who contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule made
there under shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees and, if the
contravention is in respect of a book, shall also be punishable with fine which shall be
equivalent to the value of the book, and the court trying the offence may direct that the
whole or any part of the fine realised from him shall be paid, by way of compensation to the
public library to which the book or newspaper as the case may be, ought to have been
delivered.
6.  (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act save on
complaint made by an officer empowered in this behalf by the Central Government by a
general or special Order.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Penalty.
Cognizance of
offences.
4

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954.
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2332LS(S4)—15-07-2008.