 
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Bill No. 44 of 2023
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)  
BILL, 2023
By
Sඁඋං Kൺඋඍං P. Cඁංൽൺආൻൺඋൺආ,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
      Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 20A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, for sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) Every person registered under this section shall, if otherwise eligible to 
exercise his franchise, be allowed to vote at an election at the nearest Embassy or 
High Commission or Consulate General of India, if the person is residing outside 
India.”
Short title and 
commencement.
5 Amendment of 
section 20A.
10
43 of  1950.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The framers of the Constitution of India viewed the right to vote as one of the most 
fundamental elements of democratic citizenship. Seven decades ago, they undertook a 
bold experiment by adopting universal adult suffrage, as enshrined in Article 326 of the 
Constitution of India. Our founding mothers and fathers were clear on this basic principle – 
that voting rights were for all Indian citizens, irrespective of caste, colour, creed, sex, place 
of birth, educational attainment, or disability.
The sustained strength of India’s democracy can be measured from the fact that while 
in 1951, at the time of India’s first general election, only 17 per cent of the eligible citizens 
were registered as electors and 45 per cent of them turned out to vote, in 2019, during 
India’s latest general election, over 91 per cent of the eligible citizens were registered with 
67 per cent of them coming out to vote, which is the highest voter turnout in India’s electoral 
history.
However, a worrying trend is the disenfranchisement of Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) 
from the electoral process. As per latest data by the Ministry of External Affairs, out of the 
total 1.33 crore NRIs living in various parts of the globe, a miniscule 0.9 per cent are reg-
istered to vote, according to figures by the Election Commission of India. Of the 1.22 lakh 
registered NRI electors, less than 21 per cent voted in the 2019 general elections. 
Indian diaspora has grown manifold since the mid-19th and early 20th century, when 
Indians first started emigrating overseas for work. According to the World Migration Report, 
by the International Organisation for Migration under the United Nations, India has the 
largest emigrant population in the world, with 6.4 per cent of the total 28 crore international 
migrants tracing their origin to India. The Indian diaspora holds considerable influence over 
our nation’s culture, society, and economy. In its latest Migration and Development Brief, 
the World Bank has stated that for the first time, a single country, India, is on track to receive 
more than USD 100 billion in yearly remittances. Remittances will record a 12 per cent 
increase from 2021. India’s remittance flows account for nearly 3 per cent of the country’s 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2022. Yet, NRIs’ direct involvement in India’s electoral 
politics has been limited. 
The Representation of the People Act, 1950 was amended in 2010, making way for a 
special provision, allowing for all Indian citizens to be enrolled in the electoral rolls in the 
constituency which is their place of residence in India as mentioned in their passport. While 
an appreciable first step, the dismal NRI voter figures warrant introspection. A key reason 
for low NRI voter turnout could be an onerous requirement – while they can vote, NRIs must 
be physically present in their constituency in India on the day of the election. For a large 
majority, interrupting their lives overseas, to travel to India in order to exercise their right to 
vote, is something they cannot afford.
As a result, NRIs’ concerns are completely side-lined from electoral politics. A possible 
solution to bridge this issue is making provisions for all the NRIs’ eligible to vote at the 
nearest Embassy or High Commission or Consulate General of India in order to enhance 
their voter turnouts and political participation.
As envisioned by our Constitution framers, in a democracy as vibrant as ours, no Indian 
voter should be left behind. This Bill is an attempt to create a legislative framework to allow 
for enhanced expatriate participation in India’s democracy.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the  Representation of the People Act, 1950  with a 
view to make provisions for the persons residing outside India to exercise franchise at the 
nearest Embassy or High Commission or Consulate General of India in order to enhance 
their voter turnouts and political participation. 
Hence, this Bill.
      Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                        KARTI P. CHIDAMBARAM 
18, 2023.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed amendment to section 20A provides for the persons 
residing outside India to exercise franchise at the nearest Embassy or High Commission or 
Consulate General of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to estimate the 
recurring and non-recurring expenditure likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund 
of India.

ANNEXURE
Eඑඍඋൺർඍඌ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Rൾඉඋൾඌൾඇඍൺඍංඈඇ ඈൿ ඍඁൾ Pൾඈඉඅൾ Aർඍ, 1950
(43 ඈൿ 1950)
20A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every citizen of India—
              (a)   *            *  *    *
              (b)   *            *  *    *
              (c)   *            *  *    *
        (2)   *            *  *    *
         (3) Every person registered under this section shall, if otherwise eligible to exercise 
his franchise, be allowed to vote at an election in the constituency. 
Special provisions 
for citizens of 
India residing 
outside India.

LOK SABHA
_______
ൺ
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
_______
(Shri Karti P . Chidambaram, M.P .)