1
Bill No. 44 of 2015
Short title and
commencement.
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for
section 272, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
Substitution of
new section
for section
272.
5
45 of 1860.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
‘‘272. Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article
unsafe for consumption, intending to sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to
be likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to life, or with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees,
or with both.’’.
3. In the principal Act, for section 273, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘273. Whoever stores, sells, offer for sale, possesses for sale, causes to be sold or
manufactures for sale, as food or drink, any article which has been adulterated,
misbranded or substituted so as to render it unsafe or injurious to health, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to life, or with fine which may
extend to fifty lakh rupees, or with both.’’.
Adulteration of
food or drink
intended for sale.
Substitution of
new section for
section 273.
Sale of
adulterated,
misbranded or
substituted food
or drink.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The practice of adulteration of food is a serious threat to health of the members of
community and it eventually affects the overall quality of life of people.
The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 was enacted with a view to consolidate the
laws relating to food and to establish the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India for
laying down science based standards for articles of food and to regulate their manufacture,
storage, distribution, sale and import, to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for
human consumption and for matters connected therewith.
However, there has been a need for stringent punishment to offenders and strict
implementation of the Act. Often adulterators are charged under section 272 or 273 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 which do not provide for stringent punishment and, as such, are  not
of much significance. The issue has been raised in the Parliament quite often. The Courts in
their various orders and judgements have observed that more robust legislative framework
to address the menace of food adulteration should be framed.
In view of the above, there is an urgent need for stringent punishment that can act as
a deterrent against the practice of food adulteration.
The Bill, accordingly, seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with a view to
provide for stringent punishment against the practice of food adulteration.
N
EW DELHI; SANJAY JAISWAL
January 30, 2015
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * *
272. Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article noxious
as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to be likely that
the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.
273. Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink, any article which has
been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink, knowing or
having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * * * *
Adulteration
of food or
drink intended
for sale.
Sale of noxious
food or drink.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4949LS(S3)—05-03-2015.