AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 44 of 2022
THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI K ULDEEP R AI S HARMA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment)  Act,
2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title and
commencement.

2. After section 3E of the Central Universities Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:–
“3F. There shall be established a University, which shall be a body
corporate, to be known as the Central University of  Andaman and Nicobar
Islands, having its territorial jurisdiction extending to the whole of the Union
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, as specified in the First Schedule to
this Act.”.
3. In the First Schedule to the principal Act, for serial number 1 and entries
relating thereto, the following serial numbers and entries, shall be substituted, namely:–
“1.    Andaman and
Nicobar Islands
1A.  Andhra Pradesh
Central University of
Andaman and Nicobar
Islands.
Central University of
Andhra Pradesh.
Whole of the Union territory of
Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Whole of the State of Andhra
Pradesh.”.
Amendment of
the First
Schedule.
2
Establishment of
Central
University of
Andaman and
Nicobar.
5
10
25 of 2009Insertion of
new section 3F.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
After the Presidential assent to Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2021,
India now has 55 Central Universities, out of which 40 are centrally funded through
University Grants Commission (UGC) under the purview of Union Ministry of
Education and another nine enjoy the autonomous status, directly funded by the
Government of India (GoI). The enactment of Central Universities Act, 2009 was
done with the aim to establish and incorporate universities for teaching and
research in various States and Union territories. Currently there are several
universities in Union territories like Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Delhi, Pondicherry,
Chandigarh, but there is no such university in the Union territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.
Andaman and Nicobar Islands are the third largest Union territory of India,
boasting an area of 8,249 square kilometres and a population of 3,79,944. As per the
Census of India (2011) the islands have a literacy rate of 86.27 per cent. which is
higher than the national average of 74.04 per cent. This is further compounded by the
government schemes of providing incentive to tribal students and providing primary
schools close to almost every habitation. With such a high rate of literacy, it is
imperative that the islands must have a Central University to provide quality secondary
education to its bright young population. This will also create greater job
specialization and aid in the carrying out of quality research.
Andaman and Nicobar Islands are also unique due to their prevalence of
vulnerable tribal groups. For instance, the Great Andamanese were once the most
prolific tribe in the territories, numbering 10,000 in terms of population. By 1999, their
numbers were down to just 41 tribals. Similarly, the Sentinelese are very isolated and
have lost contact with other tribes. Some tribes like the Jarawa have a buffer zone
around their inhabitance to prevent contact with tourists which may prove to be fatal
for them. These tribes are regularly endangered by tourism, especially foreign tourist,
and must be provided with quality education.
As of now, Andaman and Nicobar Islands is one of the few Union territories not
having a Central University under the Central Universities Act, 2009. Union territories
like Jammu and Kashmir, Delhi and Ladakh, etc., all have a Central University.
Improvement of quality and standard of education and research and have a strong
connection with the central authority. After taking into account the development and
spread of literacy and primary education in Andaman and Nicobar Islands and its
unique position in the country, the Government should consider setting up a Central
University in the Union territory.
Hence this Bill.
  NEW DELHI;    KULDEEP RAI SHARMA
16 February, 2022.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 3F in the Central Universities
Act, 2009, so as to establish a new university as body corporate to be known as the
Central University of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, having its territorial jurisdiction
extending to the whole of the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. At this stage, it is not possible to give exact estimate of expenditure,
both recurring and non-recurring, which will be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India, if the Bill is enacted into a law. However, it is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees twenty crore will be involved per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred twenty crore is also
likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 2009
(25 OF 2009)
   3. * * * * *
“3E. There shall be established a University, which shall be a body corporate,
to be known as the Sindhu Central University, having its territorial jurisdiction
extending to the whole of the Union territory of Ladakh, as specified in the First
Schedule to this Act.”.
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 3 (4)]
5
Establishment of
Sindhu Central
University.
Serial
No.
“1.
Name of the
State
Andhra
Pradesh
Name of the University
Central University of
Andhra Pradesh
Territorial Jurisdiction
Whole of the State of
Andhra Pradesh
* * * * *

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
(Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma, M.P .)