BUl No. 015 of 1954. 
THE MEDICINAL AND TOILET PREPARATIONS 
(EXCISE DUTIES) BILL, 1954 
(As INTRQDUCED IN THE LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to pro'Dide for the levy and collection of duties of excise on medicinal 
and toilet preparations containing alcohol, opium, Indian hamp 
OT other narcotic drug or narcotic. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and colDDleaeement.-( 1) This Act may be 
called the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, S 
1954. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notiftcation in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Deftnitlons.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise re- 10 
quires,- " 
(a) "alcohol" means ethyl alcohol of any strength and purity 
having the chemical composition C 2 H 60 H; 
(b) "collecting Government" means the Central Govern-
. ment or, as the case may be, the State Government which is 
entit!ed to collect the duties levied under this Act; 
(c) "dutiable goods" means the medicinal. and toilet pre-
parations specified in the Schedule as being subject to the duties 
of excise levied under this Act; 
IS 

s 
10 
IS 
10 
]0 
2 
(d) "excise officer" means an officer of the Excise Depart-
ment of any State and includes any person empowered by the 
collecting Government to exercise all or any of the powers of an 
excise officer under th,is Act; 
(e) "Indian hemp" has the same meaning as the word 
"hemp" in the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 (II of 1930); 
(f) "manufacture" includes any .,rocess incidental or an-
cillary to the completion of the manufacture of any dutiable 
goods; 
(g) "medicinal preparation" includes all drugs which are a 
remedy or prescription prepared for internal or external use of 
human beings or animals and all substances intended to be used 
for or in the treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease in 
human beings or animals; 
(h) "narcotic drug" or "narcotic" means a substance (other 
than alcohol) which when swallowed or inhaled by, or injected 
into, a human being induces drowsiness, sleep, stupefaction or in-
sensibility in the human being and which is a dangerous drug 
within the meaning of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 (II of 
1930); 
(i) "opium" has the same meaning as in the Dangerous 
Drugs Act, 1930 (II of 1930); 
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed. by rules made under this 
Act; 
(k) , "toilet preparation" means any preparation which is in-
tended f( lr use in the toilet of the human body or in perfuming 
apparel o~~ any description, or any substance intended to cleanse, 
improve o~ alter the complexion, skin, hair or teeth, and includes 
deodorants, and perfumes. 
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF DUTIES 
3. Duties_,of excise to be levied and collected on certa1n goods.-
( 1) There sl;\all be levied duties of excise, at the rates speclfled in 
the ScheduJ)e, on all dutiable goods manufactured In india. 
(2) The. duties aforesaid shall be leviable-
(a) where the dutiable goods are manufactured in bond, in 
the State in which such goods are released from a bonded-ware-
house for home consumption, whether such $tate is the state or 
manufacture or not; 
(b) where the dutiable goods are not manufadured in bond, 
in the State in which such goods are manufactured: 
(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, the 
duties afores!lld shall be collected In such manner as may be pres-
cribed. 
Explanation.-Dutiable goods are said to be manufactured in 
bond within the meaning of this section if they are allowed to be 
manufactured without payment of any duty of excise leviable under 
any law for the time being In fofte in respect of alcohol, opium, 
Indian hemp or other narcotic drug or narcotic which Is to be 
used. as an ingredient in the manufacture of such goods .. 

,8 
4. Rebate of duty on alcohol, etc., supplied for manufacture of 
dutiable goods.-Where alcohol, opium, Indian hemp or other 
narcotic drug or narcotic had been supplied to a manufacturer of any 
dutiable goods for use as an ingredient of such goods by, or under 
the authority of, the collecting Government and a duty of excise 5 
on the goods so supplied had already been recovered by such Govern-
ment under any law for the time being in force, the collecting 
Government shall, on an application being made to it in this behalf, 
grant in respect of the duty of excise leviable under this Act, a 
rebate to ~uch manufacturer of the excess, if any, of the duty so re- 10 
covered over the duty leviable under this Act. 
5. Recovery of sums due to Government.-In respect of the duty 
of excise and any other sums of any kind payable to the collecting 
Government under any of the provisions of this Act or of the rules 
made thereunder, the excise officer empowered by the said rules to IS 
levy such duty or require the payment of such sums, may deduct 
the amount so payable from any money owing to the person from 
whom such sums may be recoverable or due which may be in his 
hands or under his disposal or control or may recover the amount 
by attachment and sale of dutiable goods belonging to such person; 20 
and if the amount payable is not so recovered, he may prepare a 
certificate signed by him specifying the amount due from the person 
liable to p~y the sum and send it to the Collector of the district in 
which such person resides or conducts his business, and the said 
Collector on receipt of such certificate shall proceed to recover from 2S 
the said person the amount specified therein in the same manner as 
an arrear of land revenue. 
6. Oertaln operations to be subject to licenees.-( 1) The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, provide 
that from such date as may be specified in the notification, no person 30 
shall engage in the production Or manufacture of any dutiable goods 
or of any specified component parts or ingredients of such goods or 
of specified containers of such goods or of labels of such containers 
except under the authority and in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of a licence granted under this Act. . 
(2) Every licence under sub-section (1) shall be granted for such 
area, if any, for such period, subject to such restrictions and condi-
tions, and in such form and containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed. 
7. Oft'ences and penaltles.-If any person-
(a) contravenes any of the provisions of a notification issued 
under section 6; or 
(b) evades the payment of any duty of excise payable under 
this Act; or 
3S 
(c) fails to supply any information which he is required by 
rules made under this Act to supply or (unless with a reasonable 45 
belief, the burden of proving which shall be upon him, that the 
information supplied by him is true), supplies false info~ation; 
or 

.' (d) attempts to commit or abets the comnusslon of any 
offence mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b), 
he shall for every such offe~ce be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
S extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
8. Power of courts to order forfeiture.-Any court trying any 
offence under section 7 may order the forfeiture to the collecting 
Government of any dutiable goods in respect of which the court is 
satisfied that an offence under this Act has been committed, and 
10 may also order the forfeiture of any alcohol, drugs or materials by 
means of which the offence has been committed and of any recep-
tacles, packages or coverings in which any such goods or articles 
are contained and the animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances 
used in carrying such goods or articles and any implements or machi-
IS nery used in the manufacture of such goods. 
POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND LANDHOLDERS 
9. Power to arrest.-(l) Any excise officer duly empowered by 
rules made in this behalf may arrest any person whom he has reason 
to believe to be liable to punishment under this Act. 
20 (2) Any person accused or reasonably suspected of committing an 
offence under this Act or any rules made thereunder, who on demand 
of any excise officer duly empowered by rules made under this Act 
refuses to give his name and residence, or who gives a name or 
residence which such officer has reason to .believe"-to be false may 
25 be arrested by such officer in order that his name and residence 
may be ascertained. 
10. Power to summon penons to give evidence and produce 
documents In inquiries under this Act.-(l) Any excise officer duly 
empowered by rules made in this behalf shall have power to summon 
30 any person whose attendance he con.siders necessary either to give 
evidence or to produce a document or any other thing in any inquiry 
which such officer is making for any of the purposes of this Act. 
(2) A summons to produce documents or other things under sub-
section (1) may be for the production of certain specified documents 
35 or things or for the production of all documents or things of a certain 
description in the possession or under the control of the person con-
cerned. 
(3) All persons so summoned shall be bound to attend either in 
person or by an authorised agent as such officer may direct and all 
40 persons so summoned shall be bound to state the truth on any 
subject respecting which he is examined or make statements and 
produce such documents and other things as may be required: 
Provided that the exemptions under section 132 and section 133 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908) shall apply to 
4' requisitions· for attendance under this section. 
(4) Every such inquiry as aforesaid shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 
of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860). 

• 
11. Odlcers required, to assist excise olllcers.-All officers of 
Customs and Central Excise, and such other officers of the Central 
Government as may be specified in this behalf, and all police officers 
and all officers engaged in the collection of land revenue are hereby 
empowered and required to assist excise officers in the execution of S 
this Act. 
12. Owners or occupiers of land to report maaufaeture of COIltra-
band dutiable goocJs.-Every owner or occupier of land and the 
agent of any such owner or occupier in charge of the management 
of that land, if. dutiable goods are manufactured thereon in contra- 10 
vention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
shall, in the absence of reasonable excuse, be bound to give notice 
of such manufacture to a magistrate or to an officer of the Excise, 
Customs, Police or Land Revenue Department immediately the fact 
comes to his notice. 
13.. Punishment for connivance at oifenees.-Any owner or 
occupier of land or any agent of such owner or occupier in charge 
IS 
of the management of that land, who wilfully connives at any offence 
. against the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder 
shall for every such offence· be punishable with imprisonment for a :ao 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
14 .. Searches and arrests how to be made.-Ail arrests and searches 
made under this Act or under any rules made thereunder shall be 
carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal 2S 
Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) relating respectively to searches 
and arrests under that Code. 
15. Disposal of persons arrested.-( 1) Every person arrested under 
this Act shall be forwarded without delay to the nearest excise officer 
empowered to send persons so arrested to a magistrate or if there 30 
is no such excise officer within a reasonable distance to the officer in 
charge of the nearest police station., 
(2) The officer in charge of a police station to whom any person 
is forwarded under sub-section (1) shall either ad~it him to bail 
to appear before a magistrate having jurisdiction, or in default of 3S 
bail forward him without delay in custody to such magistrate . • 
16. Inquiry how to be made by excise oftlcers against arrested 
persons forwarded to them.-(1) When any person is forwarded under 
section 15 to an excise officer empowered to send persons so arrested 
to a magistrate, the excise officer shall proceed to inquire into thE' 40 
charge against him. • 
(2) For the purpose of. sub-section (1), the excise officer may 
exercise the same powers, and shall be subject to the same provi-
sions, as the officer in charge of a police station may exercise and is 
subject to under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 4S 
1898). when investigating a cognisable case: 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
35 
so 
8 
Pro~ided that-
(a) if the excise officer is of opinion that there is sufficient 
evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion against the accused 
person, he shall either admit him to bail to appear before a 
magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, Or forward him in 
custody without delay to such magistrate; 
(b) if it appears to the excise officer that there is not suffi-
cient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion against the 
accused person, he shall release the accused person on his 
executing a bond, with or without sureties as the excise officer 
may direct, to appear, if and ~hen so required, before the 
magistrate having jurisdiction and shall make a full report of 
all the par~culars of the case to his official superior. 
(3) All officers exercising any powers under section 15 or this 
section shall so exercise their powers as to ensure that every person 
who is arrested and detained in custody is produced before the 
nearest magistrate within a period of twenty four hours of such 
arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place 
of arrest to the court of the magistrate. . 
17. Vexatious search, seizure, etc., by excise ofllcer.-(l) Any 
officer exercising powers under this Act or under the rules made 
thereunder who-
(a) without reasonable ground of suspicion searches or causes 
to be searched any place, conveyance or vessel; . 
I (b) vexatiously and unnecessarily detains, searches or 
arrests any person; 
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes the movable pro-
perty ot any person on pretence of seizing or searching for any 
article liable to confiscation under this Act; 
(d) commits, as such officer, any other act to the injury of 
any person, without having reason to believe that such act is 
required for the execution of his duty; . 
shall, for every such offence, be punishable with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees. 
(2) Any person wilfully and ~liciously giving false information 
and so causing an arrest or a search to be made under this Act shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, 
or with both. C 
18. FaUure of excise otBcers on duty.-Any excise officer \\Tho 
ceases or refuses to perform, or withdraws himself from, the duties 
of his office, unless he had obtained the express written permission 
of his superior officer or has given such superior officer two months' 
notice in writing of his intention or has other lawful excuse, shall 
be punishable wi~ imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to three months' pay, 
or with both. 
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS 
19. Power to make rnles.-(l) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the 
purposes of this Act. 

7 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may-
(i) provide for the asse~sJ?ent and collection ,of duties levie,d 
under this Act, the authontles by whom functIOns under thiS 
Act are to be discharged, the issue of notices requiring payment, 
the manner in which the duties shall be payable and the reco-
very of duty not paid; 
(ii) prohibit absolutely, or with such exceptions, or subject 
to such conditions as the Central Government may think fit, the 
manufacture, or any process of the mamifacture, of dutiable to 
goods or of any component parts or ingredients or 'containers 
thereof, except on land or premises approved for the purpose; 
(iii) regulate the removal of dutiable goods from the place 
where they are stored or manufactured or subjected to any pro-
cess of production or manufacture and their transport to or from IS 
the premises of a licensed person, or a bonded warehouse, or 
to a market; 
(iv) regulate the production or manufacture of any process 
of production or manufacture, the possession and storage of 
dutiable goods or of any component parts or ingredients or con-. 20 
tainers thereof, so far as such regulation is essential for the pro-
per levy and collection of duties levied under this Act; 
(v) provide for the employment of excise officers to super-
vise the carrying out of any rules made under this Act; 
(vi) require a manufacturer or the licensee of a warehouse 2S 
to provide accommodation within the precincts of his factory 
or warehouse for excise officers employed to supervise the carry-
ing out of rules made under this Act and prescribe the scale of 
such accommodation; 
(vii) provide for the appointment, licensing, management 30 
and supervision of bonded warehouses and the procedure to be 
followed in entering dutiable goods into and clearing goods from 
such warehouses or in the movement of dutiable goods from one 
bonded warehouse to another; 
(viii) provide for the distinguishing of excisable goods which 3S 
have been manufactured under licence, of materials which have 
been imported under licence and of goods on which duty has 
been paid or which are exempt from duty under this Act; . 
(ix) impose on persons engaged in the manufacture, storage 
or sale (whether on their own account or as brokers or com- 40 
mission agents) so far as such imposition is essential for the 
proper levy and collection of the duties levied under this Act 
the duty of furnishing information, keeping records and making. 
returns and prescribe the nature of such information and form 
of such records and returns. the partic1!llars to be contained 4~ 
therein and the manner in which they shall be verified; 
(x) require that dutiable goods shall not be sold or offered 
or kept for sale except in prescribed containers, bearing a ban-
derol, stamp or label of such nature and affixed in such mfnner So 
as may be prescribed; 
(xi) provide for the issue of licences and transport permits 
and the fees, if any, to be charged therefor; 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
35 
40 
4S 
8 
(xii) provide for the detention of dutiable goods, plant, 
machinery or material for the purpose of exacting the duty; 
(xiii) provide for the confiscation of dutiable goOds in 
respect of which a breach of any rule made under this Act has 
been committed, and also for the confiscation of any alcohol, 
drugs or materials by means of which the breach has been 
committed and of any receptacle, packages or coverings in which 
such goods or articles are contained, and the animals, vehicles, 
vessels or other conveyances used in carrying such goods or 
articles and any implements or machinery used in the manu-
facture of such goods; 
(xiv) provide for the levy of a penalty not exceeding two 
thousand rupees for a breach of any rule made under this Act; 
(xv) provide for the proc~ure in connection with such 
confiscation and the imposition of such penalty, the maximum 
limits up to which particular classes of excise officers may 
adjudge such confiscation or penalty, appeals from orders of such 
officers and revision of such orders by some higher authority, 
the time-limit for such appeals and revisions and the disposal 
of goods and articles confiscated; 
(xvi) authorise and regulate the compounding of offences 
against, or liabilities incurred under, this Act or the rules made 
thereunder; 
(xvii) authorise and regulate the .inspection of factories and 
provide for the taking of samples or for the making of tests of 
any substance produced therein and for the inspection or search 
of any place, conveyance or vessel used for the production, 
storage, sale or transport of dutiable goods in so far as such 
inspection or search is essential for the proper levy and collection 
of the duties levied under this Act; 
(xviii) provide for the grant of a rebate of the duty paid 
on dutiable goods which are exported out of, India or shipped 
for consumption on a voyage to any port outside India; 
(=) exempt any dutiable goods from the whole or any part 
of the duty levied under this Act where in the opinion of the 
Central Government, it is necessary to grant such exemption 
in the interest of the trade or in the public interest; 
(xx) notify in the Official Gazette lists of the names and 
descriptions of preparations which would fall for assessment 
under any particular item of the Schedule or for regulating their 
manufacture, transport and distribution; 
(xxi) authorise. particular classes of excise officers to pro-
vide by written instructions for supplemental matters arising 
out of any rule made by the Central Government under this 
section. 
(3) Where any confiscation or penalty has been adjudged in respect 
of a breach of any rule under this Act, which is also an offence under 
-section 7, the person concermed shAll not be prosecuted under that 
section. ' 
(4) All rules made by the Central Government under this section 
shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as span as may be 
after they arE' made. 

Oi 9 
,10. Bar,of suUs and UmltalioD of salts and GUIer lepl proceed-
bap.-(l) No suit or other legal proceeding shall Ue against the 
collecting Government or against any officer in respect of any order 
passed in good faith or any act in good faith done or ordered to be 
done under this Act. 
. (2)' No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shan be institu-
ted against the collecting Government or against any officer for any-
, thing done or ordered to be done under this Act after the expira-
tion of six months from the accrual of the cause of action or from 
the date of the act or order complained of. 
21. Repeals and savings.-If, immediately before the commence-
ment of this Act, there is in force in any State any law corresponding 
to this Act, that law is hereby repealed: 
s 
10 
Provided that all rules made, notifications issued, licences or 
permits granted, powers conferred under any law hereby repealed IS 
. shall, so far as they are not inconsistent with this Act, have the same 
force and effect as if they had been respectively made, issued, grant-
ed or conferred under this Act and by the authority empowered 
hereby in that .behalf. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section -3) 
-_._ ...• _---_._ .. _._-----_._----_ .•. _ .. _--
Item No. Description of dutiable goods 
-_. __ .... _--_._----- .. _------ -----
." ._-_ .. _._._. 
Rate of duty 
... _---
I. Medicinal and toilet preparations, containing 
alcohol, which are prepared by distillation or to 
which alcohol has been added, and which are cap-
able of being consumed as ordinary alcoholic 
beverages. 
Rupees seventeen 
2. Medicinal and toilet preparations not otherwise 
specified containing alcohol-
(I) Ayurvedic preparations containing self-
generated alcohol, which are not capable of being 
consumed as ordinary alcoholic beverages. 
(ii) Ayurvedic preparations containing self-
generated alcohol, which are capable of being 
conswned as ordinary alcoholic beverage·s. 
(iit) All others. 
3. Medicinal and toilet. I?repar~tions, n.ot contain-
ing alcohol, but contatnmg opium, Indian hemp, or 
other narcotic drug or narcotic. 
and annas eight 
per gallon of 
the strength of 
London proof 
spirit. 
Nil 
Rupees three per 
gallon. 
Rupees five per 
gallon of the 
strength of 
London 
spirit. 
proof 
Nil 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Explanation I.-"Gallon" means a measure of eapacity which is 4S 
equivalent to 160 fluid ounces. 

5 
18 
Explanation II.-"London proof spirit" means that mixture of 
ethyl alcohol and distilled water which at the temperature of 51 
degrees Fahrenheit weights exactly 12/13th parts of an equal 
measure of distilled water at the same temperature. 
Explanation,III.-Where in respect of any dutiable goods the 
unit of assessment for the purpose of any duty under this Act is a 
gallon of the strength of London proof spirit, the duty shall be in-
creased or reduced in such proportlon as the strength of the dutiable 
goods is greater or less than that of the London proof spirit. 

11 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
By virtue of entry 40 in List II in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Government of India Act, 1935, medicinal and toilet preparations COD-
taining alcohol, etc., were subjected to Provincial excise duties. Each 
Provincial Government fixed its own rates of duty and followed its 
own procedure to regulate the imports from and exports to other 
Provinces of such preparations, so that the industry manufacturing 
these preparations had to contend with several handicaps imposed 
by such diversities in rates and procedure. In order to secure uni-
formity, the entry relating to excise duty on medicinal and toilet 
preparations containing alcohol, etc., were transferred under the 
Constitution from the State list to the Union list. 
2. The present Bill is intended to implement this provision in the 
Constitution, and proposes uniform rates of excise duty and a uni-
form procedure for the collection thereof. In the case of Part A and 
Part B States, the actual collection of the duties will be left to the 
Governmentil of the States, as required by article 268 of the Con-
stitution. The existing duties, and the existing procedure for col-
lection under the pre-Constitution statutes of the States which are 
at present protected under article 277 will be replaced by the rates 
nnd the procedure proposed in the Bill. 
3. The duties specified in the Schedule are, generally speaking, 
based on the recommendations of an Expert Committee appotnted 
by Government. 
c. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DELm; 
The 6th September, 1954. 

12 
MEMORANDUM 
- Clausel 3(3) and 20 of the Bill empower the Central Government 
"t.Q.~ rul'as. The, rivlt4!rs in respect of whi~h such rules may be 
. ,;'~i 'made ,'~e ~ifi~d th~rein. The Cent.ral Gov~rnment is also empow-
. etedto IsSue nohftcatlpn5 and orders In certaIn cases. 
2. In all Excise enactments- of, the States as well as of the Union, 
It has been found necessary both in the interests of Government and 
bI'thetax-payers that the Government shall have the power to make 
rules for the regulation of procedural matters. Procedural difficul-
t~ arise from time t-o time in the light of experience gained. It is, 
therefore, desirable that the provisions of law relating to procedure 
should be flexible enough to permit adaptation to the varying cir-
cumstances of each case. 
3. This; ispartic\llarlyso in the case oitbe present measure which 
will require a synthesis to be effected from a vast body of the exist-
ing rules and regulations in .force in the States, having regard to the 
. sole object of the measure, namely,tobrilJlg abeut uniformity of, 
treatment, in excise ,matters, of medicinal and toilet preparations 
~COIltaining alcohol, etc" This ¥lill baa. highly complicated process 
because, firstly, the excise duty wtll bec:oUected and retained by the 
State Governments and secondly, a eertain amount of flexibility in 
statutory operation would be necessary if spurious preparations which 
~ being put on the market in the· guise of medicines are not to 
~deleat the prohibition Policies of the State Govemments under the 
protection of the present measure. 
4. Some of the provisions of the Bill have accordingly been framed 
so as to lay down only broad principles. Matters such as classification 
of the preparations as capable or not capable of being used as ordinary 
alcoholic beverages, regulation, for the purposes of the Act, of, pro-
dMC~.,.fa,. ~d movement, etc., have been left to be regulated 
by rules. 
5. Provision has been made in clau,l~ 19(4) of the Bill for the 
Rules made under the Act to be placed ~ the table of both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
6. The matter in respect of which rules can be made under the 
Bill are more or less the same as those in respect of which rules oan 
be made under section 37 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 

LOK SABHA 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of duties of excise on 
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol, opium, 
Indian hemp or other narcotio drug or narcotic. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 
and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, 
recommended to the Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
S~. 
(Slari C. D. DtlhmuIth. 
MinUter of Fi1ll»l&I) 