BID N~. ~S of 1"1 
THE APPRENTICES BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 19TH AUGUST, 19(1) 

THE APPRENTICES BILL, Ig6I 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPI'ER I 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title; ~tentl eommencemel1t and _tJP11eaUoii, 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
APPRENTICES AND THEIR TRAINING 
3. Qualifications for being engaged as an appren.tiee.. 
4. Contract of apprenticeship. 
5. Novation of contract of apprenticeship. 
6. Period of apprenticeship training. 
7. Termination of apprenticeship contract. 
8. Number of apprentices for a designated trade. 
9. Practical and basic training of apprentices. 
10. Related instruction of apprentices. 
11. Obligations of employers. 
12. Obligations of apprentices. 
-13. Payment to apprentices. 
14. Health, safety and welfare of apprentices. 
15. Hours of work, overtime, leave and holidays. 
16. Employer's liability for compensation for injury. 
17. Conduct and discipline. 
18. Apprentices are trainees and not workers. 
19. Records and returns. 
20. Settlement of disputes. 
21. Holding of test and grant of certificate and CODcluaion at 
training. 
22. Offer and acceptance of employment. 
\. 

" 
ii 
CHAPTER m 
AtrrRORlTU'S 
CLAt1SBS 
23. Authorities. 
24. Constitution of Councils. 
25. Vacancies Ilot to invalidate acts and proceedings. 
26. Apprenticeship Advisers. 
27. Deputy and Assistant Apprenticeship Advisers. 
28. Apprenticeship Advisers to be public servants. 
29. Powers of entry, inspection, etc. 
80. Offences and penalties. 
31. Penalty where no specific penalty it provided. 
32. -Oftenees by cOMpanies. 
33. Copizance ot offences. 
34. Delegation of. powers. 
35. Construction of references. 
36. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
37. Power to make rules. 
38. Repeal. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

BID No. U 011"1 
THE APPRENTICES BILL, I9t)I 
(As Dft'ROD11CD Dr LoK 5ABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to proofde lor the regu.l4tion. and control of traiKing oj GppreM&cu 
in trades and for matters connected therewith. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the RepubUe 
of India Q follows:-
CHAPTER I 
Plu!:t.mt:IKARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Apprentices Act, 1961. Short title, 
atent, Com-
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu Mcnc:emODt 
and Kashmir and appUc:a· . don. 
(3) It shall come into force on sueh date as the Central Govern· 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: and ditfer-
10 ent dates may be appointed for difterent States. 
15 
• 
30 
(4) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to-
(a) any area or to any industry in any area unless the Cent-
ral Government by Dotiftcation in the Oftlcial Gazette speciftea 
that area or industry as an area or indUstry to which the said 
provisions shall apply with eftect from sUch date as may be men-
tioned in the notiftcation; 
(b) any graduate or diploma apprentice undergoing training 
in accordance with any scheme framed by or with the approval 
of the Government; 
(c) any special apprenticeship scheme for im.parting traJ.nJn, 
to apprentices in non-deaignated tradel. 

DibltiollS. Z. In this Act., unless the context otherwise requires,-
(4) lCapprentic:e" means a person whQ is undergoing appren-
ticeship training in a designated trade in pursuance of a contract 
of apprenticeship; 
(b) "Apprenticeship Adviser" means the Central Appren- S 
tieeship Adviser appointed under sub-section (1) of section 26 or 
the State Apprenticeship Adviser appointed under sub-section 
(Z) of that section; 
(e) "Apprenticeship Council" means the Central Apprentice-
ship Counc:i1 or the State Apprenticeship Council established 10 
under sub-section (1) of section 24; 
(el). "appropriate Government" means,-
(1) in relation to-
(4) the Central -Apprenticeship Coulieil, or 
(b) any establishment of any railway, major port, IS 
mine or oU field, or 
(c) any establishment owned. controlled or managed 
by-
(i) theCenmu Government or a department of 
the Central Government, 20 
(ii) a company in -whiehnot less than ftfty-one 
per cent of the share .c:apit$l.is held by the Central 
Government or partly by that Government and part-
ly by one or more State Governments, 
(iii) a corporation (including a co-operative l5 
. society) established by or under a Central Act which 
is owaedi'Controlled'or managed by the Central Gov· 
eromeat, 
the Central GoverllJnlel\t; 
(2) in relation ~ 
«1-) a State Apprenticeship Coun.eil, or 
(b) any establiIhment other than an establishment 
specified in subo-elawle (1) of this elauaj 
the State Government; 
(e). "designated.trade" means'8 trade which the Central Gov- 35 
emment, after consultation with the Central, .Apprenticeship 
Council, may, by notification in the_Oftlcial Gazette, specify as a 
de8tg'nated trade for the PUrpQSeS of this Act; 

or 1956. 
s 
10 
15 
3 
(f) "employer" means any person who employs one or more ::n'1 
other persons to do any work in an establishment for remunera- , 
tion and includes any 'person entrusted with the supervision and 
c:ontrol of employees in such establishment; 
(g) '''establishment'' includes any place where any industry 
is canied on; 
(h) "establishment in private sector" means an establish-
ment which is not an establishment in public sector; 
(i) "establishment in public sector" means an establishment 
owned, controlled or managed by-
(1) the Government or a department of the Government; 
(2) a Government company as defined ln section 617 of 
the Companies Act, 1956; 
(3) a corporation (including a co-operative society) 
established by or under G Central, Provincial or ·State Act. 
which is owned, controlled or managed by the Government; 
(4) a local authority; 
(j) "graduate or diploma apprentice" means an apprentice 
who holds, or is undergoing training in order that he may hold, 
20 a degree or diploma granted by any institution recognised. by the 
Government; 
• 
35 
(k) "industry" means any industry, trade. business or occu-
pation in which any trade may be specified as a designated trade; 
(1) "National Council" means the National Council for Train. 
ing in Vaeational Trades established by the resolution of the 
Govp.rnment of India in the Ministry of Labour (Directorate 
General of Resettlement and Employment) No. TR/E.P.-24/56. 
dated the 21st Augpst, 1956; 
(m) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(tt) "State" includes a Union territory; 
(0) "State Council" means a State CouncUfor Training in 
Vocational Trades established by the State Government; 
(p) "State Government" in relation to a Union territory 
means the Administrator thereof. 

4 
CHAPTER n 
APPuNTrCBS AND THElR TRAINING 
qualiftca- 3. A person shall not be qualified for being enEfBged as an appren-
tiona for be- t' t d ticeshi'" d' iq enaaaed Ice 0 un ergo appren p trammg m any eslgnated trade. un-
as an ap- less he-- I 5 
prentice. 
(a) is not less than fourteen years of age, and 
(b) satisfies such standards of education and physical fitness 
as may be prescribed: 
Provided that different standards may be prescribed in relation 
to apprenticeship training in different designated trades. 10 
Contract of 4. (1) No person shall be engaged as an apprentice to undergo 
:~tic:e- apprenticeship training in a designated trade unless-
Novation of 
contract of 
apprentice-
ShIP' 
(4) such person or if he is a minor, his guardian has entered 
into a contract of apprenticeship with the employer, and 
(b) the contract of apprenticeship has been registered with IS 
the Apprenticeship Adviser. 
(2) Every contract of apprenticeship may contain such terms 
and conditions as may be agreed to by the parties to the contract: 
Provided that no such term or condition shall be inconsistent with 
any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder. 20 
(3) The Apprenticeship Adviser shall not register a contract of 
apprenticeship unless he is satisfied that the person described as an 
apprentice in the contract is qualified under this Act for being 
engraged as an apprentice to undergo apprenticeship training in the 
designated trade specified in the contract. ~S 
5. Where an employer with whom a contract of apprenticeship 
has been entered into, is for any reason unable to fulfil his obligations 
under the contract and with the approval of the Apprenticeship 
Adviser it is agreed between the employer, the "apprentice or his 
gmrdian and any other employer that the apprentice shall be 30 
engaged as an apprentice under the other employer for the un-
expired portion of the period of apprenticeship training, the agree-
ment, on registration with the Apprenticeship Adviser, shall be 
deemed to be the contract of apprenticeship between the apprentice 
or his guardian and the other employer, and on and from the date 35 
of such registretion, the contract of apprenticeship with the ftrst 
employer shall terminate and no obligation under that contract shall 
be enforceable at the instance of any party to the contract arainst 
the other party thereto. I 

• 
J 
i. The period of apprenticeship training, which shall be 'pecified Pertoci of 
in the contract of apprenticeship, shall be as follows:- appr=Dt~Ce-ship train-
(4) in the case of apprentices who, having undergone insti- in,. 
tutional training in a school or other institution recognised by 
5 the National Council, have passed the trade tests conducted by 
that Council, the period of apprenticeship training shall be such 
as may be determined by that Council; 
(b) in the case of other apprentices, the period of appren-
ticeship training shan be such as may be prescribed. 
10 7. (1) The contract of apprenticeship shall terminate on the expiry Termination 
of the period of apprenticeship training. of appren-ticeship 
(2) Either party to a contNct of apprenticeship may make an contract. 
ap.plication to the Apprenticeship Adviser for the termination of the 
contract, and when such application is made, shall send by post a 
IS copy thereof to the other party to the contract. 
(3) After comidering the contents of the application and the 
objections, jf any, filed by the other party, the Apprenticeship 
Adviser may, by order in writing, terminate the contract if he is 
satisfied that the parties to the contract or any of them have or has 
20 failed to carry out the terms and conditions of the contract and 
that it is desirable in the interests of the parties or any of them to 
terminate the same: 
2S 
Provided that where a contract is terminated-
(4) for failure on the part of the employer to carry out 
the terms and conditions of the contract, the employer shall 
pay to the apprentice such compensation as may be prescribed; 
(b) for such failure on the part of the apprentice, the 
apprentice or his guardian shall refund to the employer 
as cost of training such amount as may be determined by the 
Apprenticeship Adviser. 
8. (1) The Central Government after consulting the Central N b f 
Apprenticeship Council shall, by order in the Official Gazette, de- .~:n~i';;s 
termine for each designated. trade the ratio of apprentices to defor oa • ..1 
o 0 Sianatcu 
workers other than unskilled workers In that trade: trade • 
3S Provided. that nothing contain~ in this sub-section shall be 
deemed. to prevent any employer from engaging a number of 
apprentices in excess of the ratio determined. under this sub-section. 

6 
(2) In determining the ratio as aforesaid, the Central Govern-
ment shall have regard to the facilities available for apprentice-
ship training under this Act in the designated trade concerned as 
well as to the facilities that may have to be made available for the 
training of graduate and diploma apprentices, if any, under any S 
scheme of training for such graduate and diploma apprentices fram-
ed or that may be framed by or with the approval of the Central 
Government. 
(3) The Apprenticeship Adviser may, by notice in writing, re-
quire an employer to engage such number of apprentices within 10 
the ratio determined by the Central Government for any designat-
ed trade in his establishment, to undergo apprenticeship training in 
that trade and the employer shall comply with such requisition. 
(4) Several employers may join together for the purpose of 
providing. practical training to the apprentices under them by mov- IS 
ing them between their respective establishments. 
(5) Where, having regard to the public interest, a number of 
apprentices in excess of the ratio determined by the Central Gov-
ernment should in the opinion of the appropriate Government be 
trained, the appropriate Government may require employers to train 30 
the additional number of apprentices. 
(6) Every employer to whom such requisition as aforesaid is 
made, shall comply with the requisition if the Government concem-
ed makes available such additional facilities and sucb additional 
financial assistance as are considered neceSS:lry by tbe Apprentice. 25 
ship Adviser for the training of the additional Dumber of apprentices. 
(7) Any employer not satisfied with the decision of the Appren-
ticeship Adviser under sub-section (6), may make a reference to 
the Central Apprenticeship Council and such reference shall be 
decided by a Committee thereof appointed by that Council for the 30 
purpose and the decision of that Committee shall be final. 
Practical and 9. (1) Every employer shall make suitable arrangements in his 
basic workshop for imparting a course of practical training to every trBininl of 
apprentices. apprentice engaged by him in accordance with the programme 
approved by the Apprenticeship Adviser. 35 
(2) The Central Apprenticeship Adviser shall be given all 
reasonable facilities for access to each such apprentice with a view 
to test his work and to ensure that the practical training is being 
imparted in accordance with the approved programme: 
Provide« that the State Apprenticeship Adviser shall. also b. 40 
given such· facUities in respect of apprentices undergoing training 
in establishments in relation to which the appropriate Government 
is the State ·Gove~ent.· . 

7 
(3) Such of the apprentices as have not undergone institutional 
training in a school or other institution recognised by the National 
Council shall, before admission in the workshop for practical train-
ing, undergo a course of basic training. 
5 (4) Where an employer employs in his establishment five 
hundred or more workers, the basic training shall be imparted to 
the apprentices either in separate parts of the workshop building 
or in a separate building which shall be set up by the employer 
himself, but the appropriate Government may grant loans to the 
10 employer on easy terms and repayable by easy instalments to meet 
the cost of the land, construction and equipment for such separate 
building. 
(5) Where an employer employs in his establishment less than 
five hundred workers., the basic training shall be imparted to the 
J 5 apprentices In traiDing institutes set up by the Government. 
(6) In any such training institute, which shall be located with-
in the premises of the most suitable establishment in the locality 
or at any other convenient place, the apprentices engaged by two 
or more employers may be imparted basic training. 
20 (7) The syllabus of, and the equipment to be utilised for, prac-
tical training including basic training shall be such as may be 
approved by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Central Apprenticeship Council. 
(8) (a) Recurring costs (including the cost of stipends) incur-
2S red by an employer in connection with practical training imparted 
to apprentices other than those referred to in clause (a) of section 
6 shall be borne-
(i) if such employer employs five hundred workers or 
more, by the employer; 
SO (ii) if such employer employs less than five hundred 
worken, by the employer and the Government in equal shares 
up to such limit as may be laid down by the Central Government 
and beyond that limit, by the employer alone; and 
(b) recurring costs (including the cost of stipends), if any, 
• 35 incurred by an employer in connection with practical train-
ing imparted to apprentices referred to in clause (a) of sec-
tion 6 shall, in every case, be borne by the employer. 

Related ins-
tru~tioD of 
apprentices. 
ObUptions 
of employ-
en. 
8 
10. (l) An apprentice who is undergoing practical training in 
an establishment shall, during the period of practical training, be 
given a course of related instruction (which shall be appropriate 
to the trade) approved by the Central Government· in consultation 
with the Central Apprenticeship Council, with a view to giving the S 
apprentice such theoretical knowledge as he needs in order to 
become fully qualified as a skilled craftsman. 
(2) Related instruction shall be imparted at the cost of the 
appropriate Government but the employer shall, when so required, 
afford all facilities for imparting such instruction. 10 
(3) Any time spent by an apprentice in attending classes on 
related instruction shall be treated as part of his paid period of 
wark. 
(4) In the case of apprentices who have passed the trade tests 
conducted by the National Council after having undergone a course IS 
of institutional training, the related instruction may be given on 
such reduced' or modified scale as may be considered appropriate by 
the N aUonal Council. 
11. Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act, every 
employer shall have the following obligations in relation to an :zo 
apprentice, namely:-
(4) to provide the apprentice with the training in his trade 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and the rules 
made thereunder; 
(b) if the employer is not himself qualified in the trade, to 25 
ensure that a person duly qualified is placed in charge of the 
training of the apprentice; and 
(c) to carry out his obligations under the contract of 
apprenticeship. 
Oblptons U. Every apprentice undergoing apprenticeship training shall 30 
of appren- have the following obligations, namely:-
IiceS. 
(a) to learn his trade conscientiously and diligently and 
endeavour to qualify himself as a skilled craftsman before the 
expiry of the period of training; 
(b) to attend practical and instructional claaaea regularly; 3S 
(c) to carry out all lawful orden of his employer and 
superiors in the establishment; and 
(d) to carry out his obligations under the contract of 
appreJl1iceship. 

63 of 1948. 
35 of 1952 . 
13. (1) The employer shall pay to every apprentice duriDg the Payment 
period of apprentieeship training such stipend at a rate not less t~ ap pren-
tluul the preseribed minimum. rate as may be specified. in the eon- uccs. 
tract of apprenticeship and the stipend so specified shall be paid 
5 at such intervals and subject to such conditions as may be pres-
cribed. 
(2) An apprentice shall not receive any other payment from his 
employer nor shall he be paid on the basis of piece work or 
required to take part in any output bonus OIl" other incentive 
10 scheme. 
14. Where any apprentices are undergoing training in a factory, Health, 
the provisions of Chapters III, IV and V of the Factories Act, 1948, safeltfiyandf . . we are 0 
shall apply m relation to the health, safety and welfare of the appreatice •. 
apprentices as if they were workers within the meaning of that 
15 Act and when any apprentices are undergoing training in a mine, 
the provisions of Chapter V of the Mines Act. 1952; shall apply in 
relation to the health and safety of the apprentices as if they were 
persons employed in the mine. 
15. (1) The weekly a.nd daily hours of work of an apprentice Hoursof 
20 while undergoing practical training in a workshop shall be such '!ork, over-time leave 
as may be prescribed. and boUd.ys 
(2) No apprentice shall be required or allowed to work over-
time except with the approval of the Apprenticeship Adviser who 
shall not grant such approval unless he is satisfied that such over-
25 time is in the interest of the training of the apprentice or in the 
public interest. 
(3) An apprentice shall be entitled to such leave as may be 
prescribed and to such holidays as are observed in the establish-
ment in which he is undergoing training. 
30 16. If personal injury is caused to an apprentice by accident Bmployer's 
arising out of ·and in the course of his training as an apprentice, hIS coliambility for . " peua-employer shall be hable to pay. compensation WhICh shall be tio n for 
determined and paid, so far as may be. in accordance wi~h the pro- i Ij ury. 
8 of 1923. visions of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, subject to the 
35 modifications specified in the Schedule. 
• 17. In all matters of conduct and discipline, the apprentice shall Conduct all 
be governed by the rules and regulations applicable to workers in the Jj.icipline. d 
trade in the establishment in which the apprentice is undergoing 
training. 

Apprentices 
are trainees 
and not 
worken. 
10 
18. Save as otherwise provided in this Act,-
(II) f!!Very apprentice undergoing apprenticeship training 
in a designated trade in an establishment shall be a trainee and 
not a worker; and 
(b) the provisions of any law with respect to labour shall 5 
not apply to or in relation to such apprentice. 
Recorda and 19. (1) Every employer shall maintain records of the progress of 
returns. training of each apprentice undergoing apprenticeship training in 
his establishment in such form as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every such employer shall also furnish such information 10 
and returns in such form, to such authorities and at such intervals 
as may be prescribed. 
Settlement ZOo (1) Any disagreement or dispute between an employer and 
or disputes. an apprentice arising out C?f the contract of apprenticeship shall be 
referred to the Apprenticeship Adviser for decision. IS 
(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Apprenticeship 
Adviser under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days from the date 
of communication to him of such decision, prefer an appeal against 
the decision to the Apprenticeship Council and such appeal shall 
be heard and determined by a Committee of that Council appointed 20 
for the purpose. 
(3) The decision of the Committee under sub-~ction (2) and 
subject only to such decision, the decision of the Apprenticeship 
Adviser under sub-section (1) shall be final. 
Hold;.. 21. (1) Every apprentice who has completed the period of 25 
~C:~fnd training shall appear for a test Ito be conducted by the National 
certificate Council to determine his proficiency in the designated trade in 
::. ~fDClu- which he has served his apprenticeship. 
trainiq. 
(2) Every apprentice who passes the test referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be granted a certificate of proficiency in the trade P 
by the National Council. 
Offer and 22. (1) It shan not be obligatory on the part of the employer 
~~;::n~~ to offer any employment to any apprentice who has completed the 
P period of his apprenticeship training in his establishment, nor shan 
it be obligatory on the part of the apprentice to accept an employ- 35 
ment under the employer. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1). where there is 
a condition in a contract of apprenticeship that the apprentice shaD, 

II 
after the successful completion of the apprenticeship training, 
serve the employer, the employer shall, on such completion, be 
bound to offer suitable employment to the apprentice, and the 
apprentice shall be bound to serve the employer in that capacity 
S for such period and on such remuneration as may be specified in 
the contract: 
Provided that where such period or remuneration is not, in the 
opinion of the Apprenticeship Adviser, reasonable, he may revise 
such period or remuneration so as to make it reasonable, and the 
10 period or remuneration so revised shall be deemed to be the period 
or remuneration agreed to between the apprentice and the employer. 
CHAPTER III 
AUTHORITIES 
23. (1) In addition to the Government, there shall be the Authorities. 
15 following authorities under this Act, namely:-· 
(a) The National Council, 
(b) The Central Apprenticeship Council, 
(c) The State CounciL 
(d) The State Apprenticeship Council, 
(e) The Central Apprenticeship Adviser, and 
(f) The State Apprenticeship Adviser. 
(2) Every State Council shall be affiliated to the National 
Council and every State Apprenticeship Council shall be affiliated 
to the Central Apprenticeship Council. 
as (3) Each of the authorities specified in sub-section (1) shall, in 
relation to apprenticeship training under this Act, perfonn such 
functions as are assigned to it by or under this Act or by the Gov-
ernment: 
Provided that a State Council shall also perform such functions 
30 as are assigned to'it by the National Coundl and the State Appren-
ticeship Council shall also perform such functions as are assigned to 
it by the Central Apprenticeship Council. 
24. (1) The Central '"Government shall, by notification in the ConatitutioD 
Official Gazette, establish the Central Apprenticeship Council and of Councils. 
35 the State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish the. State Apprenticeship Council. 
(2) The Central Apprenticeship Council shan consist of a 
Chairman and such number of other members as the Central Gov-

12 
emment may think expedient, to be appointed by that Government 
by notification in the Official Gazette from among the following 
categories of persons, namely:-
(a) representatives of employer~ in establishments in the 
public and private sectors, S 
(b) representatives of the Central Government and of the 
State Governments, and 
(c) persons having special knowledge and experience on 
matters relating to trade and industry. 
(3) The number of persons to be appointed as members of the I. 
Central Apprenticeship Council from each of the categories specified 
in sub-section (2), the term of office of, the procedure io be followed 
in the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling 
vacancies among, the members of the Council shall be such RS may 
be prescribed. IS 
(4) The State Apprenticeship Council shall consist of a Chairman 
and such number of other members as the State Government may 
think expedient, to be appointed by that Government by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette from among the following categories 
of persons, namely:- ao 
(a) representatives of employers in establishments in the 
public and private sectors, 
(b) representatives of the Central Government and of the 
State Government, and 
(c) persons having special knowledge and experience of as 
matters relating to trade and industry. 
(5) The number of persons to be appointed as members of the 
State Apprenticeship Council from each of the categories specified 
in sub-section (4), the term of office of, the procedure to be followed 
in the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling 30 
vacancies among, the members of the Council shall be such as the 
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, deter-
mine. 
(6) The fees and allowances, if any, to be paid to the Chairman 
and the other members of the Central Apprenticeship Council, shall 3S 
be such as may be determined by the Central Govemment and the 
fees and allowances, if any, to be paid to the Chairman and the 
other members of the State Apprenticeship Council shall be such as 
may be determined by the State Government. 

45 of 1860. 
13 
2s No act done or proceeding taken by the National Council, the Vacancit;' . . not to Inva-
Central Apprenticeship Council. the State C'ounClI or the State lidate acta 
Apprenticeship Council under this Act shall be questioned on the ~':Id procee-
ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the mas· 
, constitution of, such Council. 
26. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the om- A~ntf~ 
cial Gazette, appoint a suitable penon as the Central Apprenticeship :!':. AdV!-
Adviser. 
(2) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official 
10 Gazette. appoint a suitable person as the State Apprenticeship Ad-
viser. 
(3) The Central Apprenticeship Adviser shall be the Secretary t.o 
the Central Apprenticeship Council and the State Apprenticeship 
Adviser shall be the Secretary to the State Apprenticeship Count'il. 
I, 27. (1) The Government may .ppomt suitable persons as Deputy De~uty and 
and Assistant Apprenticeship Advisers to assist the Apprenticeship ~~;~:tce-
Adviser in the perfol'DUUlce of his functions. ship Advi-
sers. 
(2) Every Deputy or Assistant Apprenticeship Adviser shall, 
subject to the control of the Apprenticeship Adviser, perform such 
20 functions as may be assigned to him by the Apprenticeship Adviser. 
28. Every Apprenticeship Adviser and every Deputy or Assistant Apprentice-
Apprenticeship Adviser appointed under this Act shall be deemed ~ t~t i-
to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian public ser-
Penal Code.' vantS. 
2., 28. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Central Powers of 
30 
35 
Apprenticeship Adviser may- :tion, 
(0) with such assistants, if any, as he thinks fit, enter, in&- etc. 
peel and examine any establishment or. part thereof at any 
reasonable time; 
(b) examine any apprentice employed therein or require 
the production of any register, record or other documents main-
tained in pursuance of this Act and take on the spot or otherwise 
statements of any person which he may consider necessary for 
carrying out the purposes .of this Acti 
(c) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit 
in order to ascertain whether the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder are being observed in the establish-
menti 

14 
(d) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed: 
Provided that a State Apprenticeship Adviser may also exercise 
any of the powers specified in clause (4), (b), (c) or (d) of this sub-
section in relation to establishments for which the appropriate Gov-
ernment is the State Government. 5 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), no person shall 
be compelled under this section to answer any question or make any 
statement which may tend directly or indirectly to incriminate him. 
Offences and 30. (1) If any employer-
penalties. 
(4) engages as an apprentice a person who is not qualified 10 
for being so engaged, or 
(b) fails to carry out the terms and conditions of a contract 
of apprenticeship, or 
(c) contravenes the provisions of this Act relating to the 
number 9f apprentices which he is required to engage under IS 
those provisions, 
he shall be punishable wHh imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to six months or with fine or with both. 
(2) If any employer or any other person-
(a) required to furnish any information or return-
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or 
return, or 
(ii) furnishes or causes to be fumlshed any informa-
tion or return which is false and which he either knows or 
20 
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, or 2S 
(iii) refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to any 
question necessary for obtaining any Information required 
to be furnished by him, or 
(b) refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the Central or the 
State Apprenticeship Adviser any reasonable facility for making 30 
any entry. inspection, examination or inquiry authorised by or 
under this Act, or 
(c) requires an apprentice to work overtime without the 
approval of the Apprenticeship Adviser. or 
(d) employs an apprentice on any work which is not 35 
connected with his training, or 
(e) makes payment to an apprentice on the basis of piece-
work, or 

• 
15 
(f) requires an apprentice to take part in any output bonus 
or incentive scheme, 
• he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to six months or with fine- or with both. 
, 31. If any employer or any other person contravenes any pro- Penalty 
vision of this Act for which no punishment is provided in section where no 
30 he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees five = is 
hundred. provided. 
32. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a Offences." 
10 company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed companiel. 
'was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly: 
I, Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to such punishment provided in this Act 
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission 
of such offence. 
20 (2) Nothwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the con-
sent or connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the 
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer 'of the 
25' company, such director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
. , 
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a 
30 firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relatiop to a firm means a partner in the 
firm. 
33. No court shall take cognizance of any offence" under this Act Coanizauce 
or' the rules made thereunder except on a complaint thereof in of offeuce •• 
35 writing made by the Apprenticeship Adviser within six months 
from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been com-
mitted. 

16 
Deleption 34. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
of powen. Official Gazette, direct tha~ any power exercisable by it under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder shall, in relation to such matters 
and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
direction, be exercisable also- S 
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Gov-
ernment, by such officer or authority subordinate to the Cen-
tral Government or by the State Government or by such offi-
cer or authority subordinate to the State Government, as may 
be specified in the notification; and 10 
(b) where the appropriate Government is the State Gov-
ernment, by such officer or authority subordinate to the State 
Government as may be specified in the notification. 
ConstNction 35. (1) Any reference in this Act or in the rules made there-
of refer- under to the Apprenticeship Council shall, unless the context IS 
enc:es. otherwise requires, mean in relation to apprenticeship training in 
a designated trade in an establishment in relation to which the 
Central Government is the appropriate Government, the Central 
Apprenticeship Council and in relation to apprenticeship training 
in a designated trade in an establishment in relation to which the 20 
State Government is the appropriate Government, the State 
Apprenticeship Council. 
(2) Any reference in this Act or in the rules made thereunder to 
the Apprenticeship Adviser shall, unless the context otherwise re-
quires,- 2S 
(a) mean in relation to apprenticeship training in a desig-
nated trade in an establishment in relation to which the 
Central Government is the appropriate GoverDment, the Central 
Apprenticeship Adviser and in relation to apprenticeship training 
in a designated trade in an establishment in relation to which 
the State Government is the appropriate Government, the State 3-
Apprenticeship Adviser; 
(b) be deemed to include a Deputy or Assistant Apprentice-
ship Adviser performing the functions of the Apprenticeship 
Adviser assigned to him under sub-section (2) of section 27. 
Protection of 36. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
~ = any person for anything which is in good faith done or intendecl to 
filth. be done under this Act. 
3S 

19 of 18So. 
17 
37. (1) The Central Government may, after consulting the Power to 
Central Apprenticeship Council, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules. 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Rules made under this Act may provide that a contravention 
, of any such rule shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
fifty rupees. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which maybe comprised in 
10 one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of 
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, 
both Houses agree in making any· modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
I' case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
20 
30 
35 
38. The Apprentices Act, 1850 is hereby repealed. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 16) 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923 IN ITS 
APPLICATION TO APPRENTICES UNDER THE APPRENTICES ACT. 1961 
In the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923,-
(1) in section 2,-
(a) for clause (e), BubBtitute-
, (e) "employer" means an employer as deftned in the 
Apprentices Act, 1961, who has engaged one or more 
apprentices,'; 
(b) omit clause (k); 
(c) for clause (m), substitute-
'(m) "wages" means the stipend payable to an 
apprentice under section 13 (1) of the Apprentices Act, 
1961,'; 
(d) fOT clause (n), substitute-
'(n) "workman" means any person who' is engaged 
as an apprentice as defined in the Apprentices Act, 1961, 
and who in the course of his apprenticeship training is 
employed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule 
II:; 
Repeal. 

24; 
(2) omit section 12; 
(3) omit section 15; 
18 
(4) omit the proviso to section 21 (1); 
(5) omit the words "or a registered Trade Union" in section 
(6) omit clause (d) in section 30(1); 
(7) omit clauses (vi), (.xi), (xiii). (.rvii). (xviii), 
(.r.r) , (xxii), (xxiv), (xxv) and (.rxxii) in Schedule U. 
s 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The question of undertaking legislation for regulating the traininl 
ot apprentices in industry has been under the consideration of the 
Government for a long time. Expert Committees which went into 
t~ question have recommended such legislation. Although certain 
e~tablishments in the public and private sectors have been carrying 
out programmes of training of skilled workers on a systp.matic basis. 
industry in general has not as yet fully organised such programmes. 
In the context of the Five Year Plans amI the large scale industrial 
development of the country, there is an increasing demand for skined 
craftsmen. The Government consider that it is necessary fully to 
utilise the facilities available for the training of apprentices and to 
ensure their training in accordance with the programmes, standards 
and syllabi drawn up"by expert bodies. The Bill is intended togtve 
effect to these objects. . 
NDW DELHI; GULZARILAL NANDA. 
The 4th August, 1961. 
19 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The clauses of the bill involving expenditure ar.;! 8(6), 9, 10 and 
13. 
2. There will be two types of apprentices--(i) those who will 
undergo fuJl-Iength apprenticeship training; and (ii) those who have 
passed the trade tests conducted by the National Council for Train-
ing in Vocational Trades after undergoing the prescribed institutional 
training and have to undergo a further course of mort-term in-plant 
training for qualifying themselves for the grant of the National 
Trade Certificate. As "regards the first category, the total expen-
diture involved on the part of the Government will be about Rs. 164 
lakhs during the Third Plan Period. The liability of the Central 
Government will be about Rs. 98 lakhs and the balance will be met 
by the State Governments. Regarding the second category. there will 
be no additional expenditure as the trainees will continue to draw 
their normal stipends during the period of in-plant training the cost 
of which will be borne by the industrial units imparting the training. 
3. The existing National Apprenticeship Training Scheme which is 
being run on a voluntary basis would have cost the Central Govern-
ment Rs. 112 lakhs for an identical number of trainees, as against an 
expenditure of Rs. 98 lakhs expected to be incurred under the pro-
posed Scheme. 
~ .," . 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA'rED LEGISLATION 
Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules, after consulting the Central Apprenticeship CounciJ, for carry-
ing out the purposes of the Act. Such rules will be necessary for 
prescribing the forms of the records to be maintained by the em-
ployers and the returns to be submitted by them tmd for re~ting 
other matters of detail or procedure. Rules made under this clause 
may also provide that a contravention of any such rule shall be 
punishable with fine up to fifty rupees. 
The delegation of legislative power is of 1I normal. character. 
al : .. 
! ... 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION Act, 1923 
8 OF 1923 
• • • • • • • 
2. (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the DefinitioDl. 
subject or context,-
• • • • • • 
(e) "employer" includes any body of persons, whether 
incorporated or not and any managing agent of an employer· 
and the legal representative of a deceased employer, and, when 
the services of a workman are temporarily lent or let on hire 
to another person by the person with whom the workman has 
entered into a contract of service or apprenticeship, means 
such other person while the workman is working for him; 
• • • • • • 
(k) "seaman" means any person fanning part of the crew 
of any ship, but does net include the master of the ship; 
• • • • • • 
(m) "wages" includes any privilege or benefit which is cap-
able of being estimated in money, other than a travelling allow-
ance or the value of any travelling concession or a contribution 
paid by the employer of a workman towards any pension or pro-
vident fund or a sum paid to a workman to cover any speclal 
expenses entailed on him by the nature of his employment; 
(n) "workman" means any person (other than a person 
whose employment is of a casual nature and who is employed 
otherwise than for the purposes of the employer's trade or busi-
ness) who is-
(i) a railway servant as defined in section 3 of the Indian 
Railways Act, 1890, not permanently employed in any, of 1190. 
administrative, district or sub-divisional office of a railway 
and not employed in any such capacity as is specified in 
Schedule II, or 
(ii) employed on monthly wages not exceeding four 
hundred rupees, in any such capacity as is specified in Sche-
dule II, 
22 

23 
. whether the contract of employment was made before or after the 
passing of this Act and whether such contract is expressed or im-
plied, oral or in writing; but does not include any person .working 
in the capacity of a member of the Armed Forces of the Union; and 
any reference to a workman who has been injured shall, where 
the workman iii dead, include a reference to his dependants or any 
of them. 
• • • • • • 
12. (1) Where any person (hereinafter in this section referred to Conuac:tir. 
as the prfhcipal) in the course of or for the purpoaes of his trade or 
business contracts with any other person (hereinafter in this aect.ion 
referred to as the contractor) for the execution by or UDder the con-
tractor of the whole or any part of any work which is ordinarily part 
of the trade or business of the principal, the principal shall be liable 
to pay to any workman employed in the execution of the work any 
compensation which he would have been liable to pay if that workman 
had been immediately employed by him; and where compensation is 
claimed from the principal, this Act shall apply as if references to the 
principal were substituted for references to the employer except that 
the amount of compensation shall be calculated with reference to the 
wages of the workman under the employer by wh.cD he is immadfate. 
ly employed. 
(2) Where the principal is liable to pay compensation under thi. 
IeCtion, he shall be entitled to be indemnified by the contractor, 
or any other person from whom the workman could have re-
covered compensation and where a cantractor who is himself a 
principal is liable to pay compensation or to indemnify a principal 
under this section he shall be entitled to be indemn.ifled by any per .. 
IOn standing to him in the relation of a contractor from whom the 
workman could have recovered compensation and all questions 8S 
to the right to and the amount of any such indemnity shall, in 
default of agreement, be settled 'by the COMmissioner. 
(3) Nothing in this section shan be construed al preventing a. 
workman from recoverini compensation from the contractor instead 
of the principal. 
. (4) This section shall not apply in any case where the accident 
occurred elsewhere than on, in or about the premises on which the 
principal has undertaken or usually undertakes, as the case rna, 
be, to execute the work or which are otherwise under hill control or 
manaaement. . 
• • • • • • 

S~ial pro-
YlSlon relat-
ina to 
masters and 
seamen. 
~4 
15. This Act shall apply in the case of workmen who are masters 
of ships or seamen subject to the following modifications, namely:-
(1) The notice of the accident and the claim for compensa-
tion may, except where the person injured is the master of the 
ship, be served on the master of the ship as if he were the 
employer, but where the accident happened and the disablement 
commenced on board the ship, it shall not be necessary for any 
seaman to give any notice of the accident. 
(2) In the case of the death of a master or seaman, the 
claim for compensation shall be made within one year after 
the news of the death has been received by the claimant or, 
where the ship has been or is deemed to have been lost with 
all hands, within eighteen months of the date on which the ship 
was, or is deemed to have been, so lost: 
Provided that the Commissioner may entertain any claim 
to compensation in any case notwithstanding that the claim 
has not been preferred in due time as provided in this sub-
section, if he is satisfied that the failure so to prefer the claim 
was due to sufficient cause. 
(3) Where an injured master or seaman is discharged or 
. left behind in any part of India or His Majesty's dominions 
or in any other foreign country, any depositions taken by 
any Judge or Magistrate in that part or by any Consular Offi-
cer in the for,eign country and transmitted by the person by 
whom they are taken to the Central Government or any State 
Government shall, in any proceedings for enforcing the claim, 
be admissible in evidence-
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature 
of the Judge, Magistrate or Consular Officer before whom 
it is made; 
(b) if the defendant or the person accused, as the 
case may be, had an opportunity by himself or his agent 
to cross-examine the witness; and 
(c) if the deposition was made in the course of a 
crIminal proceeding, on proof that the deposition was made 
in the presence of the person accused; 
and it shall not be necessary in any case to prove the signa-
ture or ofticial character of the person appearing to have signed 
any such deposition and a certificate by such person that thl,' 
defendant or the person accused had an opportunity of cross-
examining the witness and that the deposition if made in a 

2 "3 Geo. 
6,c.83. 
• 
25 
criminal proceeding was made in the presence of the person 
accused shall, unless the contrary is proved, be sufficient evi-
dence that he had that opportunity and that it was so made. 
(4) No half-monthly payment shall be payable in respect 
of the period during which the owner of the ship is, under any 
law in force for the time being relating to merchant shipping, 
liable to defray the expenses of maintenance of the injured 
master or seaman. 
(5) No compensation shall be payable under this Act in 
respect of any injury in respect of which provision is made for 
payment of a gratuity, allowance or pension under the War 
Pensions and Detention Allowances (Mercantile Marine, etc.) 
Scheme, 1939, or the War Pensions and Detention Allowances 
(Indian Seamen. etc.) Scheme, 1941, made under the Pensions 
(Navy, Army, Air Force and Mercantile Marine) Act, 1939, or 
under the War Pensions and Detention Allowances (Indian 
Seamen) Scheme, 1942, made by the Central Government. 
(6) Failure to give a notice or make a claim or commence 
proceedings within the time required by this Act shall not be a 
bar to the maintenance of proceedings under this Act in respect 
of any personal injury. if-
• 
(a)lln application has been made for payment in res-
pect of that injury under any of the schemes referred to in 
the preceding clause, and . 
(b) the State Government certifies that the said 
application was made in the reasonable belief that the 
injury was one in respect of which the scheme under which 
the application was made makes provision for payments, and 
that the application was rejected or that payments made in 
pursuance of the application ,were discontinued on the 
ground that the injury was not such an injury, and . 
(c) the proceedings under this Act are commenced 
within one month from the date on which the said certificate 
of the State Government was furnished to the person 
commencing the proceedings. 
• • • • 
VeDl~e of 21. (1) Where any matter is under this Act to be done by or 
proceediOlS before a Commissioner, the same shall, subject to the provisions of 
and transfer. this Act and to any rules made hereunder, be done by or before 

26 
a Commissioner for the 1000.1 area in which the accident took 
place which resulted in the injury: 
Provided that. where Mle workman is the master of a ship or a 
seaman, any such matter may be done by or before a Commissioner 
for the local area in which the owner or agent of the ship resides 
or carries on business. 
.. .. .. .. .. 
24. Any appearance, application or act required to be made or 
done by any person before or to a Commissioner (other than an 
appearance of a party which is required for the purpose of his exa-
mination as' a witness) may be made or done on behalf of such 
person by a legal practitioner or by an official of an Insurance Com-
pany or a registered Trade Union or by an Inspector appointed under 
sub-section (1) of section 8 ot the Factories Act, 1948, or under sub- 63 of IML 
section (1) Qf section 5 of the Mines Act, 1952, or by any other 35o!I9,a. 
officer specified by the State Government in this behalf, authorised in 
writing by such person, or, with the permission of the Commissioner, 
by any other person so authorised. 
.. .. .. .. .. 
30. (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from the follow-
ing orders of a Commissioner, namely:-
(d) an order allowing or disallowing any claim for the 
amount of an indemnity under the provisions of sub-section (2) 
of section 12; or 
• .. .. .. .. 

.. 
• • • • • 
SCHEDULE n 
[See section 2 (1) (n).] 
Lm'r or PDSONS, WHO, SUBJ'ECT TO THE PROVISIONS or SECTION 2 (1) 
(n), AU INCLUDED IN THE DEl'INITION or WORKMEN· 
The following persons are workmen within the meaning of 
section 2 (1) (n) and subject to the provisions of that section, that 
is to say, any person who is-: 
• • • • • 
• 
(vi) employed as the master or as a seaman, oi-
(a) any ship which is propelled wholly or in part by 
steam or other mechanical power or by electricity or which 
is towed or intended to be towed by a ship so propelled; or 
(b) any ship not included in sub-clause (4), of twenty-
Ave tons net tonnage or over; or 
(c) any sea-going ship not included in sub-clause (4) 
or sub<lause (b) provided with sufficient area for naviga" 
tion under sails alone; or, 
• • • • 
(,ri) employed in the service of any fire brigade; or 
• • • • • 
(=ii) employed as an inspector, mail guard, sorter or van 
peon in the Railway Mail Service, or as a telegraphist or all a 
postal or railW\'iy signaller or employed in· any occupation ordi-
narily involving outdoor work in the Indian Posts and Telegraphs 
])epartment; or 
• • • • • 
(et1ii) employed in the operation ef any ferry boat capable 
of carrying more than ten persons; or i 
(~iii) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, on 
any estate which is maintained for the purpose of growing 
einehona, coffee, rubber or tea, and on which on anyone day 
27 

28 
in the preceding twelve months twenty-five. or more persons 
have been so employed; or 
• • • • • 
(xx) employed in a lighthouse as defined in cla~se (d) of 
section 2 of the Indian Lighthouse Act. 1927; or 17 of 1927. 
• • • • • • 
(xxii) employed in the training. keeping or working of 
elephants or wild animals; or ' 
• • • • • 
(xxiv) employed in operations for the catching or hunting 
of elephants or other wild animals; or 
(xxv) employed diver; or 
• • • • • 
(xxxii) employed in a circus. 
Ezplanation.-In this Schedule, "the preceding twelve months" 
relates in any particular case to the twelve months ending with the 
day on which the accident in sach case occurred . 
• • • • • 

tOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide. for the regulation and control or trainin~ of 
apprentices in trades and for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 111 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secr'tary. 
(Shri Gulzari/al Nanda, 
Minister of Labour and 
Bmplo;ymenr. ) 