2 6 NOV 19)) 
8W No. 1S .1 1"3 
THE UNIT TRUST OF INDIA BILL, 1963 
'I 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PULDlINAIlY 
1. Short title, exteat and commlllcem_t. 
2. DeftDitiOD.l. 
CHAPTER II 
E&TAIILlaHMJlNT OF TIm UNIT TRUST OF INDIA AIm '!'1m IlfITIAL CAPITAL 
THBREOF 
a. 
4. 
Establishment and incorporation 01. U.it Truat gf India. 
Initial capital of Trust. 
i. 
8. 
Maintenance of register of contributoriel. 
Issue of contribution certificatee. 
7. 
•• 
Rlaht of transfer of ctontribution certificate. in certain calM. 
Riahtl and liabilities of holder. of contributiOll certificate. . 
"I 
; 
9. Management. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGDUNT OF THJI TaUSII' 
10. Board of trustees. 
11. Term of office of trustees. 
12. Disqualiflcation for beine a trustee. 
13. Vacation and resignation of oftlce of trustee. 
a. Chairman and executive trustee. 
15. Casual vacancy in oftice of chairman 01' exentiye truaMe. 
16. Fees and allowances of certain trusteea. 
17. Meetings of Board. 
18. Executive Committee and other committees. 
. " 

(it) . 
CLAVIU • 
CHAPTER IV 
Powau AND FUNCTIONS OF TK. TRUST 
11. Busineas of Trult. 
20. Borrowing powers. 
21. Unit scheme. 
CHAPTER V 
ALLoCATIOK AND DISTRmUTIOK OF mCOKE 
22. Allocation of income, interest and other expenses. 
23. Distr\bution of income. 
24. Distribution of income aft£r refund of ,initial capital. 
25. Definition of year. 
<fHAPTER VI 
AcCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
!S.: Preparation of balance-sheet, etc., of Trust. 
27. Audit. 
28. Publication of annual accounts and reports. 
29. Furnishini of information to Reserve Bank. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
30. Power of Reserve Bank to give directions. 
31. Staft of Trust. 
32. Income-tax and other taxes. 
33.. Act 18 of 1891 to apply in relation to Trust. 
34. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy. 
35. Defects in appointments not to invalidatl! acts, etc. 
36. Indemnity of trustees. 
37. Protection of action taken under thiJI Act. 
," ., . 
38. Delegation of powen. 
39. No trust to ,be taken notice of and protection from attachment 
010. Repayment of contribution in case of' winding up of contri-
butinl inatitutton. 

(Ht) : 
CLAUillS • 
CHAPTER IV 
Pow_ AND FUNCTIONS OF TKa TltUiT 
II. Businell of Tru.t. 
20. Borrowing powers. 
21. Unit scheme. 
CHAl'TER V 
ALLoCATIOK AKD DISTRIBtJTIOK OF mCOME 
22. Allocation of income, interest and other expensea. 
23. Distr~bution of income. 
24. Distribution of income aft~r refund of ,initial capital. 
25. Definition of year. 
CfHAPTER VI 
AccotJNTS AND A tJDIT 
26.. Preparation of balance-sheet, etc., of Trust. 
27. Audit. 
28. Publication of annual accounts and reports. 
29. Furnishini of information to Reserve Bank. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
30. Power of Reserve Bank to give directiona. 
31. Staff of Trust. 
32. Income-tax and other taxes. 
33.. Act 18 of 1891 to apply in relation to Ttuit. 
34. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy. 
35. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc. 
36. Indemnity of trustees. 
37. Protection of action taken under thll Act. 
38. Delegation of powers. 
39. No trust to -be taken notice of and protection trom attachment. 
-iO. Repayment of contribution in case of winding up of contri-
butin, institution. 

LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE UNIT TRUST OF INDIA BILL, 1963 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 3, lines 4 and 5,-
!21: "official" ~ "Official" 
2. Page 8, line 30,-
for "at u re~ ... na8n 
3. Page 8, line 38,-
.!Q.r "trustee" read "member" 
4. Page 1_~, line 3~,­
~':~, or nominated" 
5. Page 21, line 1~,-
after "Statell insert IIBank" 
6. Page 23, line 19,-
~ - ~ 
for nC01'ltr~but1onSft ~ l~contributOr1esll. • '1,,_ 
7. Correct line numbers on pages 2, 3 and 4. 
NEW DELHI 
NovfiJp,ber 21. ~ 963 
Kartika 30, 1885 (Saka) 

(iii) 
CLAUSM 
41. Power of Central Government to reconstitute Board. 
42. Liquidation of Trust. 
43. Regulations. 
44. Amendment of certain enactment.. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.-DEcLARATION 0,. FlDII:LITY AND SECRECY. 
THE· SECOND SCHEDULE.-AMzNDMKN'l. or CERTAIN ENACTMDrI'I. 

J 
Ie 
BiU No. 45 011"3 
THE U NIT TRUST OF INDIA BILL, 1963 
BILL 
to pl'O'Vide lor the establilhment of a Corp01'ation with a view to 
encouraging saving and investment and pal'ticipation. in the 
iftCome, yrOfi,t3 and gain.a accruing to the Corporation. from the 
acqui3ition, holding, maru:zgement and diapOlal of 3ecuritie3. 
B. it eaacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
It.public of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short 
title. exteat 
and COIn-
meDea-
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- meni. 
ment may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Deftai-
. tio ••. (a) "Board" means the Board of trustees constItuted under 
section 10 or section 41; 
(b) "contributing institution" means an institution which is, 
for the dme being, a contributory to the initial capital of the 
Trust under section 4; 
• (c) "contribution certificate" means a certificate issued under 
lection 6; 
(d) "initial capital" means the capital of the Trust referred 
to in lection 4; 

2 
(e) "Life Insurance Corporation" means the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India established under the Life Insurance Cor-
poration Act, 1956; 
(1) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under 
this Act; 
. , 
31ol1DSI. 
(g) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India con-
stituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 2 of 1984. ' 
1 
(h) "scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being in- ~ 
cluded in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of. India 
Act, 1934; 10 2 of le34. 
(i) "securities" means shares, debentures, bonds and other 
stock of any company or other body corporate, whether incor-
porated in India or outside, ..and securities issued by any local 
authority in India, or by the Government of, or a local au-
thority in, any Buch country outside India as may be approved. IS 
by the Reserve Bank and includes Government security as defi-
ned in section.2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944, but does not in- 18 of 1M4. 
elude mortgagee on immovable property; 
(n "State Bank" means the State Bank of India constituted 
under the State Bank of India Act, 1~; 20 23 of li5 •. 
(k) "subsidiary bank" has the same meaning as in section 2 
of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959; 
(l) "Trust" means the Unit Trust of India established under 
tlection 3; 
(m) "trustee" means a trustee appointed, nominated or 2S 
elected uJider section 10 or section "I' , 
(n) "unit" means a unit issued under the unit sclteme' , 
(0) "unit capital" means the aggregate of the face value 
of the units sold under t.he unit scheme and outstanding for the 
time being; 30 
( ) " 't ..6_ t" • P lint ce.l.'uuca e means a certiftcate j!lC:u~.i to the pur-
chaser of a unit under the unit sch~e' , 
. (q) "unit holder" meens a person for the time being" recog-
nIsed by the Trust as the holder of a unit certificate under the 
unit scheme; 
(r) "unit scheme" means a schemt made undi!r section 21. 
3S 
38 of 195 •. 

) 
CHAPTER II 
ESTIUILISHMBNT 01' THE UNIT TRUST OF INDlA Am> TIlE DfmAL CAPITAL 
THEREOF 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in ~he om- Estlabliah· 
5 cial Gazette establish a Corporation by the name of the Urut Trust ment and , . I' IncorpO-
of India which shall be a body corporate havmg perpet~~ SUCCessl~ ration of 
and a common seal with power, subject to the proVlslOns of this Unit Trust 
Act, to acquire, hold or dispose of property and to contract, and may, of India. 
by the said name, sue or be sued. 
10 (2) The head office of the Trust shall be at Bombay or at SUCh 
other place as the Reserve Bank may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, specify. 
(3) The Trust may establish local offices, branches or aJenciel 
at any places in or outside India. 
IS 4. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the initial capital of Initial 
the Trust shall be five crores of rupees divided in the form of certi- cTaPital r ... at. 
fieates each of which shall be of such face value as may be pres-
cribed and contributed in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(2) Before such date as the Central Gove,nment may, by notift-
20 cation in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf-
2S 
(a) the Reserve Bank shall contribute two and a half crores 
of rupees; 
(b) the Life Insurance Corporation shall contribute seventy-
five lakhs of rupees; 
(c) the State Bank and the subsidiary banks shall contri-
bute seventy-five lakhs of rupees, the amount which the State 
Bank and each subsidiary bank shall contribute being deter-
mined by the State Bank; 
(d) other instit?tions, namely, scheduled banks other than 
those referred to in clause (c) and such cklsses of financial ins-
titutions as may be notified by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette in this behalf may contribute one crore of' rupe~. 
(3) If the aggregate of the contributions made by the institu-
tions referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (2) exceeds one crore 
3S of rupees, the Board shall refund the excess amount to such institu-
.r 

Mainten-
ance of 
reeilterot 
contribu-
tonal. 
keue of 
contribu-
'ion certi-
ftoate •. 
" tiona, 80 however, that the amount to be refunded to each mCA 
institution bears, as far as possible, the same proportion to tke 
contribution made by it as the excess amount bean to the li,re-
,ate of the contributions made by Iluch institutions. 
(4) If the aggregate of the contributions made by the institu- S 
tions referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (2) is less than ooe 
crore of rupees, the Reserve Bank &hall contribute the deficiency 
within thirty days of the date specified under 8ub-eection (2): 
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, thereafter, transfer the 
whole or any part of its contribution under this aub-section to Iny Ie 
institution referred to in clause (d) of lub-section (2). 
(5) If at any time the Board is of opinion that th'e amount of the 
initial capital is in excess of the requirements of the Trust, it may 
refund the whole or any part of such capital to the contributine ins-
titutions: 
Provided that where only a part is so refunded the amount to be 
refunded to each iuch institution shall bear, as far as possible, the 
same proportion to the contribution made by it as such part bears to 
the initial capital: 
IS 
Provided further tha~ fOf' the purpose of any refund, the valUAt of 2. 
the initial capital shall be determined by the Board on such basis as 
the Central Goverrunent may specify in this behalf, regard beine had 
to the real or exchangea,ble value thereof. 
5. The Board shall maintain in such manner as may be prescribed 
a register containing the names of the contributing institutions, the 2S 
amount contributed by each .uch institution and such other parti-
culars as may be prescribed. 
8. (1) As soon as may be after the contribution has been made by 
any contributing institution under section ~, the Board &hall issue to 
such contributing institution a contribution certificate or contribu- 1-
tion certificates in such form and containing such particulars as may 
be prescribed. 
(2) Where the whole or any part of the contribution has been 
refunded to any institution under sub-section (5) of section 4, that 
institution shall, as &oon as may be after the refund has been made, is 
forward the contribution certificate or certificates to the Board for 
cancellation or amendment, as the case may be, and the Board shall 
cancel or amend the certificate or certificates accordingly. 

S 
'I. (1) Any contributing institution referred to in clause (d) of Rilhtof 
sub-section (2) of section 4 may, in the prescribed manner, transfer a traDlfer 
contribution certificate to any .other institution referred to in that of eontri-
clause and thereupon such other institution shall ,be deemed to be a b~on 
5 contributing institution for the purposes of this Act. :ca~ in 
(2) Save as provided :in sub-section (1), a contribution certificate certaiB 
shall not be transferred. cases. 
8. Every holder of a contribution certificate shall have all the Ri'h~ 
rights and be subject to all the liabilities conferred or imposed on a :~18.~i-
10 contributing institution by or under this Act. holders 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE TRUST 
ofcontri-
button 
certi-
ftcatett. 
9. (1) The general superinten~nce, direction and management of Man .... 
the affairs and ,business of the Trust shall vest in a Board of trustees ment. 
IS which may exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may 
be exercised or done by the Trust. 
20 
30 
(2) The Board shall, in discharging its functions under this Act, 
act on business principles, regard being had to the interest of the 
unit holders. 
10. The Board of trustees shall consist of the following, namely:- Board 01. 
trusteea. 
(a) the Chairman to be appointed by the Reserve Bank; 
(b) four trustees to be nominated by the Reserve Bank. of 
whom not less than three shall be persons having special know-
ledge, of, or ex~ence ,in, commerce, industry, banking, finance 
or investment; 
(c) one trustee to be nominated by the Life Insurance Cor-
poration; 
(d) one trustee to be nominated by the State Bank; 
(e) two trustees to be elected in the prescribed manner by 
the contributing institutions referred to in clause (d) of sub-
section (2) of section 4; and 
(/) an executive trustee to be appointed by the Reserve 
Bank: 
, 
Provided that if the appointment ef the Chairman is whole-time, 
35 it shall not be necessary to appoint an executive trustee: 
Provided further that on the first constitution of the Board, the 
trustees referred to in clause (e) shall be nominated by the Reserve 

Term of 
ofttce'of 
trustees. 
Disquali-
fication 
for being 
a trustee. 
6 
Bank and shan hold office for a period of twelve months from the 
. dcite of their nomination or until two trustees are elected under the 
said clause, whichever may be earlier. . 
11. (1) A trustee nominated under clause (b) of seCtion 10, if he 
is an bft\cer of the 'Reserve Ban"k, or a trustee . nominated linder 5 
clause (c) or clause (d) of that section shall hold office dUring the 
pleasure of the authority nominating him. 
(2) A trustee nOininated under clause (b) of sec:tion 10, if he is 
not an officer of the Reserve Bank, or a trustee elected 'under 
clause (e) of that section shall hold office for four years and there- 10 
after until his successor is duly nominated or elected. 
(3) A casual vacancy in the office of a trustee referred to in sub-
section (2) or in the office of a t~stee nominated under the second 
proviso to section 10 shall be filled by election or nomination, as the 
. case may be, and the trustee so elected or nominated shall hold office 15 
for the unexpired portion of the term of his predecessor: 
Provided that no such vacancy occurring within three months of 
the date of the expiry of the normal term of office of such trustee 
need be filled ~der this sub-section. 
(4) A trustee nominated under the second proviso to section 10 or 20 
a trustee nominated in his place under sub-section (3) of this section 
shall be deemed to be a trustee elected under clause (e) of section 
10. 
(5) A person who holds, or who has held, office as a trustee s~an, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act, De eligible for re-nomma- 25 
tion or re-election, as the case may be. 
12. A person shall not be capable of being nominated or elected as 
a trustee if-
(a) he is, except in the caSe of the Chairman or the execu-
tive trustee, an officer or other employee of the Trust; or 30 
(b) he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent 
or has suspenaed paYment of his debts or has compoUnded with 
his creditors; or 
• (c) he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by' a com-
petent court; or 35 
(d)' he has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion 
of the Reserve Bank, involves moral turpitude. 

7 
13. (1) If a trustee- VjlClWm>-
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications menU on- andti;~~ . . ' ' na on 01 ed m section 12; or oftlee of 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board from more than trustee. 
S three consecutive meetings thereof; or 
(c) being a trustee elected or deemed to be elected under 
clause (e) of section 10 becomes an officer or other employee of 
Government or of the Reserve Bank, State Bank, a subsidiary 
bank or the Trust, 
10 his office shall thereupon become vacant. 
(2) A trustee nominated under claUse (b) of section 10 who i$ not 
811 officer of the Reserve Bank or a trustee elect~ or deemed to be 
elected under clause (e) of that section may by letter addressed to 
the Board resign his office and on such resignation b~g accepted by 
IS the Board shall be deemed to have vacated his office. 
14. (1) The appointment of a Chairman or of an executiv:e t~tee ~~ 
may be either whole-time or part-time: . ~~ .. 
Provided that if the appointment of the Chairman i!l part-time, trustef,. 
the appointment of the executive trustee shall be whole-time. 
zo (2) The Chairman or the executive trustee shall-
(a) hold office for such term not exceeding five years as the 
Reserve Bank may sp~ify; 
(b) receive such salary or allowances or both fr.om the 1'rU,$t 
and be governed by such terms and conditions of service as the 
2S Reserve Bank may determine; and 
(e) perform such functions as the Board may entrust or 
delegate to him. 
15. If the Chairman, or the executive trustee is by infirmity or Casual 
otherwise rendefed incapable of carrying out his duties or i~ absent :c::,:: 
30 on leave or otherwise, in circumstances not involving the vacation of of chair-
his appointment, the Reserve Bank may nominate another person to man or 
act in his place until the date on which the Chairman or the execu- executive 
tive trustee, as the case may be, resumes his duties. trustee. 
16. 'Trustees, other than the Chairman and the executiv.e trustee, P'eesand .' , ... allow-35 shall be paId such fees and allowances for attendin~ the meetings of ancell of 
the Board or of any of its committees and for attending to any other cettaln 
work of the Trust, as may be prescribed: trustees. 
Provided that no fees f:ih,all be payable to a trustee who is an 
o:(Rcer of Government or of any corporation established by any law 
40 for the time being in force. 

lleetinp 
of Board. 
becutive 
Commit-
tee aDd 
ether . 
COID-
mltteel. 
8 
17. (1) The Board shall meet not less than six times a year and at 
least once every two months and dhall observe such rules of proce-
dure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may 
be prescribed. 
(2) The Chairman, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any S 
meeting of the Board, any other trustee nominated by him in this 
behalf or, jn the event of such nominated trustee also being unable to 
attend the meeting or no such nomination having been made by the 
Chairman, any other trustee elected by the trustees present at the 
meeting from among themselves, shall preside at the meeting. 10 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board 
shall be decided by a majority of votes of the trustees present and 
voting, and, in the event of equality of votes, the Chairman or, in his 
absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. 
18. (1) There shall be an Executive Committee which shall con- IS 
list of-
(a) the Chairman of the Board, 
(b) where an executive trustee has been appointed by the 
Reserve Bank, such executive trustee, and 
(c) two other trustees nominated in this behalf by the 20 
Reserve Bank. 
(2) The Chairman of the Board shall be the Chairman of the 
Executive Committee. 
(3) Subject to such general or special directions as the Board may, .... 
from time to time, give the Executive Committee shall be competent 25 
to deal with any matter within the competence of the Board. 
(4) The Board may constitute such other committees whether 
consisting wholly of trustees or wholly of other ~sons or partly of 
trustees and partly of other persons as it thinks fit and for such pur-
pose at it may decide. 30 
(5) The Executive Committee or any other committee constituted 
under this section shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction pf busi-
ness at its meetings as may be prescribed. 
(6) The members of a committee (other than the trustees) shall 35 
be paid sucn fees and allowances for attending its meetings and for 
attending to any other work of the Trust, as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no fees shall be payable to a trustee who is an 
ofBcer of Government or of any corporation established by any law 
for the time being in force. 40 

.... po ,. ••. ~, •• I : , ...... "' ..... 
9 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE TRUST 
It. (1) The Trust may carry on aI,ld transact any of the follow- Businell 
Ing kinds of business, namely: _ of Trust. 
5 (a) selling and purchasing units; 
, (b) investing in, acquiring, holding or disposing of, securi-
ties and exercising and enforcing all powers end rights incidental 
thereto; .. 
(e) keeping money on deposit with scheduled banks or 
10 with such other institutions as may be prescribed; 
(d) generally, doing all such matters and things as may be 
incidental to or consequential upon the discharge of its functions 
under this Act. 
(2) The Trust shall not take on lease, purchase or otherwise 
• IS acquire except for its own use any immovable property or any 
interest therein. 
20. (1) The Trust may borrow from any authority or person, not Borrow-
being Government or the Reserve Bank, against such security and in, 
on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon. powers. 
20 (2) The Trust may borrow money from the Reserve Bank repay-
able on demand or on the expiry of a fixed period not exceeding 
ninety days from the date on which the money is so borrowed against 
stocks, funds and securities (other than immovable property) in 
which a trustee is authorised to invest trust m:oney by any law for 
25 the time being in force in India. 
(3) If the Board is of opinion that a situation has arisen in which 
it is necessary or expedient for the Trust to borrow money from the 
Reserve Bank against securities other thian those mentioned in sub-
section (2), the Trust may borrow money from that bank repayable 
30 on demand or within a period not exceedin~ eighteen months from 
the date on which the money is so borrowed against its own bonds 
which the Trust may issue with the approval of the Central Govern-
m~ , . 
, (4) The bonds issued by the Trust under sub-section (3) shall be 
35 llUaranteed by the Central Governinent as to the repayment of prin-
cipal and the payment of interest at.such rate as may be fixed by the 
Central Government at the time the bonds are issued. 
: 21. (1) For the purpose of providing facilities for participation lfnit 
:I! in the income, profits and gains arising out of the acquisition, holding, scheme. 

, 
10 
management or disposal of securities by the Trust, the Board shan 
make a unit scheme. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and the reguletions 
made under section 43, a scheme made under sub-section (1) may 
provide for- S 
(0.) the issue of units and the face value of each unit, which 
shall not be less than ten rupees or more than one hundred 
rupees; 
(b) the fonn and manner in ~hich an . application may be 
made for the- purahese of a unit from the Trust; 10 
(c) the manner in which payment may be made for pur-
chasing a unit from the Trust; 
(d) the issue of unit certificates and the fonn and manner 
in which such certiftcates may be issued; 
(e) the issue of duplicate of any unit certificate in the eveJlt IS 
of loss or destruction of the original and the fee on the payment 
of which such duplicate may be issued; 
(f> the procedure for determining the value at which the 
units may be sold or purchased, from time to time, by the Trust; 
(g) the recognition of persons as unit holders; 
(h) the persons to whom, the time at which and the man-
ner in which any payments in respect of a unit shall be made 
by the Trust; 
(i) the preparation and maintenance of a register, if e.ny, 
20 
of unIt holders; 2S 
(;) the conditions, if any, subject to which a unit holder 
may transfer the unit; 
(k) any ather matter which the Trust -may aonsider to be 
necessary or proper for the effective implementation of the 
scheme. . 3 0 
(8) The Board may, from time to time, add to or otherwise amend 
the scheme made under sub-section. (1). 
(4) The scheme made under sub-section. (1) and every amend-
ment thereof under sub-section (3) shall be notified in the amelal 
~e. 3S 

n. 
CHAPI'ER V 
ALLOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME 
22. (1) The total gross income of ·the Trust in any year shall.be Alloca-
allocated to the initial capital and the unit capital in thesame.pro- tionof 
5 portion as the Iformer bears' to the latter at the end of toot year. :~;::i 
(2) The interest payable for any year for any borrowings made :!:: 
by the Trust and the total amount of other expenses incurred by . 
the Trust in that year shall 'be allocated and charged to the initiel 
capital and the unit capital in the same proportion as' is referred to 
10 in sub-section (1): 
Provided that if the amount of expenses other than interest allo-
cated to the unit capi1W is more than five per cent. of the gross 
income allocated to the unit capital in that year, only an amount 
equal to such five per cent. shall be charged to the unit capital and 
IS the rest of .the total amount of expenses other than interest shall 
be charged to the initial capital. 
23. (1) The gross income allocated to the initial capital in any Distrlbu-
year reduced by the interest and the amount of other expenses tion of 
charged for that year to the initial capital maybe distributed in income. 
the prescribed manner among the contributing institutions in pro-
20 portion to their contribUtions to the initial capital. 
(2) The gross income allocated to the unit capital in any year 
reduced by the interest and the amount of other expenses charged 
for that year to the unit capital may, but not less than ninety per 
2S cent. of the gross income so reduced shall, be distributed to the unit 
holders in respect of that year. 
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 22 or se!lion..23, Distribu-
where the wJ101e of the initiW. capital has ,been refunded to the con- tion of 
tributing institUtions, the gross income in any year reduced by the income 
30 interest payable for that year for any 'borrowings made by the Trust after 
and the total amount of other expenses incurred by the Trust in that ~~~ 1 
year may, but not less than ninety per cent. of .the gross income ~aPit':.~ 
so reduced shall, be distributed to the unit holders in respect of that 
year. 
3S 25. In this Chapter "year" memlS the period in respect of which Deftnition 
the books and accounts of the Trust are balanced and closed under of ,.ear. 
sub-section(2) of section 26. 

Prepara-
tion of 
balance-
.heet, 
etc., of 
Trust. 
Audit. 
CHAPTER VI 
AcCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
26. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Trust shall be pre-
pared and maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Trust S 
to 'be balanced and clOsed each year as on such date as may be 
prescribed. 
27. (1) Thi affairs of the Trust shall be audited. by an auditor 
. duly qualified to act as an auditor under sub-section (1) of section 
226 of the Companies Act, 1956, who shell be appointed by the Trust 10 1 of 1958. 
and shall receive such remuneration as the Trust may fix. 
(2) The auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual 
balance-sheet of the Trust and it shall be his duty to examine it 
together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto.and he sball 
have a list delivered to him of all ,books kept by the Trust and Shall IS 
at all reasonable times have access to the books, accounts, vouchers 
and other docwnents of the Trust. 
(3) The auditor may, in relation to such accounts, examine any 
trustee or any officer -or other employee of the Trust and shall be 
entitled to require from the Board or officers or other employees of 20 
the Trust such information and explanation as he may think neces-
sary for the performance of his duties. 
(4) The auditor shall make a report to the Trust upon the annUBl 
balance-sheet and accounts examined by him and in every such 
report he shall state whether in his opinion the balance-sheet is a 25 
full and fair balance-sheet containing all necessary particulars and 
properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the state 
of affait's of the Trust and in case he had called for any information 
or explanation from the Board. or any officer or other employee of 
the Trust, whether it has been given and whether it is· satisfactory. 30 
Publication 28. The TruSt shall furnish to each of the contributing institutions 
~:f:D~:land within four months from the date on which its accounts are balanced 
~ parta. and closed in respect of any year a copy of the balance-sheet and 
Fumish~ 
of informa-
tion to Re-
aerve Bank. 
accounts together with a copy of the auditor's report and shall pub.-
lish the same in the Official Gazette. 35 
29. The Trust shall furnish, from time to time, to the Reserve 
Bank such information as the Reserve Bank may require. 

13 
CHAPTER VII 
. MISCELLANEOUS 
.·30. In .the discharge of its functions under this Mt, the Trust Powerof 
. shall ·be guided by such directions in matters of policy involving Reserve 
S public interest as the Reserve Bank may give to it in writing, and if :ank to 
a~y I q1,le&tion "rises whether the direction relates to tEL mat~er ,of policy c:ti;:niODS. 
inYQlv.ipg, public, interest, the decision of the. R~erve &mktbe.reon 
shall be final. 
.81. (1) The Trust may appoint such nwnber of officers and other Staft of 
10 employe~ as it considers necessary or desirahle for the efficient per- Truit. 
fo.rmance of its functions and determine the ~erms ,and conditions of 
their ,apPPintment ,and service. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), it 
shall be lawful for the Trust to utilise, and for the Reserve Bank to 
IS ~e available, the services of such staff of the Reserve Bank on 
such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between ~he ~ 
and the Reserve Bank. 
a oUMt. 32. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Income-
14 of 1983. Act, 1961, the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963, or in any other enactm,cnt . tax aDd 
14 of 1963. 
20 for, ~he time being in force relating to income-tax, super-tax or super' other 
profits tax, or any other tax on income, profits or gains- 'taxes . 
. (a) the Trust shall not be liable to pay income-tax, super-
. tax, super profits tax or any other tax in respect of any income, 
,Profits or gains derived by it from any source;. . . 
25 (b) where the income received by a unit holder, being an in-
dividual, from the Trust in respect of units does not exceed one 
thousand rupees, such income, and where such income exceeds 
one thousand rupees, a sum of one thousand rupees, shall be 
excluded in computing the total income of the unit holder for 
30 . ,purposes of income-tax but not of super-tax; and 
35 
(c) where a contributing institution is liable to be ~essed 
to super profits tax under the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963, in res-
pect of its own income, profits or gains and receives I;llly :>um 
from the Trust under this Act in respect of its contribution to 
the initial capital, such sum as reduCed by the amount of any 
income-tax and super-tax payable ,in respect thereof shall be 
exc~uded from the total income of the said institution in compu-
ting its chargeable profits far the purposes of super profits tax. 

Act 18 of 
1881 to 
apply in 
relation 
to Trust. 
Declara-
tion of 
fidelity 
and 
secrecy. 
Defects 
in ap-
point-
menta 
not to 
invalidate 
acts, etc. 
Indemni-
tyof 
trustees. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 193 or section 
194 of the I.Qcome-tax Act, 1961-
(a) no deduction of income-tax or super-tax shan be made 
on any interest or dividend payable to the Trust in respect of 
any securities or shares. owned by it or in which it has full bene- S 
ftcial interest; and 
I 
f8 of 1981. 
(b) no deduction of income-tax shall be made by the Trust 
from the income distributed by it to a unit holder being an in-
dividual. 43 0fI 96L 
(3) Su·bject to the foregoing sub-sections, for the purposes of the 10 
Income-tax Act, 1961,-
(a) any distribution of income received by a unit holder 
from the Trust shall be deemed to be his income by way of divi-
dends; and 
(b) the Trust Ish all be deemed to be a company. IS 
33. The . Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 shall apply in relation 
to the Trust as if it were a hank as defined in section 2 of the said 
Act. 
34. Every trustee, auditor, officer or other employee of the Trust 
or any employee of the Reserve Bank whose services are utilised by 20 
the Trust under section 31 shall, before entering upon his duties, 
make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the 
First Schedule to this Act. 
35. (1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of any committee of 
. the Trust shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence 25 
ot any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution 'of, the Board or com-
mittee. '. 
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a trustee ; 
shall be deemed to be invalid merely on the ground that he was dis-
qualified to be a trustee or that there was any other defect in his 30 
appointment. 
36. (1) Every trustee shall be indemnified by the Trust against 
all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the dis-
charge of his duties except such as are caused by his own wilful act 
or default. 3S 
(2) A trustee of the Board shall not be responsible for any other 
trustee, or for any officer or other employee of the Trust, or for any 
loss or expenses resulting to the Trust, from the insufficiency or de-
ficiency of value of or title to any property or security acquired or 
taken on behalf of the Trust or the insolvency or wrongful act of any 40 
debtor or any person under obligation to the Trustor anything done 

IS 
in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation 
thereto. 
37. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Trust or Protec-
the Reserve Bank or any trustee or any officer or other employee of tiOD of 
S the Trust or the Reserve Bank or any other person authorised by the :c:on 
Trust to discharge any functions under this Act for any damage U~d:~ 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done this Act. 
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act. 
38. The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to any Delega-
10 officer of the Trust, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, tion of 
as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and duties under powers. 
this Act as it may deem necessary. . 
39. (1) No notice of a trust, express, implied or constructive, shall No trust 
be receivable by the Trust. to be 
ta'ken . 
IS (2) The amount standing to the credit of a contributing institu- notice of 
tion shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of and.pro-
any court in respect of any debt or liability incurred by the contribu- ;:~O~t_ 
ting institution. tachment. 
40. (1) In the event of a contributing institution referred to in IWpay-
20 clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 4 being wound up, the Trust ment 
shall, on a demand in that behalf made by the authorit! in charge of ~~:~1~ 
the winding up, pay to such authority an amount eqUIValent to the case of 
value of the contribution to the initial capital made by that institu- winding 
tion. ' up of CeIl-
tributin, 
2S (2) The value of the contribution shall De de~erllliJ'rd by t.he institu-
Board on such basis as the Central Government lIlay specify, re~ard tie. 
being had to the real or exchangeable value of 8u.h centributiMl. 
41. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10 or sec- Powerof 
tion 11, where the whole of the initial capital has been refunded to Central 
30 the contributing institutions, the Central Government may, after Govern-
consultation with the Reserve Bank, by order, provide for the ment tti~ . reams -reconstitutIon of the Board. tute 
(2) An order made under sub-section (1) may provide for all or Board. 
any of the following matters, namely;-
3S (a) the number of trustees that will constitute the Board; 
(b) the manner in which they shall be cho~en, or nominated; 
(c) their term of office; 
(d) filling of casu~t ~acancies; J. 

Liquida-
tion of 
Trust. 
Relula-
Uolll. 
.. 
16 
(e) such incidental, consequential and supplementary mat .. 
ters as may be necessary to give effect to the order including the 
reconstitution of the executive committee or other committees. 
(3) Every order made under this section shall be published in 
the Official Gazette and a copy thereof shall be laid before each S 
House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made. 
U. (1) The Trust shall not be plaC'ed in liquidation save by order 
of the Central Government and in such manner as it may direct; 
(2) In making such order, the Central Government shall, if the 
initial capital has not been wholly refunded, direct, among other 10 
things, that-
(i) the value of the net assets of the Trust after paying oft 
all its liabilities, other than those in :respect of the initial capital 
and the unit capital shall be divided into two parts in the same 
proportion as the aggregate face value of all the units immediate- IS 
ly prior to the date on which the Trust is placed in liquidation 
bears to the initial capital as on that date; and 
(ii) the first part shall be distributed among the contribut-
ing institutions in proportion to their respective contributions 
to, the initial capital as on that date and the second part shall 20 
be distributed among the unit holders in proportion to the face 
value of the units he~d by them as on that date. 
43. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Reserve 
Bank, make regulatiOns not inconsistent with this Act to provide 
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the 2$ 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing po~r, such regulations may provide for-
(a) the form and manner of maintenance of the register of 
contributing institutions and the particulars to be contained 30 
~~.; , 
(b) the face value of a contribution certificate, its form ahd" 
the particulars to be contained therein; 
(e) the manner of transfer of a contribution certificate; 
(d) the rights and liabilities of a contributing institution; 
(e) the holding and conduct of elections under this Act, in-
cluding the final deciSion on doubts or disputes regarding the 
validity of elections; 
(f) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the trustees; 
3S 

11 
(9) the times and places of the meetings of the Board or of 
any committee constituted under this Act and the procedure to 
be followed at such meetings including the quorum necessary for 
the transaction of business; 
S (h) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the mem-
bers of a committee, other than trustees; 
(i) the institutions with which money may be kept on de-
posit; 
(;) the manner of distribution of income to the' contributing 
10 institutions; 
(k) the form and manner in which the balance-sheet and 
the accounts of the Trust shall be prepared and maintained; 
(1) the date on which the books of ae-counts of the Trust shall 
be balanced and closed' each year; 
IS ,(m) the duties and conduct, salaries and allowances, and 
other conditions of service of officers a,nd other employees of the 
Trust; 
(n) the establishment andmainrenance of provident or other 
benefit funds for officers and other employees of the Trust; llnd 
20 (0) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Any regulation which may be made by th~ Board under this 
Act may be made by the Reserve Bank within three months of the 
-establishment of the Trust/and any regulation so made may be altered 
or rescinded by the 'B'oard in the exercise of its powers under this Act. 
2, 44. ,~he enactments specified in the Second Schedule to this Act Amend-
shall be amended in the manner provided therein. m.ent of 
certain 
enact-
ments. 

Amend. 
mentol 
section 2. 
Amend· 
mentof 
lection 17. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 34) 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY 
I do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of 
my skill and ability execute and perform the duties required of me as 5 
trustee, auditor, officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the 
Unit Trust of India and which properly relate to the office or position 
held by me in the said Trust. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be com· 
municated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information 10 
relating to the affairs of the Unit Trust of India or to the affairs of 
any person having any dealing with the said Trust; nor will I allow 
any such person to inspect or have access to any books or documents 
belonging to or in the possession of the Unit Trust of India and relat. 
ing to the business of the said Trust or the business of any person 15 
having any dealing with the said Trust. 
Signed before me: (Signature) 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 44) 
AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMENTS 
PART I 
AMENDMENTS TO '11IE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 
(2 OF 1934) 
Amendments 
... 20 
1. In section 2, after clause (1), insert the following clause, 
namely:-
" (g) "Unit Trust" means the Unit. Trust of India established 
under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963.'. 
Z. In section 17,- 30 
(a) after Clause (4BB) , insert the following clause, namely:-
"(4BBB) the making to the Unit Trust of loans and 
advancer-
(i) repayable on demand or on the expiry of a 
fixed period not exceeding ninety days from the date of 35 
18 

5 
10 
IS 
!such loan or advance against the security of stocks, 
(unds and securities (other than immovable property) 
in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust money 
by any law for the time being in force in India, or 
(ii) repayable on demand or within a period of 
eighteen months from the date of such loan or advance 
against the security of the bonds of the Unit Trust 
issued with t~ approval of and guaranteed by the 
Central Government;"; 
(b) aft~r clause (4E), insert the following clause, namely:-
" (4F) contributing to the initial capital of the Unit 
Trust.". 
PART II 
AMENDMENT TO THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
Amendment 
In section 2, in sub-clause (i) of clause (a), after "Deposit Insur- Amend-
ance Corporation Act, 1961 or" insert the following, namely: - ment of 
"the Unit Trust of India established under section 3 of the Unit section 2. 
20 Trust of India Act, 1963, or". 
PART III 
AMENDMENT TO THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1948 
(15 OF 1948) Substitu--
tion of 
Amendment new sec-
tion fOr 
25 For section 20, substitute the following, namely:- section 20. 
"20. The Corporation may invest its funds in the securities of the Investment 
of funds. Central Government or of any State Government and may, with the 
approval of the Central Government, contribute to the initial capital 
of th~ Unit Trust of India established under the Unit Trust of India 
30 Act, 1963.". 
PART IV 
AMENDMENT TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955 
(23 OF 1955) 
Amendment 
In section 33, after clause (xix a), insert the following clause, Amend-
- 35 namely:-' ment of 
"(' ) t:r'b t' t th . . . 1 . section 33. XtX aa con' 1 u mg 0 e lrutla capltal of the Unit Trust 
of India established under the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963;". 

-·STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND ,REASONS 
The question of establishing an institution in the public sector for 
earryingon the business which is transacted by unit trusts or mutual 
funds in other countries has been under consideration for some time. 
It is now proposed to establish such an institution, to be known as 
the' Unit 'l'rust of India, w:th an initial capital of five crores of 
rupees. The Unit Trust of India will encourage savings by provid-
ing for various classes of investors the. facility of jnvest,ing their 
money in units of the Trust. The Trust will invest the, initial capital 
and the capital obtained by the sale of units in shares "and other 
securities and will distribute every year not less than ninety per cent. 
of the net income accruing to, the. unit-holders. It is expected that 
the risk of .losses or of depr~ci&tion on accqunt of the inv~tIllents will 
be reduced or eliminated, as a result, of the proposed arrangement. 
The Trust will also be in a position to contribute, through its opera-
tions, to the growth and diversification of the country's economy. 
2. The variQus provisions of the. Bill are explained in .detail .in the 
. notes on clauses. 
NEW DELHI; T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
The 14th November, 1963. 
PR~IDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNI?ER -ARTJ<fL.ES 1l7~D 
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.7/8Oj~i,Aated the 19th November, 1963 
from Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the Secre-
tary, Lok Sabba]. 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Unit Trust of India Bill, 1963, recommends the introduc-
tion of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under clause (1) of article 117 and 
clause (1) of article 274 and its consideration under clause (8) of 
article 117 of the Constitution. 
20 

Not" on cIa"", 
Clause 3 provides for the establishment of the TrwIt. Its head 
oflice will be at Bombay, but provision bas been made in ~e Bill 
for the transfer of the head office to any other place, if this is later 
on found to be convenient, and also for the establishment of such 
branch oflicea or agencies as may be necessary. 
Clause 4 provides for the obligations of the Reserve Bank and 
other institutions which will be contributing to the initial capital of 
the trust. The Reserve Bank will be required to contribute Rs. 2' 5 
crores, the Life Insurance Corporation Rs. 75 lakhs and the State 
of India and its subsidiaries a further sum of Rs. 75 lakhs. A sum 
of Rs. 4 crores out of the total initial capital of Rs. 5 crores will 
thus be contributed by institutions in the public sector. The balance 
of Rs. 1 crore will be offered to scheduled banks in the private 
sector or other financial institutions, which may be willing to 
become contributories, but if the actual contributions fall short of 
the sum of Rs. 1 crore earmarked for this purpose, the defiCiency 
will be made good by the Reserve Bank. The· special contribution, 
if any, which may be made by the Reserve Bank in the first instance, 
for making up any deficiency in the contributions by the institu-
tions in the residuary category, may, if necessary, be transferred to 
these institutions at any later stage. 
The initial contributions in all cases can be refunded at the option 
of the Trust, but the Trust will be requireJ to arrange for such 
refunds, if any, on a pro rata basis, in the proportion in which the 
contributions have been made by the various institutions. 
Clauses 5 and 6 provide for the maintenance of a register of 
contributories and the issue of certificates to the contributing insti-
tutions indicating the extent of their contributions. 
Clause. 7 and 8 provide for the transfer of the certificates of con-
tribution. The Reserve Bank, the Life Insurance Corporation and 
the State Bank and its subsidiaries will not be able to transfer their 
contributions to other institutions. The other contributories wm 
however be able to do 10 amone themselves. 
21 

Clause. 9 to 16 provide for the management of the Trust. The 
Board of trustees will ordinarily consist of nine members. The 
Chairman and four other members will be nominated by the Reserve 
Bank, one trustee each will be nominated by the Life Insurance Cor-
poration and the State Bank, and two trustees will be elected by 
scheduled banks in the private sector and other financial institutions, 
which may become contributories. If the Chairman is appointed 
ona part-~ime basis. or if it is otherwise considered necessary or 
desirable. a whole-time executive trustee will be appointed, in addi-
tion to the nine other members. The Chairman and the execu-
tive trustee will be appointed for such periods, not exceeding five 
years, as may be determined by, the Reserve Bank. The nominees of 
the Reserve Bank, if they are officials and the nominees of the Life 
Insurance Corporation an4 the State Bank will hold office at the 
pleasure of the authorities nominating them. The nominees of the 
Reserve Bank, if they are non-officials, and the two elected trustees 
will hold office for a period of four years in each case. 
Clauses 17 and 18 provide for the procedure to be followed at 
meetings of the Board of trustees and the constitution of executive 
and other committees. 
Clause 19 deals with the business which the Trust is expected to 
transact. The Trust will buy and sell securities, including bonds, 
shares or other stock of statutory corporations, companies or other 
bodies corporate. The Trust will not acquire any immovable pro-
perty except for its own use. 
Clause 20 provides for the grant of temporary ways and means 
assistance to the Trust by the Reserve Bank of India or by. other 
lending institutions. The Trust will be in a position to obtain 
normal banking accommodation from the Reserve Bank for periods 
not exceeding ninety days, and will, in an emergency, be able to 
borrow from that bank for periods up to six months against its own 
bonds, issued for this purpose with the approval and guarantee of 
the Central Government. The Trust will be able to borrow from 
other banks or financial institutions, on terms and conditions which 
may be agreed upon, but it will not· be in a position to borrow any 
money directly from the Central Government. 
Clause 21 provides for the framing' and publication of the scheme, 
in accordance with which units will be sold by the Trust. The 
scheme will provide for the sale of units, representing and backed by, 
all the investments made by the Trust. The face value of the unit 
will, not be less than· Rs. 10 or more than Rs. 100. The. units will 
be sold at prices determined by the Trust, having regard to the divi-
dends declared by it on the face value of 'the units. The Trust will 

23 
be prepared to purchase back the units, if necessary, at prices 
announced by the Trust from time to time. There will be no limit to 
the number of units which can be purchased and held by unit-
holders. Transfers of units will be recognised under prescribed con-
ditions. Dividends will be declared and distributed by the Trust 
to the unit-holders once every year, after the accounts for'that year 
have been closed and audited. 
Clauses 22 to 24 deal with the allocation and disposal of the 
Trust's annual income. The total gross income and expenses in 
any year will be allocated, as between the initial capital and' the 
capital representing tIle face value of the units sold and outstanding 
at the end of that year. Management expenses will be limited to 
five per cent. of the gross income allocated to the units, the actual 
expenditure, if any, in excess of this ceiling being charged to the 
contributions to the initial capital. At least ninety per cent. of the 
gross income less the management and other expenses al1bcated to 
the units will be distributed to the unit holders. 
Clauses 26 to 28 provide for the preparation, audit and publica-
tion of balance-sheets and accounts. 
Clause 30 provides that the Reserve Bank may give to the Trust, 
from time to time, such directions as may be necessary. 
Clause 31 and Clauses 33 to 38 provide for the recruitment of 
Itaft', the utilisation by the Trust, where necessary, of the services of 
the ~mployees of the Reserve Bank, the appUcation' of the provisions 
of the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, in relation to the Trust, 
declarations of fide,lity and secrecy· by the' trustees and employees, 
the indemnity of trustees, protection of any action taken in good 
faith and the delegation of powers. 
Clause 32 provides for the grant of relief from certain provisions 
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and other enactments, in order to faci-
litate the operations of the Trust and to encourage savings by indi-
viduals in the form of units. The Trust, as an institution acting far 
and in the interests of the unit-holders, will be exempted from the 
~ayment of income-tax, super-tax, and other taxes on its income. 
The contributories to the initial capital will be exempted from the 
payment of super profits tax on the income accruing to them in res-
pect of their contributions. The unit-holders will be exempted from 
the payment of income-tax, but not of super-tax, on the dividend 
income obtained from the units. The Trust, in so far as the income 
accruing to it is concerned and the unit-holders in respect of the 

24 
diyidenda accruing to them from the Truat, will be entitled to receive 
the 'amount. due to them, without deduction of income-tax at source 
(super-tax deductions will, however, be made in the cue of non-
resident unit-holders, if any). 
Clauae 39 provides inter-alia that the sums representing the 
contributions shall not be attachable under any order or decree, 
passed on account of any debts or liabilities incurred by the contri-
buting institutions. 
Cla.uae, 40 and 41 provide for the return by the Trust of the 
contributions towards the initial capital, when it is no longer re-
quired. As in the case of partial refunds, the value of the contribu-
tions will be determined in accordance with directions issued by the 
Central Government. The Board of Trustees will be reconstituted 
after the initial capital has been completely refunded, in the manner 
prescribed by the Central Government, in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank 
;' 
Clause 42 provides for the liquidation of the Trust, if necessary, 
and for the distribution of the- assets of the Trust in that event as 
between the unit-holders and the contributories, if any, to the inltial 
capital at that time. 
Clauae 43 provides for regulations to be made by the Trust with 
the approval of the Reserve Bank to give effect to the provisions of 
the Bill. 
Clauae 44 seeks to amend certain enactmenta, for the purposes of 
enabling the Reserve Bank, the State Bank (and the Industrial 
Finance Corporation in case it is interested) to contribute to the 
initial capital of the Trust, for providing for the grant of loans to 
the Trust by the Reserve Bank, and for enabling the Central Gov-
ernment to discharge, in relation to the Trust, the functions of an 
appropriate Government in the event of industrial disputes. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 20 provides that the Central Government may. in eertain 
contingencies, guarantee the bonds issued by the Trust lor the pur-
pose of enabling it to borrow from the Reserve Bank of India. The 
bonds are intended to be issued only in an emergency. and it is not 
possible at this stage to indicate whether or when they will be issued 
or the extent of the Central Government's contiftgent liability. It 
is anticipated, however, that the guarantees, if any, will not ulti-
mately involve any expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. The provision proposed to be made is also on the lines of 
similar proviSions in regard to the Industrial Finance Corporation 
and other financial institutions. 
-

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 21 confers power on the Board to make a unit scheme 
which will in.ter alia provide for the issue of units, their face value, 
the form and manner in which an application for the purchase ot 
a unit from the Trust may be made, the issue of unit certificates and 
the recognition of persons as unit holders. 
2. Clause 41 empowers the Central Government to provide by an 
order for the reconstitution of the Board when t.he initial capital 
has been refunded in full to the contributing institutions. It is not 
possible to say at this stage what will be the shape of the reconsti-
tuted Board. An order made under the said clause will provide for 
the number of trusteeS that will constitute the Board, the manner 
in which they shall be chosen. their term of office, filling of casual 
vacancies and such supplementary matters as may be necessary to 
give effect to the order. 
3. Clause 43 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulations, 
with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank, to provide for all 
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient fot' the pur-
pose of giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. These matter. 
in.:er alia relate to the form and manner of maintenance of the regis-
ter of contributing institutions, the form of the certificate of contribu-
tion, the manner of transfer of certificate of contribution, the rights 
and liabilities of a contributing institution, the holding and conduct 
of elections, the fees and allowances that may be paid to the mAes 
of the Board, the times and places of meetings of the Board, the 
institutions with which money may be kept on deposit, the date on 
which the books of accounts of the Trust shan be balanced and 
closed each year. 
4. The matter. in respect of which power il conferred on the 
Central Government under clause 41 or on the Board under clause 
21 or clause 43 are matters of detail or of routine nature and the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE hmuSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
• * * * * 
• CHAPTER I 
PRE:l.IMDI'ARY 
• * * * * 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject De1in1tiODl. 
or context,-
* 
(0) "appropriate Government" means--
(i) in relation to any industrial dispute concerning the 
Agricultural Refinance Corporation established under sec.. 
tion 3 of the Agricultural ReAnance Corporation Act, 1963, 
or any industry carried on by or unde~ the authority of th~ 
Central Government or by a railway company or concern-
ing any such controlled industry as may be specified in this 
behalf by the Central GOV'enlment or in relation to an indlls-
trial dispute conce~g the Deposit Insurance COJ;pOratj,on 
established under secti()n 3 of th~ Deposit: Insur~lD~ eotpo-
ration Act, 1961, or a banking or an insurance company, a 
mine, an oil-field, or a major port, the Central Gowrnment, 
and 
* * * * 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDusTRIAi. FmANCB CORPORATION ACT, 1948 
(15 OF 1948) 
.. . • • • • 
20. The Corporation may invest its funds in the securities of the InYcatmeDS 
Central Government or of any State Government. of fuIIdI. 
• * • • • 

LOIC SABHA 
A 
BllL 
to provide for th~ establishment of a Corporation with a 
view to enoouraging saving and investment and partici-
pation in the income, profits and gains accruing to 
the Corporation from. the acquisition, holding, mana-
gement and disposal of securities. 
(Shri T.T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance). 