AP. INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA OK 
BIU No. 15 of 1"1 
THE PAYMENT OF WAGES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1964 
BILL 
further to amend the Payment of Wages Act, 1936. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
4 of 1936. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Wagel (Amend-
ment) Act 1964.' Short title 
, and com-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Goy- mence-
emment may, by notiftcation in the OfIlcial Gazette, appoint. ment. 
10 
IS 
Z. To sub-section (5) of section 1 of the Payment of Wages Act, 
1936 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the follJoWing !:::~-
proviso shall be added, namely: - section 1. 
"Provided that in relation to any industrial establisliment 
owned by the Central Government, with objects not confined to 
one State, no such notification shall be issued except in consul-
tation with that Government.". 
I. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
AmeD4-
(i) for elause (i), the following clauses shaUbe substituted, ment of 
namely: - I secttoa l-
e (i) "employed person" includes the legal representa-
tive of a deceased employed person; 
458 (B) L&--1. 

Amend-· 
ment of 
section 3. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 5. 
~ 
(ia) "employer" includes the legal representative at a 
deceaaed employer; 
(ib) Clfactory" means a factory 'as deftned in clause (m) 
of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 and includes any place 6S of 1948. 
to which the provisions of that Act have been applied under S 
sub-section (1) of section 85 thereof;"; 
(ii) in clause (ii), for sub-clause (a), the following sub-
clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) tramway service, or motor transport service engag-
ed in carrying passengers or goods or both by road for hire 10 
or reward; 
"(aa) air transport service other than such s~~ce 
belonging t~ or exc:lJusively employed- in the military, 
naval or air fcrces of the Union or the Civil Aviation 
Department of the Government of India;"; 
(iii) after clause (ii), the following clause shall be in$erted, 
namely:-
IS 
'(iia) "mine" has the meaning assigned to it in clause 350l1952. 
(j) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952;'; 
(w) fM' elause (iii), the follOWing clause shan be substi- 20 
tuted, namely:-
'·(iii) "plantation" has the meaning assigned to it in 
clause <f) of seeticm 2 of the PlUtations I:,abour Act; 69 of 1951. 
1951;'. 
4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in the pr.o:viso, for the words 25 
"shall be responsible", the words Clshall also be responsible" shall be 
Illbstituted. 
5. In section 5 of the principal Act,-
(i) to sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added, 
namely:- 30 
"Provided that in the case of persons employed on a dock, 
wharf or jetty or in a mine, the balance of wages found due on 
completion of the ftn~ ~age account 0( the ~p or wagons 
loaded or unloaded, 8ft t~cue m.y be, ~U·be paid. before the 
expiry of the seventh day from the day of such completion.";,S 

10 
10 
30 
35 
~ 
(ii) to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be added, 
iwDely:-
"Provided that where the employment of any person in an 
establ1shme~t is terminated due to the closure of the establish-
mellt for any reason other than a weekly or other recognised 
holiday, the wages earned by him shall be paid before the ex-
piry of the second day from the day on which his employment 
is 80 terminated."; 
(iii) in sub-section (3) ,-
(a) after the brkckets and words "(otherwise than in a 
factory)", the words "or topel'lons employed as daily-rated 
workers in the Public Works Department of the Central 
Government or the State Government" shall be inserted; 
(b) the :fGllowing proviso shan be insertetl at the fond, 
mmely:-
"Provided that in the case of persons employed as 
daily-rated workers as aforesaid, no such order shall be 
made except in consultation with the Central Govern-
ment."; 
(iv) in sub-section (4), for the words "All payments", the 
words, brackets and figure "Save as otherwise provided in sub-
s.ection (2), all payments" shall be substituted. 
8. In section 7 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (2) ,-
(a) in sub-clause (e) and in sub-clause (j), after the 
words "State Government", the words "or any officer speci-
fied by it in this behalf" shall be inJerted; 
(b) for clause (f), the following clauses shal be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(f) deductions for recovery of advances of what-
ever nature (including advances for trave11ing allow-
ance or conveyance allowance), and the interest due in 
respect thereof, or for adjustment of over-payments of 
wages; 
(I) deductions for recovery of loans made from any 
fund constituted for the welfare of labour In accordance 
with the rules approved by the State Government, and 
the intereSt due in respect thereof; 
Amend-
ment of 
section 7. 

4 
Uti) deductions for recovery of loans granted for 
house-building or other purposes approved by the State 
Government, and the interest due in respect thereof;"; 
(c) after clause (k), the follOwing clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(1) deductions for payment of insurance premia 
on Fidelity Guarantee Bonds; 
S 
(m) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by 
a railway administration on account of acceptance by 
the employed per$O!l of counterfeit or bue coins or 
mutilated or forged currency notes; 10 
(11.) deductions for recovery of losses sUStained by 
a railway administration on account of the failure of 
the employed, person to invoice, to bill, to collect or 
to account fm- the appropriate charges due to that IS 
administration, whether in respect of fares, freight, de.-
murrage, wharfage and cranage or in respect of sale of 
food in catering establishments or in respect Of sale 
of commodities in grain shops or otherwise; 
(0) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by 20 
a railway adniinistration on account of any rebates or 
refunds incarrectly granted by the employed per8OIt1 
where such loss is directly 8·ttributable to his neglect 
or default."; 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, n.ame1y:- 2S 
,. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
the total amount of deductions which may be made under 
sub-secticm (2) in any wage period fram the wages of any 
employed person shan not exceed- 30 
(i) in cases where such deductions are wholly or 
partly made for payments to co-operative societies under 
clause (j) of sub-section (2), seventy-ftve per cent. of 
such wages, and. 
(ii) in any other case, fifty per cent. of such wages: 35 
Provided that where the total deductions authorts-
P.d under sub-section (2) exceed seventy-five per cent. 
or, as the case may be, fifty per cent. of the wages, 
the excess may be recovered in such manner u may 
be prescribed. u 40 

Gfl890. , 
10 
15 
20 
! 
(i} Nothing contained in this section shall be construed 
as precluding the employer from recovering from the 
wages of the employed person or otherwise any amount 
payable by such person under any law for the time being 
in force other than the Indian Railways Act, 1890.". 
7. In section 10 of the principal Act, for sub-section 
follOWing sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
(1), the Amend-
"(1) A deduction under claUSe (c) or clause (0) of sub-
aection (2) of section 7 shall not exceed the amount of the 
damage cxr loss caused to the employer by the neglect or de-
fault of the employed person.. 
(1A) A deduction shall not be made under clause (c) or 
clause (m) or clause (n) or clause (0) of sub-section (2) of 
section 7 until the employed person has been given an opportu-
nity of showing cause against the deduction, or otherwise than 
in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed for the 
making of such deductions.". 
ment of 
tecam 10. 
8. Ln section 12 of the principal Act, after clause (a), 
following clause shall ibe inserted, namely:-
the Amend-
ment of 
section 12. 
"(aa) recovery of an advance of money given after em-
ployment began shall be subject to such con.clitions as the State 
Govenunen.t may impose;". 
9. After section 12 of the principal Act, the follOWing 
shall be inserted, namely:-
section llUIertion 
of new sec-
tlen 12A. 
25 "12A.. Deductions for recovery qf loans granted under Deductions 
clause (fff) of sub-section (2) of section 7 shall be subject to for reco-
any rules made by the State Government regulating the, extent ~::a Of 
to which such loans may be granted and the rate of interest ' 
payable thereon.". 
30 10. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following aection Insertion 
sh ed I of new sec-all be insert , name y:- tion 13A. 
"13A.. (1) Every employer shall maintain such registers Mainten-
and records giving such particulars Of persons employed by anc~ of 'd th rel1sters him, the work performed by them, the wages p81 to em, and 
the deductions made from their wages, the receipts given by recorda. 
them and such other particulars and ill such form as may be 
preecribed. 

·6 
(2) Every register and record required to be maintained 
under this section shaU, for the purposes of this Act, be proserv-
eci for a period of three years after the date of the last entry 
made therein.". 
Auaend- .11. In section 14 of the principal Act, for sub-aeetiOlll (4); the 
ment of following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
~1.· 
"(4) An Inspector may,-
(a) make such examination and inqui:ry as he thinks tit 
in order to ascertain whether the provisions of this Act 
or rules made thereunder are being Observed; 10 
(b) with such assistance, if any. as he thinks fit, enter, 
inspect and search any premises of any railway, factory or 
industrial establishment for the purpose of carrying out the 
objects of this Act; 
(c) supervise the payment of wages to persons employ- r 5 
ed upon any railway or in any factory or industrial establi~h­
ment; 
(d) require by a written order the production at such 
place, as may be prescribed, of any register or record main-
tained in pursuance of this Act and take on the spot or 20 
otherwise statements of any persons which he may consider 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of .this Act; 
(e) seize or take copies of such registers or documents 
or portions thereof as he may consider relevant in respect 
of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe 25 
hu been committed by an employer; 
<f) exercise such other powers as maybe prescribed; 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this sub-
section to answer any question or make any statement tending 
to incriminate himself. 
(fA) The provisions of the Code of Criminal PrOcedure, 1898 5 of 1898. 
shaU, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizUre under this 
stib-section as they apply to any search or seiz~ made under 
the authority of a warrant i~ued under settion 98 of the said 
Code.". 3S 

of 1947. 
5 
10 
IS 
1 
12. After· aection 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall . 
~ m.rted, namely: _. insertion 
ot neW 
section 
1~ 
"14A. Every employer shall afford an lnipector all reason- Facilities 
a·ble facilities for making any entry, inspection, supervision, to be 
exammatlon or inquiry under this Act.". aiforded to 
13. In section 15 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1).-
(a) after the word "appoint", 
inserted, namely:-
the following shan be 
"a presiding officer. of. any Labo~r Couct or Indus-
trial Tribunal, constituted under the IndJlStrial Disputes 
Act, 19.7 or under any cOfl'esponding law relating to 
the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in 
fOllCe in the State or"; 
(b) for the words "or persons employed or ~ald in that 
area", the following shal be substituted namely!-
"of persons employed or paid in that area, including all 
matters incidental to such claims: 
"Provided that where tho State Government con!l;iders 
It necessary 80 to do, it may D1)point more titan one 
authority for any ~~ifled areA and may. by general or 
spedal order, provfde for the distribution or alloeation 
of work to be perforMed by them under this Act."; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "six months", wherever 
they occur, the words "twelve months" shan be substituted; 
(iii) in sub.section (3), for the words "not exceeding ten 
rupees in the latter". the following shall be substituted, name-
~- . 
"not exceeding twenty-five rupees in the latter, and even 
Inspectors. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 15. 
30 if the amount deducted or the delayed wages are paid before 
the disposal of the application, direct· the payment of such 
compensation, as the authority may think fit, not exceeding 
twenty-five rupees"; . 
(w) for sub-6ection (4), the following sub-sections she.!l b. 
35 substituted, namely:-
"(4) If the authority hearing an application Wider this 
section is satisfted-
(a) that the application was either malicious or 
vexatious, the authority may direct. that a. penalty not 

Amend-
mentof 
secti0l116. 
Amendment 
of aection 
11· 
exceeding fifty rupees be paid to the employer or other 
person responsible for the payment of wages by the 
person presenting the application; or 
(b) that in any case in which compensation is 
directed to be paid under sub-section (3), the applicant 5 
ought not to have been compelled to seek redress under 
this section, the authority may direct that a penalty not 
exceeding fifty rupees be paid to the State Govemment 
by the employer or other person responsible for the pay-
ment of wages. 10 
(4A) Where there is any dispute as to the person or 
persons being the legal representative or representatives 
of the employer or of the employed person, the decision of the 
authority on such disputes shall be final. 
(4B) Any inquiry under this section shall be deemed to IS 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193, 
219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.". 
14. In section 16 of the principal Act,-
(i) ,in sub-section (1), after the words "and if", the words 
"deductions have ,been made from their wages in contravention 20 
of this Act for the same cause and during the same wage period 
or periods ,or if" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and figures 
"the maximum compensation that may be awarded under sub-
section (3) of section 15 shall be ten rupees per head", the words, 2; 
brackets and figures "every person on whose behalf such applica-
tion is presented may be awarded maximum compensation to 
the extent specified in sub-section (3) of section 15" shall be 
substituted. 
15. In section 17 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1) ,-
30 
(a) in clause (a), after the words "three hundred 
rupees", the words "or such direction has the e1fect of im-
posing on the employer or the other person a financial 
liability exceeding one thousand rupees" shall be inserted; 35 
(b) for clause (b), the following clause shall be su~ti .. 
tuted, namely:-
4501 

~.-
s 
9 
" (b) by an employed person or any legal practitioner 
or any official of a registered trade union authorised in 
writing to act on pis behalf or any Inspector under this 
Act, or any other person permitted by the authority to 
make an application under sub-section (2) of section 15, 
if the total amount of wages claimed to have been with-
held from the employed person exceeds twenty rupees or 
from the unpaid group to which the employed person 
belongs or belonged exceeds fifty rupees, or"; 
10 (ii) after sub-section (1), the fallowing sUb-section shell be 
inserted, namely:-
"(1A) No appeal under clause (a) of su~ion (1) 
shan lie unless the memorandum of appeal is accompanied 
by a certificate by the authority to the effect that the appel-
I; lant lias deposited the amount payable under the direction 
appealed against."; 
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections ihall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(3) Where an employer prefers an appeal under this 
section, the authority against whose decision the appeal has 
been preferred may, and if so directed by the court referred 
to in sub-seclion (1) shall, pending the decision of the 
appeal, withhold payment of any sum in deposit with it. 
(4) The court referred to in sub-section (1) may, if it 
25 thinb fit, sUbzmt any question of law for the decision of the 
High Court and, if it 90 does, shall decide the question in 
conformity with SUiCh decision.". 
16. In section 17 A of tlie principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amend-
Words "any official of a registered trade union authorised in writing ~t of 
30 to act on his 'behalf", the words, brackets and figures "any legal ~7A. on 
practitioner or any ofllclal of a registered trade union authorised In 
Writing to act on his behalf or any Iinapector under this Act or any 
3S 
other person permitted by the authority to make an application 
under sub-section (2) of section 15" shall be substituted. 
17. Section 19 of the principal Act shall be omitted. OmLssioD 
of section 
19. 
18. In section 20 of the principal Act,- Amend-
merit of 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words and figures "section 5 section 20. 
and sections 7 to 13", the words: figures and brackets "section II 
458 (B) I.S-2. 

:-lit 10 
except sub-section (4) thereof, section 7, section 8 except sub-
section (8) thereof, section 9, section 10 except sub-section (2) 
thereof, end sections 11 to 13" shall be substituted; 
. (ti) in su~on (2), ,for the word and figure llsection 6", " 
'the words, flsgu1Iesand brackets ClSUi1weetton (4) of section 5, S 
·seetion 6, sub-l8C'tion (8) of eeoUon. 8, IKib .action (2) of section 
10" shall be substituted; 
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
.. (3) Whoever being required under this Act to maintain 10 
any records or registers or to furnish ~ny information or 
~Nm- . 
(a) failS to maintain such register Or record; or 
(b) wilfully refuses or without lawful excuse neg-
lects to furnish such infIonnation or return; or I, 
(c) wilfully furnishes or causes to be furnished any 
information or return which he knows to be 1alse; or 
,.... _. -
(d) refuses to answer or wilfully gives a false ans-
wer to any question necessary for obtaining any inform-
ation required to be furnished under this Act; 20 
shall, for each such offence, be punishable with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(4) Whoever-
(a) willfully obstructs e.n Inspector in the discharge 
of bis. duties under this Act; or 2S 
(b) refuses or wfl.fully negleets toaftt>rd an 1Mpee-
tor 8D1 reasonable facility for midMg By entry, ins-
peetton, exammation, supervision., otinquiry autt. ... 
by or under this Act in Nlationitoany n.illway, factory 
or iIJdustrial establishment; or 30 
(oc), wilfuUy Tefuaea to pt'OIiuce OIl Vle demmd 01. an 
Inspector any register or other document kept m pur-
suance of this Act; or 
(d) prevents or a1ltempts to prevent or does any-
tl:Ung which he has any ~ to ·believe is likely to 35 
prevent any person from appearing before or 'being 

f' u 
examined by an Inspector acting in.purauaue of bJJ 
duties under this Act; 
shall be punishable wilth fine which may ~ to five hun-
dred rupees. , . 
5 (5) If any person who has been cormcted of. any offence 
punishable under this Act is again guilty of an offence involv-
ing contmvention of the same provision, he shall be punish-
able on a subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or wd,th fine which may 
10 extend to ODe thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that for the P1Il'pOSe of 'bh.ie sub-eection, DO 
cognizance shaI1l ibe taken of any conviction made more than 
,two years before the date on which the commission of the 
offence which is being punished came to the knowledge of 
IS the klspector. 
(6) If any person fails or wilfuHy neglects to pay the 
wages of any employed person by the date fixed by the au-
thority in this behalf, he shall; without prejudice to any 
other action that may be taken against him, be' punishable 
20 with an additional fine whicih lllBy extend to fifty rupees for 
each day for which SUC'h failure or neglect continues.". 
I,.. In section 21 of the principal Act, after sub-6ection (3), the Amend-
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- ment of section 21. 
"(3A) No court shall take cognizance of eny o1fe~ punish-
able under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 20 except 
on a complaint made by or with the sanction of an Inspector 
under this Aet.". 
10." After section 22 of the principal Act, the following 
Ihall,be inserted, namely:-
section Insertion 
afnewaec-
tlon 22A. 
"22A. No suit, prosecution or other leg91 .proceeding shall Protection 
Be against the Government or any officer of :the Government for of action 
anything which is in good faith done or intended U> be done taken in 
under this Act.". I 1000 faith. 
n. In section 24 of the principal Act, after the word "railways", Amend-
35 the words "air transport services," shall be inserted. ::: M. 

Amend-
mentof 
.ecti'On 26. 
13 
·'1 
D. In seotlon 26 of the 'Principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (3) ,-
(a) in clause (a), for the words uand prescribe the form 
thereof" the following words shall be substituted, namely:-
... prescribe !the form thereof and the particulars to 5 
be entered in such registers or records"; 
(b) after clause (i), the following clauses shall be In-
serted, namely:-
U (ia) presmibe the extent to wlhich lOans may be 
granted and the 'l'I8te of interest payable thereon with 10 
reference to section 12A; 
(ib) prescdbe the powers of Inspectors for the pur-
poses of this Act;"; 
(c) in ckluse (k), the word "and" shaH be omitted; 
(d) in clause (1), the word "and" shall be inserted at 15 
the end; I 
(e) after clause' (l), the foltlowing clause shall be insert-
ed, namely:-
.. (m) provide for any other maltter which is to be or 
may be prescribed."; 20 
(ii) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(6) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this section sball be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
,before each House of PaTliament while it is in session for a 2S 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in tWQ successive sessions, and if, before the ex-
'piry of ,the session in whioh it is so laid or the session im-
mediately following, both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should 35 
not be made, the rule shall therwter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, BO, 
however, that any such modification Ofl' amendment shell be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously c::IoDe 
UDder that rule.". 40 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ANi:> REASoNS \ 
The Payment of Wages Act, 1936, was enacted with a view to 
ensuring that wages actually disbu.TSable Ito workers covered by the 
Act are disbursed within the prescribed time-limilt and that employees 
get their full wages without any deduotilOns not authorised by 
law. Though the Act has been amended from time to time and 
certain major amendments were effected in 1957, the experience of 
the wormg of the Act has revealed certain other difficulties. With 
a view to removing these difficulties, it is now IProposed-
(a) to widen the coverage of the Act so as to make it appl!l.-
calble to all factories to which ,provisions of the Factories Act, 
1948, have been extended by the State Governments, 
(b) to include in the definition of 'industrial establishmenlt' 
air t.r8i11SpOl'it services other than militall'Y, nawl and ad.r forces 
and motor transport services, 
(c) to pennit deductions from wages of employees on 
account of grant of advances for various purposes such as pur-
chase of cycles or grant of loans for ho~building purposes and 
loans from labour welfare fund, travelling allowance, etc., 
(d) to provide, as recommended Ibythe Public Accounts 
Committee, !for the recovery O<f losses to the railways due to acts 
of omission or commission on the part of the employees, 
( e) to provide for the fixation of an outer limit for deduc-
tions from twages, 
(f) to enlarge the. powers of Inspectors so as to ensure 
proper inspection and better enforcement of the provisions of 
the Act, and 
(g) to clarify that the ju:risdiction of the , authorities 
appointed to hear claim applications empowers them to decide 
incidental matters. . 
These are broadly the main features of the amending Bill. 
Opportu.nd.ty has also been taken to make certain. other amenmnents 
of a ~nor character. 
The notes on clauses explain the vaxious changes proposed to be 
made. 
D. SANJIVAYYA. 
The 18th April, 1964. 

:PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICL! 117 0' 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letteT No, 536/1/60-Fac., dated the 28th April, 1964 trom 
Shri D. San;itX1yya, Minister of Labour and EmplOJimcnt to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.] I 
The President having been JnIonned of the subjecl matter of tile 
proposed Bill further to amend the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 bas, 
in pul'IUBDee <A clI!u8e (3) of article 117 of tM ConsUtutIion of IniHa, 
recommended to Lot Sabha the ooraJideration of the BIll .. 
14 

N otft em Clause, 
C1ause 2.-Clause 2 lays down that the provIsions of the Act shall 
be extended to industrial estaIbllshments owned by the Centntl Gov-
ernment with objects not confined to one State in consultation With 
the CentTal Government. 
CZau.se 3.-C1ause 3 seeks to clarify certain terms and expressions 
WIed in the Aot and also to enlarge the coverage of the Act so as to 
include civil air transport services and establishments declared as 
factories under section 85 of the Factories Act, 1948. 
Clause 4 . .......clause 4 il intended to make it clear that in addition 
to the eJlij)loyer, the manager, the supervisors, etc. shall also be res-
ponsible for the payment of wages. 
Clause 5.--C1ause 5 seeks to amend section 5 of the Act. The 
amendments proposed in this clause seeks to lay down that any 
balance of paymen'ts due on 8C1C'OU:Dt of piece rates in certain 
cases shall be paid within seven days from Itlae day of 
completion of calculation relating to piece rates, and that wages 
shall be paid before the expiry of the second day from the day of 
termination of employment in cases where an establisbmeat is 
closed down otherwise than in observance of a weekly or other 
recognised holiday. One of the amendments to section 5 all1o" gives 
power to grant exemption to daily rated workers in the Public Works 
Department from the provisions of section 5, which power, in the 
case of daily-rated employees of the Public WorkB Department, can 
be granted only in consultation with the Central Government. 
Clau.se 6.-In suD-seetion (.2) of section 7, in dauses (i!) and (;) 
the approval of the State· Government i5 necessary. Now it is pr.o-
posed to enable the State Government to delegate the said power to 
any specified officer. 
Another amendment effected by clause 6 seeks to substitute 
clauses (f), (ff) and (iff) for clause (f) of sub-section (Z) . The 
proposed clauses authorize deductions on account of advances of 
whatever nature, including ,advances for travelliQg Qllowaace, con-
veyance allowance 8Ild also in respect (if loans for bouse building 
purposes and loans from labour welfve fund. 
This, c1J1use also, provides f(ir the recQvery .of amounts for payment 
of insunnce premia on iideYty guarantee bonds and sums lost to rail-
,I .. Ii:: m.\.IS:~:~ .. : .--. '-"" -... _,-., .. ".", 

16 
ways due to certain acts of omission or commission on the part of the 
employees. 
This clause further provides for the deduction up to seventy-five 
per cent. of the wages for payment to co-operative SOCiety and up to 
fifty per cent. in other cases. It_ is also laid down that recoveries 
under any other law are not precluded . 
Clause 7.-Clause 7 provides that deductions under clause (c) or 
clause (0) of sub-sect,ion (2) of section 7 shall not exceed the amount 
of dmlage or los,s and the deductions under clause (c), clause (m), 
clause (n) or clause (0) shall not be made until the worker has been 
given an opportunity of showing cause against such deductions. 
ClatLBe 8.-Clause 8 provides for the imposition of conditions for 
deductions on account of advances given after employment. 
Clause 9.-Clause 9 seeks to provide for the framing of rules to 
regulate the grant of loans, etc. 
Claue lO.-Clause 10 provides for the maintenance of registers 
and records by the employers and the details connected therewith. 
Clause ll.-Clause 11 enlarges the powers of the Inspector 80 as 
to render the enforcement of the provisions of the Act more effective. 
Claue l2.-Clause 12 seeks to insert a new section 14A which 
would require the employer to afford all reasonable facilities to an 
Inspector for making inspection, etc. 
Clause l3.-The amendment made by this clause would enable 
the appointment of a presiding ofHcer of any Labour Court or Indus-
trial Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act or other 
corresponding law as the authority under the Payment of Wages Act 
and also clarifies that the authority under the Act tlBn also decide 
matters incidental to claims arising out of delay in payment of wages, 
etc. ' 
Provision has also been InIlde in this clause to empower the $tate 
Government to appoint more than one authority in any specified 
area and to allocate or distribute work amongst them. 
Another change effected by this clause. is to increase the time-
limit for presentation of claim applications from six months to 
twelve months. ' 
At present, the liaibility of the employer is to pay a compensation 
up to a maximum of rupees ,ten in cases of delay in paymen,t of wages. 
It is now bein't increased to rupees twenty-five and it is also provided 

t, 
that the compensation shall be .payable even in cases where the 
amount is paid before the disposal of the claim application. 
The clause also seeks to provide for penalty in cases where the 
applicant ought not to have 'been made to seek redress under section 
15 of the Act. . 
Anothelr amendment effected. by this clause is to empower the 
authority under the Act .to decide disputes concerning the legal repre-
sentative of the employer or the employed person. 
The clause also provides that an linquiry under section 15 shall 
be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 
193, 219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. i 
Clause 14.~lause 14 seeks to eJGtend. the facility of making a 
single appli.catWn on behalf of any number of pel'RIOllB who are simi-
larly affected in case of unauthorised deductions also. 
Some other changes of a consequential natU'l'e have also been 
made by this clause. ' 
Clause 15.-Clause 15 seeks to provide for appeals from a direc-
tion under section 15 which has the effect of irn(>osing on the employ-
er a financial liability exceeding one thousand rupees. 
The proposed change in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 
17 would .provide for appeal being filed by all persons who can fHe 
claim applications under sUlb-section (2) of section 15. It would 
also enable an appeal being filed by an individual, if the amount 
involved is rupees .twenty as against rupees fifty which is the exist-
ing limit. 
A new sub-section (lA) is being introduced e.fter sub-section 
(1) of section 17 with.a view to providing that the memorandum for 
appeal filed by an employer shall be accompanied by a certificate to 
the effect that the atppelianlt has deposited the amount appealed 
against. The proposed new sub-sections (3) and (4) provide that 
where an appeal is preferred by an employer, the authority shall, it 
directed by the Appellate Court, withhold eny sum in deposit with 
him. The appellate Court would also be entitled to submi.t any 
question of law for the decision of a High Court. 
Clause 16.-Clause 16 seeks to authorise the same persons to act 
on behalf of ,the worker as are authorised under sub-section (2) of 
section 15. 
Clause 17.-The proposed omission of section 19 is consequential 
to the amendment of section 3 proposed in clause 4. 
468 (B)~. 

18 
Clause 19.-Clause 18 provides for the imposition of penalties tot 
non-maintenance of registers and records, non-sUlbmission of correct 
returns, etc.; it also provides for enhancement of the penalty in cases 
of continuing or repeated offences. 
Clause 19.-Clause 19 is self-explanatory. 
Clause 20.-Clause 20 seeks to insert a new section 22A with • 
. view to providing for protection to persons acting in good faith. 
Clause 21.-Ola.use 21 seeks to include air' transport service in 
leCtion 24 so as to bring it within the Central sphere. 
Clause 22.-Clause 22 seeks to empower the State Government to 
make rules in relation to certain additional matters necessitated by 
the other amendments made in the Bill. This clause also seeks to 
make the usual provision for the laying of ,the rules made under the 
Act before Parliament. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Payment of Wages Act, 1936, is administered by the State 
Governments except in railways, mines and oil-fields where the Act 
is em01"Ced by the Centrol Government through the Organisation of 
the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) . Clause 3 of the Bill 
seeks to enlarge the coverage CYf the Act by covering all establish-
ments declared as factories under section 85 of the Factories Act, 1948, 
and by including within the definition of "industrial establishment" 
civil air transport service. Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to empower 
the State Government tD appoint mDre than one authority in any 
specified area. At present the authorities appointed by the State 
Governments m-e alsD being appointed wthorities in respect 'Of the 
Central Sphere undertakings. In COIllnection with the enforcement 
of Dr compliance with these provisiOns in the Central Government/ 
sphere undertakings some e~ture from the Consolidated Fund 
'Of India may be involved in prDviding additional staff. The amDunt 
likely tD be invDlved 'On this aCCDunt may not exceed Rs. 25,000/-
per annum. 
19 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
ClauSe 22 of the Bill amends sub-section (3) of section 26 of the 
Act to empower the State Government to make rules in relation to 
certain additional matters. The additional matters relate, inter alia, 
to the perticula!"S to be entered in the ~gisters and records, the 
extent to which loans may be granted for house building or other 
purposes approved by the State Government and the interest pay-
able thereon, and the powers of the Inspector. These matters per-
tain to procedure, form or detail and as such the delegation of legis-
lative power is of a normal character. ' 

.-
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1938 
(4 OF 1936) 
.. • • 
Short title, 1. (1) • • • • • • catent, com-
~DCemFt (5) The State Government may, after giving three months' notice 
tion,app Ica- at its intention of so doing, by notiflcatian in the Official Gazette, 
extend the provisions of this Act or any of them to the payment of 
wages to any class of persons employed in any inC;h,lstria} ~blish­
ment or in any class or group of industrial establishments. 
,* • • - • 
DcfinitiODI. Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
(i) "factory" means a factory as defined in clause (~) ot 
section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948; 63 01 I~. 
(ii) "industrial establishment" means any-
(a) tramway or motor omni:bus service. 
• • • • • 
(iii) "plantation" means any estate which is maintained for 
the purpose of growing cinchona, rubber, coffee or tea, and OIl 
which twenty~ve or more persons are employed. for that 
purpose. 
• • • • • 
~:::,:b~li- 3. Every employer shan be responsible for the payment to persons 
mel!! of Y employed by him of all wages required to be paid under this Act: 
Wild· 
Provided that, in the case of persons employed (oth~ Ulan 
by a contractor)-
(a) in factQries, if a persot;l has been named as the man,ager 
of the factory under cIaW\e(t) of sub-.secticm (1) of sectlQn 7 
of the Factories Act, 1948, 6, of INa. 
(b) in industrial establishments, if there is a person respon-
sl,ble to the employer for the supervision and co$Ol of the 
industrial establishment, 
I 

U 
(e) upon railways (otherwise than in factories), if the 
employer is the railway administration and 'the railway admi-
nistration has nominated a person in this behalf for the local area 
concerned, ' 
the person so named, the person so responsible to the employer, OT 
the person so nominated, as the case may be, shall be responsible 
for such payment: 
• • • • • Time of 
5. (1) The wages of every person employed upon or in- payment Of WilleS. 
(a) any railway, factory or industrial establishment upon or 
in which less than one thousand persons are employed, shall 
be paid before the expiry of the seventh day, 
(b) any other railway, factory or industrial establishment, , 
mall be paid before the expiry of the tenth day, 
after the last day of the wage-periOd in respect of which the wages 
are payable. 
(2) Where the employment of any person is terminated by or on 
behalf of the employer, the wages earned by him shall be paid before 
the expiry of the second working day from the day on which his 
employment is terminated. 
(3) The State Government may, by general or special order, 
exempt, to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the order, the person responsrble for 1:he payment of 
wages to persons employed upon any railway (otherwise than in a 
factary) from the operation of this section in respect of the wages 
of any such persons or class of such persons. 
(4) All payments of wages shall be made on a working day. 
• • • • • 
'T •• AI) • • • • • DcductiODl 
which DlQ' 
(2) Deductions from the wages of an employed person shall be ~~:'e •. 
. made only in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and may 
be of the follOwing kinds only, namely:-
• • • • • • 
(e) deductions for such amenities and services supplied by the 
employer sa the State Government may, by general or 
special arder. authorise; 

Deduction. 
for damage 
or 10 ... 
23 
Ezplanation.-The word "services" in this sub-clause does hoi 
include the supply Of tools and raw materials required. for 
the purposes of employment; 
(1) deductions tor recovery of advances or for adjustment or 
over-payments of wages; 
'" '" '" '" '" 
(j) deductions for payments to co-operative societies approved 
by the State Government or to a scheme of insurance 
maintained by the Indian Post omce; and 
'" '" '" '" '" 
10. (1) A deduction under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 
7 shall not exceed the amount of the damage or loss caused to the 
employer by the neglect or default of the employed person and shall 
not be made until the employed person has been given an opportunity 
of showing cause against the deduction, or otherwise than in accord-
ance with such procedure as may be prescribed for the makina of 
such deductions. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
14 .. (1) '" '" '" '" '" 
(4) An Inspector may, at all reasonable hours, enter on any pre-
mises, and make such examination of any register or docwnent relat-
ing to the calculation or payment of wages and take on the spot or 
otherwise such evidence of any person, and exercise such other power. 
of inspectiQn, as he may deem necessary for carrying out the purpo-
ses of this Act. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
Claim. aria- 15. (1) The State Goverrunent may, by notifiCation in the Official 
ina out, of Gazette, appoint any Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation or 
deductions 'J d f C'vil C urt ~ from wRlet other officer with expenence as a u ge 0 a 1 0 or as a .Wo-
Of delay in pen..J~ .. ,",' Magistrate to be the authority to hear and decide for any 
payment of ........... .1 " , f d d ti f th wRle' and specified area all clalmS ansmg out 0 e uc OIlS rom e wages, or 
1o~2cioUi delay in payment of the wages, of persons employed or paid· in that 
or 'Vexatiou. area. 
claim., (2) Where contrary to the provisions of this Act any deduction has 
been made from the wages of an employed person, or any payment 
f . h been delayed such person himself, ,or any legal practi-o wages as de' th' d in wri+.1 ...... tioner or any official of a registered tra uruon au onse ~ 
to act on bis behalf, or any Inspector under this Act, or~y other 

24 
person acting with the permission of the authority appointed under 
su:~tioli (I), may apply( to such authority for a direction under 
sub-section (3) : 
Provided. that every such application shall be presented within six 
mOnths from" "the date on which the' deduction from the wages wu 
made or from the date on which the payment of the wages was due 
to be made, as the case may be : 
PrOvt~ further that arty application may be admitted after the 
said period of six months wheil the applicant satisfies the authority 
that he had suftiCient cause far not maklng the application within 
web period. 
(3) When any application under, sub-section, (2) is entertained, 
the authority shall hear the applicant and the employer or other 
peison responsible for the payment of wages under section 3, or give 
them an opportwiity of being heard, and, after such further inquiry 
(if" any) as may be necessary, may, without prejudice to any other 
penalty to which such employer or other person is liable under this 
Act, direct the refund to the employed person of the amount deducted, 
or the payment of the delayed. wages, together with the payment of 
such compensation as the authority may think fit, not exceeding ten 
times the amount deducted in the former case and not exceeding ten 
rupees in the latter : 
Provided that no direction for the payment of compensation shall 
be made in the case of delayed wages if the authority is satisfied 
that the delay was due to-
(a) a bona fide etror or bona fide dispute as to the amount 
payable to the employed person, or 
(b) the occurrence of an emergency, or the existence of ex-
ceptional cii'cumstances, such that the person responsible 
for the payment of the wages was unable, though exe~iS­
ing reasonable diligence, to make prompt payment, or 
(~ the fallure of the employed perBOD to apply for or accept 
payment. 
(4) If the authority hearing any application under this section is 
satistled that it was either malicious or vexatious, the authority may 
direct that a penalty not exceeding fifty rupees be paid to the em-
ployer or other person responsible for the payment of" wages by the 
person presenting the "application. 

25 
SiDile appli- 18 (l) Employed cation in . . .' persons are ~ to belong to the same unpaid 
~!f~~tf~~m group If they are borne on the same establishment and if their wages 
unpaid for the same wage-period or periods have remained unpaid after the 
IJ'oup. day fixed by section 6 . 
Appeal. 
. , ,(2) A single application may be presented under section 15 on 
behalf, or.in res~t of ~y number of employed persons belonging 
to the same unpaId group, and in such case the maximum com pen-
s~tion th,t may be awarded under sub-section (3) of section 15 shall 
be ten rupees per head. ' 
• • • • • 
17. (l) An appeal' against an order dismissing either wholly or in 
part an application made under sub-section (2) of section 15, or 
against a direction mad~under su:b-section (3) or sub-section (4) 
of that section may be preferred within thirty days of the date on 
which the order or direction was made, in a Presidency-town before 
the Court of Small Causes and e-lsewhere before the District Court-
(a) by the employer or other person responsible for the pay-
ment of wages under section 3, if the total sum directed 
to be paid by way of wages and compensation exceeds 
three hundred rupees, or 
(b) by an employed person or any official of a registeted 
trade union authorised in writing tei act on his behalf, if 
the total amount of wages claimed to have been withheld 
from the employed person or from the unpaid group to 
which the employed person belonged exceeds fifty rupees, 
or 
I .,' 
" .' 
,l'l. (1) Where at any time after an application has been made 
~~~:I wider' sub-section (2) of section 15 the authority. Ql" where at any 
ofof propeny tbne after an appeal has' beenftled under section 17 ,by an employed 
emploYer . 1 f .. L..---..:I tr de . th ised . or other per- person or any officla 0 a regtS~ a ,unJOD au or 10 
~]: f:I'r':.i-writing to act on his behalf the Court referred to in t.hat sechtion, is 
ment 0 satisfied that the employer or other person responsible for t e pay-
WqeI. mentof wage9 under section 3' is likely. to evade payment of any 
amount that may:be directed to be paid under section 15 or section 
19 :the authority or the Court, as the case may be, except in cases 
where the authority or Court is 'Of opinion that the ends: of justice 
would be defeated by the delay, after giving the employer or-other 
person m opportunity of being heard, may direct the attacpmen~ of 
so much of the property of the employer or other penon respo~ble 
for the payment of wages as is, in the opinion of the authonty or 
458 (B)LS-4. 

a6 
Court, suftlcient to satisfy the amount which may be payable under 
the direction . 
• • • • • 
It. When the authority referred to in section 15 or the Court POWer to re-
referred. to in section 17 is unable to recover from any person (other =;:O~;niD 
than an employer) responsible under section 3 for the payment of certain calel. 
wages any amount directed by such autharity Wlder'section IS or 
section 17 to be paid by such person, the autJtority shall recover the 
amount from the employer of the emplOYed penon concerned. 
20. (1) Whoever being responsible for the payment of wages to Penalty for 
an employed person contravenes any of the provisions of any of the :~h:' A:"-
following sections, namely, section 5 and sections 7 to 13, both inclu-
sive, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees. 
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of eection 4, section 6 or 
section 25 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees. 
• • • • • 
U. The powers by this Act conferred upon the State Govern- Application , of Act to 
ment shall, in !'ttlatwn to railways, mines and oilftelds, be powers of rall"a", 
the Central Gov8flUIlent. ~ne;i1field' . 
• • • • • 
D. (1) • • • • • 
(3) In particu·lar and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoilll ~w~f, rul,es made under sub-section (2) may-
(4) require the maintenanCCt of S\lch records, registers, 
returns and nGticee as are ~ry fpr the ~nfC?rcement of the 
Aet and prelCribed the form. thereof; 
• • • • • 
(k) preacribe the amount of court-fees ~Yf.ble Pl re5pect of 
any proceedings Wlder thLI Act; and. 
(I) prescribe the abtttracts to be ~ontained in the aotic. 
required, by section 25. 
• • • • • 
Rulc-makina power. 

LOK SARHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Payment of Wages Act, 1936. 
(Shri D. SanjifJayya, 
Minister of Labour & Employment.) 