As INTRODut:ED IN LoK SABRA ON 
.. 
!'HE OONS'JTl'U'.l'ION (SIXTY-THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1189 
... 
~ 
, . 
ft.WfIaeT :eo amend the Con.tit'u.tton ot r~ 
V& jt .'lI"~ bJ P.,pi.,eo.t ill ~. F.U.tb y~ Qf .. Republic .01 
l~~t~~ 
I. f1) TIlts Act may be called the Constitution (Sixty-third Amend-
ment) Act, 1989. 
S . (8) It sball come into force on such date as the Central Government 
InU, by ~tlon in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint. 
%. (1) In article 332 of the Constitution, after clause (3A), the follow-
ing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until 
10 the taking effed, under article 170, of the re-adjustment, on the 
basis of the first census after the year 2000, of the number of seats 
in the Legislative Assembly of ,the State of Tripura, the seats which 
shaU be re.;erved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assem-
bly shall be, such number of seats as bears to the total number of 
IS seats. a proportion not less than the number, as on :the date of COIn-
ing into force of the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, 
of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative 
Assembly in existence on the said date bears to the total 
number of seats in that Assembly.". 
20 (2) The amendment made to article 332 of the Constitution by sub-
section (1) shall not affect any representation in the Legislative Assem-
bly of the State of Tripura until the dissolution of the Legislative Assem-
bly existing at the commencement of this Act. 
Short 
title 
a:ld 
commen-
cement. 
Amend-
mentOf 
article 
332. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
For restoring peace and harmony in areas of Tripura where disturbea 
conditions prevailed, a Memorandum of Settlement was signed by the 
Government of India with Tripura National Volunteers on 12-8-1988. The 
Memorandum of Settlement provides for a greater share of tribals in 
the governance of the State. The M~morandum of Settlement also 
envisages amendment of the Constitution to provide that notwithstand-
ing anything contained in ~he Constitution, the number of seats in the 
Legislative Assembly of Tripura rEserved for Scheduled Tribes shall be 
such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a proportion 
not less than the number, as on the date of coming into force of the 
Constitutional amendment, of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes 
in the existing Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the exist-
ing Assembly. It also provides that the amendments shall not affect 
any representation in the existing Assembly of Tripura until its dis-
.. utiGft. " f:' ';:;' 
"Wi'IIo!_\""._:o'\oIr~ .,/1,', ',l4"'.· 
2. In order to implement the said Memorandum, action is to be taken 
to ,4etermine the,~ts which are, to bel'.rved for ~hedWed ~~ 
in 'Tripura. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State is governed by the 
provisions of article 332 of the COl'lirtitution. Having regard to the 
special circuma.tanoes obtaining in T.ripqra, it it pnpoRd to further 
amend article' 332 of the Constitution, for maldn" a:, temporary provi-
Sion forthi cWieiminatlon of thei number 'of.eats ~, for Scbec1uled 
Tribes until the re-adjustment of seats on the basis ofthefttst 'ceDS1B 
after the, year 2000 under article, 170 of the Constitution for TripUl". 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 
NEW DELHI; B'dTA SINGH. 
'l"he 21st March, 1989. 
2 

(.. LOK SABHA 
" l' 
A 
. BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri Buta Singh, Minister of Home Affa.irs) 