8m No. 1$ of !f5$. 
THE PRIZE COMPE1'n'IONS BDJ., 
1955 
(As IN'I'RODUCBD IN Lolt SABIIA) 
. . . -. 

8U1 No. 45 of 1955. 
THE PRIZE COMPETITIONS BILL, 19S5. 
(As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the control and regulation of prize competition •. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the control and regulation 
of prize competitions; 
AND WHEREAS the Legislatures of the States of Andhra, Bombay 
and Patiala and East Punjab States Union have passed resolutions in 
5 tenns of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution in relation to 
the above-mentioned matter and matters ancillary thereto in 10 far 
as such matters are matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
10 of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prize Competitions Act, 1955. Shott title. 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the States of Andhra, Bombay and Patial. and commencement. 
East Punjab States Union and all Part eStates. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
I' ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) 'licensing authority' means any officer or authority appoint-
ed by the State Government, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, for the purpose of granting licences under this 
20 Act; 
(b) 'money' includes a cheque, postal-order or money-order; 
(c) 'prescribed' means prescribed by f\lles tnadeunder this 
Act; . 
Definitions. 

2 
(d) 'prize competition' means any competition (whether called 
a cross-word prize competition, a missing-word prize com-
petition, a picture prize competition or by any other 
name) in which prizes are offered for the solution of any 
puzzle based upon the building up, arrangement, combi- S 
nation or permutation, of letters, words or figures. 
Interpretation 3. For the purposes of this Act,-
(a) references to printing shall be construed as including 
references to writing and other modes of representing or 
. reproducing words in a visible form; and 10 
(b) documents or other matters shall be deemed to be dis-
tributed if they are distributed to persons or places within 
or outside the territories to which this Act extends and 
the word 'distribution' shall be construed accordingly. 
Prohibition of 4. No person shall promote or conduct any prize competition in IS 
~r: w~ which the total value of the prize (whether in cash or otherwise) to 
prize offered be offered in any month exceeds one thousand rupees. exeecda one 
~oUllDd 
rupees a month. 
Licensing of 5 No person shall promote or conduct any prize competition in 
~ti=;here which the total value of the prize (whether in cash or otherwise) to 
the prize ..be otJered in any month does not exceed one thousand rupees unless ~o 
~!:~~one he has obtained in this behalf a licence granted in accordance with 
thoqsand ru- the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. 
pees a month. 
Licences for 6., (1) Every person desiring to obtain a licence referred to in 
~~:~- section 5 shall make an application in writing to the licensing autho-
rity in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 2S 
(2) On the receipt of such application, the licensing authority, 
after making such inquiry as it considers necessary, snaU, by order 
in writing, either grant the licence or refuse to l(I'ani the licence. 
(3) Where the licensing authority refuses to grant a licence it 
shall record a brief statement of the· reasons for such refusal and 30 
furnish a copy thereof to the applicant. 
(4) The fees on payment of which. the period for which, the con-
ditions subject to which, and the form in which, a licence may be 
granted shall be such as may be prescribed. 
Promoters of 7. Every person who promotes or conducts a prize competition in 3S 
~ com~ti- accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made there-
!:n~~ ani under shall keep accounts relating to such competition and submit 
tubmit ththe to the licensing authority a statement of accounts in such form and 
same to e h . al be 'bed Iicensm, at sue lllterv 5 as may preSCfl . 
authority. 

~ 
•. (1) The licensing authority may, after giving the holder of any Powertd 
licence under this Act a reasonable opportunity of being heard, =~~i:n'u,­
cancel or suspend the licence on anyone or more of the following eel. 
grounds, namely:-
5 (a) that there has been a breach of any of the conditions sub-
ject to which the licence was granted; 
(b) that the holder of the licence has contravened aIiy of the 
provisions of section 7. 
(2) Whenever a licence is cancelled or suspended the licensing 
10 authority shall record a brief statement of the reasons for such 
cancellation or suspension and furnish a copy thereof to the person 
whose licence has been cancelled or suspended. 
9. If any person promotes or conducts any prize competition in Penalty. for 
contravention of the provisions of section 4 or section 5, he shall be ~!i~=, or 
IS punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 1D>:~ri~ com-. petition 1D 
months, or with fine WhlCfi may extend to one thousand rupees, or contravention 
with both. o! the provi-
SIOns of sec-
tions 4 and S. 
10. If any person liable under section 7 to keep accounts or to Penalty for 
submit statements of accounts fails to keep accounts or to submit ::r::~~~p 
20 statements of accounts as required -by that section or keeps accounts account •• 
or submits statements of accounts which are false and which he 
either knows or believes to be false or does not believes to be true, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, but nothing contained in this section shall affect the pro-
2S visions contained in section 8. 
11. If any person with a view to the promotion or conduct of any Penalty for 
prize competition in contravention of the provisions of this Act or i~~~~ 
in connection with any prize competition promoted or conducted in with prize 
contravention of such provisions- competitions 
30 (a) prints or publishes any ticket, coupon or other document 
for use in the prize competition; or 
(b) sells or distributes or offers or advertises for sale or dis-
tribution, or has in his possession for the purpose of sale 
or distribution any ticket. coupon or other document for 
35 use in the prize competition; or 
40 
(e) prints, publishes or distributes. or has in his possession for 
the purpose of publication or distribution,-
(i) any advertisement of the prize competition, or 
(ii) any list (whether complete or not) of prize winners 
in the' prize competition, or 

.. 
tiii) any luch matter descriptive of, or otherwise reiating 
to, the prize competition as bl calculated to act as an 
inducement to persons to participate in that prize 
competition or any other prize competition; or 
(d) brings, or invites any person to send, into the territories to S 
which this Act extends, for the purpose of sale or distri-
bution. any ticket, coupon or other document for use in, 
or any advertisement of, the prize competition; or 
(e) sends, or attempts to send. out of the territories to which 
this Act extends any money or valuable thing received in 10 
re8pect of the sale or distribution of any ticket, coupon or 
other document for use in the prize competition; or 
(/> uses any premises. or causes or knowingly permits any 
premises to be used, for purposes connected with the pro-
motion or conduct of the prize competition; or IS 
(g) causes or procures or attempts to procure any person to do 
any of the above-mentioned acts, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months. or with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or with both, 20 
lZ. (1) If any person guilty of an offence under this Act is a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company, as well as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be 
liable- to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 2S 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment providea in this Act if he 
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that 
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 30 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), whel'e 
an offence under this Act has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 35 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section~-
(a) 'company' means a body corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 40 
(b) 'director' in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 

5 
~ 
1.3. The licensing authority may- Power of 
( ) , t' d t' , Uc:ensiDI a require any person promo mg or con uc mg a prize com- authority to 
petition to produce before it the accounts and other docu- call for and . nspect8C-
ments kept by such perlon or to furnish to it such other counts and 
infonnation relating to the prize competition as it may documents. 
require; 
(b) inspect at all reasonable times the accounts and other 
documents kept by such person. 
it. (1) It shall be lawful for any police officer not below the rank Power of entry 
10 of sub-inspector authorised by the State Government in this behalf and learch. 
by general or special order in writing,-
(a) to enter, if necessary by force, whether by day or night, 
with such assistants as he considers necessary, any pre-
mises which he has reason to suspect, are 6eing used for 
15 purposes connected with the promotion or conduct of any 
prize competition in contravention of the provisions of this 
Act; 
(b) to search the premises and the persons whom he may find 
therein; 
20 (c) to take into custody and produce before a magistrate all 
such persons; and 
(d) to seize all things found therein which are intended to be 
used or reasonably suspected to have been used in con-
nection with such prize competition, 
25 (2) All searches under this .section shall be made in accordance 
V of 1898 with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
15. Where any newspaper or other publication contains any prize Forfeifure oC 
competition or any advertisement in relation tnereto in contraven- :d'ruCli-' 
tion of the provisions of this Act, the State Government may, by catio,!" 
30 notification in the Official Gazette, declare every copy of the news- ~~~:pe_ 
paper and every copy of the publication containing the prize com- titions, 
petition or the advertisement, to be forfeited to Government. 
16. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the licensing authority Appeals. 
refusing to grant a licence or cancelling or suspending a licence 
35 may, within such time as may be prescribed, prefer an appeal to the 
State Government and the decision of the State Government on 
such appeal shall.be final. 
17, The licensing authority and any other officer acting under Licen8~ 
this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning :~h:h~ 
X,L'N of 1860 An of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. offia;rs to be .,.. pubbcser-
vanta. 

JuriadicUOIl 18. No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a 
to try of[enc:es. magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act. 
Protection oC 
action taken 
under thi, 
Act. 
Power to make 
rules. 
19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the licensing authority or any other officer of the Government for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under S 
this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
2t. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, and subject to the condition of previous publication. make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 10 
foreging power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the form and manner of applicati~n for a licence and the 
fees, if any, for such ~pplication; 
(b) the fees on payment of which, the period for w1uch, the I, 
conditions subject to which and the form in which, a 
licence may be granted; 
(c) the form in which and the intervals at which statements of 
accounts shall be submitted to the licensing authority; 
(d) the time within which an appeal against a decision of the 20 
, licensing authority may be preferred to the State Gov-
ernment; 
(e) any other matter which is fo be or may be prescribed. 

7 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Crossword puzzles and similar competitions have of late been 
increasing at an alarming rate. Though they purport to be games 
of skill. they really provide a form of gambling to the public. These 
competitions have a deleterious effect on large sections of the 
people. The object of this Bill is to remove this evil, permitting 
at the same time reasonable scope for competitions which are main-
ly games of skill and intelligence, and which provide innocent amuse-
ment without encouraging the gambling spirit 
2. The subject matter of the proposed legislation falls within 
entry 34 in List II of the Schedule VII to the Constitution (State 
List). The State Legislatures of Bombay, Andhra and Patiala and 
East Punjab States Union have passed resolutions under article 252 
empowering Parliament to make a law on the subject. The Bill 
when passed will become applicable to these States and to all 
Part C States and to Uie Andainan'and Nicobar Islands. It will also 
become applicable to such Part A and Part B States (except Jammu 
and Kashmir) as may pass resolutions under the said article adopting 
the Act. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 2~th August, 1955. 

a 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 20 of the Bill empowers the State 
Government to make rules for carrying out .the purposes of the Act. 
The matters in relation to which such rules may be made have been 
enumerated in sub-clause (2) of that clause. These matters are 
matters of administrative detail necessary for the day-to-day ad-:-
ministration of the Act and deal with such things as the form and 
manner of an application for a licence, the fees on payment of which 
and the period for which and the conditions subject to which a 
licence may be granted, the time within which an appeal against 
a decision of the licensing authority may be preferred to the State 
Government and so on. The delegation at legislative power is thus 
of a normal type. 

. 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the control and regulation of prize 
competitions. 
(Shri Gooind Ballahh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs;) 
GIPD-LAD- 867 LS-7-9-.5S- 1.7.5° 