As Intropucep iN Lox Sapna

Bitl No. 45 of 1992

जी कली
| JUTE MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992

A
BILL

to amend the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the
Kepublic of India as follows:—

1, (1) This Act may be called the Jute Manufactures Development
‘Council (Amendment) Act, 1992.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Centra] Government
‘may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 2 of the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act,
1983, for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(f) “year” means the year commencing on the Ist day of April
and ending on the 31st day of March next following:

Short
title
and

mence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of
Act 27

of 1983.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Jute Manufactures Development Council (JMDC) was estab-
lished with effect from May, 1984 under the Jute Manufactures Develop-
ment Council Act, 1983 (27 of 1983). At the time of enactment of the
Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, it was felt that the JMDC
should follow the Jute Year, which commences on Ist July and ends on
30th June of the following year, so that the annual cycle of activities
of the JMDC run concurrently with the Jute Year. In the Jute Manu-
factures Development Council Act, 1983, the relevant provision as stated
in section 2(f) reads as follows:—

‘year” means the year commencing on the Ist day of July and
ending on the 30th day of June next following’.

2. Atthough the funds for JMDC’s activities are provided from the
cess collected on jute manufactures, the budget provisions for the
JMDC are made by the Government on financial year basis. Grants are
also released to the JMDC on the same basis. This leads to certain ac-
counting problems in the JMDC as there is variance between the Gov-
ernment's financial year and the accounting system followed by the
JMDC on the basis of the Jute Year. The auditing of accounts of the
Council leads to avoidable confusion and delay due to two different years
of accounting followed by the Government and the Council.

3. In view of the above, it is proposed to amend the Jute Mamufac-
tures Development Council Act, 1983 by changing the definition of the
word “year” as mentioned in clause (f) of section 2 of the Act to
“financial year”. प्र

New Devut; ASHOK GEHLOT.

The 3rd March, 1992.



. t ANNEXURE
FROM THE Jute MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT Councit Act, 1983
१ (27 oF 1983)

* * *

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—

* * * * *

(0) “year” means the year commencing on the Ist day of July
and ending on the 30th day of June next following.

* * * *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to amend the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983

(Shri Ashok Gehlot, Min’ster of State of the Ministry of Teatiles)