As Inrropucen IN Lox SABHA

Bill No. 45 of 1993

‘HE EMPLOYMENT OF MANUAL SCAVENGERS AND CONSTRUCTION
OF DRY LATRINES (PROHIBITION) BILL, 1993

A
BILL

to provide for the prohibition of employment of manual scavengers as weil as
construction or continuance of dry latrines and for the regulation of
construction and maintenance of water-seal latrines and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Wuereas fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual has been enshrined
in the Preamble to the Constitution;

AND WHEREAS article 47 of the Constitution, infer alia, provides that the
State shall regard raising the standard of living of its people and the
improvement of public health as among its primary duties;

Anp wiereas the dehumanising practice of manual scavenging of human
excreta still continues in many parts of the country;

Awp wnereas the municipal laws by themselves as a measure for conversion
of dry latrines into water-seal latrines and prevention of construction of dry
latrines are not stringent enough to eliminate this practice;

Anp wuereas it is necessary to enact a uniform legislation for the whole of
India for abolishing manual scavenging by declaring employment of manual
scavengers for removal of human excreta an offence and thereby ban the further
proliferation of dry Jatrines in the country;

Anp wHereas it is desirable for eliminating the dehumanising practice of
employment of manual scavengers and for protecting and improving the human
environment to make it obligatory to convert dry latrines into water-seal latrines
or to construct water-seal latrines in new constructions;

AND WHEREAS Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with
respect to the matters aforesaid, except as provided in articles 249 and 250 of
the Constitution;

AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution,
resolutions have been passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of the States
of Goa, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tripura and West Bengal that the matters
25 aforesaid should be regulated in those States _by Parliament by law;

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fourth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

30 1. (1) This Act may be called the Employment of Manual Scavengers and
Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act. 1993.

Short title,
application and
commencement.



(2) It applies in the first instance to the whole of the States of Goa,

Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tripura and West Bengal and to all the Union

territories and it shall also apply to such other State which adopts this Act by

resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1) of article 252 of the

Constitution. 5

(3) It shall come into force in the States of Goa, Karnataka, Maharashtra,

Tripura and West Bengal and in the Union territories on such date as: the

Central Government may, by notification, appoint and in any other State which

adopts this Act under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, on the date of

such adoption. 10

Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “area”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such area as the

State Government may, having regard to the requirements of that provision,

specify by notification;

(b) “building” means a house, out-house, stable, latrine, urinal, sheet 15

house, hut, wall (other than a boundary wall) or any other structure whether

made of masonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or other material;

(c) “dry latrine” means a latrine other than a water-seal latrine;

(d) “environment” includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship
which exists among and between water, air and land and human beings, other 20

living creatures, plants, micro‘organism and property;

(e) “environmental pollutant” means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance
present in such concentration as may be, or tend to be, injurious to
environment;

(f) “environmental pollution” means the presence in the environment of 25

any ‘énvironmental pollutant;

(g) “Executive Authority” means an Executive Authority appointed under

sub-section (i) of section 5;

(0) “HUDCO” means the Housing and Urban Development Corporation

Limited, a Government company registered by that name under the 30

Companies Act, 1956; lof

(i) “latrine” means a place set apart for defecation together with the
structure comprising such place, the receptacle therein for collection of

human excreta and the fittings and apparatus, if any, connected therewith;
(j) “manual scavenger” means a person engaged or employed for manually 35

carrying human excreta and the expression “manual scavenging” shall be

construed accordingly;

(है) “notification” means a notification published in-the Official Gazette;
(0) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(m) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means the 40.

Administrator thereof appointed under article 239 of the Constitution;

{n) “water-seal latrine” means a pour-flush latrine, water flush latrine or a
sanitary latrine with a minimum water-seal of 20 millimetres diameter in
which human excreta is pushed in or flushed by water.

CHAPTER IE 45

PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF MANUAL SCAVENGERS, ETC.

Prohibition 3. (1) Subject to sub-section (2) and the other provisions of this Act, with
of employ- effect from such date and in such area as the State Government may, by
ment of notification, specify in this behalf, no person shall—

scavengers, (a) engage or employ or permit to be engaged or employed any other 50
ete. ’ person for manually carrying human excreta;-or



10

15

30

35

40

45

50

3

(b) construct or maintain a dry latrine.
{2) The State Government shall not issue a notification under sub-section
(1) untess—

(i) it has, by notification, given not less than ninety days, notice of its
intention to do so;

(ii) adequate facilities for the use of water-seal latrines in that area exist;
and

(iii) it is necessary or expedient to do so for the protection and
improvement of the environment or public health in that area.
4. The State Government may, by a general or special order published in the

Official Gazette, and upon such conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose,
exempt any area, category of buildings or class of persons from any provisions

of this Act or from any specified requirement contained in this Act or any rule,
order, notification or scheme made thereunder or dispense with the observance
of any such requirement in a class or classes of cases, if it is satisfied that
compliance with such provisions or such requirement is or ought to be exempted
or dispensed with in the circumstances of the case.

CHAPTER III
IMPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES AND SCHEMES

5. (1) The State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,
appoint a District Magistrate or a Sub-Divisional Magistrate, as an Executive
Authority to exercise jurisdiction within such area as may be specified in the
order and confer such powers and impose such duties on him, as may be
necessary to ensure that the provisions of this Act are properly carried out and
the Executive Authority may specify the officer or officers, subordinate to him,
who shall exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all or any of the duties,
so conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such powers or duties
shall be carried out by the officer or officers so specified.

(2) The Executive Authority appointed under sub-section (1) and the officer
or officers specified under that sub-section shall, as far as practicable, try to
rehabilitate and promote the welfare of the persbns who were engaged or
employed as manual scavengers in any area in respect of which a notification
under sub-section (1} of section 3 has been issued by securing and protecting
their economic interests.

6. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make one or more schemes
for regulating conversion of dry latrines into, or construction and maintenance
of, water-seal latrines, rehabilitation of the persons who were engaged or
employed as manual scavengers in any area in respect of which a notification
under sub-section (7} of section 3 has been issued in gainful employment and
administration of such schemes and different schemes may be made. in relation
to different areas and for different purposes of this Act:

Provided that no such scheme as involving financial assistance from the
HUDCO जगा be made without consulting it.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such schemes may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:— .

(a) time-bound phased programme for the conversion of dry latrines
into water-seal latrines;

(९) provision of technical or financial assistance for new or alternate
low cost sanitation to local bodies or other agencies;

(८) construction and maintenance of community latrines and regulation
of their use on pay and use basis;

Power to
exempt.

Appointment
of Executive
Authorities

and their
powers and
functions. |

Power of
State
Government
to make
schemes.



Power of
State
Government
to issue
directions,

Executive
Authorities,
inspectors,
officers and
other
employees of
such
authorities to
be public
Servants.

Appointment
of inspectors
and their
powers of
entry and
inspection.

Power of
Executive

Authority to
prevent

environmental
pollution in
certain cases.

(d) construction and maintenance of shared latrines in slum areas or
for the benefit of socially and economically backward classes of citizens;

(८) registration of manual Scavengers and their rehabilitation;
@) specification and standards of water-seal latrines;
(g) procedure for conversion of dry latrines into water-seal latrines;

th) licensing for collection of fees in respect of community latrines or
shared latrines.

7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law but subject to the
other provisions of this Act, the State Government may, in the exercise of its
powers and performance of its functions under this Act, issue directions in
writing to any person, officer or local or other authority and such person, officer
or a local or other authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.

8. All, Executive Authorities, all officers and other employees of such

the rules or schemes made or orders or directions issued thereunder, shall be
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.

9. (1) The State Government may, by notification, appoint such persons as it
may think Gt to be inspectors for the Purposes of this Act, and define the local
limits within which they shall exercise their powers under this Act.

(2) Every: inspector: within the local fimits of jurisdiction of an Executive
Authority shall be subordinate to such authority,

(3) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the State Government, an
inspector may, within the local limits of his Jurisdiction, enter, at all reasonable
times, with such assistance as he considers necessary, any place for the purpose
of—

(a) performing any of the functions of the Executive Authority
entrusted to him;

(0) determining whether and if so in what manner, any such functions
are to be performed or whether any provisions of this Act or the tules, orders or
schemes made thereunder OF any notice, order, direction or authorisation
served, made, given or granted under this Act is being or has been
complied with;

(c} for the purpose of examining and testing any latrine or for

conducting an inspection of any building in which he has reason to believe that

10. (1) On receipt of information with Fespect to the fact or apprehension of
any occurrence of contravention of the Provisions of section 3, whether through
intimation by some person of on a report of the inspector or otherwise, the
Executive Authority shali, as early as practicable, besides taking any other
action ‘under this Act, direct the Owner or occupier of the premises to take such
remedial ‘measures, as may be necessary, within such reasonable time as may be
Specified therein and in case the owner or occupier, as the case may be, fails to
comply with such directions, cause such remedial measures to be taken as are
necessary to prevent or mitigate the environmental pollution at the cost of such
Owner or occupier of the premises.

5

10

18

20 45 of 1860.

30

35

40

45

50


(2) The expenses, if any, incurred by the Executive Authority with respect to
the remedial measures referred to in sub-section (1), together with interest at
such rate as the State Government may specify from the date when a demand
for the expenses is made until it is paid, may be recovered by such authority or
agency from the person concerned as arrears of land revenue or of public
demand.

it. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in its Memorandum of Association
or Articles of Association or schemes for the grant of loans for housing and
urban development, it shall be the duty of HUDCO to extend, in suitable cases,
financial assistance for the implementation of such schemes for the construction
of water-seal latrines as may be made under section 6.

(2) The financial assistance referred to in sub-section (1) may be extended by
HUDCO on such terms 4nd conditions (including on easy and concessional rates
of interest} and in such manner as it may think fit in each case or class of cases.
15 42. Any order or scheme which the State Government is empowered to make

under this Act may, notwithstanding the absence of any express provision to
that effect, provide for levy of fees in respect एन
{a} community latrines constructed under a scheme on pay and: use
basis; or
20 (8) shared latrines constructed ender a scheme; or

(c) supply of copies of documents or orders or extracts thereof; or
(d) licensing of contractors for construction of water-seal latrines; or

(९) any other purpose or matter involving rendering of service by any
officer, committee or authority under this Act or any rule, direction, order
25 or scheme made thereunder:

Provided that the State Government may, if it considers necessary so to do, in
the public interest, by general or special order published in the Offical Gazette,
grant exemption on such grounds as it deems fit from the payment of any such
fee either in part or in full.

30 13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute—

(a) one or more Project Committees for appraising of the schemes for
the construction of water-seal latrines in the country;

(0) one or more Monitoring Committees to monitor the progress of
such schemes;
35 (८) such other committees for such purposes of the Act and with such
names as the Central Government may deem fit.

{2) The composition of the committees constituted by the Central
Government, the powers and functions thereof, the terms and conditions of
appointment of the members of such committees and other matters connected

40 therewith shall be such as the Central Government may prescribe.

(3) The members of the committees shall be paid such fees and allowances for
attending the meetings as may be prescribed.
(4) The State Government may, by notification, constitute—
(a) one or more State Co-ordination Committees for co-ordinating and
45 monitoring of the programmes for the construction of water-seal latrines in
the State and rehabilitation of the persons who were engaged or employed
as manual scavengers in any area in respect of which a notification under
sub-section (I) of section 3 has been issued;

Duty of
HUDCO to ।
extend
financial ।
assistance
in certain
cases.

Power to
levy fee.

Constitution
of
committees,



Penalty for
contraven-

tion of the
Provisions of
the Act and
rules, orders,
directions

and schemes.

Offences by
companies.
Offences to
be

cognizable,
Provision in
relation to

jurisdiction.

Limitation of
prosecution.

6

(9) sach other committees for such purpose of the Act and with such
iiames as the State Government may deem fit.

(5) The composition of the committees constituted by the State Government,
the powers and functions thereof, the terms and conditions of the members of
such committees and other matters connected therewith shall be such as the
State Government may prescribe.

(6) The members of the committees shall be paid such fees and allowances for
attending the meetings as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER IV
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE

14. Whéever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this
Act, Or the rules or schemes made or orders or directions issued thereunder,
shali, in respect of each such failure or contravention be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, which may
extend td two thousand rupees, or with both, and in case the failure or
contravention continues, with additional fine which may extend to one hundred
rupees for every day during which such failure or contravention continues after
the conviction for the first such failure or contravention.

15. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the
company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company
for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any: punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or that the
commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of any
director, manager, managing, agent or such other officer of the company, such
director, manager, managing agent or such other officer shall also be deemed to
be guility of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—~

(4) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(6) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
16. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, every offence under this Act shall be cognizable.

17. (1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan’ Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offencé under this Act.

(2) No prosecution for any offence under this Act shall be instituted except by
or with the previous sanction of the Executive Authority.

(3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except upon
a complaint made by a person generally or specially authorised in this behalf by
the Executive ‘Authority,

18, No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act
unless the complaint thereof is made within three months from the date on
which the alleged commission of the offence came to the knowledge of the
complainant.

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

2 of 1974.



10

15

20

30

35

40

45

CHAPTER V
MIscELLANEOUS

19. The Central Government may, in relation to its functions under this Act,
from time to time, require any person, officer, State Government or other
authority to. furnish to it, any prescribed authority or officer any reports,
returns, statistics, accounts and other information as may be deemed necessary
and such person, officer, State Government or other authority, as the case may
be, shall be bound to do so:

20, No suit, prosecution or other legal proccedings shall lie against the
Government or any officer or other employee of the Government or any
authority constituted under this Act or executing any scheme made under this
Act or any member, officer or other employee of such authority or authorities in
respect of anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith in
pursuance of this Act or the rules or schemes made, or the orders or directions
issued, thereunder.

21. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of this Act,
the rules, schemes or orders made thereunder shall have effect: notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act,
custom, tradition, contract, agreement or other instrumient.

(2) If any act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this Act and
also under any other Act, then, the offender found guilty of such offence shall
be liable to be punished under the other Act and not under this Act.

22. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out
the provisions of this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(i) the composition of the Project Committees, Monitoring Committees
and other committees constituted by the Central Government under sub-section
(1) of section 13, the powers and functions thereof, the number of
members and their terms and conditions of appointment and other matters
connected therewith;

(ii) the fees and allowances to be paid to the members of the
committees constituted under sub-section (7) of section 13.

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shal! be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.

23. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules, not being a
matter for which the rules are or required to be made by the Central
Government, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Taformation,

_feports or
returns,

Protection of
action taken
in good faith.

Effect of
other — laws
and
agreements
inconsistent
with the Act.

Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.

Power of
State

Government
to make
rules.



Power
remove
difficulties.

to

8

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters; namely:—

(i) the composition of the State Co-ordination Committees and other
committees constituted by the State Government under sub-section (4) of
section 13, the powers and functions thereof, the number of members and 5
their terms and conditions of appointment and other matters connected
therewith;

(ii} the fees and allowances to be paid to the membcrs of the
committees constituted under sub-section (4) of section 13;

(iii) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 10

(3) Every rule and scheme made by the State Government under this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.

24. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it 15
to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made in relation to a State after the
expiration of three years from the commencement of this Act in that State.

(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 20



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Despite the fact that concerted efforts have been made to eliminate the
dehumanising practice of employing persons for carrying human excreta on their
ficads or like wise, the practice still persists in certain parts of the country. It is,
therefore, proposed to prohibit the said practice by making the employment or
_engagement of manual scavengers 8 punishable offence. Further, a massive
centrally sponsored programme is under implementation for conversion of dry
Jatrines into, and construction of, new water-seal latrines in buildings. On
‘completion of the programme in a State, it has to declare itself as a manual
scavenger free State. In order to supplement the cxisting efforts for complete
élimination of dry latrines and to ensure the construction of water-seal latrines
in all buildings, it is also proposed to make constructions or maintenance of dry
latrines as a punishable offence.

2. It is also felt that the existing municipal laws arc not stringent cnough to
eliminate the practices. However, as the subject-matter “manual scavenging”, in
pith and substance, falls under the State List, suitable uniform legislation for the
whole of India could not be made without the necessary resohitions being passed
by the various State legislatures. The legislatures of the State of Goa,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tripura and West Bengal have passed the necessary
resolutions in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution
empowering Parliament to undertake the legislation for prohibiting employment
of manual scavengers as well as construction or continuance of dry latrines and
for the regulation of construction and maintenance of water-seal latrines and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thercto.

3. The Bill inter alia, provides for—

(a) making employment or engaging of manual scavenger a punishable
offence;

(b) formulation of various schemes for conversion of dry fatrines into
water-seal latrines, rendering of technical and financial assistance for new or.
alternative low cost sanitation to local bodies and other agencies,
construction and maintenance of community latrines and regulation of their
use on pay and use basis, construction and maintenance of shared latrines
in slum areas for the benefit of socially and economically backward classes
of citizens, registration of manual scavengers and their rehabilitation
through alternative employments, ctc., and financing by the Housing and
Urban Development Corporation Limited or other agencies for the

construction of water-seal latrines or conversion of dry latrines into water-
seal latrines;

(c) proper implementation of the legislation by the State Governments
through the Executive Authorities;

(d) the appointment of proper inspection staff;

(८) constitution of Project Committees for appraising of the schemes
for the construction of water-seal latrines in the country and Monitoring
Committces for the monitoring of the progress of the schemes, etc., by the

Central Government;
(f) constitution of State Co-ordination Committees and such other

committees by the State Governments as may be necessary for the proper co-
ordination of the programmes under the legislation.

4, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

SHEILA KAUL.

New Devut;
The Ist March, 1993.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Sub-clause (1) of clause 13 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may, by notification, constitute Project Committees, Monitoring Committees
and such other committees for the proper implementation of the Act. Similarly,
vide sub-clause (4) of the said clause 13, the State Governments are empowered
to constitute State Co-ordination Committees and other Committees. Sub-clause.
(3) of clause 13 provides thatthe members of the Committees constituted by the
Central Government shall~be paid such fees and allowances as may be
prescribed by rules for attending the meetings of the Committees. The members
of the State Committees are also to be paid such fees and allowances for
attending the meetings as may be prescribed by the State Government. In
respect of the Committees as may be constituted by the Central Government as
welF as in respect of the Committees as may be constituted by the Union
territory administrations without legislature expenditure shall have to be borne
out of the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of Rs. 10,000 shall be required annually for meeting the above
expenditure. During the current financial year i.e. 1992-93, it is estimated that
the above expenditure may be 10 the tune of Rs. 50004.

2. There shall be no non-recurring expenditure.

40



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the State Government to issue general or
special ordcrs, published in the Official Gazette, exempting, upon such
conditions as it may think fit, any area, category of buildings or class of persons
from any provisions of the Bill or from any specified requirement contained in
the Bill or any rule, order, notification or scheme made thereunder or dispense
with the observance of any such requirements in a class or classes of cases, if it
is satisfied that compliance with such provisions or such requirements is or ought
to be exempted or dispensed with in the circumstances of the case.

2. Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make one or more
schemes, by notification in the Official Gazette, for regulating conversion of dry
latrines into, or construction and maintenance of, water-seal latrines,
rehabilitation of the persons who were engaged or employed as manual
scavengers in any area in respect of which a notification under sub-clause (1) of
clause 3 of the Bill has been issued in gainful employment and for
administration of such schemes. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause 6 enumerates
the matters in respect of which such schemes may be made. Different schemes
may be made for different areas and for different pusposes of the proposed
legislation provided that the schemes involving financial assistance from the
HUDCO are required to be made after consulting them.

3. Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules, by
notification in the Official Gazette, for carrying out the provisions of the Bill.
Such rules may be made, inter alia, to prescribe the composition of the Project
Committees, Monitoring Committees and other Committees constituted by the
Central Government under sub-clause (1) of clause 16 of the Bill, the powers,
functions and the umber of members of such Committees, their terms and
conditions of appointment and the fees and allowances to be paid to the
members of the committees so constituted.

4, Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make rules, by
notification in the Official Gazette, except where the Central Government is or
has been required to make rales, for carrying out the provisions of the Bill.
Such rules may be madc, inter alia, to prescribe the composition of the State
Co-ordination Committees and other Committees constituted by the State
Government under sub-clause (4) of section 13 of the Bill, the powers, functions
and the number of members of such Committees, their terms and conditions of
appointment, the fees and allowances to be paid to such members, etc.

5. Every scheme and every rule made by the State Government under clause
6 and clause 23 respectively is required to be laid before the State Legislature
and every rule made by the Central Government under clause 22 is required to
be laid before Parliamens.

6. The delegation of legislative power under the afore-mentioned provisions
relate to matters of procedure or administrative detail or to matters in respect of
which it is not practicable 10 make detailed provisions. Hence, the delegation of
legislative power fs of a normal character.

11



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the prohibition of employment of manual scavengers as well as
construction of continuance of dry latrines and for the regulation of

construction and maintenance of water-seal ‘latrines and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Smt. Sheila Kaul, Minister of Urban Development.)