Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  EMPLOYMENT  BILL, 2020
By
DR.  ALOK KUMAR SUMAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide employment or means and resources for self-employment to at least one
adult member of every family and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Employment Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘Board’’ means the Employment Advisory Board constituted under
section 5;
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 45 of  2020
Definitions.
5

2
(b) ‘‘family’’ includes wife, husband and minor children; and
(c) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The shall be the duty of the Central Government to provide gainful employment
to atleast one adult member of every family.
4. Every unemployed person shall be entitled to receive monthly unemployment
allowance at such rate as may be prescribed, till he is provided with gainful
employment.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Board to be known as the Employoment Advisory Board for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of,—
(a) a retired Judge of the Supreme Court—Chairperson;
(b) two representatives of the Central Government—Members;
(c) one representative from Union Ministry of Labour and Employment—
Member;
(d) two persons having Knowledge and experience in labour laws—
Members;
(e) one representative from the National Institution for Transforming India
(NIIT) Aayog—Members;
(f) one woman having experience in the field of empowerment of women
and children—Member; and
(g) Director-General of Employment, Union Ministry of Labour and
Employment—Member-Secretary,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) the Board shall meet thrice  in a quarter of the year:
Provided that the Chairperson may call for a meeting at any time in consultation
with the Member-Secretary as and when the circumstances warrant so.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The Board shall,—
(a) identify fields and areas for generation of employment and forward
the information to the Central Government;
(b) collect data of unemployed persons in every district;
(c) develop model for generation of self employment for unemployed
youth;
(d) develop model for providing skill development and vocational training
to youth;
(e) encourage businessmen for generation of employment; and
(f) undertake such other measures for generation of self-employment for
unemployed youth as it considers necessary.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Central
Government to
provide
employment.
Grant of
unemployment
allowances.
Constitution of
Employment
Advisory Board.
Functions of the
Board.
35
40

3
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Employment Fund for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the
Employment Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, on the recommendation of the Board, take
steps to promote the interest of unemployed youth by providing employment or
generating self-employment, through various measures in such measure or may be
prescribed.
9. The Central Government shall provide all facilities or resources for self-
employment to every family, where it is not possible to provide employment to atleast
one dependent member of that family.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid
before each House of the Parliament, as soon as may be after it is made. While it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may comprise in one session or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
such modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall, as the case may be; however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.
Constitution of
Employment
Fund.
Promoting
interest of
unemployed
youth.
Central
Government to
provide
resources or
facilities to
dependent
member of
family.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Unemployment is one of the biggest problems in India. Even after seventy-
three years of Independence, we have not been able to meet the challenge of providing
employment to the massive unemployed youth. Although our country has progressed
in many fields; yet it has failed to improve the generation of employment and job
opportunities. With two-thirds of 1.2 billion people in the age group of thirty-five
years, India has the world's largest  youth population, seeking a challenge and an
opportunity. More than thirty per cent. of India's youth are unemployed. They are
reeling under poverty.
There are a large number of families  where there is not even a single earning
member and most of them earn their livelihood by labourary, domestic working as
servants, bonded-labourers, etc. and majority of population lives below poverty line.
Our country being a welfare State should take necessary steps to improve the living
standard of the people and formulate schemes and plans to eradicate poverty from
the country.
The National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) round table was last held in the year
2011-12 and there is lot of confusion about the prevailing employment situation. The
focus of the Government needs to shift towards more spending on enhancing quality
of education and vocational and skill training. There is a need to improve India's track
record on job creation.
It is proposed that at least one adult member of every family should be provided
with employment and where it is not possible to provide employment, the Government
should encourage those who desire to set up their own business and improve their
capability of increasing production, like handicraft artisans, carpenters, weavers,
cottage industry so that they become self-sufficient and the family should be given
all necessary facilities for decent and reasonable living.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; ALOK KUMAR SUMAN
January 16,  2020.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide
employment to at least one adult member of every family. Clause 4 provides for
payment of unemployment allowances to every unemployed person at such rate as
may be prescribed till he is provided with gainful employment. Clause 5 provides for
constitution of Employment Advisory Board. Clause 7 provides for constitution of
Employment Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Bill.  Clause 9 provides that
the Central Government shall provide all facilities or resources for self-employment to
a family where it is not possible to provide employment. Clause 10 empowers the
Central Government to provide funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees seven
thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure to
the tune of rupees four thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry
out the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide employment or means and resources for self-employment to at least one
adult member of every family and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4696LS—(S3)—24.02.2020.