As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

1 2 Aue 200

Bill No. 79 of 2005

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
oT : rm
SHRI M.P. VEERENDRAKUMAR, M.P.

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005.

=a
=

“253. Subject to the provisions of article 363B, Parliament has power to

_ make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing

any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or any
ae decision made at any international conference, association or other body.”

3. After article 363A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

ee

into any treaty, agreement, convention with any other country or countries or
before India signs and becomes a party in accordance with any decision made.at
any international conference, association or other body, it shall be ratified by
Parliament

q 2. For article 253 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—

“363B. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, before entering

क्र

Short title.

Substitution
of new article
for article

की के;

Legislation
for giving

‘effect to

international -
agreements.

- Insertion of

new article
363B.

Agreements,
etc. to be
ratified by
Parliament
before India
enters into
such
agreements.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Our country enters into agreements, treaties or convention with any country OF. 3
countries. Even our country signs agreements at the decisions made in any international a
conference or body. But, the Members of Parliament are not even informed about those _
agreements, let alone take them into confidence |

r

Some of the agreements signed by our country in the international arena are not in our _

interest. If the Parliament was taken into confidence before India becomes a party, sucha —

situation could have been avoided. The views of members should invariably be obtained —
before entering into any agreement and members can contribute constructive suggestions a

=
In many European countries, before that country enters into any agreement with any _

country or in international body, the Legislature of that country is always taken into confidence a
_and only after approval is given by the Legislature, that country enters into agreement. The
same system should be adopted in our country also

It is, therefore, proposed to provide that any agreement in which India is a party ;
should be made only after the same is ratified by Parliament ‘

New Deut; , M.P. VEERENDRAKUMAR
May 6th, 2005.

% onli

4 tee tee



ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE ConstiTuTION OF INDIA
sd * * * | ¥*
253. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, Parliament
has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India for implementing

any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries or any decision
made at any international conference, association or other body.

* ie ot * *

a,
af

Legislation
for giving
effect to
international
agreements.

a


MGIPMRND—1307LS(S-3)—1 3.06.2005.

Sag

‘

/

LOK SABHA

A
BILL

_ further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri M.P. Veerendrakumar, MP )