THE  HIGH COURT OF ANDHRA PRADESH (ESTABLISHMENT OF A PERMANENT
BENCH A T VIJAY AW ADA) BILL,  2009
By
SHRI L. RAJAGOPAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court of Andhra
Pradesh at Vijayawada.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the High Court of Andhra Pradesh (Establishment of a
Permanent Bench at Vijayawada) Act, 2009.
2. There shall be established a permanent Bench of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh
at Vijayawada and such Judges of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, being not less than
four in number, as the Chief Justice of that High Court may from time to time nominate, shall
sit at Vijayawada in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in
that High Court in respect of cases arising in the districts of Srikakulam, Vizianagaram,
Visakhapatnam, East Godavari, West Godavari, Krishna, Prakasam and Guntur.
Short title.
Bill No. 45 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Establishment
of a permanent
Bench of the
High Court of
Andhra Pradesh
at Vijayawada.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Before the reorganization of the State of Andhra Pradesh, between 1953 and 1956, the
Andhra High Court used to function from Guntur. After the formation of the State of
Andhra Pradesh in 1956, the Andhra High  Court was merged with the Andhra Pradesh High
Court and it was shifted to Hyderabad.
Andhra Pradesh is a very large State. The capital of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad,
which is also the seat of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, is far away from the coastal
regions of Andhra Pradesh. Therefore, the people of the coastal regions of Andhra Pradesh
face difficulties and inconvenience in pursuing litigation in the High Court of
 Andhra Pradesh. They have to travel all the way to Hyderabad for the purpose. This results
in denial of speedy justice. The establishment of a bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh
at Vijayawada will help mitigate the problems of the people of the coastal regions of
Andhra Pradesh. Vijayawada is centrally located in the coastal region of Andhra Pradesh and
people living in coastal parts can conveniently reach there to pursue their cases.
The city of Vijayawada has good infrastructure and is located in the vicinity of many
big cities like Guntur, Eluru, etc. Therefore, the establishment of a permanent bench of
High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Vijayawada shall fulfil the needs of the people of the area.
This will also help in satisfying the long pending demand of the people of the coastal
regions of Andhra Pradesh.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; L. RAJAGOPAL
June 29, 2009.
2

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a permanent Bench of the High Court of
Andhra Pradesh at Vijayawada.
————
(Shri L. Rajagopal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2632LS(S5)—08-07-2009.