THE RAILWAYS (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Railways (Second Amendment) Act, 2008.
2. In the Railways Act, 1989, after section 198, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“198A. The power to make rules under section 198, for the purposes of sub-
section (7) of  section 33,  shall  include the power to  make such rules with retrospective
effect from a date not earlier than the date of the commencement of  this Act, but no
such retrospective effect shall be given to any such rule  so as to prejudicially affect
the interest of any person to whom such rule may be applicable.’’.
Power to
make certain
rules with
retrospective
effect.
Short title.
Insertion of
new section
198A.
24 of 1989.
Bill No. 45 of 2008
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sub-section (7) of section 33 of the Railways Act,  1989 provides that the Chairman
and other Members of the Tribunal (Railway Rates Tribunal) shall hold office on such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed. Further, section 198 of the Act provides that without
any prejudice to any power to make rules contained elsewhere in this Act, the Central
Government may make rules generally to carry out the purposes of the Act. Accordingly the
Central Government notified the Railway Rates Tribunal (Salaries and Allowances and
Conditions of Service of Chairman and Members) Rules, 1995 which were based on the 4th
Central Pay Commission scales of pay and allowances. While examining the question of
revising the salary, pension and allowances payable to the Chairman and other Members of
the Railway Rates Tribunal with effect from 1-1-1996 on the basis of the recommendations of
the Fifth Central Pay Commission and to extend the pensionary benefit to those who demitted
the office of Chairman and Members in Railway Rates Tribunal prior to 30-1-1999, the date
from which pensionary benefits were made available to the Chairman and Members, by
suitably amending the relevant rules, it has been observed that there is no enabling provision
in the said Act to give retrospective effect to the rules as provided in the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985 and the Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987.  In order to overcome this
difficulty, it is proposed to amend the Railways Act, 1989 to provide for an enabling provision
to make such rules with retrospective effect not earlier than the date of commencement of the
said Act.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; LALU PRASAD.
The 24th  January,  2008.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 198A in the Railways Act, 1989, to
empower the Central Government to make rules for the purpose of sub-section (7) of section
33 of the said Act with retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of
commencement of the said Act. The matter with respect of which such rules may be made
relate to salaries, pension and allowances payable to the Chairman and  Members of  Railway
Rates Tribunal.
2. As the said Bill seeks to provide for an enabling provision to make rules, the financial
implications would be known only after the Railway Rates Tribunal (Salary and Allowances
and Conditions of  Service of  Chairman and Members) Rules, 1995 are amended.  Hence,  it
may not be possible to estimate the exact expenditure at this stage. The expenditure, if any,
will be met out of the budgetary grant of the Ministry of Railways.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 198A in the Railways Act, 1989, to
empower the Central Government to make rules for the purpose of sub-section (7) of section
33 of the said Act with retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of
commencement of the said Act. The new section 198A specifically provides that no such
retrospective effect shall be given to any such rule so as to prejudicially affect the interest of
any person to whom such rule may be applicable. The rules made under section 198A shall
also be laid before each House of  Parliament.
2. As the matters with respect to which such rules may be made to give retrospective
effect relate to salaries, pension and allowances payable to the Chairman and members of
Railway Rates Tribunal, it is not practicable to provide them in the Bill itself.  The delegation
of  legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

GMGIPMRND—2579LS(S-5)—18.07.2008.
LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
————
(Shri Lalu Prasad, Minister of Railways)