1
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  45 of 2015
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 3, in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) after clause (zi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(zia) ‘‘pre-packaged food’’ means food, which is placed in a package of
any nature, in such a manner that the contents cannot be changed without
tampering it and which is ready for sale to the consumer;’’; and
(ii) in cause (zz),—
(a) for sub-clause ( iv), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘‘(iv) by the substitution of any substance, including any inferior
or cheaper substance, whether wholly or in part; or’’; and
(b) after sub-clause ( xii) the following sub-clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘(xiii) by concealing, in any manner, any damage or inferiority; or
(xiv) by virtue of its being transported or offered for transport in
violation of provisions of section 24A.”.
3. After section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“20A. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every manufacturer or packers
of an article of food shall ensure that no substance is added or mixed thereto or
packed therewith so as to increase its bulk or weight or reduce its quality or make it
appear better or of greater value.”.
4. In the principal Act, after section 24, the following Chapter and sections thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘CHAPTER IV A
S
ANITARY TRANSPORTATION PRACTICES
24A. (1) No person shall transport any article of food in any vehicle—
(a) unless the vehicle is adequately cleaned to prevent any chemical,
physical or microbiologial contamination of an article of food; and
(b) together with contaminated food, waste food, poisonous or any
harmful substance, a living animal or any such object as may contaminate or
spoil the food.
(2) The freight compartment of a vehicle shall—
(a) have an interior surface made of an easy-to-clean and smooth, rust
free, non-toxic and non-absorbent material without open joints or seams;
(b) be dust proof; and
(c) not be used simultaneously for transport of any person or an object
which may contaminate the food.
Insertion of
new section
20A.
Amendment
of section 3.
Restriction on
the use of any
substance to
increase bulk
or weight, etc.
of an article
of food.
34 of 2006.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IV A.
Practices to
ensure
hygienic
transportation
of food.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, no non-prepackaged food shall be—
(a) transported in such a manner as may bring it in contact with the floor
of a vehicle or covering part thereof; and
(b) transported in such a manner as may spoil or contaminate it.
24B. (1) The Chairperson may, after consultation with other Members, by order
waive any requirement of section 24A, with respect to any class of persons, vehicles
or articles of food, if the Chairperson has reason to believe that the waiver—
(a) shall not result in transportation of food under conditions that would
be unsafe for health; and
(b) is not contrary to the public interest.
(2) Every order issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be published along with
reasons thereof in the Official Gazette.
5. In section 51 of the principal Act, for the words ‘‘five lakh rupees’’, the words
‘‘twenty lakh rupees’’ shall be substituted.
6. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), for the words ‘‘three lakh
rupees’’, the words ‘‘ten lakh’’ shall be substituted.
7. In section 53 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( 1), for the words
‘‘ten lakh rupees’’, the words ‘‘fifty lakh rupees’’ shall be substituted.
8. In section 54 of the principal Act, for the words ‘‘one lakh rupees’’, the words
"five lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
9. In section 56 of the principal Act, for the words ‘‘one lakh rupees’’, the words
‘‘five lakh rupees’’ shall be substituted.
10. In section 57 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(a) in clause (i), for the words ‘‘two lakh rupees’’, the words ‘‘five lakh rupees’’ shall
be substituted; and
(b) in clause ( ii), for the words ‘‘ten lakh rupees’’, the words ‘‘twenty lakh rupees’’
shall be substituted.
11. In section 59 of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause (i), for the words ‘‘one lakh rupees’’ the words ‘‘five lakh rupees’’ shall
be substituted;
(b) in clause ( ii), for the words ‘‘three lakh rupees’’ the words ‘‘ten lakh rupees’’
shall be substituted.
(c) in clause (iii), for the words ‘‘five lakh rupees’’, the words ‘‘twenty lakh rupees’’
shall be substituted; and
(d) for clause ( iv), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(iv) where such failure or contravention results in death, with imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life
and also with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five lakh rupees.’’.
Waiver in
respect of
practices of
transportation
of articles of
food.
Amendment
of section 51.
Amendment
of section 57.
Amendment
of section 59.
Amendment
of section 52.
Amendment
of section 53.
Amendment
of section 54.
Amendment
of section 56.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With a view to consolidate the laws relating to food and for laying down science
based standards for articles of food and to regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution,
sale and import, to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption
and for that purpose to establish the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India,
Parliament enacted the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
However, there is a need to bring more malpractices within the meaning of adulteration
and to make it more robust.
Also, the issue of penal provisions for the offenders has been discussed and
questioned time and again by the Parliament as well as the Judiciary. The punishment given
to offenders for adulteration of food fails to act as a deterrent. There is thus a need for
amending the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 to make various offences punishable
with greater severity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; SANJAY JAISWAL
January 30, 2015
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006
(34 OF 2006)
* * * * *
3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(zi) ‘‘premises’’ include any shop, stall, hotel, restaurant, airline services and
food canteens, place or vehicle or vessel where any article of food is sold or
manufactured or stored for sale;
* * * * *
(zz) ‘‘unsafe food’’ means an article of food whose nature, substance or quality
is so affected as to render it injurious to health:—
(i) * * * * *
(ii) * * * * *
(ii) * * * * *
(iv) by the substitution of any inferior or cheaper substance whether
wholly or in part; or
* * * * *
(xii) by virtue of containing pesticides and other contaminants in excess
of quantities specified by regulations.
* * * * *
51. Any person who whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for
human consumption which is sub-standard, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend
to five lakh rupees.
52. (1) Any person who whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for
human consumption which is misbranded, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to
three lakh rupees.
* * * * *
53. (1) Any person who publishes, or is a party to the publication of an advertisement,
which—
(a) falsely describes any food; or
(b) is likely to mislead as to the nature or substance or quality of any food or
gives false guarantee,
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Penalty for
sub-standard
food.
Penalty for
misbranded
food.
Penalty for
misleading
advertisement.
5

6
54. Any person whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf manufactures
for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for human consumption
containing extraneous matter, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one lakh
rupees.
* * * * *
56. Any person who, whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf,
manufactures or processes any article of food for human consumption under unhygienic
or unsanitary conditions, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees.
57. (1) Subject to the provisions of this chapter, if any person who whether by himself
or by any other person on his behalf, imports or manufactures for sale, or stores, sells or
distribute any adulterant shall be liable—
(i) where such adulterant is not injurious to health, to a penalty not exceeding
two lakh rupees;
(ii) where such adulterant is injurious to health, to a penalty not exceeding ten
lakh rupees.
* * * * *
59. Any person who, whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf,
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any article of food for
human consumption which is unsafe, shall be punishable,—
(i) where such failure or contravention does not result in injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees;
(ii) where such failure or contravention results in a non-grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and also with fine which may
extend to three lakh rupees;
(iii) where such failure or contravention results in a grievous injury, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six years and also with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees;
(iv) where such failure or contravention results in death, with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and also with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees.
* * * * *
Penalty for
food
containing
extraneous
matter.
Penalty for
unhygienic or
unsanitary
processing or
manufacturing
of food.
Penalty for
possessing
adulterant.
Punishment
for unsafe
food.

GMGIPMRND—4486LS(S3)—02-03-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
————
(Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal,  M.P .)