1
THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2022
By
SHRI C. P. JOSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to pr ovide for contr olling the population of the countr y and for
establishment of National Population Contr ol Committee
and for matters connected ther ewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-Third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India .
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 45 of   2022
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: –
(a) “Committee” means the National Population Control Committee
established  under  section 3; and
(b) “family” means mother, father and two or less than two children; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
NATIONAL POPULATION CONTROL AND PUBLIC WELFARE COMMITTEE
3. (1)  The Central Government shall, with ef fect from such date as it may, by
notification, specify, establish a Committee to be known as the National Population
Control Committee.
(2)  The headquarters of the Committee shall be at New Delhi.
(3)  The Committee shall consist of–
     (a) the Union Minister of Planning, Chairperson, ex-officio;
  (b) the Planning Ministers of all the States Members; and
(c) Secretaries of the Union Ministries of Planning, Health  and  Family
Welfare,  Statistics  and   Programme  Implementation, Women  and  Child
Development and Social  Justice and Empowerment –Members,  ex-officio.
(4) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers
and employees as it may consider necessary for the working of the
Committee.
(5) The salaries and allowances to be paid and other terms and
conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Committee shall
be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Committee shall follow such method for the conduct of its meetings
and the quorum of such meetings shall be such, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
4. The Committee shall,—
(a)  formulate and implement a National Policy on two-child norm and review
the policy every five years;
(b)  organise workshops and awareness programmes regarding population
control;
(c)  formulate plans regarding contraception and sterilization and other family
planning measures  and organize counselling sessions for couples with the aid
of district administration;
(d) ensure appointment of a Nodal Officer for family planning in every hospital
from amongst the existing management in Government and private hospitals;
and
(e)  perform such other functions for carrying out the purposes of this Act,
as may be prescribed.
5
10
1 5
20
25
30
Definitions.
Establishment of
the National
Population
Control
Committee.
Functions of the
Committee.
35
40

CHAPTER IV
INCENTIVES AND DISINCENTIVES
5. Every married couple, having two or less than two living children, shall be
entitled to the following incentives by the Central Government: –
(a) free treatment for the whole family in Government Primary Health
Centres;
(b) if either of the married couple is a Government servant, then priority in
promotion; and
(c) scholarship for higher education to the children.
6. If a married couple, having more than two living children at the
commencement of this Act, procreates another living child one year after the
commencement of this Act, then both the husband and the wife shall not be
entitled to,–
(a) contest elections to Houses of Parliament, State Legislature, Panchayat
and Municipal Corporation;
(b) exercise franchise right;
(c) benefits of Government schemes;
(d) Government jobs;
(e) benefits of Government scholarship or fellowship; and
(f) be engaged either directly or indirectly to a Government institution.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
7. The Committee shall prepare, in such form as may be prescribed, for each
financial year an annual report giving an account of the activities undertaken
during the previous financial year and submit a copy of that report to the Central
Government.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Committee
every year  for  carr ying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall apply notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force .
10. (1) The Central Government may , by notification in the Of ficial Gazette,
make rules for carrying  out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule .
3
5
10
1 5
20
25
30
35
40
Incentives for
the married
couples with
two or less
than two living
children.
Disincentives
for the married
couples with
more than two
living children.
Annual Report.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Act to have
overriding effect.
Power to make
rules.

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The population of India is the second largest in the world after the China.
The population of the country has exceeded 130 crore and according to the United
Nations, by the year 2027, the population of India will exceed that of China and
India will become the most populous country in the world.
As the resources of the country are limited due to the population explosion,
they are  being depleting  rapidly. A time will come when we will not have enough
resources to fulfil the needs of the entire population. Therefore, it is necessary
that the  population be controlled well in time. China has been successful in controlling
its population by making laws and implementing them strictly. There is also a need
for a similar population control law in India so that the population can be controlled.
The welfare of public is inherent  in it.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; C.P. JOSHI
February 3, 2022

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Population
Control Committee. It also provides for appointment of officers and employees to
the committee.
Clause 5  provides for the incentives like free treatment to the whole family in
Government providing health centres who is having two or less than two living
children. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
funds  to the Committee. The Bill,  therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
However, at this stage, it would be dif ficult to state the exact amount both
recurring and non-recurring expenditure to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund
of India on the constitution and functioning of the Committee.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As these rules will relate to the matter of
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for controlling the population of the country and for
establishment of National Population Control Committee
and for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri C. P. J oshi, M.P.)