1
Bill No. 45 of  2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Declaration.
THE RAINWATER (HARVESTING AND STORAGE) BILL, 2016
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater in every Government, residential,
commercial and institutional building to conserve water and ensure recharge of
groundwater and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rainwater (Harvesting and Storage) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in public interest that the Union
Government undertake adequate measures to harvest rainwater so as to conserve water and
prevent over-exploitation of existing water bodies.
5
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "building" includes all such structures, sheds, houses and buildings as may
be notified by the Government under this Act;
(b) "commercial establishment" means any building which is being used as an
office or factory or for any other commercial purpose in connection with any trade or
business;
(c) "Government" means the Central Government or the Union territory
Administration, as the case may be;
(d) "Government building" means any building occupied or being used by any
Government department or Ministry and includes offices of public sector enterprises,
statutory bodies, bodies owned or administered by the Government, autonomous
bodies, bodies of local self government and residential areas provided by the
Government to government employees;
(e) "household" means a dwelling unit of any description;
(f) "housing society" means a dwelling unit in a complex or building;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) "rainwater harvesting" means collection and storage of rainwater from rooftop
of a building or other parts of a building or from a vacant land for use or for the purpose
of groundwater recharge.
4. It shall be the duty of the Government to ensure and implement such measures, as it
may deem necessary and appropriate, to harvest rainwater in Government buildings within
such time as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Every owner of an independent household building having area of not less than
1100 square feet or every owner who proposes to construct an independent household
building on a sital area of not less than 1l00 square feet shall install rainwater harvesting
structures for storage and for use of harvested water or for groundwater recharge.
(2) It shall be obligatory for the builders and promoters of every building and housing
society to install rainwater harvesting structure on the top of every building or in the land
forming part of the property, in order to meet a part of its total requirement of water in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The responsibility to ensure compliance of the provisions of sub-section (2) shall
lie with the developer or builder of the proposed building or housing society.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section "builder" or "developer" means the
company or individual or group of individuals responsible for the planning and construction
of the building or housing society.
6. (1) Every commercial establishment shall adopt such measures to provide rain water
harvesting structures for storage and for use of harvested water or for groundwater recharge
within the premises of the commercial establishment.
(2) The responsibility to ensure compliance of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall
lie on the person, by whatever name called, who is primarily responsible for the affairs of that
establishment.
7. (1) The Government shall, as soon as possible, prepare an action plan to educate the
masses about the technology and the benefits of rainwater harvesting.
Definitions.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting in
Government
buildings.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting by
households
and residential
establishments.
Compulsory
rainwater
harvesting by
commercial
establishment.
Action plan to
educate the
masses about
rainwater
harvesting.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
35

3
(2) For the purpose of spreading awareness and promotion of rainwater harvesting,
including awareness and promotion through internet, the Government shall encourage
non-Governmental Organisations and other agencies or institutions engaged in the field of
rainwater harvesting by providing them adequate financial assistance.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
9. Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend upto two years and with fine which may extend upto rupees one
lakh.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. This provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is  in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or  in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite
funds.
Punishment.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Water availability per capita has been on the decline in India due to increasing demand
for water and the rapid population growth. The quantum of water available in the country
being fixed, the increasing demand has reduced per capita water availability.
There is a large-scale pollution of water as a result of industrialisation and urbanization,
a trend which has to be checked. Water in most industries is used for cooling purposes, thus,
it is not necessary to use potable water. Instead, the recycled water may be used for this
purpose. Demand of water for domestic use can also be reduced. For example, in most urban
areas about 12.5 litres of water is used in one flushing. By using the recycled water over and
over again, fresh water can be conserved.
Compulsory rainwater harvesting is, therefore, need of hour. It will not only reduce the
burden on limited water resources but will also ensure sustainability for the future generations.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT  PREMJIBHAI  SOLANKI
February 8, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Government shall provide adequate financial
assistance to non-Governmental organisations and other agencies or institutions engaged
in the field of rainwater harvesting for the purpose of spreading awareness among people
about the importance of rainwater harvesting. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government
shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a sum of rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved as recurring expenditure per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory harvesting of rainwater in every Government, residential,
commercial and institutional building to conserve water and ensure recharge of
groundwater and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4226LS(S3)—29.02.2016.