1
THE COMMISSION FOR IMPARTING SCIENCE, ENGINEERING
AND MEDICAL SCIENCES EDUCATION IN INDIAN
LANGUAGES BILL, 2011
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of a Commission for imparting science, engineering and
medical sciences education in Indian languages and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act  may be called Commission for Imparting Science, Engineering and
Medical Sciences Education in Indian Languages Bill, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 45 of 2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

(3) It shall come into force on scuh date as, the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "Indian languages" includes the languages included in the Eighth Schedule
to the Constitution; and
(ii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall set up a Commission which shall be known as the
Commission for Imparting Science, Engineering and Medical Sciences Education in Indian
Languages (hereinafter referred to as the Commission).
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of the following:—
(i)  a Chairperson, who shall have not less than twenty years of experience in
the field of teaching at university level and in administration, to be appointed by the
Central Government;
(ii) thirty other members having fair knowledge of atleast any one of the
languages included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution and not less than
twenty years experience of teaching science or engineering or medical sciences at
the university level, to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation with
the Chairman.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of Chairman and other members of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall have its headquarters in New Delhi.
(4) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Commission, as may be necessary for its efficient functioning.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
officers and staff of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
5. The Commission shall perform the following functions:—
(i) working with the State Governments with a view to providing secondary,
higher secondary, college and university level education in all science stream
subjects in Indian languages in all the educational institutions in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(ii) giving such assistance as may be prescribed to all institutions imparting
education in technological, engineering and medical sciences with a view to provide
such education in Indian languages;
(iii) causing the preparation of syllabi of all science stream subjects at all
levels of education in Indian languages in consultation with universities and
institutions providing engineering and medical education and such other experts as
it may deem fit;
(iv) causing the preparation of glossary of 'technical terms' of all the subjects
relating to science, technology, engineering and medical sciences in the Indian
languages;
(v) organizing seminars and workshops inviting suggestions from experts
and such other persons including general public to ensure the high standard of
technical, engineering and medical education in Indian languages.
Definitions.
Composition
of the
Commission.
2
Setting up of
Commission
for imparting
science,
engineering
and medical
sciences
education in
Indian
languages.
Functions of
the Commis-
sion.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6. One year after the commencement of the Act, it shall be the duty of Government of
every State to impart technical, engineering or medical science education in the official
language of the State or in any of the Indian languages spoken by majority of the people in
the State:
Provided that any student studying in any of the institutions imparting technical,
engineering or medical sciences education may also continue to pursue his studies in a
language in which he was receiving instructions before the commencement of this Act.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation by Parliament by law,
provide adequate funds for the implementation of the provisions of the Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force, regulating any of the matters dealt within this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
3
State Governments
to impart techni-
cal, engineering
or medical science
education in the
official language
of the State.

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mother tongue is the best medium of expression. Our thoughts are best expressed in
our mother tongue and it plays an important role in our upbringing. Therefore, if the medium
of instructions for imparting education in schools and colleges is the mother tongue, it will
enable the students to obtain better results and to stimulate their cognitive development
and ability to study. The use of English as a medium of instruction in schools and colleges
education was chosen during the British rule and is still being used as a sole medium of
instruction in higher education particularly for science subjects. But we should not forget
that all Indian languages have depository of knowledge. Today, imparting education in
English language has become a symbol of so called civilization. Mother tongue is seen with
inferiority and infirmity. But, the countries which are on top and leading the world in the
areas of development, viz. China, Japan, Russia, Germany, etc. chose to impart education of
science, technology and medical sciences in their mother tongue. They are unaffected
without introducing English as a medium of instruction in education, instead they have
been continuously leading in the field of science and technology.
In our country, many languages are spoken and this fact represents our 'unity in
diversity'. These languages are advance and rich. If we intend to become a super power and
join the League of such Nations, we need to take urgent steps to promote and implement the
use of Indian languages as a medium of instruction in all subjects not only in schools but
also in institutions of higher learning. Had we imparted education of all basic subjects
including science, technology and medical sciences in our mother tongue, we would have
made sweeping reforms in our system of education.
It is therefore, necessary to promote and impart education of science, technology,
engineering and medical sciences in Indian languages so that students can learn better in
their own language and utilize their potential to the fullest extent. Moreover, such a step will
ensure development of all Indian languages and safeguard our heritage. The Bill seeks to
provide for setting up of a Commission for facilitating and imparting education including
science, engineering and medical sciences in Indian languages and for other related matters.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR
July 15, 2011

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for setting up of a Commission for facilitating and
imparting science, engineering and medical sciences education in Indian Languages. Clause 4
provides for composition, salary and allowances to be paid to the Chairman and other
members of the Commission. Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the Commission shall perform
certain functions like preparation of syllabi of all science stream subjects, preparation of
glossary of 'technical terms' of all subjects, organization of workshops and seminar, etc.
Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall provide funds to the Commission after
due appropriation by Parliament.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred
crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is
of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—843LS(S3)—09-08-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for setting up of a Commission for imparting science, engineering and medical
sciences education in Indian languages and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir, M.P.)