1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE SKILL (TRAINING AND EDUCATION) BILL, 2018
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide skill training to individuals post retirement, including and not limited to
ex-servicemen to enable them to learn new skills and gain employability and also to
include skill education as compulsory part of school and college curriculum and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called The Skill (Training and Education) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 45  of  2018
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Ex-servicemen” means an individual who has been a member of the armed
forces;
(c) “internship module” means a position of a student or trainee who works in
an organisation, sometimes without pay, in order to gain work experience or satisfy
requirements for a qualification;
(d) “job fair” means an event where employers, recruiters and schools give
information to potential employees;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “sustenance” means minimum wage required for livelihood.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official   Gazette, set
up training centres in each State and Union territory to  impart skill training to individuals
post retirement to help them gain employment for their sustenance.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute for the
funding of the training centres in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) The appropriate Government shall provide necessary training options to
individuals based on the demand of skilled workforce.
4. Every training centre set up under section 3 shall provide—
(a) accommodation facilities for all trainees;
(b) nutritious meal; and
(c) equipments required for skill training.
5.  (1) The appropriate Government shall, after the completion of training, ensure
job availability to the skilled individuals;
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government  shall—
(a) organise job fairs in each State;
(b) introduce internship module; and
(c) conduct assessment and counselling sessions for trainees.
6. The appropriate Government shall reserve—
(a) twenty per cent of seats in each training centre; and
(b) five per cent of the jobs under the State,
in favour of ex-servicemen.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall make skill education a compulsory part of the
school and college curriculum to impart basic skill training to students.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide options for skill training to be provided
to the students, who can choose to learn any one of the particular set of skills among the
given options.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything  inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to skill education
and training, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
Training
centres to
provide for
accommodation,
meal and
equipments.
Appropriate
Government
to set up skill
training
centres.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure job
availability to
skilled
individuals.
Reservation in
favour of ex-
servicemen.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
compulsory
skill education
in schools and
colleges.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Definitions.

3
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has a huge labour force, second only to China. Labour availability is expected to
grow further as India is predicted to be the youngest country in the world with a median age
of twenty-nine by 2020. However the Labour Bureau Report 2014 had pegged the skilled
workforce of India at a dismal two per cent.
The Government has taken several initiatives in the last few years under the Skill
India Programme to train individuals in various industry relevant skills. However, most of
these programmes target the freshly unemployed citizens or college dropouts, but ignores
the approximately twenty per cent of the population in the age group of 40-60 years old who
are usually unemployed by this age having retired from their previous employment. They
have the potential to work and contribute in a significant way but they lag behind due to
lack of skill required for any new job opportunity. If trained, this population can contribute
in pushing the skilled workforce of India significantly.
The most important change however needs to happen on a cultural level. Skill training
should be viewed as a complimentary part of mainstream education, rather than being
regarded as an inferior alternative. Therefore, the curriculum and education system offered
also needs to be overhauled, and imparting skill training to students in schools and colleges
as a compulsory subject be incorporated.
Although every citizen is faced with the problem of unemployment at his own level
and has to confront with the stress of a fast changing society, the ex- servicemen feel it very
painfully for a variety of reasons. Their problems become highly peculiar and specialised as
they are made to leave a job at an age when the social responsibilities of an ex-serviceman
are at its peak. He is out of job when his children are growing or in school. His income,
benefits and privileges are reduced to bare minimum at a time when he requires them the
most. Lack of entrepreneurial skills and unfamiliarity with the business/corporate world
makes it difficult for him to get a second job to support his family.
Gainful employability through skilled trades needs to be embraced by the wider Indian
public given the respectability and opportunity it deserves, for true change to be brought
about.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
January 15, 2018.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of training centres in each State to impart
skill training to individuals. Clause 4 provides for free hostel, meal and equipment facilities
for individuals in the training centres. Clause 5 provides for organising job fairs, internship
modules, and assessment and counselling sessions. Clause 6 provides for reservation of
ex-servicemen in the skill training centres and in jobs under the State. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
sum of  rupees one thousand crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide skill training to individuals post retirement, including and not limited to
ex-servicemen to enable them to learn new skills and gain employability and also
to include skill education as compulsory part of school and college curriculum
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—4058LS(S3)—09-02-2018.