THE  RURAL  LABOUR  WELFARE  FUND BILL, 2007
By
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a rural labour welfare fund for the welfare of the
rural labour employed in the agriculture and other rural occupations and for
 matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
Bill No. 45 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

(a) “employer” means the cultivator, orchard owner, poultry farm owner,
agency, society including co-operative society or any establishment in a rural area
which employs rural labour;
(b) “Fund” means the Rural Labour  Welfare Fund established under section 3;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “rural labour” means any person engaged in agriculture, sericulture, poul-
try, horticulture, handicrafts or any related occuption in rural areas as a wage earner,
whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood and includes a person enaged through a
contractor or engaged as a self employed person.
3. (1) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be constituted for the purposes of this
Act, a Fund to be called the Rural Labour Welfare Fund which shall be operated by an
Authority with its headquarters at Shimla in the State of Himachal Pradesh.
(2) The Central Government shall after due appropriation made by
Parliament in this behalf, credit to the Fund in each financial year such sums of
money as it considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
4. The Fund shall be utilized by the Central Government to meet the expenditure in
connection with measures which in the opinion of the Central Government, after consulting
the Governments of the States and Union territories, are necessary or expedient to promote
the welfare of the rural labour and in particular:—
(a) to defray the cost of measures to be carried out for the benefit of rural labour
towards—
(i) providing water supply for drinking and other purposes;
(ii) providing educational facilities;
(iii) the improvement of standard of living and nutrition;
(iv) amelioration of the social conditions;
(v) providing housing and recreational facilities;
(vi) rendering financial assistance in case of infirmity or disability due to
accident, old age, or any other reason; and
(vii) providing such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
(b) to grant loan, assistance or subsidy to Government of any State, Union
territory Administration, local authority or any organisation for any scheme approved
by the Central Government for the purposes connected with the welfare of rural labour;
(c) to pay annually grant-in-aid to Government of any State or Union territory
administration, local authority or an employer or any other organisation which
provides to the satisfaction of the Central Government such welfare measures and
facilities of the prescribed standard for the benefit of rural labour;
(d) to meet the cost of administering the Fund; and
(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be
defrayed from the Fund.
5. (1) The Central Government may constitute as many Advisory Committees as it
deems fit to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the implementa-
tion of the provisions of this Act or administration of the fund:
Provided that at least one Advisory Committee for each State and Union
territory shall be constituted by the Central Government in consultation with the
respective State Government and Union territory administration.
Establishment
of Fund.
Utilisation of
Fund.
State
Advisory
Committees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2

(2) The Chairman and such number of other members, as may be prescribed,
of each Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chairman and other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Central Advisory Committee to
coordinate the work of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 and to advise
the Central Government on any matter arising out of the implementation of provisions of
this Act.
(2) The Chairman and such number of other members as may be prescribed of the
Central Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chairman and other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government may appoint as many as Rural Labour Welfare Fund
Commissioners, Inspectors and such other officers and staff as it deems necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public servant
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(3) Any officer or inspector appointed under this Act, may,—
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he may deem fit, inspect at any reasonable
time in any place which he considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this
Act;
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his
duties; and
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government may require a State Government or a Union territory
Administration or a local authority or an employer to furnish for the purposes of this Act,
such statistical and other information in such form and within such period as may be
prescribed.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for,—
(a) the manner in which the fund may be applied;
(b) the conditions governing the grant of loans or subsidy;
(c) the conditions governing grant-in-aid;
(d) the standard of welfare measures and facilities to be provided out of the
fund;
(e) the composition of the Advisory Committees and Central Advisory Commit-
tee constituted under sections 5 and 6 respectively and the manner in which the
members thereof shall be appointed;
(f) the term of office of such members, the allowances, if any, payable to them and
the manner in which the Advisory Committee and the Central Advisory Committee
shall conduct their business;
(g) the recruitment, conditions of service and duties of all persons appointed
under section 7; and
(h) the powers that may be exercised by an officer or inspector appointed under
section 7.
Central
Advisory
Committee.
Appointment
of
Commissioners,
Inspectors
and other
officers.
State
Government,
etc. to
furnish
requisite
information.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.
3

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India resides in villages and 85 percent of its population earns its livelihood from
agriculture. There are cultivators, orchard owners, poultry owners, agricultural workers and
home based workers in the rural areas. However, their wages and income are meagre and
many of them do not get employment throughout the year. These rural labourers also be-
come an easy prey to the debt trap of the landlords and money-lenders who force them to
become bonded labourers. Most of them are very poor and are living in distress for
generations. In a Welfare State like ours there are no welfare schemes or funds for these
hapless rural labourers whereas in the industrial sector there are Labour Welfare Boards and
cess is levied and collected through legislative measures in order to provide them with
various amenities including housing, education and medical care. But the rural labourers are
unorganized and thus are neglected even by the State.
It is, therefore, necessary that in order to ameliorate the plight of rural workers the
Central Government should establish a Rural Labour Welfare Fund for financing adequately
and systematically the welfare measures to be carried out for the rural and agricultural labour
throughout the country so as to achieve the goals of welfare State in its true sense.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
March 16, 2007

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Rural Labour Welfare Fund.
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of Advisory Committees. Clause 6 provides for con-
stitution of a Central Advisory Committee. Clause 7 provides for appointment of Rural
Labour Welfare Commissioners, Inspectors and such other officers and staff for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India but it is not possible at this stage to give the precise details of
the expenditure that would be involved. It is, however, estimated that it will involve a recur-
ring expenditure of about rupees two hundred twenty five crore per annum.
It will also involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty five lakh.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. The delegation of legislative  power will relate to matters of
details only and is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a rural labour welfare fund for the welfare of the rural
labour employed in the agriculture and other rural occupations and for matters
connected therewith.
—————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—1445LS(S-3)—10.04.2007.