As IntropuceD IN Lox SasHa.

10 Aus 200!

Bill No. 45 of 2001

THE RAPID ACTION FORCE BILL, 2001

By
‘Suet [IQBAL AHMED 50९01, M.P.
ry
BILL

1o provide for constitution of a Rapid Action Force to control communal riots in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Rapid Action Force Act, 2001. anew
‘extent
(2) It extends to the whole of India. ‘commence-
‘ment
5 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by

notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. The Central Government shall constitute a Force to be called as Rapid Action Constitution of
Force for controlling communal riots in the country or in any part thereof and Rapid Action
performing such other duties as may be entrusted to it from time to time. Force.

10 3. The Central Government shall deploy the Force constituted under section 2 at Deployment of
the time of communal riots or before actual occurrence of communal riots in any part of Rapid Action
the country on request from the State Government concerned. हाफ

4. Every member of the Rapid Action Force shall be empowered to apprehend all Duty ofevery
persons whom he is legally authorized to apprehend and for whose apprehension sufficient memberof
15 grounds exist. Sere


2

Act not to bein 5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
ee other law for the time being in force.

Power to make 6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for the purpose of
= carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide, for—

(a) the Constitution, governance, command and discipline of the Force;

(0) the enrolment of persons to the Force and the recruitment of other
members of the Force;

(c) the conditions of service of members of the Force; and

(d) any other matter which a
which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be xfter it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive ses-
sions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifi-
cation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.

10


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Even fifty years after Independence, communal riots continue to break out in the
country. Of late although there has been some improvement, our country is still facing
communal riots. India is a secular country and all people irrespective of caste, colour or
creed enjoy equal rights under the Constitution. Involvement of external forces in incit-
ing communal disturbances is one of the reasons for the occurrence of such incidents.
The poor and innocent people easily fall prey to their machinations. The outbreak of
communal riots at one place affect the other parts of the country because of false propa-
ganda. Sometimes State Government machinery is unable to swiftly act and control such
communal riots, It is therefore necessary to constitute a separate force to be known as
Rapid Action Force to prevent and control the communal riots in any part of the country.
The Bill seeks to make provision accordingly.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
April 4, 2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

ie
communal riots in any party of the country. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will i
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a
expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore per annum,

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be invol


MEMORAND!
| 6 of the Bill

UM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

empowers the Central
1. These rules will relate to matters of detail

to make rules for carrying
only. The delegation

purposes of the Bill
is, therefore, of a normal character.

power


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for constitution of a Rapid Action Force to control communal riots in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P.)

|
| MGIP(PLU)MRND—497LS1—26-06-2001.