Bill No. i' of 19$9 
THE WAKF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 3RD AUGUST, 1959) 

9 of T954. 
Bill No. 46 of 1252. 
THE WAKF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Wakf Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 1959. Short title. 
2. In sub-section (3) of section 1 of the Wakf Act, 1954 (herein- Amendment 
S after referred to as the principal Act> ,_ of section I. 
10 7 of 1956. 
2.0 
(a) in the proviso, the word "Delhi," shall be omitted; and 
(b) after the proviso, the following further proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that where on account of the territorial 
changes brought about by the States Reorganisation Act, 
1956. this Act is, as from the 1st day of November, 1956, 
applicable only to a part of a State, the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, bring this Act 
into force in the remaining part of that State with effect 
from such date as may be specified in the notification.". 
3. For sub-section (1) of section 10 of the principal Act, the fol- Amend!Uent 
lowing sub-section shall be substituted, namely: _ of section 10 
"(1) The Board shall consist of-
(a) eleven members. in the case of a State and the Union 
territory of Delhi; and 
(b) five members, in the case of any other Union terri-
tory.". 

2 
Insertion of 4. After section 66 of the principal Act, the following sections 
new sections shall be inserted, namely:-S6A and 66B 
Special pro-
vision for 
reorganisa-
tion of eer-
t&in Boards. 
'66A. (1) Where on account of the reorganisation of States 
under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the whole or any part 37 of 1956• 
of a State in respect of which a board was, immediately before 5 
the 1st day of November, 1956, functioning has been transferred 
on that day to another State and by reason of such transfer, it 
appears to the Government of a State in any part of which the 
Board is functioning that the Board should be dissolved or that 
it should be reconstituted and reorganised as an intra-State 10 
Board for the whole or any part of that State, the State Govern-
ment may frame a scheme for such dissolution or such recons-
titution and reorganisation, as the case may be, including propo-
sals regarding the transfer of the assets, rights and liabilities of 
the Board to any other Board or State Government and the 15 
transfer or re-employment of employees of the Board and for-
ward the scheme to the Central Government. 
(2) On receipt of a scheme forwarded to it under sub-sec-
tion (1), the Central Government may, after consulting the 
State Governments concerned, approve the scheme with or 20 
without modifications and give effect to the scheme so approved 
by making such order as it thinks fit. 
(3) An order under sub-section (2) may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the dissolution of the Board; 
(b) the reconstitution and reorganisation in any man-
ner whatsoever of the Board including the establishment, 
where necessary, of a new Board; 
(c) the area in respect of which the reconstituted 
Board or new Board shall function and operate; 30 
(d) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, 
rights and liabilities of the Board (including the rights and 
liabilities under any contract made by it) to any other Board 
or State Government and the terms and conditions of such 
transfer; 35 
(e) the substitution of any such transferee for the 
Board, or the addition of any such transferee, as a party to 
any legal proceeding to which the Board is a party; and the 
transfer of any proceeding pending before the Board to any 
such transferee; 40 

37 of 1956• 
37 of 1956. 
s 
3 
(f) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of 
the Board to, or by, any such transferee and subject to the 
provisions of section 111 of the States Reorganisation Act, 
1956, the terms and conditions of service applicable to such 
employees after such transfer or re-employment; 
(g) such incidental, consequential and supplemental 
matters as may be necessoary to give effect to the approved 
scheme. 
(4) Where an order is made under this section transfer-
10 ring the assets, rights and liabilities of any Board, then, by 
virtue of that order, such assets, rights and liabilities of the 
Board shall vest in, and be the assets, rights and liabilities of, 
the transferee. 
(5) Every order made under this section shall be publish-
15 ed in the Official Gazette and this Act and the notifications issued 
thereunder shall have effect subject to the provisions of the 
order. 
(6) Every order made under this section shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is 
20 made. 
35 
66B. (1) Where on account of the territorial changes brought Special pro-
about by the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, this Act is, as from ~!~~~li!~~ 
the 1st day of November, 1956, applicable only to any part or parts ment of 
of a State but has not been brought into force in the remaining ~:t~f :or 
part thereof, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this State. 
Act, it shall be lawful for the Government of the State to estab-
lish one or more Boards for such part or parts and in such a case, 
any reference in this Act to the word "State" in relation to a 
Board shall be construed as a reference to that part of the State 
for which the Board is established. 
(2) Where any such Board has been established and it ap-
pears to the Government of the Stl.1te that a Board should be 
established for the whole of the State, the State Government 
may, by order notified. in the Official Gazette, dissolve the Board 
established for the part of the State or reconstitute and reor-
ganise such Board or establish a new Board for the whole of 
the State and thereupon, the assets, rights and liabilities of the 
Board for the part of the State shall vest in, and be the assets, 
rights and liabilities of the reconstituted Board or the new 
Board, as the case may be.'. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Prior to the reorganisation of States on the 1st November, 1956, 
the Wakf Act, 1954, was brought into force in certain States only 
and Boards of Wakfs had also been set up for some of them. The 
Act was not, however, brought into force in all the States. On 
account of the reorganisation of States, certain difficulties have arisen 
in the working of this Act. Some of the Boards established und:.r 
the Act have, since 1st November, 1956, been functioning in respect 
of two or more States, while in some other cases there is more than 
one Board functioning in the same State. This is not a satisfactory 
arrangement. It is, therefore, necessary to reconstitute such Boards 
as intra-State bodies. It is accordingly proposed to empower the 
Central Government to make, wherever necessary, suitable orders 
for the reconstitution of these Boards and for the division of their 
assets and liabilities. In regard to the composition of the Boards, 
the Act makes a distinction between Part A States, Part B States 
and Part C States. This distinction no longer holds good. It is, 
therefore, proposed to provide that each Board, when it is constituted 
for any of the States on the Union territory of Delhi, should have 
eleven members while the Boord for any other Union territory, 
should have five members only. 
2. In some of the States, the Act is in force in certain parts only 
and it is proposed to empower the Central Government to bring 
the Act into force in the remaining part of such States. If, how-
ever, for any reason it is not found feasible to bring the Act into 
force in the remaining part of any such State and establish a Board 
for the whole of the State, it would at least be desirable to have a 
Board for such part or parts of the State where the Act is already 
in force. Under the Act, as it stands at present, it is not permissible 
for a State Government to form a Board for a part of a State only. 
It is, therefore, proposed to empower a State Government to estab-
lish a Board for a part of a State also in such cases. 
3. The present Bill seeks to achieve these objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th July, 1959. 
H. MOHAMMAD IBRAHIM. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
New section 66A inserted by clause 4 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Government to make an order to give effect to a scheme 
for the reorganisation of any Board which, on account of the 
reorganisation of States, is functioning in more than one State, at 
the instance of any of the State Governments concerned with that 
Board. The State Government would frame a scheme for the pur-
pose and the Central Government, after consulting the other State 
Governments, would give effect to the scheme by making an order 
and notifying it in the Official Gazette. Having regard to the cir-
cumstances of the case, the delegation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. Moreover, every order to he made under new 
section 66A shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 

Short title, 
extent and 
commence-
m:nt. 
Composition 
of the Board, 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE WAD ACT, 1954 (No. 29 or 1954) 
An Act to provide for the better administration and supervision 
of "'akfs. 
• • • • 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) • • • • 
• • • • 
(3) It shall come into force in a State to which this Act extends 
on such date as the Centr·.ll Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf for that State; and different 
dates may be appointed for different States: 
Provided that in respect of any of the States of Bihar, Delhi, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal, no such notification shall be issued except 
on the recommendation of the State Government concerned . 
• • • • 
CHAPTER III 
ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND THEIR FUNCTIONS 
• • • • 
10. (1) The Board shall consist of-
(a) eleven members in the case of each of the States speci-
fied in I\irt A of the First Schedule to the Constitution; 
(b) seven members in the case of each of the States specified 
in Part B of the First Schedule to the Constitution; and 
(c) five members in the case of each of the States specified 
in Part C of the First Schedule to the Constitution: 
Provided that any State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, vary the number of members in the Board and 
fix such number, not exceeding eleven members, as it thinks fit and 
in such a case, the Board shall consist of the number of members 
specified in the notification. 
(2) There shall be a Chairman of the Board who shall be elected 
by the members from amongst themselves. 
• • • • 
6 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Wakf Act, 1954 
(Hafiz Mohammad Ibrahim, Minister of Irrigation and Power) 