BU1 No. 46 of 1956 
THE NATIONAL IDGHW AYS 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SAliHA) 

Rill No. 46 of 1956 
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS BIiLIC)S6 
(As INTROWC!:DDI LoK· SASHA) 
A 
BII,.L 
. ' :." r' 
to provide for the declaration oj certain hig1!-wa,ys .. tQ be national 
highway, au for matters connected. tlH~rew,ith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the 'Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Highways Act, 1956. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
5 (3) It shan come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title, 
extent and 
commence-
ment. 
t. (1) Each of the hiahways specified in the Schedule except such Declaration 
parts thereof as are situated within any municipal area is hereby ~ih;'; to 
declared to be a national highway. be national 
highways. 
10 (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare any other highway to be a national highway and or. 
the publication of such notification such highway shall be deemed 
to b~ specified in the Schedule. 
(3) The Central Government may, by like notification, omit any 
I, highway from the Schedule and on the publication of such noti· 
fication, the highway so omitted shall cease to be a national highway. 
3. In this Act, "municipal area" means any municipal area with D' 'fin' •• e Ilion, 
a population of twenty thousand or more the control or m«nagement 
I 

Naticoal 
hip,")" 
to WltlD 
the UDiOD. 
Relponsi-
bility for 
develop-
mentand. 
maiDten- . 
II1\CC of DI-
tional hiSh-
ways. 
Powwto 
i ... direc-
tiou. 
Fees for 
aervicea Or 
beDcfit. 
rendue4'-utioul 
hjpwaYI. 
~meata 
wsth State 
Goverll-
menu Or 
municipali-
ica, • 
2 . . 
of which is entrusted to a municipal committee, a town area com-
mittee, a town committee or any other authority. 
t. All national highways shall vest in the Union, and for the 
purposes of this Act "highway:>" inc1ude-
(i) all lands appurtenant thereto whether demarcated or not; 5 
(ii) all bridges, culverts, tunnels, causeways, carriageways 
and other itructures constructed on or -across such highways; 
anctl 
om all fences. trees, posts and boundary, furlong and mile 
stones of such highways or any land appurtenant to such 10 
highways. 
5. It sIaall be tIae~ponsl~Wty . of the Central Government to 
deveiDp ud maIDtatn In proper repair all nattoulldgll1'ays; but the 
Cea1nl Govern .... -Yt '" aotI8e ........ tile 08lelal Gazette, 
dIreet tIIat any fImctioD In relation to the development or malnte- IS 
DaDee of aDy national hll'bway -..1, subject to' such condWons, It 
any, as may be speelfted In the noWlcatlon, also be exercisable by 
the Govenunent of the State within w1tkta tbe national idpway Is 
situated or by Illy oftIeer or a.atherHy....,.... to the Central 
Go ........ t ..... file &a&e ~t. 20 
6. The Central Government may give directions to the Govern-
ment of any State as to the carrying out in the State of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, notification or order made 
thereunder. 
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official ~, 
Gazette, levy fees at such rates as may be iaid down by rules made 
in this behalf for services or benefits rendered in relation to the use 
of ferries, temporary bridges and tunnels on national highways. 
(2) Such fees when so levied shall be co11eat~ in accordance 
with the rules made under this Act. 30 
(3) Any fee leviable immediately before, the commencement of 
this Act or services or benefits rendered in' relation to the use of 
ferries, temporary bridges and tunnels on any highway specified in 
the Schedule shall continue to be leviable under this Act unless and 
until it is altered in exercise of the power conferred by sub-section 
(1). 55 
I. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central 
Government may ~ter into all agree~ent with the Government of 
any State or with any authority entr;ust.ed with the control or 
management of any municipal area in relation to the development 

3 
or maintenance of the whole or any part of a national highway 
situated within the State or, as the case may be, in relation to the 
development or maintenance of any such part of a highway situated 
within a municipal area as is referred to in sub-section (1) of sectiOll 
5 2 and any such agreement may provide for the sharing of expenditure 
by the respective parties thereto. 
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official !:~ t~ ...... era ..... Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In parLcular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
10 foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:,....· 
(a.) the manner inwhich~ and the conditiolls sub~ to 
which, any function in relation to the development or main-
tenance of a national highway or any part thereof may be 
J, exercised by the State Government or any oftlcer or authority 
subordinate to the Central Government or the State 
Government; 
20 
2, 
(b) the rates at which fees for services rendered in relation 
to t he use of ferries. temporary bridges and tunnels on any 
national highway may be levied and the manner in which such 
fees shall be collected; 
(c) the periodical inspection of national highwan and the 
submission of inspection reports to the Central Government; 
(d) the re-purts on works carried out on national highways; 
(e) any other matter for which provision should be made 
under this Act. 
10. All notifications or agreements issued or entered into under Layiq of 
this Act shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as IlOtific:a-t · I_ 
. 10i111, ru_. 
l,Ilay be after they are issued or entered into and all rules made etc.. before 
under section 9 shall be laid for not less than thirty days before Parliament, 
30 both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after they are made, 
and shall be subject to such modifications as Parliament may make 
during the session in which they are so laid or the session immediately 
following. 

THE SCHEDULE 
[See Section 2) 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
-------------------- .. _-----_._. 
Sorial 
No. Description of national highways 
I The highway connecting Delhi, Ambala, JullUl\dur, and Amritsar 
snd proceeding to the border between India and PUiltlll. 
2 The highway connecting Jullundur, Madhopur, Jammu, Banlhal' 
Srinagar, Baramuta rnd Uri. 
3 The highway connecting Delhi, M(:thura, Agra, Kanpur, AllJbabad 
Banaras, Mohania, Barhi and Calcutta. 
4 The highway connecting Agra, Gwalior, Shivpuri, Indore, Dhulia. 
Nasik, Thana and Bombay. 
S The highway starting from its junction neer Thana with the highway 
sp.!cified in ser:al No. 4 and connecting Poona, Belcaum, Hubli, 
Bangalore, Ranipet ~nd Madl1's. 
6 The highway starting from its junction ncar Bahan,ora with the 
highway specified in serial NO.7 and connecting CuttICk, Bhu-
baneshwar, Visakhapatnam, Vijayavada and Madras. 
7 The highway starting from ita jU14ction near Dhulia with the highway 
specified in serial NO.4 and COIUlectin, N6,pur, Raipur, Sam-
balpur, Bahamgora and Calcutta. 
8 The highway starting from its JUQction Qear Baneras with the highway 
specified in serial NO.3 and connecting Mangawan,Rewa, Jabalpur. 
Lakhnadon, Nagpur, Hyderabad, Kumool, Bangalore, Krislma-
giri. Salem, Dindi,ul, Madurai and Cape ComoriD. 
9 The highway connecting Delhi, Jaipur. Ajmer. Udaipur. Ahmeda-
bad, Baroda and Bombay. . 
10 The highway connecting Ahmedabad, Limbdi. Morvi and Kandla. 
II The highway starting from its junction near Bamanbhore with the 
highway specified in serial No. 10 and coonecting RIljltot and 
Porbandar. 
12 The highway connectinS Poooa. Sho18pur, Hydcrabad and Vija-
ya\'ada. 
13 The highway connecting Delhi and Fazilka and proceedinS to the 
border between India and Pakistan. 
4 

. 5 
Serial 
No. Description of national highways 
14 The highway. connecting Ambala~ Kalka~ Simla, Narkanda, Ram-
pur and Chini and proceeding to the border between India and 
. Tibet near Shipki-Lll. 
IS The highway connecting Delhi, Bareilly and Lucknow. 
16 The highway connecting Lucknow, Kanpur, Jhansi and Shivpuri. 
17 The highway connocting Jhansi and LakhnadOD. 
18 The highway connecting Allahabad with the highway specified in 
serial No.8 near MangawaI'. 
19 The highway starting from its junction near Barauni with the 
highway s.pecified in serial No. 23 and connecting Muzaffarpur, 
Pipra, Gorakhpur and Lucknow. 
20 The highway starting. from its junction near Pipra with the highway 
specifi~ in. !,IerialNo. I9andconl\ectinB Sagauli and Raxaul and 
proceeding to the border between :Inditl and Nepal., ' .. 
21 The highway connecting Gorakhpur, GA8zipur and Banaras: 
22 The hi&hway starting from its j~ion near Mohania wit.h th~ 
highway specified in serial No. 3 and connecting Patna and 
Bakhtiyarpur. 
23 The highway starting from its junctiofl near Barhi with the highway 
specified in serial NO.3 and connecting Bakhtiyarpur, Mokameh, 
Pumea, DalkhClila, Siliguri, Sivok, and Cooch B :har and proceeding 
to its jUl\ction with the highway specified in seripl No. 28 
near Goalpara. 
24 The highway connecting Sivok and Gangtok. 
2S The highway starting from its junction near Barhi with the highway 
specified ill serial NO.3 and connecting Ranchi al\d Tatanagar 
and proceeding to its junction with the highway specified in 
serial NO·7 near Baharagora. 
26 The highway starting from its junction near Dalkhola with the 
highway specified in serial No. 23 and connecting Berhampore, 
Barasat and Calcutta. 
27 The highway connecting Barasat and Bangaon and proceeding to 
the border between India and Pakistan 
28 The highWllY starting from its junction near Goalpara with the 
higbway specified in serial No. 23 and connecting Gauhati, 
Jorahat Kamqaon, Makum and Saikh09 Ghat. 
2~ Ttc high\\ay coDnecting Makum, udo and Lekhapan;. 
30 The hi~hway contJecting Kamargaon, Imphal, and Palel and pro-
ceedIng to the border between India and Burma. 
1022 L.S. 

Serial 
No. 
6 
Description of national higbways 
31 The highway connecting Jorabat and Shillong and proceeding to 
the border between India lind Pakistan near Dawki. 
32 The highway surting from its junction near Sambalpur with the 
highw9y specified in serial NO.7 and proceeding via Angul to 
its junction with the highway specified in serial No. 6 near 
Cut tack. 
33 The highway connecting Raipur and Vizianagan'm and proceeding 
to its junction with the highway s~ed in serial No.6 near 
Vizianagaram. 
34 The highway connecting Madras, Tiruchirappalli and Dindigul. 
3S The highway connecting Krishn'lgiri and Ranipet. 
36 The highway connecting Salem, C'oimbatore, Trichur, Emakulam, 
Trivandrum and Cape Comorin. 
37 The highway starting from its junction near Trichur with the 
highway specified in serial No. 36 and connecting with the West 
Coast Road near Chalisseri. 
38 The highway connecting Madurai and Dhanushkodi. 
39 The highway connecting Nasik with the highway specified in 
serial No. ~ near Poona. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under an agreement entered into with the then existing Pro-
vinces, the Government of India provisionally accepted entire 
ftnancial liability, with effect from the 1st April, 1947, for the con-
struction, development and maintenance of certain highways in the 
Provinces which were considered suitable for inclusion in a system 
of national highways. Upon the creation of the Part B States and 
the new Part C States under the Constitution, the national highways 
scheme was extended to those States also. 
2. Under entry 23 of the Union List, Parliament has exclusive 
power of legislation with respect to highways which are declared to 
be national highways by or under law made by Parliament. It is, 
therefore, proposed that the highways comprised in the Schedule 
annexed to this Bill should be dealared to be national highways. Such 
a declaration would help the Central Government in exercising its 
powers with respect to the development and maintenance of these 
highways more effectively. Power is also sought to be vested in the 
. Central Government to declare by notification other highways to be 
national highways. Power should also be given to the Central Gov-
ernment to enter into agreements with the State Governments or 
municipal authorities with respect to the development or mainten-
ance of any portion of any national highway and fees may have to 
be levied in respect of certain types of services rendered on national 
highways. 
3. The present Bill is designed to achieve the objects set forth 
above. 
NEW DELHI; LAL BAHADUR. 
The 30th July. 1956. 
7 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the declaration of certain high-
ways in States to be national hoighways. Under clause 4, all high-
ways so declared will vest in the Central Government and, under 
clause 5·, the Central Government will be respon&ible for their 
development and maintenance. 
2. The highways comprised in the Schedule to the Bill, which 
would be declared as naUonal highways, were provisionally approved 
by the Government of India as suitable for inclusion in a system 
of national highways and they accepted complete financial liability 
for their development and maintenance, after consultation with 
States, with efJlect from the 1st April, 1947, in respect of most of the 
highways. The expenditure so far incurred by the Government of 
India on these highways is covered by article 282 of the Constitution 
3. The total mleage of the highways proposed to be declared 83 
national highways is 13,800, including missing links of a total length 
of about'9oo miles under construction, but excluding road links with-
in towns having a population of 20,000 or more in respect of which 
any liability that the Government of India may accept will be 
governed by an agreement entered into with the State concerned 
under clause 8. Strictly speaking, the financial liability that will 
fall on the Central Government under the proposed legislation will 
not be a fresh liability because they have already accepted liability 
for the construction and maintenance of the highways in question. 
4. Up to the end of 1950-51, i.e., before the commencement of the 
first five-year plan, a total expenditure of Rs. 6:23 crores was incurred 
by the Central Government on the development of the provisional 
national highways. Under the first five-year plan, a further ex-
penditure, estimated at Rs. 27'7 crOl'eS, has been incurred on the 
development of these highways. The second five-year. plan pro-
vides for an expenditure of Rs. 55 crores for this purpose, the budget 
provision for the current financial year being Rs. 9 crores. 
5. The budget provision for the maintenance of national highways 
during the current year is Rs. 4'65 crores. This provision is intended 
for expenditure on the normal maintenance of the existing national 
highways and on alternative road routes maintained for the con-
venience of traf'fic in place of missing road links in the national 
highway system and expenditlp'e on flood damage repairs, etc . 
• 

9 
6. Taking into consideration· the missing links still remaining to 
be constructed, new bypasses in congested areas or other diversions 
that may be built in the national highway 3ystem, and the liability 
the Central Government may accept in respect of maintenance of 
road links to national highways within towns having a population 
of 20,000 or more under clause 8 of the Bill, the total average annual 
expenditure on the maintenance of national highways in the second 
five-year plan period is expected to be roughly Rs. 5 crores per 
annum. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION .. 
The broad features envisaged in the Bill, namely, the declaration 
of certain highways to be national highways, responsibility for the 
develop~ent and maintenance of national highway;;, the delegation 
of functions in relation to such development or maintenance to the 
State Governments and to subordinate officers and authorities, the 
levy of fees for services and benefits rendered on national highways 
and agreements with State Governments or municipal authorities in 
relation to the development or maintenance of any part of a highway 
situated with:n a municipal area are laid down in the Bill it.;elf. 
2. Su'b-clause (1) of clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central 
Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes contem-
plated in the Bill. The particular matters in relation to which such 
rules may be made have been enumerated in sub-clause (2) of that 
clause and relate inter alia to the manner in which and the conditions 
subject to which functions in relation to the development or main-
tenance of a national highway may be delegated to a State Govern-
ment or to any subordinate officer or authority, the rates at which 
fees for services and benefits rendered on national highways may 
be levied and the periodical inspection of national highways and so 
on. These are matters of detail and it is unneCe3sary as well as 
cumbersome to include them in the Bill itself . 
. 
3. The delegation of legislative power is thus of the normal type. 
10 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
te provide for the declaration of certain highways to be nationa 1 
highways and for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Lal Bahadur, Minister of Transport) 
GIPD-·LAD-IO:za LS-4-8-S6-17S0. 