THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
ASSOCIATION (STATUS, IMMUNITIES 
AND PRIVILEGES) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 10TH AUGUST, 19l"lC) 

BwNp. 46%.-.. 
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOpMENT 
ASSOCIATION (STATUS, IMMUNITIES 
AND PRIVILEGES) BILL, r<)60 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
tQ imp~ment the international agreement for the establishment and 
operation of the International Development Association in 80 
faT a.<; it relates to the status, immunities and privileges of that 
Association. and tOT matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
gf India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the International Development $boll I •• 
A.ociation {Stat",., Immunities and Privile,es) Act, 1960. .... .... 
71.~m •• • 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
·(3) It thall come into force On such date as the Central Govena-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(tI) "Agreement" means the Agreement for the estab1i8h. 
,. ment and operation of the international body known u the 
International Development Association; 
(b) "Association" means the International Developm~t 
Asociation estabU.hed under the AlI'eemalt. 
qIIIIlt. 

Conferment 3. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
:~tus and any other law, the provisions of Article VIII of the Agreement set 
immd ~~Jes out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India: an pnvi p8 
~ti:e :di- Provided that nothing in section 9 thereof shall be construed 
~~~ 5 of ocrtlin 
immunities (a) entitling the Association to import into India goodli and privileges 
on it, ofIicel'll free of any duty of customs without any restriction on their 
ad subsequent sale therein; or employee'. 
(b) conferring on the- Association any exemption from 
duties or taxes which form part of the price of goods sold; or 10 
(c) conferring on the Association any exemption from 
duties or taxes which are in fact no more than charges for ser-
vices rendered. 
(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule in conformity with I; 
any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the 
Agreement set out therein. 
Power to 4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
make ruJes_ Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
Notificati,?ns 5. Every notification issued under sub-section (2) of section S 20 
~d :on and every rule made under section 4 shall he laid as soon as msy 
under section be after it is issued or made before each House of Parliament whUp 
~%!: placed it is in seasion for a period of thirty days which may be comprised 
Parliament. in one session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately fol- 25 
lowing both Houses agree for making any modification in the noti-
fication, or as the case may be, in the rule, or both Houses agree 
,.~: "_~,' .. ,: that the notification or rule should not be issued or made, the noti-
;- "'.',.,. fication or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any 30 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that notification or 
rule. 
:',) ,. ,.t 

5 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
Proviai011l ·of . the _,""ment which shall have force of law 
ARTICLE VIII 
STATUS, IMMUNITIES AND PRMLEGES 
Section l.-Purposes of Article. 
To enable the Association to fulfil the functions with which it is 
entrusted, the status, immunities and privileges provided in this' 
Article shall be accorded to the Association in the territories of each 
10 member. 
Section 2.-Status of the Association. 
The Association shall possess full juridical personality and, in 
particular, the capacity: 
(i) to contract; 
15 (ii) to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable pro-
perty; 
(iii) to acquire and dispose of inunovable and movable pra-
Section 3.-Position of the Association with regard to Judicial Pro-
cell. 
~ Actions may be brought against the Association only in a court 
of competent jurisdiction in the territories of a member in which 
the Association has an office, has appointed an agent for the purpose 
of accepting service or notice of process, or has issued or guaranteed 
securities. No actions shall, however, be brought by members or 
lS persons acting for or deriving claims from members. The property 
and assets of the Association shall, wheresoever located and by 
whomsoever held, be immune from all forms of seizure, attachment 
or execution before the delivery of final judgment against the Asso-
ciation. ~ .,~ 
30 Section 4.-Immunity of 'Assets from Seizure. 
Property and assets of the Association, wherever located and by 
whomsoever held, sOOll be immune from search, requisition, con-
fiscation, expropriation or any other form of seizure by executive 
or legislative action. . 
3 

.. 
Section 5.-Immunity of Arch.ives. 
The archives of the Association shan be inviolable. 
Section e.-Fnedom of ASBets from Restrictiou. 
To the extent necessary to carry out the operati~ 'provided for 
in thiS A:greement and aubject to the provisions of this Al1'eemlllt, 5 
all property and aasets of the Association shall be free from restric-
tion., regulations, controls and moratoria of any nature. 
Section 7.-Privilege for Communications. 
T_oftk:W COJNDwUcaiions of the ~pn aball be·~ed 
by eac;b .... tw the. lime treatment that it aceorda to the ofJldM ,0 
~W*·JltjQD •. of other members. 
Section B.-Immunities and Privilege. of Officers and Emplo1/eeB. 
All Governors. Executive Directors, Alternates, Officers and. em-
ployees of the Association, 
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to act!! J S 
performed by them in their official capacity except when the 
AHOciation waiVe!! this immunity; 
(ii) not being local nationals, shall be accorded the same 
immunities from immigration restrictions. alien registration 
reqUirements and national service obligati01l8 and the same faei- 10 
liti. as regards exchange restrictions as are accorded by mem-
bers to the representatives, officials, and employees of compar-
able rank of other members; 
(iii) shall be granted the same treatment in respect of 
travelling facilities as is accorded by members to representa- ~!! 
tiv8!l, officials and employel"S of comparable rank of other mem-
beN. 
~ 9.-Immunitie6 from Taxation. 
(a.) The Association, its assets, property, income and transa~M 
authorized by this Agreement, shall be immune from all taxatIon)O 
and from all customs duties. The A.saociati.on shall also be immune 
from liability for the collection or payment of any tax or duty. 
(b) No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emolu-
~,p,aid by theAssocitl.tiDn to Executive Dtrectora, Altematee, 
oftlcials or employees of the Association who are not local citizens. 3S 
loctl subject8, or .other local nationals. 

s 
(c) No taxation of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or 
MCUrity issued by the Association (including any dividend or inter-
est thereon). by whomsoever held, 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security 
S IIGlely because it is issued by the Association; or 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis foor such tax~tion is the 
place or, currency in which it is issued, made payable or paid. 
()r the location of any oftke or place of business maintained by 
the, Association. 
10 (d) No texation of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or 
securlty guaranteed by the Association (including any dividend or 
interest thereon) by whomsoever held, 
(i) which diaeriminates against such obligation or security 
solely because it is ,guaranteed by the Association;· or 
15 (ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the 
location of any office or place of business maintained by the 
Association. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A new financial institution called the International Development 
Association is being established, as an affiliate of the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, by 8n International 
Agreement to which India will be a signatory. Article VIII of the 
Articles of Agreement of the said Association provides for the grant-
ing to the Association and its officials and employees certain status, 
immunities and privileges in the territory of each member country. 
Section 10 of this Article requires each member country to take such 
action as is necessary in its own territories for the purpose of making 
effective in terms of its own law, the principles set forth in the Arti-
cle. By this Bill, it is proposed to enact the necessary legislation 
to give effect to the provisions of the said Article VIII of the Articles 
of Agreement. 
MORARJI R. DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 20th July. 1~. 

M:EMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 (2) of the Bill confers power on the Central Government 
to amend the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, duly 
made and adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out there-
in. 
Clause 4 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government 
tt> make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The immu-
nities and privileges of the International Development Association 
and its officials and employees having been specified in the Schedule 
to the Bill, occasions for making rules, if any, will be few and far 
between. The Association has not yet started its functions in India. 
It is not possible. therefore, to envisage at this stage the matters 
which may have to be provided for by rules. But as the immuni-
ties and privileges have been specified in the Bill, it is clear thet 
rules, if any, will be confined to matters of procedure and other 
matters of minor detail relating to the enjoyment of those immuni-
ties and privileges and their waiver. For instance, if the Associa-
tion decides to waive any of the immunities or privileges, a rule 
ITl'ly be necessary prescribing the manner in which and the officer 
of the Government to whom such waiver should be communicated. 
The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal type. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to implement the international agreement for the establish--
ment and operation of the J ntemational Development Asso-
ciation in so far as it relates to the status, immunities and 
privileges of that Association, and for matters connected 
therewith. 
The Presidtnt has, in pursuance of c1huse (I) of anic1e h7 
and clause (1) of article 274 of the Conr.titution of India, 
recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
(Secrelary.) 
(Shn' MONTi; Duai, 
Mi"islm-of Financ~.) 