" , 
~ 
lofJ9S6-
.. --.... 
As INTRODUCED IN 1.,01: SABHA ON 
26 NOV 1963 
BlU No. r of 1$ 
TIm COMPANIES.-(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
fu:rtke7 '0 amend the CompG",ie. Act, 1956, 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (AmeJ:ldment) Act, Short title 
1963. dd com-
DJeDCemeDt. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the ·Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint, and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Ac', 
2. In section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred AmeDdment 
10 to as the principal Act),- ofaec:ti0D2. 
(a) atter ~lause (10), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:~ 
• (lOA) "Company Law Board" means the Board of 
Company Law Administration constituted under section 
15 lOE;'; 
(b) a£ler clause (49), the following clause oa11 be inserted. 
namely:-
• (49A) "Tribunal" means the Tribunal constituted 
un.d.er section lOA;' 
20 3. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections IaaertioD of 
shall be inserted in Part I, namely:- :gr~': 
25 
to iDPart I. 
'YA. (1) Tile Cent... Gover_ent Ida,. J t.,. BOtlftattion in Cooititution 
6e eftirial GueUIe, constitute • TrD8aal ~,of .5 many of Tribunal. 
membns 88 it! dIiDb fit, to exercise ... di8c1uwp- . 
(a) the powers and functions conferred on such Tribunal 
by or under this Act; 
1401 (B) L.S.-1. 

2 
(b) the powers and functions conferred on the Court 
by or under section 203 in so far as it relates to the granting 
of leave under that section and sections 397 to 407; and 
(c) such other powers and functions conferred on the 
Court by or under this Act as the Central Government may, S 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify: 
Provided that where any powers and functions are or become 
exercisable by the Tribunal by virtue of this section, the Court 
shall not exercise those powers and functions and any reference 
to the Court in any of the s,ections, powers and functions of the 10 
Court whereunder have been conferred on the Tribunal, shall be 
construed as a reference to the Tribunal. 
(2) The members of the Tribunal 'shall be persons who 
appear to the Central Government to have adequate knowledge 
of, and experience in,- IS 
(a) law, or 
(b) matters of accountancy, or 
(c) administration or management of companies and 
law relating thereto. 
(3) The Central Government shall ordinarily appoint one 20 
of the members of Tribunal having knowledge of, and experience 
. in law, who-
(a) 
(b) 
Court; 
is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or 
is qualified for appointment as Judge of a High 
to be the chairman of the Tribunal. 
(4) The Chairman and other members of the Trlbunallhall 
receive from the Central Government lueh remUDel'8tion, and 
shall be Ifovemed by sueh conditions of service, as the Central 
25 
Government may determine: 30 
Provided that the remuneration of the chairman or any 
other member shall not be varied. to his disadvantage after his 
appointment. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall derogate from the powers 
and functions of the Court in relation to any proceeding pending 3S 
before the Court immediately before such powers and functions 
are or become exercisable by the Tribunal by virtue of this 
section and the Court shall dispose of such proceeding according. 
ly. 

.. 
} 
LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE COMPANIES (AMENDM~NT) BILL,1963 
(To be/As introduced 4n Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 2, line 27,-
for "Chairman" read "chainman" 
2. Page 4, line 33,-
for "Panel" ~ "Penal" 
3. Page 5, line 8,-
for "prefering" ~ "preferring ll 
4. Page 6, line 3,-
for "loan" read "loans" - -
5. Page 6, line 38,-
after "and" insert 
6. 
" " , 
Page 6, 11ne,38,-
.) . :,~ 
after "~rt1cu1ar" insEifrt 
7. Page 7, line 31,-
before "holds" omit - " " , 
8. Page 8, lines 13 and 14,-
11 " , 
for "mange-ment" ~ "manage-ment" 
9. Page 12, in clause 13,-
for the marginal heading to new section-63SA, 
- read--
"Protection of acts done in 
good faith." 
10. Page 12,-
for the marginal heading to clause 14,.~.a4 • 
If Amendment of section 637. 11 
11. Page 12, line 13,-
after "conditions" f2!: "." ~ " " , 
• 

12. Page 12, line 25,-
after "347 (2)" insert " " , 
13. Page 15, line 22," 
for " nd" read " and" -
14. Page 15, line :2~, .. 
for "Say" read "s ay" 
15. Page 1:5, line 3 from bottom,-
omit II a" -
16. Page 17, line 7 .. , 
for "OF" read "OR" 
17. Correct line numbers on pages, 7, 10, 11 and 12. 
',-,r •. 
;- \ 

= decision. of 
the 
Tribunal. 
4 
(c) compelling the production of documents, 
(d) examining witnesses on oath, 
(e) granting adjournments, 
(I) reception of evidence taken on affidavit, 
(9) issuing commissions for the examination of wit- 5 
ne&aeB, and summoning and examining no mGltu afty penon 
whose evidence appears to the Tribunal to be material. 
(2) Where the Tribunal has reason to believe that tany place 
is used for the deposit or custody of any dQC1UQeni or thing 
which may be material for the purposes of any proceeding be- 10 
foI!e it, the Tribunal may by its'warrant authorise ad di1"ect any 
police oftlcer above the rank of a constab~ 
(a) to ~nter that place with such assistance as may be 
required, 
(b) to search the same in the manner specified in tl.le IS 
warrant, 
(c) to take possession of any documents or things there-
jn found and to ~epare a list of the same and te dispclSle 
them of in accordance with the pro\lisions hereinafter con-
tained. 20 
(3) When in the execution of a search w,"rra:nt uadu sub-
section (2) any document~ or things for whkh search is made 
are fou~d, such documents or things, togetber with the list of 
t~e same, sh.all immediately be taken before the Tribun.al. 
(.f) The p:r<Wisions-of the Code of Crimin-al ProC'!dur-., 1898. 25' of 1898· 
shall, so tar as lIlay be, awly to a seuch d;rected, and a search 
warrant issued, under sub-section (2) as they 8lJply to a search 
and a search warrant under sectlon 98 of that C04e. 
(5) 'nw 'PribuDal sha-tl be deemed te be a eim court for the 
ptq>oses of aecUon 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Corle of Crimi- 30 
nal Procedure, l898. and evp.rv Pl'oceedin~ before the TribaDeI 
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceedinJ! within tJae meaIlli:tg 
of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Panel Code and. for the pur- of' of 1860. 
pose of section 19ft of that Code. 
Ion. (l) Save as otherwj~p orovined in this Act. an lI1'lIteal 35 
shall lie only on questions of law arising out of any decision, 
findin~ or order of t~ Tribunal to the Hhzh Court havinJ! iuris-
diction in relation to t~ place at wlW:h the· register'" ofllce of 
the company concerned is situate. 

", $ 
S 
(2) Every such' appeal shall be heard by a Bench of not less 
than two Judges of the High Court. 
(3) Every such appeal shall be filed within the period of 
sixty days from the date of the decision, finding or order of the 
S Tribunal: 
Provided that the appeal may be admitted after the expiry 
of the aforesaid period if the appellant satisfies the High Court 
that he had Bufticient cause for not prefering the appeal within 
that period.'. 
10 4. In the principal Act, after Part I, the following Part and sec- Insertion of 
tion shall be inserted, namely: - :f:r~ II~ 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
40 
'PART IA 
BOARD OF COMPANY LAW ADMINISTRATION 
10E. (1) As soon as may be after the eommeRcement of the Constitution 
Companies (Amendment) Act~ 1963. the Central GOV8l'bment ~a;:: of 
shall. by notificatiOll in the Official Gazette, coastitute a Board Law Ad~i­
to be called the Board of Company Law Adrninistratien te exercise niatration. 
and tlischarge such powers and fuadieDs cenferred 8R the Cent-
ral Goyel'lUlaellt by or under this Ad or any ether law _ may be 
eDtrusted to it by that Govenll .. t. 
(2) The Company Law Board shall consillt of such number 
of members, not exceeding five, as the Central Govenmient 
deems fit, to be appointed by that Government by notification in 
the Official Ga2:ette. 
(3) One of the members shall be appointed by the Central 
Gowrnment to be the chairman of the Company Law Board. 
(4) No act done by the C(}mnffnv Law Board shall be called 
in question on the ground only of any defect in the constitution 
of, or the existence of any vacancy in, the Company Law Board. 
(5)· The procedure of the Company Law &ani &hell be such 
_ Rlay be prHCribed. 
(6) In the exercise of its powers and discharge of its func-
t;on8, the Company Law Board shall be subject to the control 
of the Central Government.'. 
5. In section 81 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the proviso to sub-section (3), the forIowing proviso 
small De substituted., namely:-
"Provided that the terms of issue of su£h debentures or 
the terms of such loans inelude a term providing for such 
optioQ and such term-
Amend meat 
of sectiOIl 81. 

6 
(a) either has been approved' by the Central Gov-
ernment before the issue of debentures or the ,raising of 
the loan, or is in confonnity with the rules, if any, made 
by that Government in this behalf; and 
(b) in the case of debentures or loans other than S 
debentures issued to, or loans obtained from, the Gov-
ernment or any institution specified by the Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf, has also been approved by a 
special resolution passed by the company in general 
meeting before the issue of the debentures or the raising 10 
of the loans"; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
" ( 4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the fore-
going provisions of this section, where any debentures have IS 
been issued to, or loans have been obtained from, the Gov-
ernment by a company, whether such debentures have been 
i~ued or loans have been obtained before or after the com-
mencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1963, the 
Central Government may, by order, direct that such deben- 20 
tures or loans or any part thereof shall be converted into 
shares In the company on such terms and conditions as 
appear to the Government to be reasonable in the circums-
tances of the case, even if the terms of issue of such deben-
tures or the terms of such loans do not include a term 2S 
providing for an option for such conversion: . 
Provided that if the terms and conditions of such con-
version are not acceptable to the company, the company 
may, within thirty days of the communication to it of such 
order or within such further time as may be granted by the 30 
High Court, prefer an appeal to the High Court in regard to 
such terms and conditions and the decision of the High Court 
on such appeal and, subject only to such decision, the order 
of the Central Government under this sub-section shall be 
final and conclusive. 3S 
(5) In issuing any order under sub-section (4), the 
Central Govertlment shall have due regard to the financial 
position of the company, and in particular to the terms of 
issue of the debentures or the terms of the loans, as the case 
may be, and the rate of interest payable on the debentures 40 
or loans, the subscribed capital of the company and its loan 
liabilities, its reserves, its profits durin~ the preceding flve 
years and the current market price of the shares of the 
company.". 

10 
20 
25 
35 
1 
•. After section 153 of the principal Act, the following section InsertioD. of new sechon 
shall be inserted, namely:- lS3A after 
IcctiOn IS3. 
"153A. (1). Where any shares in, or debentures of, a com- Dcclaretion 
pany are held in trust by any person (hereinafter referred to as :~o ~:~ 
the trustee), the trustee shall, within such time and in such .form tures held in 
as may be prescribed, make a declaration to the Registrar. trust. 
(2) A copy of the declaration made under sub-section (1) 
shall be sent by the trustee to the company concerned, as soon as 
may be, after the declaration has been sent to the Registrar. 
(3) If a trustee contravenes any provision of this section 
or makes any statement in the declaration which is false and 
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe 
to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years and also with fine. 
(4) The provisions of this section and section 187B shall 
not apply in relation to a trust-
(a) where the trust. is not created by instrument in 
writing; or 
(b) even if the trust is created by instrument in writing, 
where the trust money invested in shares in, or debentures of, 
a company-
(i) does not exceed one lakh of rupees, or 
(ii) exceeds one lakh of rupees but does not exceed 
either five lakhs of rupees or twenty-five per cent. of the 
paid-up share capital of the company.". 
7. After section 187A of the principal Act, the following section lnaertion of 
shall be inserted, namely: - ~;B ~~ 
section 187A. 
""1878. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained In this Act E&crc:isc of 
or any other law or any contract, memorandum or articles, yotinl ri1htfl 
In reapect 0 
where a member or debenture-holder of a eompany (hereinafter sharea and 
referred to as a truste";), holds shares in, or debentures of, the ~:~:='t. 
company for the benefit of any other person, the Central Gov-
ernment may, if it considers necessary so to do in the public 
Interest, appoint such person, as it thinks fit, to exercise at any 
meeting of the company or at any meeting of any class of mem-
bers of the company or at any meeting of the debenture-holders 
of the company, as the case may be, the same rights and powers 
(including the right to vote by proxy) as the trustee would 
exercise as a member or debenture-holder at such meeting and 
thereupon the trustee shall not exercise any such r.hts and 
powers as aforesaid. 

IDlCrtion of 
DeW Chapter 
&ad sections 
in Part VI. 
Reference to 
Tribunal of 
CIIeI llainst 
IDIlD8&erial 
personnel. 
(Z) In order to enable the persOD appointed by the Central 
Government under sub-,section (1) to exercise the rights and 
Powers as aforesaid, that person i;ball alllO be entitled to raeeive 
an books and papers under this Act as if he were a member or 
• debenture-holder.". 5 
8. In the principal Act, in Part VI, after Chapter IV, the follow-
ing Chapter and sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"CHAPTER IV A.-PoWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO REMOVE 
MANAGEBIAL PERSONNEL FROM OFJI'lCE ON THE RECOMMEHDATION OF 
THJ: TJwmNAL. 10 
388B. (1) W~re in the opinion of the Central Government 
there are circ:\HIlStances suggesting-
(a) that any person concerned in the condu.ct and. mange-
ment of the affairs of a company is or has been in connection 
therewith guilty of fraud, misfeasance, negligeDCe or default IS 
in carrying out his obligations and functions under the law, 
or breach of trust; or 
(b) that the business of a company is not or has not 
been conducted and managed by such person in accordance 
with sound business principles or prudent commercial prac- 20 
tices; or 
(c) that a company is or has been conducted and manag-
ed by such person in a manner which is likely to eauae, or 
has caused, serious injury or damage to the interest of the 
trade, industry or business to which such company pertains; 25 
or 
(d) that the business of a company is or has been con-
ducted and managed by such person with intent to defraUD 
its creditors, members or any other persons or otherwise for 
a fraudulent or unlawful purpose or in a manner prejudi- 30 
cial to public interest, 
the Central Government may state a case against tbe person 
aforesaid and refer the same to the Tribunal with a req1lest that 
the Tribunal may inquire into the case and record a ftRdi .. as to 
whether such person is a fit and proper peFson to hold 1Ihe office 35 
of director or any other office connected with the COftduet and 
management of any company. 

450f r,6O. 
~ 
(2) Every case under sub-section (1) shall be stated Ja the 
~rm of an applfcation which shall be presented to the Tribunal 
. 61" such officer thereOf as it may appoint in this behaH. 
(3) The per..,n· against whom a case is reft!rred to the Tribu-
S nal under this section shall be joined as a respondent to the 
·.ppllcaUcin~ 
1'0 
20 
25 
35 
(4) Every such application-
(a) shall contain' a concise statement of such circums-
tanees :anli materials as the Central GO'V'etntrient m:ay ebnsi-
der necessary for the purpose of the inquiry, and 
(b) shall be signed and verified in the manner laid down 
in the Code ()f Civil Procedure, 1908, for the signature and 
verification of a plaint in a ,guit by the Central Government. 
(5) The Tribunal may at any stage of the proeeedift'gs allow 
the Central Government to alter or amend the application in such 
manner and on such terms as may be just, and all sueh' amend-
ments shall be made as may be necessary for the .purpose of 
4~~rmintn.g the real questions in the inquiry. . 
388C. (1) Where during the pendency of a case before the !~~". 
TrIbunal it appears necessary to the Tribunal so to do in the ~ ... 
interest of the members or creditors of the company or in the' 
public interest, the Tribunal may on the application of the Cen-
tral Government or on its own motion, by an order-
(4) diTeet that the respondent shall 'nbt discharge any 
of the duties of his oBice uhtil further orden of the Tti·bu-
naI, and 
(b) appoint a suitable person in place of the respondent 
to discharge the duties of the oiD.ce held by the . respondent 
subject to such terms and conditions as the Tribunal maY' 
specify in the order. 
(2) Every perlOn appointed under clause (-b) of sub-sec-
tion (1) shall be.deemed to be a public servant within the mean-
ing of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
-388D. At the conclusion of the hearing of the case, the Tribu- ~ec:ili0D of 
nal shall record its findi"s stating therein speciftcally if the ~~buaal. 
Tribunal considers the respondent as being not a fit and .proper 
.person.to hold ~he office of director or any o~her office connected 
~th tlie condUct and management of any company. 
888E. (l) An appeal shalllieQlftly OIl qUefltions of law «riling Appeal to 
'OUt. ef ,the·· ftncUngs of the Tri-bunal to the ,High Court withia the IfJjh Court 
OD quatiODI 
oflaw. 

Power of 
CentralGov'-
ernmeDt to 
remov, 
IIJADIIUial 
~rsoADcl OD 
the bai,of 
Tribunal', 
tIa4iJIIa. 
10 
local limits of whose jurisdiction the place at which the Tribunal 
has held its sittings for the purpose of the inquiry under section 
388B, is situate and every such appeal shall be heard by a Bench 
. of not less than two Judges of the High Court : 
Provided that where the Tribunal hal held its sittinp at S 
more places than one and such places are situate within the 
local limits .f the jurisdiction of different High Courts, the 
appeal shall lie to the High C011rt within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction the appel~nt at the time of the flUng of the 
appeal ordinarily resides. 10 
(2) Every such appeal shall be filed within a period of 
sixty days from the date of the finding of the Tribunal: 
Provided that the appeal may be admitted after the expiry 
of the aforesaid period if the appellant satisfies the High Court 
that he had sufticient cause for not preferring the appeal within 15 
that period. 
388F. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision contained in 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, remove from 
ofBce any director, or any other person concerned in the conduct 
and management of the affairs, of a compay, against whom there 20 
is a finding of the Tribunal or a decision of a High Court under 
this Chapter: 
Provided that where a firm or a body corporate is concerned 
in the conduct and management of the afta!rs of a company as 
its managing a~nt or secretaries and treasurers, and the finding 2, 
of the Tribunal or the decision of a High Court is aealnst any 
partner in such firm, or any director of, or any person holding a 
general power of attorney from, such body corporate, the Cen-
tral Government may also remove from the offtce of managing 
agent or secretaries and treasurers such firm or body corporate. 30 
(2) No order under this section shall be made against any per-
son unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity to show 
cause against the same: 
Provided that no matter shall be raised by such person 
before the Central Government Ii such matter has been decided 35 
by the Tribunal or the High Court. 
(3) The person against whom an .order of removal from 
office is made under this section shall not hold the oftlce of a 
director or any other office connected with the conduct and 
management of the affairs of any company during a period of 40 
five years from the date of the (lrder of removal, 

10 
I' 
20 
30 
35 
,it 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provi. 
lion of this Act, or any other law or any contract, memorandum 
or articles, on the removal of a person from the office of a direc· 
tor or, as the cue may be, any other oftice connected with the 
conduct and management of the affairs of the company, that 
person shall not be entitled to claim any compensation for the 
L)ss or termination of office. 
(5) On the removal of a person from the office of a direc-
tor or, as the case may be, any other oftice connected with the 
conduct and management of the affairs of the company, the 
company may, with the previous approval of the Central Gov· 
ernment, appoint another person to that office in accordance with 
tl1e provisions of this Act.". 
t. In section 397 of the principal Act- Amendmeat 
of ,ection 
(0) in sub-section (1), for the words "are being conducted", 397· 
the words "are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to 'Pub. 
lie interest or" shan be substituted; 
(b) in sub1eCtion (2), in clause (a), for the words "are 
being conducted", the words "are being conducted in a manner 
prejudicial to public interelt or" shall be substituted. 
10. In sub-section (1) of section 398 of the principal Actr- ~=­
(4) in clause (4), for the words "are being conducted", the 398. 
words "are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to public 
intereat or" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (b), for the words "will be conducted", the 
words "will be conducted in a manner prejudicial to public in· 
terest or" shall be lubstituted. 
11. In 8ub-eection (1) of section 408-
(0) after the words "if the Central Government", the words 
"of its own motion or" shall be inserted. 
(b) after the words "interests of the company", the words 
"01' to public interest" shall be insened. 
Amendmeot 
of acetiOD 
",os. 
U. In Part VI of. the prinCipal Act, in Chapter VII, after section Iasertion of 
'1'. the following section shall be inserted, namely:- :f:r~ 
4IS· • 
"41 SA. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply in rela. Prov~ODt of 
tion to the Company Law Board as they apply in relation to the ~:PPl' ~ 
Central Government in respect of any matter in relation to ~ 
inccrWD 
C8ICI. 

llIIenion of 
neW eection 
63SA after 
scctiOll 635· 
Protection of 
acta doae in 
,ood faith. 
Amendment 
ur section 
637· 
1* 
wb,t.ch., the powers and functions of the' Central ~vernment 
UAder'SeCtions 410 a1)d 411 have been delegated to t4~: C()~pany 
I.aa,.w Board under section 637. fl. ' . 
13. After s.e~tion ~5 .of the princ:ipal Act, the. foUowmg section 
IJ.bell be illsened, namelY:- 5 
CC635A. No suit, prosecution or othe~ 1"al p~pc~ng shall 
lie against officers of Government for aJl.Yt~g. vihiqp ~, ~good 
faith done or inten~d to be done in Pw.:-s'A~c, at u.u. ~t or 
any rules made thereunder.". " 
I.. F~r sab-sections (1) and (2) of s~ti~ 637 0.( ~9:~. pIi~ipal 10 
Act, the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
cc (1). The Central G9ver~ent may, by noti8cation in the 
Official Gazette and subject to such conditions. restrictions and .. 
lilJdtati01;lS as may be specified therein, delegate- . 
(a) any of its powe~s o~ fun.c~o~. ~ ~. Act (pther IS 
than the power to make rules) to the Company Law Board; 
(b) any of its powers or functions un4er this Act •. other 
than those' specitl~ in Bub-section (2), to s,!c~ ()~~:r .• »tho-
rit)r or such oft!eer as may be specified in the notification. 
~} 'DIe powers and functions which cannot be delegated 20 
muier .clause (b) of sup-s~.ti9n (1) aJ;e. th~. c:o¢.e~~.~d by or 
mentiqneci in the fo1l9'Wing pfovisions ~ this Act, n~y .. sec-
tions 10, 89(4), 211 (3) IWQ, (4)., 212, 2~a,2~~,.·3Ia. 241, 
242, 243, 244, 245, 247, 248, 249, 250, 259, 268, 2~9, 274 (2) , 
29i, aoo. 310, SU, S24, 328. 328, 329, 332, 343, M.5, '346, 347 (2) . 2S 
Me. 352. 88&, &72, 396, 399(4) and (5), 4(}1,.408, ~,410, 4t-~(b), 
448, 609, 613, 620,638,641 and·-M2!'. 

STATEMENT 01' OBJECTS AND R&ASONS. 
~ ~. ~ ~~~#a~ quick action against persons involved in 
cases of fraud, misfeasance and other such malpractices and irregula-
rities in the management of companies, it is considered. necessarY to 
set up a Tribunal whose findings would enable the Central Govern-
ment to remove such persons from positions of managerial authority 
in any company. This Tribunal will also be empowered to hear 
certain applications under section 203 and sections 397 and 398 of 
the Companies Act, as these relate to matters of a similar nature. 
The scope of sections 397 and 398 and other related sections is being 
enlargec:l to provide for the entertainment of applications on grounds 
of public interest as well besides those stated therein. This 
Tribunal will also be empowered to exercise the powers and func-
tions of the court under such sections of the Companies Act as the 
Central Government may, from time to time, notifY. 
In order to prevent the use of voting rights attached to shares 
held by trusts for the advancement of personal interests of the 
donol'S, it is considered necessary to regulate the exercise of such 
rights in suitable cases. For this purpose, it is proposed to empower 
the Central Government to appoint a person to exercise voting rights 
in respect of trusts with significant share holding, when necessary, 
with a view to securing proper management of the company in the 
interests of the shareholders. 
In cases where Government has advanced a loan to a comPany, 
it is considered necessary that Government should have the power 
to direct the conversion of such a loan into shares of that company 
on fair and equitable terms. Where the loan agreement provides for 
such conversion, it is proposed to dispense with the procedure pres-
cribed under section 81: of the Companies Act in regard to such 
conversion of loans given by Government and specified financial 
institutions. Section 81 is proposed to be amended accordingly. 
Further, it is considered desirable, for the better and convenient 
administration of the Companies Act, to set up a Board to which 
w1ll be entrusted most of the powers and functions of the Central 
13 

i4 
Government under the Companies Act or other laws. The Board 
will function subject to the control of the Central Government in 
all matters. 
The Bill seeks to amend the Companies Act to give e1!ect to the 
above proposals. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHA.RI. 
NEW DELm; 
The 14th November, ID63. 

,,,. 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill aeeks inter alia to set up a Tribunal to enquire into 
c.... of m1I-conduct of various types en the part of company 
managements and an administrative Board to exercise such powera 
and functions of the Central Government under the Companies Act 
or under any other law, as may be assigned to that Board by that 
Government. 
The provision for the setting up of a TrIbunal will necessitate the 
appointment of Chairman and Members of the Tribunal and some 
additional .taft. As far as can be anticipated at present, the expendi-
ture on this account together with incidental expenses on administra-
tion to be met out of the Gonsolidated Fund of India is estimated at 
• about RI. 1,50,000 per annum as indicated below: 
R • ....""., of "11","" .rt4 ~ 
I. OJflem J1te. 
Chair.an of Tribunal 
Memben of Tribunal 2 
Reai.trar 
Company AcCOWltIDt 
a. """" conaist:q of SteDOIf&phen 
nc! Lower Diviaion Clerk, 
3. r .. ddI .. ,al "''''''" includiq 
Clan IV ad, tnvelliDa 
allowances. lICCOIIUDOdation, 
1 
3 
I 
1 
A .... ual Coni .. 
.,."".",.,." Ra. 
x ,,2,000 04;1,000 
X 27,000 54.000 
x 9,000 9.°°0 
X 7,300 7,200 
1303 00 
fUrniture. etc. 25.000 
Total 1,50>400 
or Say 1.5 0 ,000 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------The provision for the setting up of a Board may not involve any 
fresh expenditure from the Consolidated Fund as it is expected that 
the Board would be able to function with the help of the officers 
and a stafJ who are now borne on the strength of the Department 
of Revenue for dealing with the administration of the Companies 
Act. 

MEMORANDUM &'&GADDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 3, 4 and 60f the BUI empower the Central Government 
to make rules in respect of matters which, inter :alia, relate to. the 
strength of every Bench of the Tribunal, the procedure o1llii 
i'rib\Hlal .and 'Benches thereof, the procedure to he followed 'bftbe 
proposed Board of Company Law Administration, and the form in 
which a declaration may be made Under subsection (1) of the .pro-
posed s~ction 153A. ' 
The matters in respect of which rules may be made 'are' JDattert 
of proeedure at adl'ilinijtnttft ctetatl. The dele«*tiofl,'Of ~ive 
power f1f, tMrefore, 6f a normal cibaraem. 
16 

Folrthr 
issue of 
capital .. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956 
(1 OF 1958) -
• • • • 
PAllT III 
PROSPECTUS AND ALLOTMENT, AND OTHER MATl'ERS RELATING TO ISSUE OF 
SHAJlJ!'.S 'OF DEBBNTUUS 
• • • • 
Fv:rthe,' Issue Of Capital 
M. 0) • • (3) Nothing in this section shall apply-
• • 
(a) to a private company; or 
(b) to the increase of the subscribed capital of a public 
company caused by the exercise of an option attached to deben-
tures issued or loans raised by the· company-
(i) to OOIlvert such debentur~ or loans into shares in 
the company, or 
(ii) to subscribe for shares in the company:. 
Provided that the terms of isaue of such debentures or the terms 
of such loans include a term provdding for such option and such 
term-
(a) has been approved by a special resolution passed .by the 
company in general meeting ·before the issue of the debentures 
or the raising of the loans; and also 
(b) either has been approved by the Central Government 
before the issue of the debentures or the nlisiDg of the loans, or 
is in conformity with the rules, if any, made.by that Government 
in this behalf. 
• 
• 
• • 
PART VI 
MANAGDUHT AND ADMINISTRATION 
• • 
• 
• 
CHAPTBR VI.-Pu:vl:NTION OF OpPRESSION AND MISMANAGEMFoNT 
A. Powera of Court 
A~tlon 387. (1) Any members of a company who eomp1ai.n that the aftairs 
:Uef jut for of the company are being condueted In a manner oppreHive to any 
cueao~ member or members (including anyone or more ofthemle}ves) may 
oppre88l0n. apply to the Court for an order under thia HCtiOl1, provicled euch 
members have a ri~t 10 to apply In virtue of aacbiaD •. 
17 

18 
(2) If, on any application under su~tion (1), the Court is of 
opinion-
(a) that the company's affairs are beinl conducted in a 
manner oppressive to any member or members; and 
(b) that to wind up the company would unfairly prejudice 
such member or members, but that otherwise the facts would 
justify the making of a wind!ng-up order on the ground that it 
was just and equitable that the company should be wound up; 
t.e Court may, with a view to bringing to an end the matters com-
plained of, make such order as it thinks fit. 
398 (1) Any members of a company who complain- Application . to Court for 
() ha h _111.' f th b . d ted' relief in a t t t e aualI'S 0 e company are mng COD uc In eases of 
a manner prejudicial to the interests of the company; or misman8le-ment .• 
(b) that a material change (not being a change brought 
about by, or in the interests of, any creditors including deben-
ture holders, or any 'class of shareholders, of the company) has 
taken place in the management or control of the company, whe-
,ther by an alteration in its Board of directors, or of Its managing 
agent or secretaries and treasurers or manager, or in the consti-
tution or control of the firm or body corporate acting as its 
managing agent or secretarie6 and treasurers, or in the owner-
ship of the company's shares, or if iJt has no share capital, in its 
membership, or in any other manner whatsoever, and that by • 
reason of such change, it is likely that the affairs of the company 
will be conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the 
company; 
may apply to the Court for an _o~r under this section provided 
such members have a right so to apply in virtue of section 399 . 
• • • • 
B. Powers of Central G01'emmen.t 
408. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Powers of 
Central Government may appoint not more than two persons to hold ~O;:e~~~Dt 
office as directors thereof for such period, not exceeding three years OPPrcs.fOD 
on anyone occasion, as it may think fit, if the Central Government, ~nt. 
on the application of not less than one hundred members of the com-
pany or of members of the company holding not less than one-tentli 
of the total voting power therein, .is satisfied, after such inquiry as 
it deems fit ~o make, that it is necessary to make the ,appointment 
or appointments in order to prevent the affairs of the company I;>eing 
conducted either in a manner which is oppressive to any members 
of the company or in 8 manner which is prejudicial to 'the interests 
of the company: 

19 
Provided that in lieu of passing an order as aforesaid, the Central 
Government may, if the company has not availed itself of the option 
given to it under section 265, direct the, company to amend its arti-
cles in the manner provided in that section and make fresh appoint-
ments of directors in pursuance of the articles as so amended, within 
such time as may be specified in that behalf by the Central Govern-
ment. . 
• 
• 
• 
• 
PART XIII 
GENERAL 
• • 
• • 
Delegation of powers and junctions of Cemral Government 
~e~gatio~ 637. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Jov:~~ent Official Gazette, delegate any of its powers or functions under thJB 
Ofjt~power8 Act, other than those specified in sub-section (2), to such authority 
~ron9 ':';ier or officer, and subject to such conditions, restrictions and limitations, 
Act. as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) The Central Government shall not delegate its powers or 
functions under the following provisions of this Act, namely, sec-
tions 10, 89 (4), 211 (3) and (4), 212, 213, 235, 237, 239, 241, 242, 243, 
244, 245, 247, 248, 249, 250, 259, 268, 269, 274 (2), 295, 300, 310, 311, 
324, 326, 328, 329, 332, 343, 345, 346, 347 (2), 349, 352, 369, 372, 396, 
1399 (4) and (5), 401, 408, 409, 410, 411 fb), 448. 609, 613, 620, 638, 
Q641 and 642. 
'. • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BIU.. 
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
(Shri T. T. KTishnamtJdJari, Minister of FinDrtc,.) 