All INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
t· -
.. 
DUI No. 46 of 1987 
--THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND 
PRIVILEGES) AMENDMENT" BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and 
Privileges) Act, 1982. 
BE! it enacted by Parliament in the 'I1:1irty-eighth Year of the 
RepUblic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Governors (Emoluments, AllowaneM 
and Privileges) Amendment Act, 1987. 
2. In seehon 3 of the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privi-
leges) Act, 1982, in the opening paragraph, for the words "rupees five 
thousand five hundred per mensem", the words "rupees eleven thousand 
per mensem" shall be substituted, and the said section 3 as s') amended 
shall be deemed to have come in to force with effect from the 1~~ day of 
Apri:, 1986. 
Short 
title. 
Amend· 
ment of 
Act 43 of 
1982. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Clause (3) of article 158 of the Constitution provides, in.ter «tia, tbat 
the Governor shall be entitled to such emoluments and privileges 88 m&7 
be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision. in that behalf 
is so made, to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as are speci-
fied in the Second Schedule to the COl'\Stitution. Accordingly, the G0ver-
nors (EmOluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982 had been 
enacted prescribing the same emoluments of Rs. 5,500 per month as 
specified in the Second Schedule to the Constitution in 1950. 
2. Consequent on revision of the salary and allowances of President, -
Vice-President, Ministers, Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Members of Parlia-
ment, etc., in December, 1985, the question of revision of salary. etc., of 
various statutory authorities including Governors has been under consl-
deration. There has been considerable price-rise since 1950 and the 
emoluments of the Governors have not been enhanced since then. 
3. This Bill seeks to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Al10wances 
and Privileges) Act, 1982 to increase the emoluments payable to the 
Governors. According to the amendment proposed in thE' Bill, the 
Governors will be entitled to emoluments at the rate of Rs. 11,000 per 
mensem lind such increase is being made retrospectively from the 1st 
April, 1986. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELHI; 
ThE' 14th April. 1987. BU'l'A SINGH . 
... 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRArTS "ROM THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLoWANCES AND PRIVILEGES) 
Acr, 1962 
(43 OF 1982) 
• • • • 
1. (1) • • • • 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
• • • • 
Short 
tide, ex. 
tent and 
Commence-
ment. 
3. There shall be paid to ev~y Governor emoluments at the rate of Emolu. 
rupees five thousand five hundred per mensem: menta. 
Provided that if a Governor, at the time of his appointment,-
(a) is in receipt of a pension (other than disability or wound 
pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government 
of India or any of its predecessor Governments or under the Govern-
ment of a State or any of its predecessor Governments his emolu-
ments shall be reduced,~ 
(i) by the amount of that pension; and 
(ii) if he has, before s~h appointment, received in lieu of 
a portion of the pension due to him in respect of such previous 
service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that 
portion of the pension; and 
(iii) if he has, before such appointment, received a retire-
ment gratuity in respect of such previous service, by the pen-
sion equivalent of that gratuity; Or 
(b) is in receipt of any benefi! by way of contributory provident 
fund, his emoluments shall be reduced by the pension eqUivalent of 
such benefit. 
• • • • • 
3 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 
1982 . 
.. 
(Sh,.. ButG StAgh, MiniBter of Home Ajftltr •• ) 