As INTRODUCED IN Lmc SAlSA OX 
. .",. -
2 s AP~ ,gaf 
Bill No. 46 of 1985 
THE RAILWAYS BILL, 1988 
• 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES . 
CLAUSES ;-' .. '" 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION 
3. Zonal Railways. 
4. Appointment of General Manager. 
CHAPTER m 
COMMISSIONS OF RAILWAY SAn:rr 
5. Appointment of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety aDd 
Commissioners of Railway Safety. 
6. Duties of Commissioner. 
7. Powers of Commissioner. 
8. Commissioner to be public servant. 
9. Facilities to be afforded to Commissioners. 
CHAPTER IV 
CoNSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF WORKS 
10. Power of railway administrations to. execute all necessary 
works. 
11. Power to alter the position of pipe, electric supply line, 
drain or sewer, etc. 
12. Protection for Government property. 
13. TemporarY entry upon land to remove obstruction, to ~ or 
to prevent accident. 
14. Payment of amount fo;r damage or loss. 
15. Accommodation works. 
16. Power of owner, occupier, State Goveriunent or local authority 
to caUSe additional accommodation works· to be made. 
17. Fences, gate~ and bars. 
18. Overbridges and underbridges. 
(i) 

eii) 
CHAPTER V 
,: {. " ~ 01' RAILWAYS 
~VBES 
19. Sanction. of ,the Central Government to tJ1e opening of railway. 
20. Formalities to be complied with before giving sanction to the 
/0 
opening of a railway. : 
21. Sections 19' and 20 to apply to the opening of certaln works. 
22. Temporary suspension of traftic. 
?-1. Power to close railway opened for the public carrJage of 
passengers. 
24. Re-opening of closed railway. 
25. Use of rolling stock. 
28. Delegation of powers. 
27. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter. 
CHAPTER VI 
FIxATION 01' RATES 
28. Power to fix rates. 
29. Power to classify commodities or alter rates . 
. 30. Power of railway administration to charge certain ratel. 
CHAPI'ER vn 
RAILWAY RATES 'l'IlnruNAL 
31. Constitution of the Railway Rates Tribunal 
32. Staff of ~he Tribunal. 
33. Sittings of the Tribunal. 
34. Complaints against a railway administration. 
~. Matters not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal 
36. Powers of the Tribunal. 
37. Reference to the Tribunal. 
38. Assistance by the Central Government . 
•. Burden of proof, etc. 
40. Decision, etc., of the Tribunal. 
41. Bar of jurlldiction of courts. 
42. ReUefs which the Tribunal may grant. 
43. Revision of decisions given by the Tribunal. 
44. Ex:ecution of decisions or orders of the Tribunal. 
45. Report to the Central Government. 
46. Power of the Tribunal to make regulations. 
C}tAPTER vm 
. CARRIAGE 01' PASSENGERS 
47. Exhibition of certain' timings and tables of fares at station •• 
4&. Supply of tickets on payment of fare. 

(iii) 
CLAUSIB 
49. Provision for case in which ticket is h8ued for ~888 or tram 
not having accommodation for additional pll8eftPl'l., 
50. Cancellation of ticket and refund. 
5l Prohibition against transfer of certain tickeils. 
52. Exhibition and surrender of passes and tickets. 
53. Prohibition against· travelling without pass or ticket. 
54. Power to refuse to carry persons suffering from infectious 
contagious diseases. 
55. Maximum number of passengers for each compartment. 
56. Earmarking of compartment, etc'J for ladies. 
57. Communications between passengers and rallway ..... t 
incharge of trains. . 
58. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter. 
CHAPTER IX 
CARRIAGE OF GOODS 
59. ~tenance of rate-books, etc., for carriage of goods. 
60. Conditions for receiving, etc., of goods.-
61. Provision of risk rates. 
62. Forwarding note. 
63. Railway receipt. 
64. Power to require statement relating to the description of goods. 
65. Carriage of dangerous or offensive goods. 
88. Carriage of animals suffering from infectious or contagious 
diseases. 
fYI. Deviation of route. 
68. Prohibition of undue preference. 
69. Power to give directions in regard to carriage of certain goods. 
70. Maximum carrying capacity for wagons and trucks. 
71. Punitive charge for overloading a wagon. 
72. Passing of property in the goods covered by railway rece:pt. 
73. Section 72 not to affect right of stoppage in transit or claima for 
freight. 
74. Surrender of railway receipt. 
75. Power of railway administration to deliver goods or sale proceeds 
thereof in certain cases. '. , 
76. Power to measure, weigh, etc. 
77. Weighment of consignment on the request of the consignee. or 
endorsee. 
78. IJability of railway administration for wrong delivery. 
79. Open delivery of consignments. 
80. Partial delivery of consignments. 

(iv) 
CLA'CSES 
81. Lien for freight or any other sum due. 
82. Unclaimed consignment. 
83. Disposal of perishable consignments in certain circumstances. 
84. Sales under sections 81, 82 and 83 not to affect the right to suit. 
85. Power to make rules in respect ot matters in this Chapter. 
CHAPTER X 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS AS TO GOODS BOOKED TO NO'tlFIED STATIONS 
86. Definitions. 
87. Power to declare notified stations. 
88. Disposal of unremoved goods at notified stations. 
89. Price to be paid to person entitled after deducting dues. 
90. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter. 
CHAPTER XI 
REsPoNsmn.I:TIES OF RAILWAY ADMlNISTltA.TION AS cARRIERS 
91. General responsibility of a railway administration as carrier of 
goods. 
92. Goods to be loaded or deliverp.d at a siding not belonging to a 
railway administration. 
93. Goods carried in open vehicles. 
94. Delay or detention in transit. 
95. Traffic ~ing over railways in India and railways in foreign 
countries. 
98. Goods carried at owner's risk rate. 
9'1. Goods in defective condition or defectively packed. 
18. Responsibility of a railway administration after termination of 
trlDllt. 
99. Responsibility as carrier of luggage. 
100. Responsibility as a carrier of animals. 
101. Exoneration from liability in certain cases. 
102. Extent of monetary liabiijty in respect of any consignent. 
103. Right of railway administration to check contents of anv goods 
or luggage. 
104. Notiee of claim for compensation and refund of over charge. 
105. Suits for compensation' for loss, etc., of goods. 
106. Person entitled to claim compensation. 
107. Suits for compensation for personal injury, etc. 
108. Burden of proof. . 
109. Extent of liability of railway administration in .reSpect of 
accidents at sea. 
110. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this, Chapter. 

CLAUSES 
(v) 
CHAPTER XII 
Aa:ml::NTs 
111. Notice of railway accident. 
112. Inquiry by Commissioner. 
113. Inquiry by railway administration. 
114. Powers of Commissioner in relation to inquiries. 
115. Statement made before Commissioner. 
. 116. Procedure, etc. 
117. No inquiry, investigation, etc., to be made if the CommiIIion 
of inquiry is appointed. 
118. Inquiry into accident not covered. by section 111. 
119. Returns. I 
120. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter • 
. CHAPTER XIn 
LIAmLITY or RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION roa DMTK ANJ) INJl7II1' TO 
PASSBNGEBS DUll: TO ACCJDII:R'l'S 
121. DefInitions. 
l.22. Extent of liability. 
123. Claims Commissioner. 
124. Application for compensation. 
125. Interim relief ,by railway administration. 
126. Procedure and powers of Claims Commissioner. 
127. Claims Commissioner to decide the liability to pay compensa-
tion, etc. 
128. Determination of compensation in respect of death. 
129. Provision for medical examination of persons injured. 
130. Determination of compensation in respect of any injury or loss 
of goods. 
131. Payment of compensation. 
I 
132. Appeals against the decision of a Claims Commissioner. 
133. Saving as to certain rights. 
134. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter .. 
CHAPTER XIV 
RmuLA'l'10N OF HOUBS OF WORK AND PBRlOD or IIDT 
135. Definitions. 
136. Chapter not to apply to certain railway servants. 
137. Limitation of hours of work. 
138. Grant of periodical rest. 
139. Railway servant to remain on duty. 
140. Supervisors of railway labour. 
141. Power to make rules in respect of matters In this Chapter. 

CLAUS1'8 
(vi) 
CHAPTER XV 
PENALTIES AND 0FI'ENc:rs 
142. Fraudulently travelling o.r attempting to travel without proper • 
pass or ticket. . 
143. Levy of excess charge and fare for trave1ltng without proper 
pass or tiCket or beyond authorised distlace. 
144. Power to remove persons. 
145. Security for good behaviour in certain cases. 
14& Needlessly interfering with means of communication in a tnin. 
147. Penalty for transfer of tickets. • 
148. Penalty for unauthorised carrying on of business Of procur1Dg 
and supplying of rail way tickets. 
149. Prohibition on hawking, etc., and belling. 
150. Drunkenness or nuisance. 
151. Obstructing railway servant in his duties. 
152.· Trespass and refusal to desist from trespass. 
153. Penalty for making a false statement in an application for 
compensation. 
154. Making a false claim for compensation. 
155. Maliciously wrecking or attempting of wreck a train. 
1~ Damage to or destruction of certain. railway propertle&. 
157. Maliciously hurting or attempting to hurt per80DS ~ by' 
railway. I 
156. Endange.ring safety or persons travelling by railway by wilful 
act or omission. .. . 
159. Endangering safety of persons ,travelling ,by railway by rash or 
negligent act or omission. . . 
160. Entering into a compartment reserved or resisting entry into a 
compartment not reserved. I' . 
161. Entering carriage in motion or otherwise improperl1 tra-
velling on a railway ~ 
162. Travelling on roof, step or engine of a train. 
163. Altering or defacing pass or ticket. 
164. Penalty for contravention of any of the provisions of Chapter 
XlV. 
165. Disobedience of or drivers or condu~s of vehicles to direc-
tions of railway servant, etc. 
166. Opening or breaking a level crosaing gate. 
167. Cattle trespass. 
168. Negligently crossing unmanned. level crolllling. 
169. Entering carriage or other ~ reaerved for females. 
170. Giving false account of goods. 
111. Unlawfully bringing dangerous goods on a railwar.. 
172. ·Unla.wfully briDging offensive goods on a railway. 
'. 

CLAUSES 
I It.f . -
173.. DeIaclngpublic notices. 
174. 'Smoking. 
175. Travel on railway with-infectious or contagious dlleaae. 
176. Provision with respect to commiS'Sion· of offence by the childreD 
of acts ellciangering safety of pertoIl travel.lingOll railway. 
177. Levy of penalty on:non-Govemment railway. 
178. Recovery of penalty. 
179. Section 1.77 or 178 not to preclude Central Government from 
taking any other action. 
180. Penalty for drunkenness. 
181. Abandoning train, etc., without authority. 
182. Obstructing rwming of train, etc. 
183. Endangering the safety of persons. 
184. Obstructing level ,,"ossing. 
185. False returns. 
186. Making a false report by a rtrllway servant. 
187. Penalty for wilfully permitting a person suffering from any 
infectious or contagiOus disease to travel. -
188. Omission to give notice of accident. 
189. Arrest fQr offences under cenain sections. 
190. Arrest of persons likely to abscond, etc. 
191. Magistrate having jurisdiction upder the Act. 
192. Place of trial. 
CHAPTER XVI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
193. Power to provide other transport services. 
194. Taxation on railways by local authorities. 
195. Taxation on railways for advertisement. 
196. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts. 
197. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
198. Restriction on execution aeainst railway property. 
199. Railway servants to be public servants for the pUrJ)OSes of 
Chapter IX and section 409 of the Indian Penal Code. 
200. Railway servants not to engage in trade. 
201. Procedure for delivery to railway administration of property 
detained by a railway servant. 
202. Proof of entries in records and documents. 
203. Service of notice, etc., on :railway administration. 
204. Service of notice, etc., ,by railway administration. 
205. Presumption where notice is served by' post. 
206. Representation of railway administration. 
207. Power to exempt railway from Act. 

(viii) 
CLAUSIB 
208. Matters supplemental to the deftnitions of "railway" and 
"railway servant". 
209. General power to make rules. 
21,0. Rules to be laid before Parliament. 
211. Repeal and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

THE RAILWAYS BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
BIB No ... of U88 
to COftBoUdate and amend the law relating to R"ilW4111. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh 'Year of-·tho 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
Pal:LIMINABY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Railways Act, 1986. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date. as the Central Government 
may by notification ill: the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions 
of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the co~eilcement 
10 of' this Act shall be construed as·a reference to the coming into foree of 
that provision. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "authorised" means authorised by a railway administration; 
(2) "carriage" means the carriage of passengers or goods- by a 
15 ' railway administration; 
,(3) "classification" means the classification of commodities made 
under section 29· for the purpose of determining the rates, to be charged 
for carriage of such commodities; 
(4) "cl~ss rates" mean'S the rate fixed foT' a class of commodity in 
20 the claSSification;' . 
(5) "Commissioner" m.eans the Chief CommiSsioner of Railway 
Safety, or the Commissioner Of. Railway Safety appointed under 
section 5; 
Short 
title auf 
c:omen""" 
meIlt 
JleGaj. 
lion •• 

2 
(6) "commodity" mean~ a, !ped6.c item of goods; • ':,P • • 
(7) "cODaignee" means the ~'t1lGft named as ~onsipee in a railway 
receipt; .:'" \ I ' · 
(') "CODaipunent" means goods ~ted to . .a railway admiDil-
tration for carriale; ~ \ '. I .' 
(9) "consignor" means the person, nam~ ill a raUway' r~t u 
cou1por, by whom or on whose behalf goods ~JI'IJ'I'Ied ,by the riilway 
receipt are entrusted to a railway administratiorr ,for carriage; 
(10) "demurr." means the charge levied for !the' ~etention of 
any rolling stock 11tH the expiry ot free tim~. it aJI.y.~ ... allowed for 10 
such detention; " ,~. 
(11) "endorsee" means the person in whose favour an l'u:dorae-
ment is matt_. and in the case of successive endorsements, the. '8ftIQD 
in whose favour the last endorsement is made; ,,' \ 
(12) "endorsement" means the signing by the consignee or t1i~ '\ I. 
endotsee· aftft' -adding Q direction on a railway receipt to paiS the 
property in the goods mentioned in' such receipt to a specified person; 
(13) "tare" mean! the charge l~vied for the carriage of passen-
. cera; 
, .. , (H) "ferry" includes a bridge. of boats, pontoons or rafts, a swang, ~ 
.~ 
or; '. 
I"" , 
pridget a fty-bridge- and a temporary bridge and' the approachea to,. 
an~lancltng plaeesof j a.ferry j 
(15) "forwarding n:lte" means the document executed under 
section. 62; 
(16) "freight" means the charg~ levied for the carriage of goods. 25 
including transht~ent charges; if 'any; 
(17) "General Manager" means the General Manager of a Zeaal 
Raijwa~' appointed under section 4; 4 
(1') "l(Jods" includes animals; . , 
(19) "Goverament railway" me.ns a railway owned. by thQ3 0 
Central Government; 
(20) "in transit" in relatibn to the carriage of goods by railway, 
means the period Wtween the·,oommencement aud the termiAatlon of 
tranlit of such'~; and .unless otherwise previously detennined-
(ci) transit commences as soon as the railway receipt is iBaued 35 
or the conalpment il loaded, whichever is earlier; 
(b) transit term.tDates on the 'expiry ot the tree time,aJ,Jowed 
for unloading ot consignment from . any' rolling . 'Stock and wJaere 
.~ unloading lu" been,'completed .within·such free time, traDIIt 
terminates on the expiry of the free time allOWed, for the zoe- 40 
~V" .. l of the goocisfr:om the railway premises; 
~ "level Cl"oSsing" means an inter-ieetioJ:l. ota.road 1Vith li=I 
04 r~ at. the sam~ leNel: ' 

10 
20 
35 
8 
(22) "luggage" melLn9 tbe g.QOds of a pa.s~er either' carried. by 
J:Wn in his charge or entrusted to a railway admin1strati~ for 
carriage; 
(23) "lump sum ra,te" means. the rate mutuaU1y ~ upon 
between a railway a~stration and a co~~r for the" carriage of 
IQOds and for any service in relation to such can1age; , 
" . 
-(24) "non:.oovemment raitway" means a rafiway other than a 
Government railway;. 
(~) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
G~ette; 
(2~) "parcel" means goods entrusted to a railway -admini!!ltration 
for carriage by a passenger or a parcel train; 
(27) "pass" means ;m rmthority given by the Ceratl'al Govem-
ment or a railway administration to a perscm allowing him to tl'avei 
as 11 passenger, but does not include a ticket; 
(28) "passsenger" means a person travelling witb a valid pass or 
~cket; 
(29) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under thiL' 
Act: . 
(30) "railway" means a railway, or any portion of a railway, for 
the public carriage of passengers or goods, and includes-
(a) all 'laMs within· the fImces or ether' . boWlUry mara 
indicatilig the limits of, the land 'appurtenant to a railway; 
(b) all lines of rails, sidings, or yards, or branches uied for 
the purposes of, or in connection with, a railway; 
(c) all rolling stock stations, offices, warehouses,w.ba.rves, 
workshops, manufactories, fixed. plant and machinery, roads and 
streets, running rooms, r~t ho~es, institutes, hospitals, water 
VIOrks and water sUJPly, m..nations, staff dweUings and aDY 
other works constructed for the purposes of, or in connection with, 
railway; and 
(d) all vehicles which ar~ used. on any road for tbe purposes 
of traftlc of a railway and owned, hired' or worked by aiatlway; 
and 
. (e) all ferries, shipB, boats .and rattsw.hU;h are· w;ed,0A, any 
canal, river, l~~or otherna~Qle inleJJd,.ten for die. ",ar-
poses of the' traftic of a raUway and owned; hired or wor"'ked. by 
a railway administrc.tion" 
but does not include-
40 (i) a tramway wholly within a municipal area; and 
45 
(ii) lines of raUs buil~ in any exhibWon .. grOllDcl, fair, 
park, or ~\Dy other place so~ely for the P1.Q'POSe of ~cnatiOD.; 
(31) "railway administration", ir. re:lition to-
.(a) a Govenunent .railway. means the ·Otmeral 'Manafer' of_ 
Zonal Railway; and 
(b) a non-Govern~t railway, means t,be pel"8on who i8 the 
owner or lessee of the railway or the person worldtlf the tan_ay 
'Wider. an'agte~ment; 
(32) "railway receipt" means the receipt issued under ilaetion a; 

Zcmal 
aaHway, 
(83) "railway servant" means any person employed by the 
Central Government or by a railway administration in connection 
with the se.rvice of a railway; 
(84) "rate" includes any fare, freight or any other charge for the 
'carriage of any passenger er goods; 5 
(35) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Railway 
Rates Tribunal under thi!:j Act; 
"(36) "rolling stock" includes locomotives, tenders, carriages, 
wagons, rail-cars, containers, trucks, trolleys and vehicles of all kinds 
moving on rails; 
(37) "station to station rate" means a special reduced rate appli-
cable to a specific commodity booked between specified stations; 
(38) "ticket" includes a single ticket, a return ticket and a season 
ticket; 
10 
(39) "traffic" includes rolling stock of every description, as well J 5 
as passengers and goods; 
(40) "Tribunal" means the Railway Rates Tribunal constituted 
under section 31; 
(41) "wharfage" means the charge levied on goods for not 
removing them from the railway after the expiry of the tree time for 20 
such removal; 
(42) "Zonal Railway" means a Zonal 'Railway constituted under 
section 3. 
CHAPTER IT 
RA:ILWAY ADMINISTRATIONS 
"Cl, (1) The: Central Government may, for the purpdSe of the efJl.cient 
administration of the Government railways, by notification, constitute 
such'ra,Uways into as many Zonal Railways as it may deem fit and specify 
in', such notification the names and headquarters of such Zonal Railways 
-and the areas in respect of which they shall exercise jurisdiction. 
(2) The Zonal Railways existing immediately before the commence-
ment of this Act shall be deemed to be Zonal Railways constituted under 
sUb-section (1). 
,', (3) The Central Government may, by notification, declare any unit 
25 
go 
of the railways engaged in research, development, designing, construction 35 
or prodution of rolling stock, its parts or other equipment used on a 
!ailw~, to be a Zonal Rallway. 
(4) The Central Gove,rnment may, by notification, abolish any Zonal 
Rafl~1 or constitute any new Zonal Railway out of any existing Zonal 
Rallway Or Zonal Railways, change the name or headquarters of any Zonnl 40 
.a.anway ,or determine the areas in respect of which a Zonal Railway shall 
carercIIe jurisdiction. 

4S of 1860. 
.. 
J. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint a pe1'IOJl 
-to be the General Manager of a Zonal Railway. 
(2) Th~ genet:a1 superintendence and control of a Zonal Railway shall 
vest in the General Manager. . , 
Appoiat_ 
meat 
of GeDeral 
Manager. 
5 CHAPTER III 
10 
llO 
CoMMISSIONERS OF RAILWAY 8APETY 
Appoint-
S. The Central Government may appoint a person to be the Chief meat 
Commissioner of Railway Safety and such other persons as it may comdder of Chief Commis-
necessary to be the Commissioners of Railway Safety. sioner 
6. The Commissioner 'Shall-
of R.aiJ.way 
Safety and 
ColDDliss-
ionera 
of Railway 
Safety. 
(a) inspect any railway with a view to ~etermine whethe.r it is Duties of 
fit to be opened for the public carriage of passengers and report thereon Commis" 
to the Central Government as required by or under this Act; , ianel. 
(b) make such periodical or other inspections of any J'ailway or 
of any roIliJlg stock used thereon as the Central Government may 
direct; 
(c) make an inquiry under this Act into the cause of any 
accident on a railway; and 
(d) discharge such other duties as are conferred on him by E)I'. 
under this Act. 
7. Sublect to the control of the Central Government, the Commissioner, Powers of 
~.~ whenever it is necessary 'So to do tor any of the purpoleS of this ACt, may- Own .. 
~ (II) enter Upon and inspect any railway or any relling stock: u.ed ioner 
So 
thereon; 
(b) by order in w.riting addressed to a rail way admiDistratiOD, 
require the attendance before him of any railway servant and to re-
quire answers or returns to such enquiries as he thinks fit to make from 
such railway servant or from the' railway administration; and 
(c) require the production of any ~k, docwnent or material 
object belonging to or in the possession or control Of any raUway 
admintstTation which appears to him to be necessary to in'spect. 
8. The C()mmissioner shall be deelneci to be a public servant within 
the meanmg of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
{)muniIt-
iODII' to 
bo' pablic 
'servaat. 
t. A J'aUway administration shall afford to the Commissioner all Facilfti. 
"S5·:reuonable t.cUities for the diseharge of the duties or for the exerciae of to bo 
~ powersiJDposed or conferred on him by or under this Act. atronled to 
eommill-

Power of 
raDway 
adminis-
trations 
to eucule 
all neces 
aary works 
~to 
.... ,tIIe 
..... of 
,..... ..... 
c:tric' .."., 
UDe 
drain or 
8~, etc 
.,. ........ 6 
CHAPTER IV 
CoNSIRUCTlO~ AND MAINTllNANCE OF WOREs 
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the tiule 
being in force, but subject to the provision'S of this Act and the provlstODa 
of any law for the acquisition of land for a public parpose or for com- 5 
panies, and subject also, in the case of a non-Govermnent railway, to the 
provisions of any contract between the non-Government railway and 
the Central Government, a railway administration may, for the p~ of 
constructing or maintaining a railway-
(a) make or construct in or upon, accross, under or over any 10 
lands, or any streets, hills, valleys, roads, railway, tramways, or any 
rivers, canals, brooks streams or other waters, or any drains, water-
pipes, gass-pipes, oil-pipes, sewers, electric supply lines, or telegraph 
lines, such temporary or pennanent inclined-planes, arches, tuDnels, 
culverts, embankments, aquaducts, bridgeS, roads, lines of rails, ways, 15 
passages, conduits, drains, pienlw cuttings and fences, in-take wells, 
tube wells, dams, river training and protection works as it thinks 
proper; ~ 
(b) alter the course of any rivers, brooks, streams or other water 
courses, for the purpose of construction and ~~ t~ls, 20 
bridges, passages or other works over or under them.' '8nd divert or 
alter either temporarily or pennanently, the course of any rivers, 
brooks, streams or other water courses or any roads, streets or ways, 
or raiweor sink the level thereof, in order to' carry them more COD-
veniently over or under or by the side of the railway; 
(c) make drains or condUits into, through or r.lnder any laIlds 
adjoining the railway for the p~rpose of conveying water from or 
to the railway; 
25 
(el) erect and construct such houses, warehouses, omces and 
other buildings, and such yards, stations. ~harves, en,eines, ,machi- qO 
nery apparatus and other works and conveniences as the railway" 
administration thinks proper; 
(e) alter, repair, or discontinue such buildings wor~ and, con-
veniences as aforesaid or any of them and substitute others in their 
stead· .• , I ,<I;" , ~ ~~ 
(j) erect, operate. maintain or repair any tel'~h and tele· 
phone lines in connection with the working of the' r8Uway; and. 
(g) do all other acts necessary for making, maintaining, alter-
ing or repairing and using the railway, 
11. (1) A railway administration may, for the purpose of e~ 40 
the powers conferred on it by this Act, .alter the position 'Of any 'ptpe for 
the SUpply of gas, water. oil or compressed air, or the pOsItion of lnY 
electric supply line, dr~n or sewer: 
Provided that before altering the position of any s-".lcb pipe, ;eleetric 
supplylifte, drain or sewer, the railway administration shlll·gt.e.~ '45 
indicating the time at which the work of sueb alteratlon'SId:_. 
mance, to the local authority or ot,per person having control Oftr the 
pipe, e1eetrIc supply line., drain or sewer. 

5 
10 
15 
20 
·...... .. ..... 
7 , 
(2) The railway adminiatl'ation shall execute the work referred· to in 
sub-aeetIaR (1) to the reasonalXe,satisfaction ef the 10aal authority or the 
pel'BOn receiving the notice under the proviso to su~ (I). 
12. Nothing in sections 10 and 11 shall authorise-
(a) a railway adminjs~ation of the Governmept railway to do 
anything on or to any work$, lands or buildings vested in, Or jn the 
pouession of, a State Government without the consent of that Gov .. 
·erament; and 
(b) a railway administration of a non-Government railway to 
do anything on or to any works, lands or buildings vested in, or in 
the Poaession of, the Central Government or a State Government. 
witbout the. consent of the Government concerned. 
13. (1) Where in the opinion of a railway administration-
(4) there is imminent danger that any tree. post or structure 
~y fall on the railway so as to obstruct the movement of rolling 
stock; 
(b) any tree, post, structure or light OQstructs the view of any 
signal provided for movemeR.t of rolling stock; or 
(c) any tree, post or structure obstructs any telephone or tele-
graph line maintained by it, 
it may take such steps as may be necessary to avert such danger or 
~ve such obstruction and s'lbmit a report thereof to the Centre! Gov-
ernment in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. 
(2) Where in the opinion of a railway administration-
25 (4) a slip or ~ccident has occurred; or 
(b) there is apprehension of any slip or accident to any cutting, 
embankment or other work on a railway, 
it may enter upon any lands adjoining the railway and do all such works 
as may be necessary for the purpose of repairing or preventin~ &"lch slip 
or accicfent and sublUit a report th~reot to the Central Government in 
30 such manner' and ~thm such time as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Central Government may, after consideril'lg the report under 
sub-section (1) orsub-eection (2), in the interest of public satety, by 
order, direct the railway administration that further action rmder sub-
15 section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be stopped or the same shall be sub-
ject to such conditions as may be specifted in the order. 
ProtectiOIl 
for Ocmm-
BlOllt'"'" 
perty. 
Temporary 
elltry upoll 
IlUId to 
remove obi-
t! Uc:tiOIl, to 
repair" or to 
prevCIlt 
accident, 
14, (1) No suit shall lie against a railway administration to recover PaYDWlt of 
any am~unt .for any damage or lou caused in the exercise of the powers IIDOUIlt for 
conf~~q by, any of the foregoing provisions of ' this Chapter. damale or 
40 (2) A raUway administration shall payor, tender payment for any 
,damag.. or laa, cause~ In the· exercise of the powers conferred by any 
of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, and in case' of a dlspute as to 
the s'aftlciency of any amount so paid or tendered or as to the persons 
entitled to receive the' amdUllt, it shall immediately refer the dispute to 
-t.c. the decriaiOD of the District Judge of the district and his decision thereon 
\.I &ball be iDal. ' , -' .. ' " • • 
1081. 

Accommo-
dation 
works. 
..,.._. ........ -,--
8 
(8) The reference under sub-section (2) shall be treated as an appeal 
under lICtlon 98 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and shall be dfI.. 5 of 1908, 
posed of accorcUngly. 
(4) Where any amount has been paid as reqtJiNd by sub-aection (2), 
the railway administration shall, notwithstanding anything in any other 5 
law for the time being in force, be cUscharged from allliabiUty to any 
penon whatsoever in respect of any amount so paid. 
15. (1) A railway administration shall make and maintain the follow-
ing works for the accommodation of the owners and occupiers of lands 
adjoining the railway, namely:- 10 
(m) such crossings, bridges, arches, culverts and passages over. 
under or by the sides of, or leading to or from, the railway as may, 
in the opinion of the State Government, be necessary for the pUl'pOse 
of making good any interruptions caused 1;>y the railway to the use 
'C1f the lands through which the railway is made; and 15 
(b) all necessary aT'Ches, tunnels, culverts drains, water sources 
or other passages, over, under Or by the sides of the railway, of such 
dimeaslons as will, in the opinion of the State Government be IJUfft-
clent at all times to convey water as freely from or to the lands lying 
near or affected by the railway as it was before the making of the 20 
railway or as nearly as possible. . 
(2) S"lbject to the other provisions of this Act, the works specified 
in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) shall be made at the cost of the 
railway administration during or immediately after the laying out or 
formation of the railway over the lands traversed and in such a manner 25 
as to cause as little damage or inconvenience as possible to persons inte-
rested in the lands or aff'ertp.~ by the works: 
Provided that-
(a) a railway administration shall not be required to make any 
accommodation works in sl1ch a manner as would ~revent or obstrrJct 30 
the workinR' or usin" of the railway. or to make any accommodatinn 
works with. respect to which the owners or occupiers of the lands 
have heen paid compensation in consideration of their not reauirin~ 
the Raid works to be made: 
(b) '=::IV~· 8!' 'herE'i1'lafter in th", Chnotp.,.. t:l"I')~rled. not TIl;1wav 35 
fldministrAtion shall he li"l)le to execute ~.nv further or ~dditioTlal 
accommodation works for the use of the owners or occupiers of the 
Inn~s after the e~iration ef ten yeRt's fr"m the dRte on which thE' 
rfl.fl''I'flY f)1.ssing thrO"lqh the lands wa'3 first onenett for public tt'ilftic: 
(c) where a railway administration has 'Dro'rideri snitll'hle accorn- 40 
modatton wnrk for the CM!'!"fn~ 6f a road or 1It."p'l'Im. nnd the l'nad or 
stream is afterwards diverted bv the net or neplp.ct nf f:hp. 'Derson hav-
ing the control thereof, the railwlilv ""mfnf,,trAtf'"tn .,hlll1 nnf: l'ie com-
pelled to provide nnv other accommodation work fnr the C'rnq"ng of 
such road or stream. . 45 
(3) The State Govemment mav snecifv 8. dRtP. for the cr\l'l'lmpncement 
of any work to be executed under sub.seetion (nand. if within three 
months next after that d~te, the railway flrJministration fails to commenc(" 

9 - •. t 
the work or having commenced it, fails to proceed diligently to execute 
it, the Central Government ,shall, on such failure being brought to its 
·notice by the State Government, iss·.le such directions to the railway 
administration as it thinks fit. 
5· ErpZanation.-For the purposes· of this section, the expression "lands" 
shall include public roads. 
16. (1) If an owner or occupier of any land affected by a railwa'y con. Power of 
siders the works made 1plder section 15 to be insufficient for the· use of OWJlor, 
the land, or if the State Government or a local authority desires to con· :~:~~~v. 
10 struct a public road or other work· across, under or over a railway J such emment 
owner or ,occupier, or. as the case may be. the State Government or the or local 
local authority, may, at any time, require the railway administration to authority 
make at the expense of the owner or occupier or of the State Government to cause 
or the local authority, as the case may be, such further accommodation. additional accommo· 15 works as are considered necessary and are agreed to by the railway dation 
administration. ; works to 
(2) The accommodation works made under s"Jb-section(1) shall be 
maintained at the cost of the occupier or owner of the land .. the State 
Government or the' local authority, at whose request the works were 
20 made.' " 
(3) In the case of any difference of opinion between the railway ad-
ministration and the owner or occupier. the State C;;overnment or t~e local 
authority, as the case may be, in relation to-
(i) the necessity of such further accommodation works; or 
~5 (ii) the eXpenses to be incurred on the construction of 'Such 
further accommodation works; or 
(iii) the quantum of expen~es on the maintenance of. such further 
accommodation works, 
it shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon 
10 shall be final. 
be made. 
17. The Central Government may. within such time as may be speci- Fences, 
fled by it or within such further time., as it may, grant, req: lire that- gatel and 
barl, 
35 
(a) boundary marks or fences be provided or renewed by a 
railway administration for a railway or any part thereot and tor 
roads constructed in connection therewith; 
(b) suitable gates, chains. bars, stiles, or hand-rails be erected 
or renewed by a railway administration ~t level crossing; . 
(c) persons be employed by a railway administration to open 
and shut gates, chains or bars. 
lO 1~. (1) Where a railway administration has constructed 11,:raes of rails 
across a public road at the same level. the St,te Goverttment or the local 
authority maintaining the road, may, at any· time, in the interest of p·Jbllc 
safety, require, the railway administration to take the road either under 
or over the railway by means of a bridge or arch with convenient ascents 
~5 and descents and other convenient approaches, ihstead of crossing the 
road on the level, or to execute such Qther works as may. in the circum-
stances of the case, appear to the State Government or local authority 
Over. 
bridges 
aad 
under. 
bridges. 
• 

10 
maintaining the road to be best adapted for removing or diininishing the 
danger arisil)g from the level crossing. 
(2) The railway administration may require the State Government 
or the local authority. as the case may be, as a condition of exeo-lting 
any work under sub-section (1), to undertake to pay the whole of the 5 
cost of the work and the expense of maintaining the work, to the raUway 
administration or such proportion of the cost and expenses as the railway 
admtnistratton thinks just and reasonable. 
(3) In the case of any difference of opinion between the railway admi-
nistration and the State Government or the local authority, as the case 10 
may be, over any of the matten; mentioned in su~ections (1) and (2), 
it shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon 
shall be final. 
CHAPTER V 
OPENING OF RAILWAYS 
"andioD It. No railway shall be opened for'the pUblic carriage of paSsengers 
lJ~~ t~o;:~ ,until the Central Government has. by order, sanctioned the opening 
ment to thereof for that purpose: 
the opening 
Of ·railway. 
Formali-
ties to be 
complied 
with before 
living' sanc-
tion to 'the 
opening of 
a railway, 
Sections 19 
and 20 to 
apply to 
the openia. 
of certain 
works. 
20, (1) The Central Government shall, before givirlg its sanction to 
the opening of a railway under section 19, obtain a report. fI'om the Com- 20 
missioner that-
(a) he has made a careful inspection of the railway and the 
rolling stock that may be used thereon; 
(b) the m,oving and fixed dimensions as laid down by the Cen-
tral Government hove not been infrillgedj !l5 
(c) the structure of lines of rails. strength of bridges, general 
structural character of the works and the size of, and maximum gt'OS'S 
load upon, the ,axle9 of any rol1i~ stock, comply with the reqUire-
ments laid down by the Central GoverDm.ent; and 
(d) in his opinion. the railway can be opened for the public 30 
carriage of passengers without any danger to the public using it. 
(2) If the Commissioner is of. tAe .&ion that the railway cannot be 
opened without any danger to the public using it, he shall, in his rePOrt, 
state the grounds therefor, as also the req:Jirements which, in his opinion, 
are, to be complied with before sanction is given by the Central Govern- 35 
ment. ' .. -.. -. '----. 
(3) The Central Government: after considering the report of the Com.-
missioner. may sanction the opening ,of.a railway under section 19 as 
88ch or subject to S1ICh conditions a'S may be considered necessary by it 
for the safety of the pIilblic. ' 
,/.' 4::> 
~. The provisions ofleCtions 19 and 20 shall apply to the opening of 
the following works if they form part -of, or are direetly connected with, 

5 
10 
11 
a raUwa,y used far the public camaae of ~era aDd have .,.. __ 
tructed &"Jbsequent to the giving of a report by ~e CommiuiODer'.1oIWi.-
section 20. namely:- J 
(II) opening of additional lines of railway and deviation lines; 
(b) openiDc of stations, jUDCt.ioIJs and level Cl'OII8iup; 
(c) re-modelling of yards and re-building of bridges; 
(ci) introduction of electric traction; and 
.(e) aD1 alteration or reconstruction materially ~. the 
structural character of any work to wbichtbe proviaio.DS" of HCtioDB 
19 aDd 20 apply or are extended by tbis aecticm. . 
22. When an accident has occurred on a railway resultiDJ in a tam- Temporary 
porary s"lspension of traffic, and either the original lines of rails and suspension 
works have been ~stored t~ their original standard or a tempoary diver- of traffic. 
sion has been laid for the purpose of reStoring communicati~ the origi-
15 nal lines of rails and works so restored, or the temporary diveraion" .. 
the c_ may be, may, wi~out prior inspection bytbe Commiuioner, 
be opened for the public carriage of "MeDger., subject to the folJq:wi.na 
conditions, namely:-
(a) the railway servant incharge of the works und~en by 
reason of the accident has certified in writing that the openiDC of the 
restored lines of rails and works, or of the temporary· diversion will 
DOt in hit opinion be atteDded with danger ,to the public; aDd 
(b) a notice by telegraph of the opening of the lines of rails and 
works or the divel?ion shall be sen~, as soon as may be, to the Com-
misBiODe1'. 
U. Where after the inspection of any railway opened and used Power to 
for the pablic carriage of paasengers or any rolling stock used thereon,. close railway 
the Commissioner is of opinion that the llse of the railway or of any °thpenedbl~or 
he bli . 't, th e pu IC 
rolling stock will be attended with danger to t pu C USlDg 1 . e curiaae of 
30 Commissioner shall send a report to the Central Government who may passe_gers. 
thereupon direct that-
(i) the railway be closed for the public carriage of passengers; or 
(ij) the use of the rolling stock be discontinued; or 
(I£ii) the railway or the rolling stock may be used for the public 
35 carriage of passengers sabject to such conditions as it may comider 
necessary for the safety of the public. . 
45 
24.. When the Central Government has, under section 23, directed the Re-opening 
~losure of a railway or the discontinuance of the use of any rolling stock- of closed 
railway. 
(a) the railway shall not be re-opened for the public carriage 
of passengers until it has been inspected by the Commissioner and 
its re:'opening is sanctioned in accordance with the provisions of this 
Chapter; and 
(b) the rolling stock shall not b~ used until it has been inspected 
by the Commissioner and its re-ase is sanctioned in accordance with 
the provisions of Ws Chapter. 

U" of 
tolUol 
stock. 
Dole,a· 
lion of 
powcrs. 
Power to 
mtlkc rulcs 
in respect 
of matters 
iD this 
Chapter. 
Power to 
fix rates. 
Power to 
,. .... fy 
CIMdIOdi-
t1eaoral-
terrateB. 
12 
21. 'A railway administration ma.y use such -rolling stock as it may 
consider necessary for the· construction, operation and working of a 
railway: 
Provided that before using any rolling stock of a design or type 
difteren~ from 'that already running on any section of the railway. the 5 
previoUs sanction of the Central Government shall be obtained for such 
use . 
•. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any ~f 
its powers or functions 'under this Chapter. except section 27, or the r~es 
made thereunder shall, in relation to such matters and' subject to such 10 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised 
or discharged also by a Commissioner. 
27.(1) The Central Gover-ament may, by notification, make rulus to 
carry out the purposes of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-" 5 
going power, such rules may provide for all or 'any of the following 
matters, namely:-:-
(a) the duties of a railway administration and the Comnussioner 
in regard to the opening of a railway for the public carriage of 
passengersj 20 
, (b) the arrw;agements to be made for and the formalities to be 
complied .with before opening a railway for the public carriage of 
passengers; and 
(c) for l'egulating the mode in which, and the speed at which 
rolling stock used oh railways is to be moved or propelled; 25 
(d) the' cases in which and the extent to Which the procedure 
in this Chapter may be di'Spensed with. 
CHAPTER VI 
FIXATION OF RATES 
~8. (l) The Central O;overnment may, from time to time, by general 30 
01' special order fix, for the c~rriage of passengers and goods. rate~ for 
the whole or any part of the railway and different ,rates may be fixed for 
different class of goods and specify in such order the cond,ition subject 
to which such rates shall apply. 
(2) The Central Government may, by a like order, fix the rates of any 35 
other charges incidental to or connected with ·such carriage including 
'demurrage and whadage for the whole or any part of the railway and 
.',' _'.pacify in the order the conditions subj,ect to which such rates shall 
" ."ly. 
, ,.,"'" 
,,' 
~ The Central Government shall have' power to - 40 
(a) classify or reclassify any commodity for the purpose of de .... 
minjng the ,rates to be charged for the carriage of such commodities; 
or , .'., 
(b) increase or reduce the class rate and other charges. 

13 
GO. Notwithstanding anything contained in this· Chapter, a railway' Power of 
administration may. in respect of the carriage of any commodity and railway 
subject to such conditions as may be speci1ied,- adminis-
5 
(eI) quote a etation to station rate; or 
t b) increase or reduce or cancel, after due notice in the manner 
detennine.d by tlJe Central Government, a station to station rate, not 
being a station to station rate introduced in compliance with an 
. order made by the Tribunal; or 
. (c) withdraw, after or amend the con,ditions attached to a 
10 station to .station rate other t~ conditions introduced in compliance 
with an order made by the Tribunal; or 
(d) charge any lump sum rate. 
CHAPTER vn 
RAILWAY RATES TRIBUNAL 
15 ;31. (1) There shall be a Tribunal, to be called the Railway Rates 
Tribunal, for the purpose of discharging the function'S specified in thiS 
Chap~.· . 
(2) The T.ribunal shall consist of a Chairman and two other members 
to be appoin~d by the Central Government. 
RO (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman 
of the Tribunal'unless he is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court 
or of a High Court and of the other two members, one· shall be a person, 
who, in the opinion of the Central Government, has special knowledge 
of the commercial, industrial 0, economic conditions of the country, and 
25 the othel shall be a person, who, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
has special knowledge and experience of the commercial working of the 
railwaYii. . 
(4) The Chairman and the other members of the Tribunal shall hold. 
olfice for such period, not exceeding five ye~rs, a'll! may be prescribed. 
30 (&) In case the Chairman or any other member is, by infirmity or 
otherwise, reQdered incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on 
leave or otherwise in circumstances not involving the vacation of his. 
office, the Ce!W'al Government may appoint ano~er person to act in hi'S 
place during his absence. 
35 (6) A persol'\. who holds office as the Chairman or other member of 
the Tribunal. shall, on the expiration of the term of his office (not betnI 
an office to fill a casual vacancy), be ineligible for re-appointment to that 
office. 
(7) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (5) and (6), the Chairman 
4u and other members of the Tribunal shall hold office on such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed. 
4:5 
(8) No ac.t or proceedings of the Tribunal shall be invalidated. merely 
by rea'Son of-
(a) any vnc:mcl' in, or any d('r~ct in the constitution of, thl" 
. Tribunal; or 
. tration to 
charge cer-
tain rates. 
''::onsli-
tutionof 
tbeRall. 
way Rates 
Tribunal. 

14 
, (b) 8Dy defect in the .appointment of a person acting as a Chair-
man er other member of the Tribunal. 
Staff. 3%. (1) The Tribunal may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Sittinls of 
the 
Tribunal. 
Com-
plaints , 
against a 
railway 
adminis-
tration. 
Matters 
not with· 
'in the 
jurisdic-
tionof 
the 
Tribunal. 
Powers 
of the 
Tribunal. 
Reference 
of the 
Tribunal. 
Government, appoint such officers and employees as it consiQers neces-
SBl'1 for the efficient discharge of, its functions under this Chapter. 5 
(2~ The terms and cOIlditions of service of the oftlcets and employees 
of the Tribunal shall ,be such as may be determined by regulations.· 
33. The Tribunal may sit at such place or places as it may find con-
venient for the traniamon. of its business. 
34. Any complaint that a railway administration- 10 
(a) is contraveni,ng the provisions of section 88; 
(b) is charging for the carria,ge of any commodity between two 
stations a rate which is unreasonable; Qr 
(c) is levying allY other charge which is unreasonable; 
may be made to ~he Tribunal, and the Tribunal shall hear and decide any 15 
such complaint in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
35. Nothing in this Chapter shall confer jurisdiction on the Tribunal 
in respect of:-
(a) cla~sification or re-classification of any commodity; 
(b) fixation of wharfage and demurrage charges (including gO 
conditions attached to such charles); 
(c) fares levied for the carriage 'Of passengers and freight levied 
for the carriage of luggage, parcels, railway material and military 
traffic; and 
(d) lump sum rates. 
36. (1) 'rhc 'lribLlnal :;h1l11 have the powers of a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 for the purposes of taking .evidence on 
oath enforcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the discovery, 
. production of doeuments and, illlumg commissions for the examination. 
of witnesses and of review and shall be deemed to a civil court for all SO 
the purposes of sectioni 195 and Chapter XXXV of the' Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 and any reference in such section or chapter to the pre· 
Siding officer of a court shall be deemed to include a reference to the 
CJW.rman of the Tribunal. 
(2) The Tribunal shall also have power to pass such interim and final 85 
.. DRiers as the ckcumstances may req~ire, includiag orders for the pay-
:mant of casts. . 
3'7. Notwithstandin'g anything contained in section 35, the Central 
Ocmmiment may make Ii referenee to the Tribunal in re~pect Of any of 
the matters specified in that section and where any such 'reference is made 40 
jll rQPft'~ of .any such matter, the Tribunal shall make an inquiry into 
that matter llnd submit its report thereon to the Central Government. 
5 of 1908. 
2 of 1974. 

~, . 
31. (1) The Central Government shall aive to the Tribunal such· as-
sistance U it may PIIquire and .un also Pace at its CHIposal .. an)' iUor-
matton in. the pa.asScm of the Central Governmeat which that Go¥-
ernment may think ~elevant to any matter before the Trillunal. 
5 (2) Any. person duly authorised in this behalf by the Central Gov-
ernment shall be entitled to appear and be heard in aI\Y' proceedings 
before the Tribunal. . . . . 
39. In the ease of any complaint under clause (a.) of sectiOlll 3.,-
(a) whenever it is shown that a railway admiftistratkm; C!harges 
J 0 one trader or class of traders or the traders in any local area, lot or 
rates for the same or similar goods or lower charges for the same or 
similllr services than it charges to ~ther traders in any other local 
area, the burden of pt'oving that such lower rate or charge does not 
amount to an undue p1"eference, shall He OJl the railway adminis-
'5 tration; 
(b) in deciding whether a lower me or charge does ·net amount 
to an undue preferenee, the Tribunal may, In additiOlt ta nyother 
conSiderations affecting the case, take iiDto consideration whether 
such lower rate or charge is necessary in the interests of the publk. . ' 
20 Ct. The 'decision at' orders of the Trtbunal shaD be by .• majol'tty at ·the 
members sitting and ,hall be fil'lal. 
41. No suit shall be instituted or proceeding taken in respect of 
any matter which the Tribuna' is empowered to deal with, or decide, 
under this Chapter. 
25 42. In the case of complaint under clause (b) or claUSe (c) Itf seetlon 
34, the Tribunal ma),- . 
(i) . fix such rate or charge as it considers l'eaaonabie from. any 
date as it may deem proper, not being a date earlier to 'the date-of 
the filing of the complaint; 
3n (ii) direct a refund of. amount, if any .. as being the ex-oe&i of 
the rate or charge fixed by .the .Tribunal under clause (i). 
43. Where B railway admlnistnltien considers that sinee the date of 
decision by the Tribunal, there has been a material change in the cir-
cumstances on which it was based, it may, after the expiry of one year 
35 from such date, make an application to the Tribunal and the Tribunal 
may, after making such inq.uiry as it considers necessary, vary or. rROke 
the decision. 
44. The Tribunal may tranmnit any cieeIaion or moder made by it to • 
. civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil CDUrt .. hall ~te the 
40 dE-cision or order, if it were a decree made by that court. 
G. The Triunal shall present annually a report to the Central Gov-
ernment of all its proceedings under _fa Cbapter. 
A.sistanee 
by the 
Ceat.1'Ii1 
Gove~­
ment. 
Burden 
cst proof. 
etc. 
Decofaion. 
etc. 
of the 
·Tribunal. 
Bar of 
jurlldi'~­
tion of 
courts. 
Reliet.. 
which·the 
TribUD&l 
maygret. 
Revision 
of decis-
ions 
ExeauWtn 
ofdeci8-
ions or 
orders 
of the 
'l"ribuDal. 
RePOrt 
of the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 

Power 
of tbe 
Tribunal 
to make 
relula. 
lions. 
Exhibi-
tion of 
certain 
timinlS 
and tables 
of fares 
at stations. 
Supply of 
tickets 
on pay-
mentof 
fare. 
16 
48. (1) The Tribunal may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make regulations consistent with this .. Act. and rules 
generally to regulate its procedure for the effective discharge of its func-
tions under this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and withoOlt prejudice to the generality of the fore. .5 
going power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(CI) the terms and conditions of service of the officers and em.-
ployees oj the Tribunal; 
(b) the award of costs by the TrIbunal in any proceedings before 10 
it; 
(C) the reference of any question to a member or to an officer of 
the Triblmal or any other person appointed by the Tribunal, for report 
after holding· a local inquiry; 
(d) the right of audience before the Tribunal, provided that any 15 
party shall be entitlea to be heard in person or by representative 
duly authorised il;1 writing, or by a legal practitioner; 
(e) the proposal by the Tribunal of any proceedings ibefore it, 
notwithstanding that in the course thereof there has .heena change 
. in the persons sitting as members of the Tribunal; 20 
(f) a scale of fees for and in connection with the proceedings' be-
fore the Tribunal. 
. CHAPTER VIII 
CARRIAGE OF PASSENGERS 
4'1. (I) Every railway administration shall cause to be pasted in a 25 
conspicu9us and accessible place at every station in Hindi and in Eng-
lish and also in the regional language commonly in use in the area where 
the station is situated,-
(i) a table of times' of arrival and departure of trains 
carry passengers and stops at that station, and 
(ii) list of fares from such station to every place for 
"card-tickets are ordinarily issued to passengers at that station. 
which 
30 
which 
(2) At every station where tickets are issued to passengers, a copy of 
the time table in force shall be kept in the office of the station master, 
•. (I) Any person desiroui of travelling on a tailway shall, upon 35 
payment of the fare, be supplied with a ticket by a railway servant or an 
agent authorised in this behalf and such ticket shall contain the follow-
ing particulars, namely:-
(i) the date of issue; 
(~) the class of carriage; 
(iii)the place fl.om and the place to wh~h it is issued; and 
(iv) the amount of the "fare. 
(2) Every railway administration shall display th~ hours during 
which booking windows -at a station shall be kept open for the issue of 
tickets to passengers. 45 

i'i 
(3) The particulars req.aired to be spedfled on a ticket under clauses 
(ii) and (iii.) of sub-section (1) shall,-
(a) if it is for the lowest clUII of carriage, be set forth in Hindi, 
English and the regional language commonly in use at the place of 
5 issue of the ticket; and 
(a) if it is for the lowest class of carriage, be set forth in Hindi, 
and E,ngllsh: 
Provided that where it is not feasible to specify such particulars in 
any such language due to mechanisation or any other reason, the Cen-
10 tral Government may exempt such particulars being specified in that 
language. 
49. (l) A ticket shall be deemed to have been issued subject to the 
'COndition of availability of accommodation in the class of carriage and the 
train for which the ticket is issued. 
• 
15 (2) If no accommodation is available in the class of carriage for which 
20 
a ticket is issued, and the holder thereof travels in a carriage of a lower 
class, he shall, on returning such ticket, be entitled to a refund at the 
difference betWef!n the fare paid by him and the fare payable for the 
class of carr.iage in which he travels. 
SO. If a ticket is returnad for cancellation, the railway administra-
tion shan cancel the same and refund such amount as may be 
prescribed. 
51. A ticket issued in the name of a person shall be used only by that 
person: 
!l5 Provided that nothing contained in this section shall prevent mutual 
transfer of a seat or berth by passengers travelling by the same train; 
Provided further that a railway servant author.ised in this 1Jehalf 
may permit ('hange of llame of a passenger having reserved a seat or a 
berth subject to such circumstances as may be prescribed. 
30 52. Every passenger shall, on demand by any railway servant autho-
35 
rised in this behalf, present his pass or ticket to such railway servant 
for examination during the journey or at the end of the journey and 
surrender SUtch ticket-
(a) at the end of the journey, or 
(h) if such ticket is issued for a specified period, on the expira-
tion of such period. 
Provilica 
for ease 
in which 
ticket is 
illued for 
class or 
train Dot 
bavinl K-
commoda-
tion for 
additioaal 
PUleD-
acn· 
Caneen.-
tion of 
ticket and 
refund. 
Probibitiaa 
apiaIt 
trlUllfer 
of eertain 
tickets. 
&bibition 
and luma-
der of 
paIIIDI aad 
tickets. 

Prohibitlot 
apiast 
travellial 
without 
pall or 
ticket. 
Power to 
refuSe to 
carry per-
IOns suffer_ 
Ull from 
iDfectious 
or c:ontali· 
QUI eli· 
aeates. 
Masimum 
number 
at poseD' 
&en for 
eacb ~m· 
parldIcal. 
Earmar· 
killJ of 
compart· 
ment, elc. 
for l.mcs. 
Commu. 
cations 
betwccn 
paaeqm 
aacl rail· 
way ICr· 
"BIIl in 
chllPof 
lralas. 
Power to 
make rules 
in reapect 
ofm ... 
in litis 
c:bapter. 
18 
S3. (1) No person shall enter or remain in any carriage on a raliwaY' 
.f9r t~ purpQse of travelling ther,ein as a passenger unless he has with him 
a proper pass or ticket or obtained permission of a railway servant autho-
rised in this behalf for such travel. 
(2) A perron obtaining permission under sub-section (1) shall ordinarily 5 
get a certificate from the railway servant referred to in that sub-section 
that he has been permitted to travel in such carriage on condition that 
he subsequently pays the iare payable for the distance to be travelled. 
54. (1) A person suffering from such infectious or contagious diseases, 
as may be prescribed, shall not enter or remain in any carriage un .a 10 
railway or travel in a train without the permission of a railway servant 
authorised in this behalf. 
(2) The railway s,ervant glV.mg permISSIon under sub-section (1" 
shall arrange (or tbe separation of the person suft'ering from such disease 
from other persons in the train and such PJerson shall be carried in the 15 
train subject to such other conditions as may be prescribed. 
55. Subject to the approval of the Central Government, evf!lry railway 
administration shall fix the maximum number of passengers which may 
be carried in each compartment of every desctUption of carriage, and shall 
exhibit the number so fixed in a conspicuous manner inside or outside 20 
each compartment in Hindi, English and also in one or more of the 
regional languages commonly in use in the areas served by the railway. 
56. Every railway administrat:on shall, in every train carrying passE:J')' 
gers, earmark for the exclusive use of females, one compartment or 
such number of berths or seats, as the railway adminiAration may think 25 
fit, at least of the lowest class. 
57. A railway administration shall provide aJ'),d maintain in every 
train carrying passengers, such efficient means of communicaw.on between 
the passengers and the railway servants in charge of the train • may 
be approved by the Central Government: 30 
Provided that where the railway administration is satisfied that the 
means of communication provided in a train are being misused, it may 
cause such means to be disconnected in that train for such period as it 
thinks fit: 
Provided further that the Central Government may specify the cir- 35 
cumstances under ~ich a railway administration may be exempted from 
providing such means of communication in any train. 
S8. (1) The Central Government may. by notification, make rules to 
carry out the purposes of this Chapter., 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- 40 
ICing power, such r!lles may provide for all or any of the following 
mattel'l, namely:-
('4) the accommodation (including the reservation of seats en 
~rtbs in tra.~ns) to PJl~eniers; 

19 
(b) the amount of refund for the can~ellation of a ticket; 
(c) the circumstances under which change of names of passen-
gers, having reserved seats or berths, may be permitted. 
(d) th& carriage of lugg'age and the cortdttions subject to which 
5 luggage may be kept in the cloak rooms at the stations; 
(e) diseases which are infectious or contagious; 
(f) the conditions subject to which a railway administration 
may carry passengers sUffering from infe~tious or contagious diseaSelt 
and t~e manner in which carriages used by such passengers may be 
10 disinfected; 
(g) generally, for regulating the travelling upon. and the use, 
working and management of the railways. 
(3) Any rule made under this secti-on may provide that a contraven-
tion thereof shall be punishable with fine which shall not exceed one 
15 hundred and fifty rupees. 
110 
(4) Every railway administration shall keep at every station on its 
railway a copy of all the rules made under this section and shall all10 
allow any person to inspect it tree of charge at all reasonabJ.ehct1kra:· 
CHAP'T'ERIX 
CARRIAGE OF GOODS 
59. Every railway administration shall maintain, at each statton and 
at such other places where goods are received for carriage, tile rate-bOokS 
or other documents which shall contain the rates autboriiiec1 for the 
carriage of goods from one station to another and make them avail.bIe 
85 for the reference' of any person during all reasonable hoUrs' without pay-
ment of any fee. 
80. (1) A ranway administration may' impose conditions, not inconsis-
tent with this Act or any Rules made thereunder, with ~pect to the 
receiving, forwarding, carry.ing or'. delivei'ing of any goods. 
30 (2) A railway administration shall maintain, at each station and at 
such atbet' places whe~ goods are received for carriage, a copy of the 
conditions for the time being in force under sub-section (1) and make 
them available for the reference' of any person during all reasonable 
hours without payment of any fee. 
S5 '1. (1) Where any goods are entrusted to a railway administration 
for carriage, such carriage shall, except where owner's risk rate is appli-
cable In respect of such goods, be at railway risk rate. 
(2) Any goods, for which owner's risk rate and railWay risk rate are 
in force, may be entrusted for carriage at either of the rates and if no raW 
40 is opted, the goods shall be deemed to have been entrusted at owner's . .rI.-
rate. 
Mainte-
nance of 
rate-boob 
etc., for 
carriaieof 
good •• 
Condi-
tions for 
reccivlDa. 
etc., of 
aoods. 
Provilioa 
of rillE 
rates. 

Forwar-
dina note. 
Railway 
receipt. 
Power to 
require 
statemcnt 
relatinB 
to thc 
delc:rip-
tion of 
JOOds. 
20 
62. Every person entrusting, any goods to a railway administration for 
carriage shall execute a forwarding note in such fonn as may be specified 
by the Central Government: 
Provided that no forwarding note shall be executed in the case of 
such goods as may be specified by the Central Government. 5 
83. (1) A railway administration shall-
(a) in a case where the goods are to be loaded by a person 
entrusting such goods, on the complet;on of such loading; and 
(b) in any other case, on the acceptance of the goods by it, 
issue a railway receipt in such form as may be specified by the 10 
Central Government: . 
(2) A railway administration shall not be responsible for the correct-
ness of the weight, description or classification of goods or the number 
of packages mentioned dn the railway receipt unless a certificate to.) that 
effect is recorded in the railway receipt by a railway servant authorised I fl 
in this behalf. 
M. (1) The ()wner or a person having charge of any goods which are 
brought upon a railway for the purposes of carriage by railway, and the 
consignee or the endorsee of any consignment shall, on the request of any 
railway servant autharised in this behalf, deliver to 'Such railway ser- 20 
vant a statement in writing signed by such owner or person or by such 
consignee or endorsee. as the case may be, containing such description 
of the goods as would enable the railway servant to determine the 
rate for 'Such carriage. 
(2) If such owner or person refuses or neglects to give the statement 25 
as required under sub-section (1) and refuses to open the package con-
taining the goods. if so required by the railway servant, it shall be open 
to the railway administration to refuse to accept such goods for carriage 
unless such owner or person pavs for sucn carr;age the highest ratr. for 
any class of goods. 30 
(3) If the consignee or endorsee refuses or neglects to give the state-
ment as required under sub-section (1) and refuses to open the package 
containin!! the goPds, if So required by the railway servant. it shall be 
open to the railway administration to charge in respect of the carriage 
of the goods the higbest rate for any class of goods. 35 
(4) If the statement delivered under sub-section (1) is materially 
falae ~th re:;pect to the description of any goods to which it purports 
to relate, the !'~ilway administration :may charge in respect of the carriage 
at su~h goode; such rate, not exceeding double the highest rate for -any 
class of goods as may be specified by the Central Government. 40 
(5) If any difference arises between a railway servant and such owner 
or person, the c:onsignee or the endorsee, a:s the caSe may be. in .respect 
of the description of the goods for which a statement has been deltve~ 
under sub-eecf.1on (1), the railway servant may d~tain and e"am~ne the 
goods. 45 

• 
4 of 188f. 
21 
(6) Where any goods have been detained under sub-sectiOR (5). for 
examination, thp. cost of such detention and examination shall be borne 
by such owner or person, the consignee or the endorsee, as the caM Illay 
be, and the railway administration shall not be liable for any loss, damage 
5 or deterioration which may be caused by such detention or examination. 
8&. (1) No person shall take with him on a railway, or require 9 rail-
way administration to ('arry such dangel';)us or offensive goods, as may 
be prescribed, except in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2) No person shall take w.~th him on a railway the goods referl'ed to 
10 in 8U·b-section (1) unless he gives a notice in writing of their dangerous 
or . offensive nature to the railway servant authorised in this behalf . . 
(3) No person shall entrust the goods referred to in sub-section (1) to 
a railway servant authorised in this behalf for carriage unless he diS-
tinctly marks 0'1 the outside of the package containing such good. their 
15 dangerous O.t· offenSive nature and gives a notice in writing of their dan-
gerous or offensive nature to such railway servant. 
(4) If any railway servant has reason to believe that goods contained 
in a package Bre dangerous or offensive and notice as required under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may be, in respect of such goods 
20 is not given, he may cause such package to be opened for the purpose of 
ascertaining its contents. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any railway 
servant may refuse to accept any dangerous or offensive goads for rar-
riage or stop, in transit, such goods or cause the same to be removed, as 
25 the case may be,· if he has reason to believe that the provisions this 
section fQr such carriage are not complied with. 
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to derogate from the 
provisions of the Indian Explosives Act, 1884, or any rule or order made 
under that Act, and nothing in sub-sections (4) and (5) shall be construed 
SO to apply to a ny ~ods entrusted for carriage by order or on behalf 01 
the Government or to any goods which a soldier, sailor, airman or any 
other officer of the armed forees of the Union or a police oftlcer or II 
member of the Terl'litorial /t.rmy or of the National Cadet Corps may take 
with him on a railway in the coune of bis employment or duty as such. 
35 ". A railway administrat;On shall not be bound to carry any animal 
suffering from such infectious or contagious disease as may be prescribed. 
'-. ,.. 
Carriage 
01 dan-
gerousor 
offenslYe 
goods. 
. Carriaae of 
Ilnimals 
sufferiDI 
from in-
fect;oul 
or conla-
lioul 
diseases. 
I'l. Where due to any cause beyond the control of a railwayadminis- Deviation at 
ttation or due to congestion in the yard or any other operational reasons, rout. 
goods are carried over a route other than the route by which such goods 
.fD are booked, the railway administration shall nQt be deemed to have com-
mitted a breach of the contract of carriage by r~asop only of th, devla· 
tioll of the route. 

Prohibi· 
tion of 
undue 
prefer. 
ence. 
Power to 
to Jive 
direction 
in regard 
to eer-
riage of 
certain 
goods. 
Maximum 
CIll'l'yiq 
capaci~ 
for 
wagon. 
and 
trueb. 
22 
•. A railway admiaistration shall not make or (§ive any' undue or 
UDreISOnable preference or advantage to, or in favour of, any ~~ 
person or any particular desc.ription of traffic iri the carriage of' SOOdt. 
... (1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that It b 
Deeeaary in the pubUc dnterest so to do, by general or special order, djr~ 5 
any railway administration-
(n) to give special facilities for, or preference to, the carriage of 
such goods or class of goods consigned by or to the Central Govern~ 
ment or the Government of any Statp or of such other goods or class 
of goods, as may be specified in the order; 10 
(b) to carry any goods or class of goods by such route or routes 
and at such rates as may be specilled in the order: 
( c) to restrict or refuse acceptance of such goods or class of goods 
at or to such station for carriage as may be specified in the ordtu'. 
(2) Any order made under sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect 15 
after the expiration of a period of one year from the date of such order. 
but may, by a like order, be renewed from time to t.ime for suck' period 
not exceeding one yea.r at a time as may ·be specifled in the order. 
(I) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every ratlwty 
administration shall be bound to cOmply with any order given ~r 10 
sub-section (1) and any action taken by a railway administration In pur-
surance of any such order shall not be deemed to he a contravention 
of section 68. 
70. (1) The gross weight of every wagen or truck bearing on the 
axles when the wagon or truck is loaded to its maximum carrying capadty.5 
shall not exceed such limit as may be fixe'd by the Central Government 
for the class of axle under the wagon or truck. 
(Z) Subject to the limit fixed under sub-section (1), every railway 
administration !than determine the normal carrvinJZ capacity for every 
wagon oJ' truck in its possession and shall exhibit in words and figures 30 
the nonnal carrying capacity so detennfned in a conspicuous manner 
on the outside of every such wagon or truck. 
(3) Every person owning a wagon or truck which passes over a. 
railway shall detennine and exhibit the normal carrying capacity for 
the wagon or truek in the maMer speilrlfted in sub-section (2). 55 
(4) Notwithstanding anything COntained in 'Sub-sectton (2) or suf>., 
section (3). where a railway administration conside'rs it necessary or 
expedient so to do in respect of any wagon or truck can-ying any speci-
fled class of goods or any class of wagons or trucks of any specified type. 
It may vary the normal carrying ca'pBcity for such wal{on or truck or 40 
such class of wagons or trucks and subject to such conditions as it may 
think fit to impose. determine for the wagons or trucks or cla'Ss. of 
WBltOns or trucks such car:rying capacity' as may·be specifted 
In the notiftcation and it shall not be necessary to exhibit the wo,.' afte 
ft~res· representing the ·carrying capacity so determined on the' outstde..q· 
of such wa«on 0.1' truck or such class of wagons or truclts: 
Provided that in no ease, the gross weight of such wagon or truck or 
such class of wagon'S or trucks shan exceed the limit fixed under 8\1~ 
section (1) for the class of axle under "the wagon or truck. 

3 of J930. 
~ 
'1. Wl)ere a person 10. goods in a wagon beyond its permissible 
carrying capacity as exhibited under &ub-section(2), or sub~section (3), 
or notified under sub-section (4), of section 70, a railway administration 
may, in addition to the freight and other charges, recover from the con-
5 signor, the cons1'grlee or the enciCirsee, as the case may be, charges by way 
of penalty at'Sueh rates, as may be prescribed, before the delivery of. the 
.g~: 
Provided that it shall be lawful for the railway administration to 
unload the goods loaded beyond the capacity of the wagon, if detected 
to at the forwarding station or at any place before the destination station 
and ·to Hoover the cost of such unloading and any charge ror the deten-
tion of any wagon on this ac.:ount. 
72. The property in the consignment covered by a railway receipt shall 
pa8J to ijle conawn~ or the endor*, a8 the case may be, -on the delivery of 
15 such railway receipt to him and he shall have all the rights and liabilities 
of the consignor. 
20 
73. Nothing contained in section 72 shall prejudice or affect--
(~) any right of the consignor for stoppage of goods in transit 
as an unpaid vendor (as defined under the Sale of Goods Act, 1930) on 
his· written request to the railway administration; 
(b) any right of the railway to claim freight f~m the consignor; 
or 
(c) any liability of the consignee or the endorsee, referred to in 
that section, by reason of his being such consignee or endorsee. 
i5 74. The railway administration shall deliver the consignment under a 
railway receipt only on the surrender of the railway receipt: 
Provided that in case the railway receipt is not forthcoming, the 
consignment may be d~livered to the person, entitled in the opinion of 
the railway administration to receive the goods, in such manner as may 
30 be prescribed. 
75. Where no uulway receipt is forthcoming and any consignment or 
the sale procc£>ds of any consignment are claimed by two or more persons, 
the raHway administration may withhold delivery of such consignment or 
sale proceeds, as the case mby be, and shall deliver such consignment or 
35 sale p:roeeeds to the person entitled in its opinion to receive the same in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
78. Notwithstanding anything contained ·in the railway receipt, the 
railway administration may, before the delivery of the consignment, have 
the right to-
(i) re-measure, re-weigh or re-elassify any consignment; 
(it) re-calculate the treight -and other charges r and 
Punitive 
ch8l'le tor 
over~ad­
iDga 
w~on. 
PallsinJof 
property 
in the 
,oocis 
covered 
by rall.. 
way 
receipt . 
. Section'12 
not to 
atreet 
ri,htof 
lltoppap 
in tnneit 
orclaima 
for 
treiabt. 
Surrender 
of railway 
receipt. 
Power of 
railway 
admbUs· 
tration to 
deliver 
,oocisor 
sale pro-
ceeda 
thereof in 
certain 
~ 
Power to 
measure, 
weigh, 
etc. 

We1ah.. 
ment of 
consign-
ment on 
the 
request 
of the 
consignee 
or endor-
see. 
Liability 
of rail-
wayad-
ministra. 
tion for 
wrong 
delivery. 
Open 
delivery 
of con-
signments. 
Partial 
delivery 
of con-
signments. 
Llenfor 
freilht 
or any 
other 
lumdue. 
(iii) correct any other error or collect any amount that may have 
been omitted t(l be charged. . 
77. (1) A railway administration may, on a request made ,by. the 
consignee or endorsee, allow weighment of the consignment subject to 
such conditions and on payment of such charges as may be prescribed: 5 
Provided that except in cases where a railway servant authorised in 
this behalf considers it necessary so to do, no such weighment shall be 
allowed in cases of goods booked at owner's l'il:ik rate or goods which are 
perishable and are likely to lose weight in transit: 
Provided further that no request for weighment ot consignment in 10 
wagon load shall be entertained under this. sub-section, if, 
(a) weighment i'S not feasible due to congestion in the yard or 
other operational reasons; or 
(b) in the opinion of a railway servant authorised in this behalf, 
circumstances exist which do not warrant such weighment. 15 
(2) Where a request for weighment is allowed by the railway adminis-
tration, the consignee or the endorsee shall pay such charges as may be 
prescribed and the demurrage charges, if any. 
78. Where a railway administration delivers the consignment to the 
person who produces the railway receipt, it shall not be responsible for 
any wrong delivery on the ground that such person is not entitled thereto 20 
or that the endorsement on the railway receipt is forged or otherwise 
defective. 
79. Where the consignment arrives in a damaged condition or shows 
signs of having been tampered with and the consignee or the endorsee 2" 
demands open delivery, the railway administration shall give open J 
delivery in such manner as may be prescribed. 
80. (1) The consignee or endorsee shall, as soon at the consignment or 
part thereof is ready for delivery, take delivery of such consignment 
or part thereof notwithstanding that such consignment or part thereof is 30 
damaged. 
(2) In the case of partial delivery under. sub-section (1), the railway 
admini'Stration shall furnish a partial delivery certificate, in such form as 
may be prescribed. 
(3) If the consignee or endorsee refuses to take delivery under sub- 35 
section (1), the consignment or part thereof shall be subject to wharfage 
charges beyond the time allowed for removal. 
81. (1) If the consignor, the consignee or the endorsee fails to pay any 
freight or other charges due from him in respect of any consignment, the 
railway administration may detain such consignment or part thereof or, 4D 
if such consignment is delivere:d, it may. detain any other consignment of 
such person which is in, or thereafter comes into, its possession. 
(2) The railway admini'Stration may, if the 
under sub-section (1) is--
(a) perishable in nature, sell at once; or 
(b) not perishable :n nature, 
consignment detained 
sell, by public auction, such consignment or part thereof, as may be 
necessary to realise a sum equal to the freight or other charges: 
45 

PrQvided that where a raUway administration, for reasons to be re. 
corded in writing is of the opinion that it is not expedient to hold the 
auction, such coIl8ii~t or part thereof maf be sold. in such manner u 
inay be ·preacribed. 
(3) The railway administration shall give a notice of not less than 
5 seven da~ of the public auc~ion under clause (b) of sub-~ection (2). 
In one or more local newspapers or where there are no such newspapers 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) The railway. adminls~ration may, out of the sale pl'oceeds receiv-
10 ed under 'Sub-section (2), retain a .um equal to the freight andotb.er 
charges including expenses for the sale due to it and the surplus of such 
proceeds and the part of the consipment, if any, shall be rendered to 
the person entitled. thereto. 
82. (1) If any penon fails to take delivery of-
(u) ·the COllSigllmcnt released from detention made under sub-
dection (1) of section 8; or 
(c) a.'ly remaining part. of the consigrunent under sub-section 
.(2) of section alj 
(a) any consignment, or . . 
ao aach consignment shall bt: treated as unclaimed. 
(2) The railway ac;imjDistl·ation may,-
(a) in the caae ot an unclaimed consignment which is periShable 
in nature, sell such consignment in or the manner is provided.in clau~e 
.(a) of sub-sectior. (2) of fiectiolL 81; or 
(b) in tht: case of unclaimed. consignment which is not perish .. 
able in nature, cause a notice to be sel'ved upon the consignee if his 
name and address are known, and upon the consignor if the name 
and address of the consignee are not known, requiring him to remove 
the goods within a periOd of seven days from the receipt thereof· and 
if such notice cannot Qe served or there is a failure to comply with 
the requisition in the notice, sell such consignment in the manner 
provided in clause (b) of sab-section (2) of section 81. 
(3) The railway administration shall, out of the sale proceeds received 
under sub~section (2), retain It sum equal to the freight and other charges 
35 Including expenses for the sale due to it and the Surp],OlS if any, of such 
proceeds shall be rendered, to the person entitled thereto. 
83. (1) Where by reason of any flood, land-slip, breach of any lines of 
rails, collision between U'ains, derailment of, or other accident to a· train 
or any other cause, traffi.c on any route is interrupted and there is no 
40 likelihood of early resumption of such traffic, nor is there any other 
reasonable route whereby tra1!lc of perishable consignment may be 
diverted to prevent loss or deterioration of, or damage to, such consign-
ment, the railway administration may sell them in the manner provided 
in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 81. 
45 (2) The raUway administration shall, out of the sale proceeds received 
. under sub-section (1), retajn a sum equal to the freight and other charges 
including expenses for the sale due to it and the &atplus, if any, of such 
sale-proceeds, shall be rendered to the person entitled thereto. 
u~ 
ed coD-
~ignment, 
DJspoaa1 
otperish-
able con-
signmenta 
iDc:ertain 
clrcum. 
.tancea. 

ConditioM 
IIIbject to 
wbich 
-.lea 
under 
sections 
81,83 and 
83 not to 
affect the 
riJb,tto 
suit. 
90wer 
toiDake 
ruleain 
respect of 
matters 
in this 
Chapter. 
De8n1-
tIcma. 
~ 
It. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the right ol 
sale under sections 81 to sa shall be without prejudice to the right of the 
i'allway administration to recover by suit, any freight, .charae, 8II1OUl1t or 
other oxpeDSe8 due to it. . . _ .. J 
86. (1) The Central Government may, by noWieatitm, make rules to 5 
cury out the pl¥'pOI8S of thisC8apter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following mat-
ten. namely:-
(a) d'mgerous and offensive goods for the purposes of section 10 
65; 
(b) infectious or contagi'Ous diseases for the purposes of section 
68; 
(c) rates of penalty charges under section 71; 
(d) the manner in which the consignment may be delivered 15 
Without a railway receipt under section 74; 
(e) the manner of deli·very of conaignment or 'the sale proceeda 
to the person entitled thereto under section 75; 
<f) the conditions subject to which, and the charges payable for 20 
weighment under section 77; 
(9) the manner of givmr: open delivery under section 79; • (h) the form of partial delivery certifioate under sub-eectioD 
(2) of section 80; 
<i) the manner of sale of consignment or part thereof r.mder the Sl5 
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 81; 
(j) the manner in which a notice under sub-section (3) of sec· 
tion 81 may be given; 
(k) generally, for Ngulating the carriage of goods by the raU. 
ways. SO 
(3) Any rule made under this section may provide that a contraven-
tion thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred an? fifty rupees. ! 
(4) Every railway administration shall keep at each station a 
copy of the rules for the time being in force under this section, and shall 55 
allow any pprron to refer to it free of chal'ge at all reasonable hours, 
CHAPTER X 
SPELU. PROVISiOK8 AS '1'0 GOODS BOOKBD m XO'l'D'lD· S'M.'1'lONS 
81. In this Chapter,' unless tilt! context otherwise requires,-
(a) "essential coinmodity" means an essential commodity as 40 
~ed in clause (fJ) of section. 2 of the Essential Oommoditiea Act, 
1965. 10 of 1955. 
(b) "notified station" mf\~ns a station declared to be a notified 
statlOJlUDder section 8'1; 

5 
17 
(c) "State (;overnment", in relation to. a notit.ed atation, means 
tile .QgV8l'DIDeIlt of the State in which .such station fa sltu.ted, or 
wMre ·wcla station is sitaated in a Union territory, the administra-
tor of that Union territory appointed under article 239 of the Con-
stitution. 
R'. (1) The Central Government may, if it is aatillled that jt fa DeCeS-
aary that goods entrusted for carriage by train intended solely for the 
carrlage of goods to any raflway station should be removed without delay 
10 from such railway statmn declare, by notiftelttt(JD, such raHway station 
to be a notified station for such period as may be specifted in the notift-
ca~D: . 
Provided that before declaring any raUway station to. be a notified 
I statioa mtder.. this sub-sedlon, the Central Government shan have. regard 
5 to all or any of the following factors, namely: - . 
(m) the volume of tJ'aftlc and the sWage space aun-ble at such 
raUway statton; 
(b) the nature and quantities of goods generally booked to stich 
railway station; 
(e) 'fhe scope for catl8lng scarctty oflUch gGOds by not r-emoving 
ao tMm for long periods from such r.aUwav station and the hardship 
whteh sUch searctty may ea:-.Jae ·to the community; 
(d) the number of wagons likely to be held up at web raftway 
statton if goods are .not removed therefrom quickly and the need 'for 
qaick movement and 'availability of such wagons.; 
115 (e) such other factors (befnfl' relevant fmm the point of view 
of the interest of the ~eneral public) as may he prescribed: 
Provide" f,ilrther that the neriod snecifted in any notification issued 
under this mh-sectfon In respect 'Of anvraflwav staticm shall ·.!lot exceed 
six months In the first in!rtance, but such ~riod may, bv zroUftcattou, be 
30 extended from time to time by a period IIOt eKoeeding six mollths on 
each occas'nn. 
(~) If Im'VTJe1'llOD entrustlnt! anv p,oods to a raflwav administration. 
to be carried to atmtfflM· !ltlttion ·makes an .8.tU)Ucation in such form and 
mam'lef as rna'V be l)teseribeci' a1ll'l sPMifteSl therein the a.ddress of the 
35 'Pe1'!lOft to whnm' i~tfmatio1J1 bv re .. r-ed .post of the arrival of tlte ~oods 
at the no~d Btilrtton. !C1t~n he mWlll aDd gayS the DOsUltle charltes ra-
~uired for ~i'rinl1 such in14matioft. the 1'I!ilwav admini!;tration shall. as 
SOOIl as mav bp after the arrival cf the eoods at the notified ~"tfon. Send 
!qr.h intimatfon accordfn~y. 
40 m There &taa\1 be -Rhtbltec:1 s..t a oonlilnictlous place at each notf~ed 
.tfo'n " ",.ileMfmt -ill. the nresc~ihed ftlrm settlnl! out t .... e descrfntfon 
r . 'ftf 1:hf'! ~'" wlftcR·by l1ealOR,o! tAe lact that t'hev have not been l'f'!moved 
t..J ~C')m thl! stAtion within A nerlod nf seven dllvs from the tennin1'1tion tJf 
tTIlnsit thp!'f'of are liAb1e to hp ~M. in a('''o''~''ncp. wit'" the nl"Ovilllto11" of 
45 fI1!b-!IIectin11 (n of lIIertf('ln 88 by nublic Rllction an" the ·\fflfl .. "Whit'h 
tbf'!V wo1118 bp.fIO sold: 
Prnvfded thAt difl'P.l'ent ,::tatemp.nt:" mtrV be so .exb.1blted in r~spect Qf 
. coMa 1)1'Oposec1 ·to he sold on dftl'erent date •• 
Power to 
dedare 
DOtiflad 
statiODI. 

Diapoeal 
of UD-
removed 
,oocU at 
notified 
stations. 
28 
(4) If the goods specifted in any statement to be exhibited under 
sub-section (3) include essential commodities, the railway Iel'V8Dt pre-
paring the statement shall, as soon as may be after the preparRtton of 
. such statement, forward a copy thereof to:-
(a) the representative of the Central Government nominated hy 5 
that Government in this behalf; 
(b) the representative of the S~te Government, nominated by 
that Government in this behalf; and 
(e) thE' District Magistrate within the local limits of whose juris-
diction the railway station is situated. 10 
•. (1) If any goods entrusted for carriage to any noti1led station by 
a train intended solely for the carriage of goods are not removed from 
such station by a person entitled to do so within a period of seven day8 
after the termination of transit thereof at such station, the railway ad-
ministration may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), sell such 15 
goods by pubJic auction and apart from exhibiting, in accordan<:e with 
the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 87, a statement containing 
a description of such goods, it shall not be necessary to give any notice 
Of such public auction, but the date on which such auction may be held 
under this sub-section may be notified in one or more local newspapers, 20 
or where there are no such newspapers, in !lUCh manner as may be pretl-
crlbed: '1 r ~ .,.-, '. ,'-" 
Provided that if at any time before the sale of such goods under this 
sub...section, the person entitled thereto pays the freight and other charges 
and the expenses due in respect thereof to the railway administration, 25 
he shall be allowed to remove such goods. 
(2) If any goods which may be sold by public auction under sub-
section (1) at a notified station, being essential commodities, are requir-
ed by the Central Gcvernment or the State Government for its own use 
or if the Central Govemment .or such State Government considers th~t 30 
it is necessary for securing the availability of all or any such essential 
commodities at fair prices so to do, it may, by order in ~Writing, :afrect 
the railway servant in-charge of such auction to transfer such goods to 
it or to such agency, cO-operative society or other person (being an 
agency, co-operative soclety or other person subject to the control of 55 
the Government) engaged in the business of selling such essential com- . 
modities as may be speclfted in the direction. 
(3) Every direction issued under sub-section (2) in respect of any • 
essential commodity shall be binding on the rafiway servant to whom 
it.is issued and the railway administration and it shall be a sufBcteont 40 
defence against any claim by the person entitled to the goods that such 
eaenttal commodities' have been transferred in comp1i.n~ with sucli 
direetf.on: 1 . . ~ '\"-! 
Prov:Ided that-
(a) such direction shall not. be bindin/% on such railway servant ~ 
or the railway admtntlltration-
(f) if it has not been received by the ra11way servant sum-

5 
10 
29 
oiently in time to enable him to prevent tho sale of the essential 
commodities to which it relates; Or 
(ii) if before the time appointed for such sale, the person 
entitled to such goods pays the freight and other charges and 
the expenses due in respect thereof and claims that he be allow-
ed to remove the goods; or 
(iii) if the price payable for such goods (as estimated by 
the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Go,'-
ernment) is not credited to the railway administration in the 
prescribed manner and the railway administration is not in-
demnified against any additional amount which it may become 
liable to pay towards the price by reason 'Of the price not having 
been computed in accordance with the provisions of sub·section 
(4) ; 
(b) where directions are i!lsued in respect of the same go ()dli 
both by the Central Government and the State Government, the 
directions received ea.lier· shall prevail. 
(4) The price payable for any essential commodity transferred in 
20 compliance with a direction issued under SUb-section (2) shall be the 
price calculated in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) of 
'10 of 1155. section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955: 
10 of 1955. 
Provided that-
(a) in the case of any essential .commodity being a food-stuff 
in respect whereof a notification issued under sub-section (3A) of 
section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, is in force in the 
locality in which the notified station is situated, the price payable 
shall ·be calculated in accordance with the provisions of Clauses 
(iii) and (iv) of that sub-section; 
(b) in the caSe of an essential C'Ommodity being any grade or 
variety of foodgrains, edible oU seeds or edible oUs in respect whel'f'-
of no notification issued under sub-section (3A) of section S of the 
10 of 1951 Essential Commodities Act, 1955, is in force in the locality in which 
10 of 1955. 
100f 1855. 
35 the no~fied slation is situated, the price payable shall be calculate<! 
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3B) of that section; 
45 
(c) in the case of an essential commodity being any kind of 
sugar in respE:Ct whereof no· not11lcation issued under sub-section 
(3A) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, is in force 
in the locality in which the notifted station is situated, the price 
payable shall. if such sugar has been'"booked by the producer to 
himself, ,be calculated in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (3C) of that section. 
ExplaMtioft.-For the purposes of this clause, the expressions 
producer'; and "sugar" shall have the meanings assigned to these 
expressions in the ExpZatUltion to sub-section (3C) of section 3, 
and clause (e) of ~ction 2 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, 
respectively. 

Price to 
be paid 
to person 
entitled 
after 
deducting 
dues. 
Power to 
make 
rules in 
respect of 
matters 
in this 
Chapter 
GeIleral 
·roapoDli-
bili't)r of 
a ni!way 
adminis-
trationas 
carrier of 
toock 
'Ie. (1) Out of the proceeds of any sale ofgoeds under sub-aection 
(1) of section 88 or the price payable therefor under 8Ub-aection 
(4) of that section, the railway administration may retain a sum equal 
to the freight and other charges due in respeCt of such goods and the 
eltpenses incurred in respect of the goods and the auction thereof and 5 
render the surplus, if any, to the person entitled thereto. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-aection(1), the 
railway administration may recover by suit any such freight or charge or 
expenses referred to therein or balanee thereof. 
(3) Any goods sold under sub..aection (1) of section 88 or transferred 10 
in compliance with the directions issued under sub-section (2) of th8jt 
secttrm shall vest in the buyer or the transferee free from all encumbrances 
but subject to a priority being given for the sum which may be retained 
by a railway administration under sub-section (1), the person in whose 
favour such encumbrance subsists may have a claim in respect of such 15 
encumbrance against the surplus, if any, referred to in that sub-section. 
to. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, malte rules , to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of t\le 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fQUowing 20 
matters, namely:-
(a.) the factors to which the Central Government shall have 
regard under clause (e) of the first proviso to sub-section (1) of 
section 87; 
(b) the form and manner in which an application may be 25 
made under sub-section (2) of section 87; 
(c) the form in which a statement is required to be exhibited 
under sub-section (3) of section 87; 
(d) the manner in which the dates of public auctions may be 
notified under sub-section (1) of section 88; 30 
(e) the manner of crec:Htin~to the railway administration the 
price of goois referred to in sub-clause (iii) of elause (a.) of the 
proviso to sub-section (8) of section 88. 
CHAPrER XI 
RBSPONSIBILlTII'6 OF RAILWAY ADMINJB'nWl'IONS AS CAlUm'Jts 85 
91· Save as otherwise pmvided in t.his Aet, a railway admilits1lratJon 
shaUbe l'esponsible felf the less, destruction, damage, deterioration in 
traDSit, or non delivery of any OOIlSigmnent, arising frGm any cause 
except the following, namely:-
.(.) aot of God; 40 
(b) aet of war; 
(c) act of public enemies; 
(d) arrest, restraint or seizure under legal procei8; 

5 
10 
31 
(e) orders or restrictions imposed by the Central Goverriiilen\ 
or a State Government or by an o1Bcer or authority, subordiDate to 
the Central Govenunent or a State Government authorised by it in 
this behalf; 
<I) act or omission or negligence of the consignor or the 
coD&ipee or endorsee or the agent or servant of the consignor Or the 
co,mlgnee or the endorsee: 
(g) natural deterioration or wastage In bulk or weight due to 
inherent defeet, quality or vice of the goods; 
(h) latent d~ects; 
(i) fire, explosion or any unforeseen risk: 
Provided that even where such loss, destruction, damage, deterlora-
iion or non-delivery is proved to have arisen. from anyone or more of 
the aforesaid· ·caUSes, the railway administration shall not be relieved 
J 5 of its responsibility for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration· or 
non delivery unless the railway administration further proves that it has 
used reasonable foresight and care in the carriage of the goods. 
92. (1) Where goods are required to be loaded at a siding not belong-
i", to a railway ·administaltion for carria" by railway, the railway 
20 administratipn shall not be responsiblct for any loss, destruction, damage 
or deterioration of such goods from whatever cause arising, until the 
wagon containing the goods has been placed at the spec11ted point of 
iMwdtange of wagorut between the sitting and the railway admInistra-
tion and a railway servant authorised in this behalf has been informed 
25 in writing accordingly by the owner of the siding. 
(2) Where any consignment is required to be delivered by a railway 
administration at a siding not belonging to a rallway administration, 
the railway administration shan not be responsible for any loss, destruc-
tion" damage or deterioration or non-delivery of such consignment from 
30 whatever cause arising after the wagon containing the cODSigament 
has been placed ai the spet'ifled point 'Of interchange of wagons between 
the railway and the siding and the owner of the siding has been informed 
in writing a~ordingly by a railway servant authorised in this behalf. 
93. When afiy goods which, under ordinary circumstances, would 
35 be cRrried in covered vehicles or vessels and would be liable to damage 
if carried otherwilte, are, at the request of the consignor recorded In the 
ft)rwarding note, entrusted. for carriage by railway in open vehicles or 
vessels, or in vehicles or vessels which are defective or not fully covered, 
the railway administration shall not be responsible for any destruction, 
40 deterioration or damage which may arise by reason of the goods being 
ao carried. . 
84. A railway administration shall not be responsible for the loss, 
destruction, damage or deterioration of any consignment proved by the 
GWI18rtohave ·bettll caused by the delay or detention in their carriage if 
• 5 tMrallway administration proves that the delay or detention arose for 
reUODa beyond its control or without negUgence or miBc<mduct on its 
part or on the part of any of its servantl. 
Goocla ~ 
be loaded 
ord.ellve-
red ata 
Eddinlnot 
belongiq 
to araH-
wayadmi-
nistra-
tion. 
Goods 
carried 
in open 
vehicles. 
Delay or 
detention 
ill tran-
sit . 

'fr. 
pasailll 
over rail-
ways in 
India and 
raiiways 
in foreign 
coun-
tries. 
Goods 
carried 
at owner's 
risk rate. 
Goods in 
defective 
condition 
ordefec-
tively 
packed. 
85. Where in the course of carriage of any coiisignment from a pladt 
in India LO iJ. place outside India or .from a place outside India to a place 
in India or from one place outside .India to another place outside IDdia 
or irom one place in lndia to another place in India over ~ territory: 
outside lnwa, it is carried over the railways of any railway admiDistra- 5 
tion in India, the railway admiDistration sball not be responsible UDder 
~ of the pr(iviBions of this Chapter for the loss, destruction, damage or 
deterioration of the goods, from whatever cause arising, unless it is 
proved by the owner of the 100ds that such loss, destruction, damage 
or deterioration arose over the railway of the railway administration. 10 
9ti. l~otwit.hstanding anything contained in section 91, a railway 
administration shall not be responsible for any loss, destruetion, damap 
deterioraLion or non-delivel·y in transit, of any consignment carried at 
owner'i risk rate, from whatever cause arising. except upon proof that 
liiuch loss, destruction, damage, de~rioration or non-d.elivery was c:tue to 15 
llegligcnce or misconduct on its part or on the part of all)' of its 
servants. 
97. (l) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foresoiDi pre-
visions of this Chapter, when any goods entrusted to a railway adminis-
tration for carriage- 20 
(a) are in a defective condition as a consequence of which they 
are liable to damage, deterioration, leakage or wastage; or 
(b) are either defectively packed or not packed in such. manner 
as may be prescribed and as a result of such defective or improper 
packing are liable to damage, deterioration, leakage or wastage, ~5 
and the fact of such condition or defective or improper packing 
has been recorded by the consignor or his apnt in the forwarding note, 
the railway administration shall not be responsible for any damaae, 
deterioration, leakage or wasta&e or for U1e condition in which such 
goods are available for delivery at destination. go 
(2) When any goods entrusted to a railway administration for 
carriage are found on arrival at the destination station to have been 
damaged or to have suffered deterioration, leakage or wastage, the rail-
way administration shall not be responsible for the dama.&e. deterioration. 
leakage or wastage of the goods on proof by railway administration,. 35 
(a) that the goods weret at the time of entrustment to the 
railway administration, in a defective condition, or were at that 
time either defectively packed or not packed in such manner .. 
may be prescribed and as a l'esult of which were liable to damage, 
deterioration, leakage or wastage; and 40 
(b) that such defective condition or defective or improper 
packing was not b.rought to the notice of the railway adminiStration 
or any 01 its servants at the time of entrustment of the goods to 
the railway administration for carriage by railway: 
Provid~ that the railway administration shall be respoDlllble 4~ 
for any such damage, deterioration, leakage or wastap if Dejli-
sence or miacondu('t on the part of the railway administration or of 
any of its servant's is proved. 

· 9 of 1872. 
33 
IS· (1) A railway administration shall be res~ible as a bailee 
un~ _tions 151, 152 and 161 of the ,Indian Contract Act, 1872, for the 
loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of any consign-
ment up to a period of seven days after the termination of transit: 
5 Provided that where the consignment is, at owner's risk rate, the 
railway administration shall not be responsible as a bailee for such loss, 
destruction, dmnage, deterioration or non-cielivery except on proof 01 
negligence or misconduct on its part or on the part of any of its servants. 
J n (2) The railway administration shall not be responsible in any case 
for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of any 
consignment arising after the expiry of a period of seven days after the 
termination of transit. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contaiJi.ed in the foregoin, provisions 
J 5 of this section, a railway administration shall not be responsible for 
the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of perishable 
goods, animals, explosives and such dangerous or other goods as m~y 
be specified, after the termination of transit. . 
(4) Not.hing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall aftect 
2() of affect the liability of any to pay any demurrage or wharfage, as the 
case may be, for so long as the consignment is not unloaded from the rail-
way wagons or removed from the railway premises. 
99. A railway administration shall not be responsible for the loss, 
destruction, damage, deterioration Or non-cielivery of any luggage 
25 unless a railway servant has booked the luggage and given a receipt 
therefor and in the case of. luggage which is carried by the passenger 
in his charge, unless it is also proved that the loss, destruction, damage 
or deterioration was due to the negligence Or misconduct OIl its part 
or on the part of any of its servants. 
30 100. A railway administration shall not be responsible for any loss, 
or destruction of, or injuries to any animal carried by railway. arising 
from fright or restiveness of the animal or from overloading of wagons 
by the consignor. 
101. NotWithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions 
35 of this Chapter, a railway administration shall not be responsible for 
the losS, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of any 
consignment.-
45 
(a) when such loss, destruction, damage, deterioration Or non-
delivery is due to the fact that a materially false description of 
the consignment is given in the statement delivered under sub-
section 0) of section 64; or 
(b) where a fraud has been practised by the consignor or the 
consignee or the endorsee or by an agent of the consignor, consignee 
or the endorsee; 
(c) where it is proved by the railway administration to have 
been caused by, or to have arisen from-
(i) improper loading or unloading by the consignor or the 
consignee or the endorsee or by an agent of the consignor, consignee 
or the endorsee; 
Responsi-
bility ofa 
raflwayad-
ministra-
tion 
after-ter-
mination 
oftron-
sit. 
Respon~i­
bility 
as car-
rierof 
luggage. 
Responsi-
bility as a 
carrier 
of ani-
mals. 
Exonera-
tion from 
liability 
in cer-
tain 
cases. 

Extent of 
monetary 
liability 
inre'spect 
of any 
consign_ 
ment. 
Right of 
railway 
adminis-
tratio'l 
tocbeck 
contents 
ofcerlai n 
consign-
mentor 
IIlGl!ac:e. 
Notic::: 
of claim 
for com 
pensa-
tion. 
ad muDd 
of over 
eha1'ge. 
(ii) riot, civil commotion, strike, lock-out, stoppage or rea-
traint of labour from whatever cause arising whether partial or 
general, or 
(d) for any ind~rect Or consequential loss or damage or for loIS 
of particul.u- market. 5 
102. (1) Where any consignment is entrusted to a railway adminis-
tration ior carriage by railway and the value of such consignment has 
not been declared as required under sub-section (2) by the consignor, 
the amount of liability of the railway administration for the 1088, de~ 
truction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of the consignment shall 10 
in no case exceed such amount calculated with reference to the weight 
of the consignment as may be prescribed, and where such consignment 
consists of an animal specified in column (1) of the Schedule, the liabi-
lity shall not exceed the amount as specified in the corresponding entry 
in column (2) of the Schedule. IS 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in SUb-section (1), where 
the consignor declares the value of any consignment at the time of its 
entrustment to a railway administration for carriage by railway, and 
pays such percentage charge as may be prescribed on so much of the 
value of such consignmet as is in excess of the liability of the railway 20 
administration as calculated Or specified, as the case may be, under sub-
section· (1), the liability of the railway administration for the loss, des-
truction, damage, deterioration Or non-delivery of such consignment 
shall not exceed the value so declared. 
(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification 25 
direct that such goods as may be specified in the notification shall not 
be acCepted for carriage by railway unless the value of such goods is 
declared and percentage charge is paid as required under sub-section 
(2). 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (12), such declaration 30 
of value and payment of 8-applement any sum shall be mandatory in 
the case of such goods and luggage as may be specified by the Central 
Government. 
103. Where the value has been declared under section 102 in res-
pect of any consignment a railway administration may make it a condi- 35 
tion of carrying such consignment that a railway servant authorised by 
it in this behalf has been satisfied by examination Or otherwise that the 
consignment tendered for carriage contain the articles declared. 
1M. (1) A person shall not be entitled to claim compensation against 
a railway administration for the loss, destruction, damage, deteriora- 40' 
tion or non-delivery of goods carried by railway, unless a notice there-
of is served by him o~ on his behalf,-
(a) to theraUway administration to which the goods are 
entrusted for carria«e; or 
(b) to the railway administration on whose railway the destt- 45-
nation station lies, or the loss, destruction, damage or deterioration 
oc:cur-. 
within a period of six months from the date of entrustment of the goods-
, 

35 
(Z) Any information demanded or enquiry made in writing from, 
or any complaint made in writing to, any of the railway administrations 
mentioned in 8ub-aection (1) by or on behalf of the persOn within the 
said period of six months regarding the non-delivery or delayed delivery 
5 of the goods with particulars sufficient to identify the goods shall, for 
the purpose of this section, be deemed to be a claim for compensation. 
(3) person shan not be entitled to a refund of an overcharge in res-
pect of goods carried by rail way unless a notice therefor has been served 
by him or on his behalf to the railway administration to which the over-
10 charge has been paid within six months from the date of such payment 
or the date of delivery of such goods at the destination station, which-
ever is later. 
105. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, a suit for compensation for loss, destruction, 
15 damage, deterioration or non-delivery of goods may be instituted against 
the railway administration on whom a notice under section 104 has been 
served. 
(2) A suit against the railway administration under sub-section (1) 
shall be instituted only in a court having jurisdiction over the place at 
20 which the goods are entrusted for carriage or, as the case may be over 
the place in which destination station lies or the loss, destruction, 
damage, deterioration occurs. 
106. (1) If a railway administration pays compensation for the loss. 
destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of goods entrusted to 
25 it for carriage, to the consignee or the endorsee producing the railway 
receipt, the railway administration shall be deemed to have discharged 
its liability and no suit shall lie against the railway administration aD 
the ground that the consignee or the endorsee was not legally entitled to 
receive such compensation . 
. 30 (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the right of any person 
having any interest in the goods to enforce the same against the con-
signee or the endorsee receiving compensation under that sub-section. 
35 
107. A suit for compensation for the loss of life or personal injury to 
a passenger, may be instituted against,-
(a) the railway administnttion from which !he passenger 
obtained his pass or purchased his ticket, or 
(b) the railway administration on whose railway the destination 
station lies or the loss or injury occurs, 
in a court having jurisdiction over the place at which the passenger 
-40 obtained his pass or purchased his ticket or over the place in which thc 
destination station lies or the loss or personal injury occurs. 
SWlslor 
compen-
sation 
for 
loss, etc., .. 
of goods.· 
• 
Person 
entitled 
to claim 
compen-
satioD. 
. ; 
Suits for 
Compen-
sation tor 
per!'OI'lal 
injury, 
etc. ~ 
108. In any suit against a railway administration for compensation Burden 
for loss, destruction, damage deterioration or non-delivery of any goods, of proof. 
the burden of proving,-
-45 (a) the monetary loss actually sustained; or 

IlateDt 
of lJIabi-
JiVOf 
rail".,. 
lIdmin»-
baticm 
in respect 
of acci-
dents at , 
sea. 
Power to 
make 
ruletin 
re.pectof 
matter. 
in this 
Chapter. 
NoticE' 
of rail-
way 
accident. 
a8 
(b) where the value has been declared under sub-section (2) of 
_tioh 102 til respect of any consignment that the value sO declared 
is its true value, 
shall lie OD the person claiming compensation, but subject to the other 
provisions contained in this Act, it shall not be necessary for him to 5 
prove how the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-de1ivery 
was caused. 
1 •• (1) When a railway administration contracts to carry passengers 
or goods partly by railway and partly by sea, a condition exempting the 
railway administration from responsibility for any lois of life, personal 10 
inju,ry or loss. of or damage to goods which may happen 
during the carriage by sea from act of God, public 
enemies, fire, accidents from machinery, boilers and steam and 
all and every other. dangers and acc1dents of the seas, rivers and naviga-
tion of whatever nature and kind shall. without being expressed, be 15 
deemed to be part of the contract, and, subject to that condition, the 
railway administration shall, irrespective of the nationality or ownership 
of the ship used for the carriage by sea, be responsible for any loss of 
Ufe, personal injury or loss of or damage to Pets which may happen 
during the carriage by sea, to the extent to which it would be reepon- 20 
sible under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, if the ships were register- 44 of 1958. 
ed under that Act and the railway administration were owner of the 
ship and not to any greater extent. 
(2) The burden of proving that any such loss, inj:Jry or damage as 
is mentioned in sub-section (1) happened during the carriage by sea 25 
shall lie on the railway administration. 
110. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make ,rules 
to carry out the purposes. of this Chapter; 
(Z) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 30 
matters, namely:-
(a.) the manner of packing of goods entrusted to a railway 
administration; 
(b) the goods for the purposes of sub-section (3) of section 98; 
and;' ' I 35 
(c) thE' ml'lximum amount payable by the railway administration 
for the loss, destruction. dnmage, deterioration or non-delivery of any 
consignment under sub-section (1) of section 102. 
CHAPI'ER xn 
ACCIDENTS 
111. (1) Where, in the course of working a railway,-
(a) any accident attended with loss of any human Ufe, or with 
4-0 
grievous hurt. as defined in the 'Indian Penal Code. or with serious 45 of 1880. 
injury to property; or 
(b) any collision between trains of which one is a train c~ng 45 
passengers; or 
(c) the derailment of any train carrying passengers, or of any 
part of such train; or 
(d) any accident of a description usually attended with loss of 
human life or with such griewus hurt as aforesaid or with serious 50 
injury to property; or 

3'1 
('> any accident of ,my other description whicll the Central 
Government may notify in this behalf in the Oftlcial Gazette, 
occur~ the station master of the station nearest to the place at which 
the accident occurs or. where there is no station master, the railway 
5 servan"t in charge of the section of the railway on which the accident 
occurs, shall. without unnecessary delay, give notice of the accident to 
the District Magistrate and Superintedent of Police, within whose juris-
c;fiction the accident occurs, the ofticer in charge of the police station 
within the local limits of which the accident occurs and to such other 
10 Magistrate or police officer as may be appointed in this behalf by the 
Central Government. 
(2) The railway administration within whose jurisdiction the accident 
occurs, as also the railway aclministration to whom the train involved 
in the accident belongs, shall without unnecessary delay, give notice of 
15 the accident to the State Government and the Commissioner having 
jurisdiction over the place of the accident. 
llZ. (1) On the re~pt of a notice under section 111 of the occurrenc" Inquiry 
of an accident to a train carrying paasengers resulting in loss of human by Com. 
life or grievous hurt causing total or partial disablement of pennanent mbsio-
20 nature to a passenger or serious damage to railway property, tl\e Com- nero 
missioner shall. as soon as may be. notify the railway administration in 
whose jurisdiction the accident occurred of his intention to hold an in-
5 of 1908 quiry into the causes that led to the accident and shall at the same time 
fix and communicate the date, time and place of inquiry: 
25 Provided that it shall be open to the Commissioner to hold an inqUiry 
into any other accident which, in his opinion, requires the holdfDg of 
such an inquiry. 
(2) If for any reason, the Commissioner is not able to hold an fDquir1 
as soon as may be after the occurrence of the accident, he shall notify 
30 the railway administration accordingly. 
35 
113. Where no inquiry is held by the Commissioner under sub-section 
(l) of section 112 or where the Commissioner has informed the railway 
administration under sub-section (2) of that section that he is not able 
to hold an inquiry, the railway administration within whose jurisdic-
tion the accident occurs, shall cause an inquiry to be made in acco.rd-
ance with the prescribed procedure. ' 
114. (1) For the purpose of conducting an inquiry under this Chapter 
into the causes of any accident on a railway, the Commissioner shall, in 
addition to the powers specified in section 7, have the powers as are 
5 ot 1908. 40 vested In a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Proce-
dure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
2 of 1974. 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and exa-
mining them on oath; 
(6') requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
45 (c) receiving evidence on aftidavitB; 
Cd) requisitioning any pubUc record or copies thereof from any 
court or office; 
(e) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(2) The Commissioner while conducting an" inquiry under this Chap-
50 ter shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973. 
Inquiry 
by rail-
wayad-
ministra-
tion. 
Powers of 
C 0JJlJIlt.-
sioner 
inrela-
lion to 
inqui-
ries. 

State-
ment 
made 
betol'e 
Com-
missio-
ner. 
Proce-
dure. 
No in-
quiry, 
investi-
,ation. 
e'tc. to be 
made if 
the Com-
mission 
otInquiry 
is appoin-
ted. 
Inquiry 
into 
• accident 
not 
covered by 
section 
111. 
Returru. 
Power 
to make 
rules ill 
respect of 
matters 
in this 
Chapter. 
38 
115. No statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence 
in an inquiry before the Commiuioner shall subject him to, or be used 
against him in, any civil or criminal proceeding, except a prosecution 
for giving false evidence by such statement: 
Provided that the statement is- 5 
(a) made in reply to a q.aestion which is required by the Com-
missioner to answer; or 
(b) relevant to the subject-matter of the Inquiry. 
116. Any railway administration or the Commissioner conducting 
an inquiry under this Chapter may send notice of the inquiry to such 10 
persons.. follow such procedure, and prepare the report in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 
117. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions 
of this Chapter, where a Commission of Inquiry is appointed under 
the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, to inquire into an accident, any I j loI 1.52 
inquiry, investigation or other proceeding pending in relation to that 
accident shall not be proceeded with, and all records or other documents 
relating to such inq.airy shall be forwarded to such authority as may be 
specified by the Central Government in this behalf. 
118. Where any accidJmt of the nature not specified in section 111 20 
occurs in the course of working a railway, the railway administration 
within whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, may cause such inquiry 
to be made into the causes of the accident, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. 
Ut.Every railway administration shall send to the Central Govem- 25 
ment, a return of accidents occurring on its railway, whether attended 
with injury to any person or not. in such form and manner and at such 
intervals as may be prescribed. 
130. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules 
to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. go 
(2) In particular. and witho~t prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all Or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the injury to property which shall be considered serious 
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 111; 35 
(b) the forms of notice of accidents to be given under section 111 
and the particulars of the accident such notices shall contain; 
(c) the manner of sending the notices of accidents, including the 
class of accidents to be sent by telegraph immediately after the 
accident; 40 
(d) the duties of the Commissioner, railway administration, 
railway servants, police officers and Magistrates on the occarrence 
of an accident; 
(e) the persons to whom notices in respect of any inquiry under 
this Chapter are to be sent, the procedure to be followed. in such 45 
inquiry and the manner in which a report of such inquiry shall be 
prepared; 
(I) the nature of inquiry to be made by a railway administra-
tion lnto the caUS81 of an accident under section 118; 
, 

39 
(g) the form and manner of sending a return of accid~ts by a 
railway administration under section 119. 
CHAPl'ER XIU 
LIABILITY OF RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION FOR DEATH AND INJURY '1'0 
5 PASSENGERS DUE TO ,ACCIDtNTs 
10 
121. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "accident" means an accident of the nature described in 
section 122; 
(b) "Claims Commissioner" means a Claims Commissiouer 
appointed under section 123; 
(c) "dependant" means any of the following relatives of a 
deceased passenger, namely:-
(i) the wife, husband, son and daughter, and in case the 
deceased passenger is unmarried or is a minor, his parent; 
15 (ii) the parent, minor brother or unmarried sister, widowed 
sister, widowed daughter-in-law and a minor child of a pre-
deceased son, if dependant wholly or partly on the deceased 
passenger; 
(iii) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter, if wholly 
25 dependant on the deceased ,passenger; 
(iv) the paternal grand parent wholly dependant on the 
deceased passenger. 
122. (1) When in the course of working a railway, an accident occurs, 
being either a collision between trains of which one is a train carrying 
go passengers or the derailment of or other accident to a train or any pert 
of a train carrying passengers, then whether or not there has been any 
wrongful act, neglect or default on the part of the railway administra-
tion such as would entitle a passenger who has been injured or haa 
suftered a lOBS to maintain an action and recover damages in respect 
35 thereof, the railway administration shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law to the contrary, be liable to pay compensa-
tion to the extent set out in sub-section (2) and to that extent only 
for loss occasioned by the death of a passenger dying as a result of 
such accident, and for personal injury and loss, destruction, damage or 
40 deterioration of goods owned by the passenger and· accompanying him 
1n his compartment or on the train, sustained as a result of such accldent. 
(2) The liability of a railway administration under this section 
shall in no case exceed one lakh rupees in respect of anyone person. 
(3) The provisions contained in sub-section (1) shall also apply to a 
45 railway servant on duty. on the train. 
123. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint any 
person to be a Claims Corrunissioner for such local area or for such 
accident or accidents as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) The qualifications and conditions of Service of a Claims Commis-
50 sioner shall be such as may be prescribed. 
lJiI. (1) An application for compensation under section 122 may be 
made to the Claims Commissioner-
(a) by the person who bas sustained the injury or suftered aDy 
lOllS, or 
Defini_ 
tions. 
Extent of 
liability. 
Claims 
Commis-
sioner. 
App!ica-
tion for 
compen-
sation. 

Interim 
roW by 
railway 
adminis-
tration. 
P1'OCI6Iure 
aad powers 
ofChims 
Commis-
IIloner. 
40 
(b) by any agent duly authorised by such person in un. behalf, 
or 
(c) where such person is a minor, by his guardian, or 
(d) where death has resulted from the accident, by any 
dependant of the deceased or wh~e such a dependant is a minor, by 5 
his guardian. 
(2) No application for compensation under this section shall be 
entertained unless it is made within three months of the occurrence of 
the accident but the Claims Commissioner may, on good cause shown, 
allow any application to be made at any time within one year of such J () 
occurrence. 
E.rpZanation.-Where a Claims Commissioner is appointed under 
section 123 with respect to any particular accident or accidents, the 
refwences in this sub-aection to the occurrence of the accident shall be 
construed as references to the date on which the Claims Commissioner I" 
80 appointed assumes charge of his office. :J 
(3) Every application by a dependant for compensation under this 
sectIon shall be for the benefit of every other dependant. 
125. (1) Where a person who has made an application for compen-
sati~ under section 124 desires to be paid interim relief, he may apply 20 
to the railway administration for payment of interim relief along with 
a copy of the application made under that section. 
(2) Where, on the receipt of an application made under sub-tsection 
(1) and after making such inquiry as it may deem fit, the railway 
administration is satisfied. that circumstances exist which require relief 25 
to be aftorded to the applicant immediately, it may, pending determi-
natton by the Claims Commissioner of the actual amount of compen-
sation payable under section 122, pay to any person who has sustained 
the injury or suffered any loss, ·or where death has resulted from the 
accident, to any dependant of the deceased, such sum as it considers 3(1 
reasonable for affording such relief, so however, that the sum paid shall 
not exceed the amount of compensation payable at such rates as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The railway administration shall, as soon as may be, after 
making an order regarding payment of jnterim relief under sub~ection 35 
(2). send a copy thereof to the Claims Commissioner. 
(4) Any sum paid by the railway administration under sub-aection 
(2) shall be taken into account by the Claims Commissioner while 
determining the amount of compensation payable. 
118. (1) In inqui.ring into and determisisg any claim for co.pen- 40 
sation payable under section 122, the Claims cnmmissiooer may, subject 
to any rules that may be made iil this behalf, follow such summary 
procedure as he thinks ftt. 
, 

5 of 1908. 
5 
(2) The Claims Commissioner shall have the same powers as ar6 
vested in a civil court while trying a suit UDder the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) .urnmoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
aI)d examining him on oath; 
. (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits. 
(3) The Claims Commissioner shall be deemed to be a civil court 
for the purposes of section. 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Crimi-
2 of 1974. 10 nal Procedure, 1973. 
(4) 'Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the Claims 
Commissioner may, for the purpose of determining any claim for com-
pensation, choose one or more persons possessing special knowledge of 
any matter relevant to the enquiry to assist him in holding the enquiry. 
15 127. Any question as to the liability of a railway administration to 
pay compensation under section 122, or as to the amount thereof, or as 
to the ·pei'son to whom such compensation is payable, shall be decided 
hy Claims Commissioner. 
".~.' .. ' 
Claims 
Commi5-
sioner to 
decide tbe 
liability 
to pay 
compensa· 
tion, etc. 
128. (1) The Claims Commissioner shall, in every case where death Detcrmina. 
20 has resulted from any accident, cause notice of the application for com· tion of 
pensation to be published or served on every dependant who has made compensa· 
tion in the application in such manner as he deems fit calling upon such de- respect of 
pendant to appear before him on such date as he may fix for determining death. 
the compensation payable to each of the dependants. 
25 (2) The compensation payable for death shall, after giving credit 
to any amount paid by way of interim relief under section 125, be appor· 
tioned among the dependants of the deceased passenger in such propor· 
tionsas the Claims Commissioner thinks fit, or may be allowed to any 
one dependant who, in the opinion of the Claims Commilaioner is best 
90 entitled. 
129. Whenever any person is injured as a result 01 an accident under 
section 122, the claims Commissioner mq, if he considers it necessary, 
dir@et that the person injured be examined by some duty qualified 
medical practitioner named in the order and not being a witness on 
either side and ma, make such order with respec:!t to th. adita of the 
g5 examination as he thinks fit. . 
ProvlalcUt 
for m.dl. 
cai examjDR~ 
tion of 
Pertoris 
injured. 
t30. (1) Subject td such rules as may be made, the rates of com- b,ternU" 
liensation payable in respect of any injury shall be determined by the datiOn of 
Claims Comliii.moner. ~:l1ltipeDsa' 
, (2.) The compensation payable in respect of any loss of godds shall 
be such as· the Claims CommissioDQr may_ having regard to the circum· 
40 stances of the case, determine to be reasonable. 
l'on in res;· 
}teet of 
any injury 
or losR of 
1l00d •• 

'aysaent 
of COlD-
pouatioa. 
Appeals 
against 
the deci~ion 
of a 
Claims 
Commis-
sioner. 
Savilll 
.. to 
oertaiD 
ripts. 
Power to 
make 
rulea 
in respec:t 
of matters 
in thiJ 
a.apter. 
I, .. " • .(It .,.'.:t'I' ~~, .... , .. 
is!. (1) A railway administration shall comply with an order for 
eompensation forthwith by depositing the amount of the compensation 
with the Claims Commissioner, 
(2) Where any compensation has been deposited as required by 
lub-eection (l), the railway administration Ihall, notwithstanding any.. 5 
thing in any other law for the time being in fOl"Ce, be discharged from 
all liability to any person whatsoever in respect of any compensation 
so deposited" 
(3) Any compensation deposited with . the Claims Commi8lioner 
under this section shall, with the least possible delay, be paid to the to 
applicant for compensation to whom it is payable. 
132. (l) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Claims Commis-
sioner refusing to grant compensation, or as to the amount of compen-
sation granted to him, may prefer an appeal to the High Court having 
jurisdiction in the place where the accident occurred: '5 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to authorise 
the High Court to grant compensation in excess of the limit specified 
in section 122. 
(2) The period of limitation for an appeal under this section shall 
be ninety days. 20 
(3) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act" 1963, shall be :: of 1963. 
applicable to appeals under this section. 
(4) Subject to the decision of the High Court in cases in which an 
appeal is preferred under sub-section (1), the order of the Claims Com-
missioner on any question shall be final and shall not be called in ques- 25 
tion in any court. 
133. (1) The right of any person to claim compensation under section 
122 shall not afteot the right of any such person to recover compensa-
tion payable under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, or any 8 of 1913, 
other law for the time being in force; but no person shall be entitled to 30 
claim compensation more than once in respect of the same accident. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the right of any person 
to claim compensation payable under any contract or scheme providing 
for payment of compensation for death or personal injury or for damage 
to property or any sum payable under any policy of insurance. 35 
134. (1) The Central Government may, by notiftcation" make rules 
to carry out the purposes of this Chapter, 
(2) In particular, aDd without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules ,may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:- 40 
(4) the qualifications and conditions of service of the Claims 
Commissioner; 
(b) the compensation payable for death; 
(c) the nature of the injuri.s for which compenaattOD IhaU .. 45 
paid and the amount of such compelllation; 

...... -.----.~--.. -.. _ ... ---
(d) the manner in which clailnl for compensation may be in-
quired into and determined by the Claims Commissioner; 
(e) the matters in respect of which persons may be chosen. to 
assist the Clailnl Commissioner under sub-section (4) of section 126 
5 and the functiO'lls exercisable by such person; 
<f) generally for the effective exercise of any powers conferred 
on the Claims Commissioner by this Chapter. 
CHAPTER XIV 
REGULATION OF HOURS OF WORK AND PERIOD OF BEST 
10 135. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) the employment of a railway servant is said to be "continu- Definitioal. 
ous" except when it is excluded or has been declared to be essen-
tially intermittent or Intensive; 
(b) the employment of a railway servant is said to be "essen-
'5 tially intermittent" when it has been declared to be so by the pres-
cribed authority on the ground that the daily hours of duty of the 
railway servant normally include periods of inaction aggregating 
to six hours or more (including at least one such period of not less 
than one hour or two such periods of not less than half an hour 
20 each), during which the railway servant may be on duty, but ia not 
called upon to display either physical activity or sustained attention; 
(e) the employment of a railway servant is said to be "excluded", 
if he belongs to anyone of the following categories, namely:-
(i) railway servants employed in a confidential capacity; 
:25 (ii) armed guards or other personnel t1l~ject to discipline 
similar to that of any of the armed police forces: 
(iii) staff of the railway schools imparting technical training 
or academic educa~on; 
(iv) such categories of Grade D staff as may be prescribed; 
3'J (v) such staff as may be specified as supervisory under the 
rules: 
(vi,) such categories of staff of the Health and Medical De-
partment as may be prescribed; 
~5 (d) the employment of a railway servant is said to be Ilfnten_ 
sive" when it has been declared to be so by the preScribed authority 
on the ground that it is of a strenuo~ nature involving continued 
eoacentration or hard manual labour With little Gr no period of 
relaxation • 
63 of 1941. .fO 1.. Nothi~&, in this Chapter shaD apply to any railway aery-ant to 
35 of 1"2. whom the Factories Act, 1948 or the Mines Act. 1952 or the Merchant 
44 of 1'51. Shipping A,ct, .1958. applies. 
Chapter 
aotto 
apply to 
certain 
railway 
servanw. 

, I 
LimitatiOn 137. (1) A railway servant whose employment is essentially inter-
of hours mfttent shall not be employed for more than seventy-five hours in any 
of wort. week. 
Grant of 
periodical 
rest. 
(2) A railway servant whose employment, is continuous shall not be, 
employed for more than ftfty-four hours a week on an average in any 5 
month. 
(3) A railway servant whose employment is intensive shall not be 
employed for more than forty-five hours a week on an average in any 
month. 
(4) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, temporary exemptions 10 
of railway servants from the provisions of sub-eeetion (1) or 8ub-6ection 
(2) or sub-section (3) may be made by the prescribed authority if it 
is of opinion that such temporary exemptions are necessary to avoid 
serious interference with the orqinary working of the railway or in 
cases of accident, actual or threatened, or when urgent work is required 15 
to be done to the railway or to rolling stock. or in any emergency which 
could not have been foreseen or prevented, Or in other cases of excep-
tional pressure of work: 
Provided· that where such exemption results in the increase of hours 
of employment of a railway servant referred to in any of the sub-aections, 21) 
he shall be paid overtime at not less than one and a half times his ordi-
Dary rate 'Of pay for the excess hours of work. 
138. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a railway servant-
(a) whose employment is intensive or continuous shall, for 
every week commencing on a Sunday, be granted a rest of not less 25 
than twenty-four consecutive hours; 
(b) whose employment is essentiaUy intermittent shall, for every 
week commencing on a Sunday, be granted a rest of not less than 
twenty-four consecutive hours including a full night; 
(e) whose employm~nt is excluded under sub-clause (iv) of 30 
clause (a) of section 135 shall be granted a rest of not less than forty-
eight consecutive hours each month, or a rest of not less than twenty-
four consecutive hours each fortnight including a full night. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) any locomotive or traffic running staff shan be granted. each 
month, a rest of at least four periods of not less than thirty conse- 35 
cutive hours each or at least five periods of not less than twenty-
two consecutive boul's each, including, a full night; 
. (ii) 'the Central Government may, by rutes, specify the raUway 
servants to whom periOds of rest on scales tess than those laid down 40 
under sub-section (1) may be granted and the periods th~; 
(3) ,Subject to such rules as '~y be m.~ in, thjs behalf, If -,the 
prescribed authority is of the opinion that such '~rc\lmstancesa.,~ 
referred to in sub-section (4) of section 137 are present,· it may exempt 
81'ly railway servant from the provisions of I$u~ection'(n or claUI8 45 
(i) of ~b-section ·(Z>; 

45 
Provided that a railway servant so exempted shall, in such circum-
stances as may be prescribed, be granted compensatorype.rlods of rest 
0 
for the periods he has foregone. 
139. Nothing in this Chapter or the rules made thereunder shall, where 
5 due provision has been made for the °relief of a railway servant,8uthorise 
him to leave his duty until he ha'S been relieved. 
10 
140. (1) Subject to such rules as 0 may be made in this behalf, the 
Central Government may appoint supervisors of railway labour. 
(2) The duties of supervisors of railway labour shall be-
6) to inspect railways in order to determine whether the pro-
visions of this Chapter or of the rules made thereuJlder are duly 
observed; and 
(ii) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed. 
(3) A supervisor of railway labour shall be deemed to be a Com-
15 missioner for the purposes of sections 7 and 9. 
141. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make r\lles 
to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. 
• 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing opower, ~uch rules may provi"e for all or any of the follow-
20 ing matters, namely:-
(a) the authorities who may decJare the employment of any 
railway servant essentially intermittent or intensive; 
(b) the appeal.. against any such declaration and the manner 
in which. and the conditions subject to which any' such appeal 
25 may be filed and heard: 
(c) the categories of staff that may be specified under sub-
clauses (iv) , (t) and (vi) of clause (e) of 'Section 135; 
(d) the authorities by whom exemptions under sub-section (4) 
of section 137 or sub-section (3) of section 138 may be made; 
(e) the delegation of power by the authorities oreferred to in 
clause (d); 
(I) the railway servants to whom clause (ii) of sub-section (2) 
of section 138 apply and the periods of rest to be granted to them; 
(g) the appointment of supervisors of railway iabour and their 
functions. 0 
CHAP'I'ER XV 
PENALTIEs AND O!'FSNCES 
It2. (1) If any person, with intent to defraud a railway adminil-
tration.-
.fO (a) enters or remalms in any carri.g~ on a railway or travels 
in a train In ~ontraventjon of section 53, or 
Railway 
servant 
to remain 
on duty. 
Super-
visors of 
railway 
labou'r. 
Power te 
make 
I'ules ill 
respect 
of matters 
in this 
Chapter, 
Fraudu-
lently 
travel-
ling or at 
tempting 
to travel 
without 
proper 
pus or 
tick4, 

Levy of 
excess 
charge 
and fare 
for travel-
ling 
without 
propei' 
pass or 
ticket Of' 
beyond 
authorised 
distance. 
(b) uses or attempts to use a single ·pass or a lingle ticket 
which has already been used on a previous journey, or in the case 
of a return ticket, a half thereof which has already been: so used, 
he 'Shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term Which may extend 
to six months and to fine which may extend to one thousand rupees: 5 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such punish-
ment shall not be less than imprisonment for a term of one month and 
a fine of two hundred and fifty rupees. 
(2) The person referred to in sub-section (1) shall also be liable J 0 
to pay the 'excess charge mentioned in sub-section (3) in' addition 
to the ordinary single fare for the distance which he has travelled, or 
where there is any doubt as to the station from which he started, the 
ordinary single fare from the station from which the train originally 
started, or if the tickets of passengers travelling in the train have been J 5 
examined since the original starting of the train. the ordinary single 
fare from the place where the tickets were so examined or, in case of 
their having been examined more than once, were last examined. 
• 
(3) The excess charge refelTed to in sub-section (2) shall be a SUIll 
equivalent to the ordinary single fare referred to in that sub-section or 20 
twenty rupees, whichever is more. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 65 of the Indian 
Penal Code the court convicting an offender may di~t that the person 45 of 1880. 
in default of payment of any fine inflicted by the court shall suffer im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to six months. 25 
143. (1) If any passenger,-
(4) being in or having alighted from a train, fails or refuses 
to present for examination or to deliver up his pass or ticket imme-
diately on a demand being made therefor under section 52, or 
(b) travels in a train in contravention of the provisions of 3U 
section 53, 
he shall be liable to .!lay, on the demand of my rail way servant authorised 
in this behalf, the excess charge mentioned in sub-section (3) in addition 
to the ordinary single fare for the distance which he has travelled or, where 
there is any doubt as to the station trom which he started, the ordinary 35 
single fare from the 'Station from whicl1 the train originally started, or. 
it the tickets of passengers travelling in the train have been examined 
since the original starting of the train, the ordinary single fare from the 
place where the ticket. were so examined or· in the case of their havin, 
been examined more than once, were last examined. .fO 
(2) If any passenger,-
(0) travels Or attempts to travel in or on a carriage, or by a 
train, of a higher class the that for which he has obtained a pass 
or purchased a ticket; or ~, 'J . -. 

~ , 
~ i' 
t l 
• 
Power .. 
remove 
,mODI. 
• 
Security 
fO!' aood 
behaviour 
ill certaIa 
cases. 
• 
.~" l' 
(b) travels in or on a carriage beyond the place authorised by 
his pa,ss or ticket, 
he shall be liable to pay, on the demand of any railway servant autho-
rised in this behalf, any difference between the f-.re paid by him and the 
5 tare payable in respect of the j,ourney he has made and the exceBi charee 
referred. to in sub-section (3) . 
(3) The excess charge shall be a sum equal to the amount payable 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be or twenty 
rupees, whichever is more: 
10 Provided that if the passenger has with him a certificate granted 
under sub-section (2) of section 53, no excess charge shall be payable. 
(4) If any passenger liable to pay the excess charge and the fare men-
tioned in 'Sub-section (1), or the excess charge and any difference of fare 
mentioned in sub-section (2), fails or refuses to pay the same on a 
J 5 demand being made therefor under one or other of these sub-sections. 
as the case may be, any railway servant authorised in this 
behalf may apply to any Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first or second class, as the 'Case may be, for the recovery 
of the sum payable as if it were a fine, and the Magistrate if satisfied 
20 that the sum is pa.le shall ord~ it to be so recovered, and may order 
that the person liab~e for the payment shall in default of payment suffer 
imprisonment of either description for a tenn which may extend to one 
month but not less than ten days. 
(5) Any sum recovered u~er sub-section (4) shall, as and when 
25 it is recovered, be paid to the railway administration. 
144. Any person failing or refusing to pay the fare and the excelS 
charge referred to in section 143 may be removed. by any railway 
~ervant authorised in this behalf who may call to his aid any other 
person to effect such removal: 
30 PrOvided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude a 
person removed from a carriage of a higher class from continumg his 
journey in a carriage of a class for which he holds a pass or ticket: 
Provided further that a woman or a child if unaccompanied by a mal. 
passenger, shall not be so removed except either at the station from 
where the or he commences her or his journey or at a junction or 
35 terminal station or station at the headquarters of a civil district and such 
removal shall be made only during the day. 
14&. (1) When a court convioting a person of an offence under 
section 142 or section 143 finds that he has been habitually committlug 
40 or attempting to commit that offence and the ~urt "is of the opinion that 
it is' necessary or desirable to require that person to execute a bond 
for good behaviour, such court may at the time of passing the sentence 
on· the persoh, order him. to execute a bond with or without lureti~. 
for such amount and for such period not exceeding three years as It 
45 deems fit. 
(2) An order under sub-section (1) may alga be made by an appellate 
court or by the Kith Court when exercising its powers of revision. 

Needlessh 
interfering 
with meaDS 
otcommu-
.ication in 
a train. 
.... lty for 
b'aDsfer 
al tickets. 
I'etlatty 
for un-
authoris-
ed cat-
fying OD of 
businelS of 
proeurin. 
and sup-
Plyinl ot 
I'Iillway 
ticketL 
48· 
,1M. J1 any passenger or any other person, without reasOnable and 
sufficient cause, makes use of, or interferes with, any means provided 
by a railway administration in a train for communication between 
passengers and the railway servant in-charge of the train, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment tor a term which may extend to one year, 5 
or with 'fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, where a passen-
aer, without reasonable and sufficient cause, makes use of the alarm 
chain provided by a railway administration, such punishment shall not 10 
be less than-
(a) a fine of five hundred rupees, in the case of conviction for 
the first offence; and 
(b) imprisonment for three months, in case of conviction for the 
second or subsequent offence. 
14:7. (1) If ~y person not being a railway servant or an agent 
authoriSed in this behalf-
(a) sells or attempts to sell any ticket or any half of a return 
ticket; or I 
• (b) parts or attempts to part with the po_sion of a ticket 20 
against which reservation of a seat Or berth has. been made or any 
half of a return ticket or a season ticket, 
in order to enable any other person to travel therewith, he shall 'be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term. which may extend to three 
months and with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and shall 25 
also forfeit the ticket which· he sells or attempts to sell or parts or 
attempts .to part. 
(2) If any person purchases any ticket referred to in clause (a) of 
sub-sectio~ (l) or obtains the possession of any ticket referred to in 
clause (b) of that sub-section from any person other than a railway ser- 30 
vant or an agent authOTised in this behalf, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a tenn which may extend to three months and with 
fine whU:h may extend to five hundred rupees and if the' purchaser or 
holder of any ticket aforesaid travels or attempts to travel therewith, 
he shall forfeit the ticket which he BO purchased or obtained and shall be 35 
deemed to be travelling without a proper ticket and shall be liable to be 
dealt with under section 143: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to 
the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, the punishment 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be less than imprison- 40 
ment for a term of one month and a fine of two hundred and fifty rupees. 
la. (1). If any person, not being a runWay servant or an agent autho-
rised. in this behalf,-
(a) carriei.'OJi· the business of procuring and supplyina tickets 
for travel on a railway or for reserved accommodation for jo~y 45 
in a train; or 
, (b) purchases or sells or attempts to p"n:hase or sell tickets 
with a view to carrying on any such business either by himSelf or 
bl any other person, ,', 

• 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to three years and with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees 
aDc1 shall also forfeit the tickets which he 80 procures, supplies, purchases, 
sells or attempts to purchase or sell: 
5 Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such punish-
ment shall not be less than imprisonment. for a tann of one year and 
a fine of five hundred rupees. . 
(2) Whoever abets any offence punishable under this section shall, 
10 whether or not such offence is committed, be punishable with the same 
punishment as is provided for the offence. 
149. (1) If any person canvasses for any custom or hawks or exposes for 
sale any article whatsoever in any rail way carriage or upon any part 
of a railway, except under and in accordance with the terms and ccmdt-
15 tlons of a licence granted by the railway administration in this behalf, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one year and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees: 
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such punishment 
20 shall not be less than imprisonment for a term of six months and a fine 
of five hundred rupees. 
(2) If any person begs in any railway carriage or upon a railway 
station, he shall be liable for punishment as provided under sub-
section (1) . 
25 (3) Any person referred to in sub-seetien (1) or sUb-seetion (2) may 
be removed from the railway carriage or any part of the railWay or rail-
way station, as the case may be, by any railway servant authorised in 
this behalf or by any other person whom such railway servant may call 
to his aid. 
30 150. If any person in any railway carriage or upon any part of a 
35 
l'ailway-
(a) is in a state of intoxication; or 
(b) commits any nuisance or act .of indecency or uses abu.ive 
or obscene language; or 
(c) wilfully Or without excuse interferes with any amenity 
provided by the railway administration So as to affeet the confon-
able travel of any passenger, 
he may be removed from the railway by any raUQY servant and abaU, 
in addition to the forfeiture of his pass or ticket, be punishable with tm-
40 prisonment which may extend to six months and with fiDe which may 
extend to five hundred rupees: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate r~ to tile 
CODtrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such pum. 
1D8I1t shall not be IBM ttian-
Prohibition 
on hawk-
ing. etc., 
and 
begging. 
Drunken. 
ness or 
nuisance. 

Obs~ 
tin, rail-
way ser-
vant Ia 
his duti •• 
Tresp8II 
and refu-
Bal to 
desist 
from 
trespull. 
Penalty 
for making 
a false 
statement 
in an 
application 
for com-
pensation. 
Makin, a 
false claim 
for com-
pensation. 
Maliciously 
wreckine 
orattem-
pting to 
wreck a 
train. 
50 
(a) a fine of one hundred rupees in the case of conviction for the 
first offence; and 
(b) nnprisonment of one month and a fine of two hundred and 
fifty rupees, in the case of conviction for second or subsequent offence. 
151. If any person wUfully obstructs or preven~ any railway ~ant 5 
in the ~charge of his duties, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees, or with both. , 
152. (1) If any person enters upon or into any part of a railway 
without lawful authority, or havi~ lawtuily entered upon or into such 10 
part misuses such property or refuses to leave, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such punishment 15 
shall not be less than imprisonment for a term of one month and a fine of 
two hundred and fifty rupees. 
(2) Any person referred to in sub-section (1) may be removed from 
the railway by any railway servant or by any other person whom such 
railway servant may call to his aid. 20 
153. Ii in any application for compensation under section 124, any 
person makes a statement which is false or which he mows or believes to 
be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or 
with both. 25 
1M. If any person requiting compensation from a railway adminis-
tration for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of any 
consignment makes a claim which is false or which he knows or believes 
to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which lYlay extend to three years, or with fine, or 30 
with both. 
155. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), if any person 
unlawfully,- . 
(a) puts or throws upon or across any railway, any wood, stone 
or other matter o.r thing; or 35 
(b) takes up, removes, loosens or displaces any rail, sleeper or 
other matter or things belonging to any railway; or 
(e) turns, moves, unlocks or diverts any points or other 
machinery belonging to any railway; Or 
(d) makes or shows, or hides or removes, any signal or light upon 40 
or near to any railway; or 
(e) does or causes to be done or attempts to do any other act or 
thing in relation to any railway, . 
with intent or with mowledge tbat he is likely to endanger the safety of 
any person travelling on or being upon the railway, he shall be punishable 4S 
with· imprisonment for life, or with regorou'S impriSonment fw a term 
which may extend to ten years: 

51 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reUODs to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, where a perIOD 
is punishable with rigorous imprisonment such imprisonment shall not 
be less than-
5 (4) three years in the case of a conviction for the first ofrence; 
and 
(b) seven years, in the case of conviction for the second or sub-
sequent offence. 
(Z) If any person unlaWfully does any act or thing referred to in any 
10 of the clauses of sub-section (1)-
(a) with intent to cause the death of any person and the doing 
of such act or thing causes the death of any person; or 
(b) with knowledge that such act or thing is so imminently 
dangerous that it must in all probability ce.USe the death of any 
15 person or such bodily injury to any person as is likely to cause the 
death of such person, 
he shall be punishable with death or imprisonment for life. 
156. (1) If any person, with intent to cause, or knowing that he is 
likely to cause damage or destruction to any property of a railway reter-
20 red to in sub~tion (Z), causes by fire, explosive substance or other-
wise, damage to such property to the extent of one hundred rupees or 
upwards, or destruction of such property, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years. 
(Z) The properties of a railway referred to in sub-section (1) are 
25 railway track, bridges, station buildings and installations, carriages or 
wagons, locomotives, signalling, telecommunications, electric traction 
and block equipments and such other properties as the Central 
Government being of the opinion that damage thereto or destruction 
thereof is likely to endanger the operation of a railway, may, by noti-
go fication, specify. 
157. If any person unlawfully throws or causes to fall or strike at, 
against, into or upon any rolling stock farming part of a train, any wood, 
stone or other matter or thing with intent, or with knowledge that he is 
likely to endanger the safety of any person being in or upon such rolling 
35 stock or in or upon any other rolling stock forming part of the same train, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years. 
158. If any petBon by any unlawful act or by any wilful omission or 
neglect, endangers or causes to be endangered the safety of any person 
40 travelling on or being upon any railway, or obstructs or causes to be 
obstructed or attempts to obstruct any rolling stock upon any railway, 
he, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to five yeara: . 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
... , contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such imprIIon-
ment shall not be less than-
(a) six months in the case of conviction for the ftrst Offence; and 
Damqe to 
or destruc-
tion of 
certain 
railway 
properties. 
Malimoual)o 
hurting or 
attemptin, 
to hurt 
persons 
travelling 
by railway. 
Encl.anpr-
In, safety 
of persom 
tntvelllng 
by raUway 
by wi1fuJ. 
act; or 
omission. 

EndaDJering 
safety of 
person. 
travellln, 
by railway 
by ruh 
or negli-
aent act or 
omlMlon. 
EDtering 
into 
'8 compart-
ment re-
lerved or 
relistinc 
entry inte 
acom-
partment 
notre-
served. 
• 
Enterinl 
carriage 
in motion 
or other-
wise im-
properly 
travellin, 
ona 
railwq. 
TravelllnJ 
on rOot, 
step or 
~of 
a ireln. 
(b) two years in the case of a conviction for the second or sub-
o. 0 ,sequent offence. 
158. If any person in a rash and negligent manner does any act, 01' 
omits to do what he is legally bound to. do, and the act or omi'SsioD Is 
likely to endanger the safety or any persQn travelling or being upon any 3 
railway, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
110. (l) If any pell8Jlger-
(4) having entered a compartment wherein no berth or seat has 
been .reserved by a railway administration for his use, or 10 
(b) having unauthorisedly occupied a berth or seat reserved· by 
a railway administration for the use of another passenger, 
refuses to leave it when required to do so by any railway servant 
au.thorised In this behalf, such railway servant may remove him or 
callie him to be remeved, with the aid of any other person, from the 15 
compartment, berth or seat, as the case may be, and he shall also be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(2) If any passenger resists the lawful entry of another passenger into 
a compartment not reserved for the use of the passenger resisting, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 20 
1&1. If any passenger enters or leaves, or attempts to enter or leave,-
(4) any carriage while the train is in motion; or 
(b) elsewhere than at the side of the carriage adjoining the 
platform or other place appointed by the railway administration for 
passengers to enter or leave the carriage; or 25 
(c) opens the door of any carriage while the train is in motion, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment fOr a term which may extend 
to one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both. 
162. If any pa$en~r or 8I1Y other person, after being warned by a 
railway servant to 4esist, persists in travelling on the roof, step or foot- 30 
board of any carnage or on an engine, 0 or ip. any other part of a train DOt 
int@.ded for the use of passengers, he shall be punishable with lmprisoD-
ment for a term which may extend to three months and with fui'6 which 
may extend to five hundred rupees and may be removed from the railway 
by any railway servant: 3~ 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequ~ reason to the 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such punishment 
Iball not be less than imprisonment for a term of ten days and a ftne of 
Oftll hundred Npeel. 

113. If any passenger wilfully alters or defaces his pUs or ticket so u 
to render the date, number or any material portion thereof illegible, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may eXtend to 
three month;l, or with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty 
5 rupees, or. with both. 
164. Any person under whose authority any railway servant is 
employed in contravention of any of the provisions of GhaPter XIV or 
of the rules made thereunder, he shall be punishable wltli fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees. 
10 185. If any driver or conductor of any vehicle while upon the premises 
of a railway ttisobeys the reasonable directions of any railway servant 
or police ofticer, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a tenn 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees, or with both. 
15 1416. (l) If any person" other than a railway servant or a person 
authorised in this behalf, opens any gate or chain or barrier set up on 
either side of a level crossing which is closed to road traffic, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years. 
20 (2) If any person breaks any gate Or chain or barrier set up on either 
side of a level crossing which is closed to road tra1Bc, he shail be 
punishable with imprisOnment for a term which may extend to five 
years. 
Alterin, 
or <ferae .. 
ing pus 
or ticket. 
Penalty 
for con-
travention 
of any of 
the provi-
siona 011 
Chapter 
XIV. 
Dieobedi-
ence of 
drivers or 
conduc. 
tors of 
vehicle, 
to direc-
tions of 
railwsy 
servant 
etc. 
Open.inc 
or break-
iIlg a level, 
crossinl 
Icntic. 
167. (1) If any cattle are wilfully driven, or knowingly permitted to Cattle 
25 be, on any railway otherwise than for the purpose of lawfully crossing the trespass. 
railway or for any other lawful purpose, the person in charge of the 
cattle or, at the option of the railway administration, the owner of t~e 
cattlE: shall, in addition to any amount which may have been recovered 
I of 11'1 \. or may be recoverable under the Cattle-trespass Act, IP71. be punishable 
1 of 18'11. 
1 of 1871. 
J of 11'11. 
30 with fine whiCh may extend .1;0 thirty rupees for each head of cattle. 
(2) Any fine imposed under sub-secijon (1) may, if the court so 
directs, be recovered in the manner provided by section 25 of the Cattle-
trespass Act, 1871. 
(3) The expression "public road" in sectIons 11 and 2e of the Cattle-
5S trespass Act, 1871, shall be deemed to include a railway, and any railway 
senr~i may exercise the powets conferred on officers of police by section 
11 of that Act. 
(4) In this section,' "cattle" has the same meaning as in the Cattle-
trespass Aet. 1871. 

Neali-
&eDtly 
cross-
ing un-
manned 
level 
crossiDl· 
Entering 
carriaae 
or other 
place re-
served 
for femala 
Giving 
false ac-
count of 
goods. 
Unlaw-
fuU7 
bringing 
dangerous 
goods on 
a railway. 
Unlaw-
full,. 
bringing 
oI'lenalve 
good. on 
a railway. 
Defacing 
pubUo 
notices. 
168. If any person driving or leading a vehicle is negligent in Cl'OI8iDa 
an unmanned level crossing, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year. 
E~la1&4tion.-For the purposes of this section, "negligence" in rela-
tion to any person driving or leading a vehicle in croBBing an unmanned 5 
level crossing means the crossing of such level crossing by such person-
(a) without stopping or caring to stop the vehicle near such 
lev.el crossing to observe whether any approaching rolling stock is 
in sight, « 
(b) even while an approaching rolling stock is in sight. 10 
169. If a male person knowing or having reason to believe that a 
carriage, compartment, berth or seat in a train or room or other place 
is reserved by a railway administration for the exclusive use of females, 
without lawful excuse,-
(a) enters such carriage, compartment, room or other place, or 15 
having entered such carriage, compartment, room or place, remains 
therein; or 
(b) occupies any such berth or seat having been required by 
any railway servant to vacate it, 
h~ shall, in addition to being liable to forfeiture of his pass or ticket, be 20 
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees and may 
also be removed by any railway servant. 
170. If any person required to furnish an account of goods under 
section 64, gives an account which Is materially false, he and, if he is not 
the owner of the.. goods, the owner also shall, without prej,udice to his 25 
liability to pay any freight or other chafge unde:r any provision of this 
Act, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred. rupees 
for every quintal or part thereof of such goods. 
171. If any person in contravention of section 65, takes with him. any 
dangerous goods or en4'Usts such goods for carriage to the" raUway go 
administration, he shall be pwiishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable for any loss, 
injury or damage which may be caused by reason of bringing such goods 
on the railway: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate ,I'easons to the 35 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such punishment 
shall not be less than imprisonment for a term of one month. 
172. If any petaon, in contravention of section 65, takes with him any 
offensive goods or entrusts such goods for carriage to the railway 
administration, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 40 
ftve hundred rupees and shall also .. be liable for any loss, inj,ury or' 
damage which may be caused by reason of bringing such goods on the 
raUway. 
173. If any penon without lawful authority-
(a) pulls down or wilfully damages any board or document set 4S 
up or pasted by the ord~ of a railway administration on a railway 
or any rolling stock; or 
(b) obUterates or alters . any letters or figures upon any such 
board or document or upon any rolling stock, 

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to one month and with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty 
rupees. . 
17'. (1) No passenger in any compartment of a train shall, if objected Smoking. 
5 to by any other passen·ger in that compartment, smoke therein. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a railway 
administration may prohibit smoking in any, train or part of a train. 
(3) Whosoever contravenes the provisions of s~b-section (1) or sub-
section (2) shall be pwlishable with fine which may extend to one 
10 hundred rupees. 
175. If any person suffering from any infectious or contagious d1seaae 
enters or remains in any carriage or travels on raihvay in contravention 
of the provisions of 8ub-section (1) of section 54 he, and any person 
accompanying him on the railway shall, in addition to their being liable 
15 to the forfeiture of their .passes or tickets and removal from the railway 
by any servant, be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees. 
176. (1) If a person under the age of twelve years is guilty of any of 
the offences under sections 155, 156, 157, 158 and 159, the court convicting 
20 him may require the father or guardian of such person to execute, within 
such time as the court may fix, a bond for such amount and for such 
period as the court may direct for the ,ROod conduct of such person. 
(2) The amount of the bond, if forfeited, shall be recoverable by the 
court as if it were a fine imposed by itself. 
25 (3) If a father or guardian fails to execute a bond under sub-section 
(1) within the time fixed by the court, he shall be punishable with ftne 
which may extend to fifty rupees. 
177. If a non-Government railway fails to comply with, any requisition 
made, decision or direction given, by the Central Government, under any 
30 of the provisions of this Act, Or otherwise contravenes any of the pro-
visions of this Act, it shall be open to the Central Gove.rnment, by order, 
to levy a penalty not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees and a 
further penalty not exceeding one hundred rupees for every day during 
which the contravention continues: 
35 Provided that no such penalty shall be levied except after giving a 
reasonable opportunity to the non-Government railway to make such 
representation as it deems fit. 
178. Any penalty imposed by the Central Government under section 
177, shall be recoverable by a suit in the District Court having j.urisdiction 
40 in the place where the head office. of the non-Govemm.ent railway is 
situated. . 
119. Nothing in section 177 or 178 shall preclude the Central Govern-
ment from resorting to any other action' to compel a non-Government 
railway to discharge any obligation imposed upon it by or under this 
45 Act. 
Travel on 
railway 
with infee-
tious or 
contagious 
disease. 
Provision 
with res-
pect to 
commission 
of offence 
by the 
children 
of acts en-
dangering 
safety of 
person 
travellin, 
on railway. 
Levy of 
penalty 
on non-
Govern-
ment rail-
way. 
Recove17 
of penalty. 
Section 
177 of 178 
not to 
preclude 
Central 
Govern-
mentfrom 
taking an,. 
other 
action. 

Penalty 
f~ 
drunken-
neue 
Abandoa-
ina 
train, 
etc., with-
out 
authority. 
Obstruct-
in, run-
nin! af 
train, etc, 
Endaupr-
tn,the 
lBfety of 
penoaa. 
110. U any raflway servant is in a state of intoxication while on dutJ. 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees and 
w,hen the performance of any duty in such state is likely to endanger the 
safety of any person travelling on or being upon a railway, such railway 
servant shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine or with both- 5 
181. If any railw~ servant, when on duty, is entrusted with any res-
ponsibilfty connected with the running of a train, or of any other rolling 
stock from one station or place to another station or place, and he aban-
dons his duty b~fore reaching such station or place without autharlq or 10 
without properly handing over such train or rolling stock to another 
authorised railway 'Servant, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to t~ years and with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees: 
Provided that in the absem:e of special and adequate reasons to the 15 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such punishment 
shall not be less than imprisonment for a term of six months and with a 
fine of two hundred and fifty rupees. 
182. If any railway sel'vant (whether on. duty or otherwise) or any 
other person obstructs or causes to be obstructed or attempts to obstruct 20 
any train or other rolling stock upon a railway,-
(4) by squatting or picketing or during any rail TOka agitation 
or b4ndh; or 
(b) by keeping 
railway; or 
without authority any rolling stock on the 
25 
(c) by tampering with, disconnecting or interfering in any other 
manner with its hose pipe or tampering with signal gear or otherwise; 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 30 
contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, such punishment 
shall not,-
(i) if it relates to the offences specified in clauses «(I) and (b), 
be less than imprisonment for a term of three months and a fine of 
five hundred rupees; 35 
(n) if it relates to the offences specified in clause (c), be leas 
than imprisonment for a term of six months and a fine. of one thousand 
rupees. 
183. If an,y railwa~ servant, when on duty, endangers the safety of any 40 
person-
(G) by disobe~ng any rule made under this Act: or 
(b) by disobeying any instruction, direction or order under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder, or I 
(c) by any rash or negligent a'Ct or omission, 
he shall be punishable with impp,sonment for a term which may e~tend 45 
to two years and with ftne which may extend to one thousand rupees: 

57 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
contrary to be mentioned. in the judgment of the court, such punishment 
shall not be less than imprisonment for a term of six months and a 
fine of five hundred rupees. 
5 184. 1£ any railway servant unnecessarily,-
(a) allows any rolling stock to stand across a place where the 
railway crosses a public road on the level; or 
(b) keeps a level crossing closed against the p,ublic, 
he shall be punishable with ftne which may· extend to one hundred rupees. 
IO 185. If any railway servant required to furnish a return by or under 
this Act, signs and furnishes a return which is false in any material par-
ticular or whi'Ch he knows or believes· to be false, OT does not believe to 
be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or witll 
15 both. 
186. If any railway servant who is required by a railway adminislra~ 
tion to inquire into a claim for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or 
non-delivery of any consignment makes a report which is false or which 
he mows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
20 years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Obstruct_ 
ina level 
croulng. 
False 
returns. 
Making a 
false re-
port by a 
railway 
servant. 
187. If any railway servant referred to in sub-section (2) of section 54 Penalty 
knowing or having reason to believe that a person is suffering from any for 
W nNlo •l1-infectious or contagious disease, wilfully permits the person to travel on ........ ......., 
25 a railway without malt::ng arrangements for his separation from other pas- permitting a person 
sengers, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one sutrerln, 
hundnd rupees. } tram any 
infectious 
or conta-
11ou. 
diIeIIe 
188. If any railway servant omits to give such notice of an accident as 
is required by section 111 or in the .form and manner prescribed under 
30 section 120, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees. 
189. (1) If a person commits any offence mentioned in sections 142, 
146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152,156, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 
162, 163, 166, 168, 169, 171, 173, 176, 180, 181, 182 and 183, he may be 
35 arrested without warrant od other written authority by any raUway se,rvant 
or police officer not below the rank of a head' constable. 
(2) The railway servant or the police officer may call to his aid any 
other person to effect the arrest under sub-section (1) 
(3) Any person so arrested under this section shall be produced 
40 before the nearest Magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of 
such arrest exduding the time necessary for the . journey from' the 
place of arrest to the court of the Magistrate. 
to travel 
OmilBion 
to Jive 
notice of 
accident. 
Arrest for 
offences 
under 
certain 
sections. 

Arrest ot 
P ...... 
~to 
ablcoNl, 
etc. 
Mqlatrate 
laniDI 
juride.. 
ticm ..... 
the Act. 
Place of 
trial. 
u 
111. (1) If any person who commits any oJIence under this Act, oUter 
tha:n an offence meiltionect in seetion 189, -or js -~ to .pay any excess 
chqe or other sum. demanded under section 143, falls or ~ to.give his 
name and address or there is reason to believe that the name and 
address given by him are fictitious or that he will abscond, any railway 5 
servant authorised in this .behalf or any police oftlcernot ·be1owtllerank 
of a bead constable may arrest him without warrant or written authority. 
(2) The railway servant or the police officer may call to his aid any 
other person to effect the ar1'est under sub-section (1). 
(3) Any person· arrested under this section shall be produced before 10 
the> nearest Magistrate within a perioo of twentY-four hours of such 
arrest aeluaing Itbe' time necessary for 'the joumey from the· place of 
arrest to -1he court of the~glstnte unless he i'8 released earlier on 
1iYiD,·ball.or if 'his true ·name and ack:JNss are aacertain8d on executing 
a JbCIIld without ~'I1U'etieS for his appearlDce ·before the· Magistrate having 
jurtlldmtion to try him for the·offence. 
(4) The provisions of Chapter XXIII of the Code of Criminal Pro-
oeclun!, 1t73, -shall, 110 far B'S may be, appll: to the giving of bat I and the 
exeeution of bonds 'under ,this ·seetfon. 
15 
2 of tnt. 
Ul.Notwtthstanding anyt~g contained in the Code oJ. Criminal 20{ 1974. 
Proceclure,'19'13, 'ilO court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or ~o 
a l-udiefal Macfstrate of the first class shall try an offence under this 
Act. 
liZ. (1) Any person committiQean. ,oaence UDder this Act or any 
rule made. tlberem:t.der 1Iaa1l. be .. Viable -for, luc:h offealce in .eny plaCe in 
which he may be or which the State Government may nouty in tbi8 be- 25 
half, as well as in any other place in which he Is liable to be tried UDder 
any law for the time being in forc:e. 
(2) Every notification under sub-section (1) shall be publilhed In 
the <>mcla1 Gazette, and a copy .thereof shall be eDibtted for Qae iQIor-
matlon of:the pubUc in some ~CUOU8 place at such railwa.1. *tloDI 30 
as the State Government may .c1Ireet. 
i' 
I 
L _ CHAPTER XVI 
193. (1) A railw,q. ac1ministr.ation may, for the pudpose of faclUting 
the carrl. of puienl81's or goods or to provide integrated service for 35 
suh carriage, provide .any otker mode ·of transport. 
(2) .Jiotwithstapd.inl-~ coataioed in .• y other law for ,~·time 
",!ia~feree, the~r.of ,thia ~ &ball.apply to~the oarrtace of 
,.-e!WIF' or ,geMa hy tHo mede of traD8pOrt .refeQed· ·totn sbolectlon 
Ul. ~ 

59 
l,N.J (1} NoWritUt.anding. anJtbial to, the,con • ., COJItaiDed' in any 
other, law. a~railwa, administ&'&ticn\,1lIIB D .. fbe,ltall18!to:pay:; ...... in 
aid of~tAe:tuDdI·,of my loeal amborU,t:UD1eIIl tbe~Calltntc.aownu.eat, 
by notification, declares the railway administration to be liable·to pay the 
5 tax specifted in such notification. 
(2) While a not1fieation of. the·Ceatral aov..r-n.,\IJldeao sub 1IOUoft· 
(1) is in fOllCe, the, raUwa,. admiai .. tleatbaBcbe·1i8b1e,to ~..,. the-
local authority either the tax specified in the notification or, in Ueu'tM!w-
of, such sum, if any, as an oftlce.r appointed in this behalf by the Central 
10 Government may, having regard to all the clreumItances of the cue, 
from time to time, detennine to be fair and NUOnable. 
(3) The Central Government may at any time revoke or vary a DOti· 
fication issued under sub-section (1). 
(4) Nothing in this section shaU. be. conatnIed.to preueDt any railway 
J 5 administration from enterin., into a cOlltl:lct.. with ,8D,.local • .,. ... tor 
the supply of water or U,ht, or for. the sc:aveDllUl of. raUWIlF: pNIIIiIeI, 
or for any other service which the local authority· Ill. be,.."., .. or 
be prepared to render to the railway administration. 
ItS. (1) Notwithstandin, anytmaa to tt. contluy COlltalned in any 
20 other law, a railway administration shall not be llable to pay any tax to 
any local autbority:. in respeet', of·. anr. advJer.tiaanmt· macI&-'OIl 8D1 part of 
the railway un.lea the CeD.tral; Govemment, bJ· notiflatlea; declans the 
railway adminiatration to be J.iaWe.. to pay' the tax specifted in SUGh 
notification. . 
2 5 (2) The Centra} Government may at any time, revoke or vary a noti-
fication issued under, sub-sectlon (1). 
1M. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act. no civil COIIl't 
shall have jurisdiction to entertain. any suit or proceediDc.for anyWq 
done or action taken or any omission. made by the Ceatral GonnuDent 
or by a railway administration in violation or contravention, of aDJ' pro-
30 vision of this Act. . 
35 
197. No suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall lie aplnst the Cen-
tral Government, any railway admtnistratt~ a rallway &el'VJU'1t or aD1 
other person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of this Act o.r any rules or orders made thereunder. 
118. (1) No rolUng stock, machinery, plant, tools, fittings, materials 
or effects used or provided by a railway adm1nfstrattOD for the pu.rpoI8 
of traftle on its railway, or of its stations or workshops, ehaU be llah1e to 
be taken in execution of any deereeor order. of any court or of ~ local 
40 authority or person having hy law the. power to attach. or, dlItnin ~ 
perty or otherwise to cause property to be taken in executioD, wW.1CNt the 
previous sanction of the Central Govemment. 
(2) Nothing insub-secUon (1) shall be coastnled to .. the au-
thority-of any court to attach the eaminp of a railway in executlOJl. of 
45 a decree or order. 
TaMlon' 
on na. 
wa,.., ,by 
~ .. 
authori-
tle$ •. 
TaatloA 
OIl rail· 
....... toI'-
ad, •••. 
JDeIdi 
Barot 
jurildtc-
tlon of 
civil 
courta. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
tak_ in 
IGOd fIWL 
Restrie-
tioa,. encu._ 
apu.t 
rellwa;v 
ptoperty. 

Bailwa)" 
8II1'98nts 
to be 
pUblic 
servfmts 
tor the 
PlU"POIeIJ 
of Chap_ 
ter IX 
au4 
section 
409 of the 
IadlIIIl 
Penal 
Code. 
Railway 
-rvant. 
not to 
eDg&fe in 
trade. 
PJoew4I_ 
fGl"-. 
ftlT tiD 
raIlwa)" 
adminis-
tration of 
prGpeJ:ty 
-WIled 
by. 
railway 
Iel"VaIlt. 
Servlee 
of DOtfce, 
on ra!1way 
acJmfnt. 
tt'aUDft. 
189 .. (1) Any raUway servant, who is not a public servant within the 45 Of lts6. 
meaning of·· section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, shall be deemed to 
bea public· servant for the purposes of Chapter IX and secUs" of 
.that Code. ' 
(2) In the definition of ''legal remuneration" in section 161 of the 
Indian Penal Code, the word ''Govel-nment'' shan, for the purposes of 5 
iiUh sectiOD (1), be deemed to include any employer of a railway servant 45 Of 1'86. 
u~. . 
200. A railway servant shall not-
10 
(a) purchase or bid for, either in perlOn or by an agent, in his 
O'Wn·name'or in that of another, or lomtly or in shares with others, 
any property put to auction under section 81 or 'Section 82 or section 
83 or seetion 88; or . 15 
(b) in contravention of any direction of the railway administra-
tion in this behalf, engage in trade. 
.1. If a railway servant is d1scharged from service or is suspended, 
or . dies or abseonds or absents himself, and he or his wife or widow or 
any member of ·his family or his representative, refuses or neglects, after 
notice in writing for that purpose, to deliver up to the railway aciminis- 110 
tration or to a person appointed by the railway administration, in this 
behalf, any station, dwelling-house, oftlce or othtU' building with its appur-
tenances, or any books, papers, keys, equipment or other matters, belong-
ing to the railway administration and in the possession or custody of 
such railway servant at the occurrence of any such event as aforeaald, 
any M~tropoUtan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class may, 
on application rnadeby or on behalf of the railway administration, order 
any police ofticer, with proper assistance, to enter upon the station, dwel-
ling-house or other building and remove any per~on found therein and 
take possession thereof, or to take possession of the books, papers or other 15 
matters, and to deliver the same to the railway administration or to a 
person appointed by the railway administration in that behalf. 
202. Entries made in the records or other documents of a railway 
administration shall be admitted in evidence in all proceedings by or 
against the railway administration, and all such entries may be proved 30 
either by the production of the records or other documents of the railway 
administration containing such entries or by the production of a copy of 
the entries certifled bf' the oftleer having custody of the records or other 
doewnents under h1's signature and stating that it is a true copy of the 
original entries and that such orlglnal entries are contained in the records 
or other documents Of the railway administration in his possession. 35 
203. AIly notice or other document required or authorised by this Act 
to.be served on a raUway administratiOn may be served, in the case of a 
Zonal" Railway on the General Manager or any of the railway servant 
authorilled by the General Manager, and in the case of any other railway, 

lot 1974. 
81 
on the owner or:leuee of the railway or the pe1'lOl1,W'orkiDI the railway 
under an ,agreement- ; 
(a) by'delivering it to him; or 
(b) by leaving it a~ his ofBce; or 
5 (c) by registered post to his oftlce addre •• 
204. Unless otherwise provided 'in this 'Act or the rules framed tbe.re- s8mce 
under, any notice or other document required or "authorised by this Aet Of DOticee 
to be served on 'any person by a railway adminh1tration may be served- etc." 
(4) by delivering it to the penon; or 
10 (b) by leaving it at the usual or last known place of abode of 
the person; or " 
(c) by registered post addressed to the person at his usual or last 
known place of abode. ' 
205. Where a notice Ol' other document is served by post, it sliaU be 
15 deemed to have been served at the time when the letter contatntn, It 
would be delivered in the ordinary course of post, and in proving such 
service, it shall be suftlcient to prove that the letter contafniDg the DOtfce 
or other document was properly addressed and registered. 
206~ (1) A railway administration may, by order in writing, autboriM 
20 any railway servant or other person to act for, or represent it, as the case 
may be, in any proceeding before any clvil, criminal or other courts. 
(2) A person authorised by a railway administration to conduct pro-
secutions on its behalf shall, notwithstanding anything in section 302 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,be entitled to conduct such prose-
25 cutions without the permission of the Magistrate. 
207. The Central Govetnment may, by notification, exempt any rail-
way from all or any of the provisions of this Act. 
, Z08~ (1) For the purposes of sections 65" 111, 119, 121, 129, 152, 158 
to 159, 166, 171, 173, 176, 178, 179, 181 to 184, 188, 189, 190,192, 191,195, 198 
30 to 201, 203, 204, 206 and 208, the word "railway" whether it 0CC'lU'Ji alcme or 
as a, pl'efix to another word, has refwence to a railway or portion of a 
rllUway under construction Ill}.d to a railway or portion of a railway not 
used for the public carriage of passengers, animals or goods as wen as to a 
raUway falling within the deftnitic!D of that word in clause (30) of 
40 section 2. 
by railway 
acImInJ.-
tration. 
P~ 
tion where 
notice is 
servecI by 
poet. 
RapreMn-
tatioD of 
ra1:1wa,. 
acImJJU-
tratlOD. 
Power to 
exaapt 
railwey 
froas Act. 
Mattws 
supple-
matal 
to the 
deftDitioll8 
ot "raU-
way" and 
"railway 
senrant". 

Rulee to 
be •. 
~ 
Parlta. 
mfnt. 
"," .. _-- .. ~. 
82 
(I)' Nt ~: puIpClM' of MfettDlW '1, 22, Ul, 1M; 1.." 180 to 1M; 1M. 
199, 200 and 201, the expression "railway ~I' ~ a perifib. 
employed under a railway in connection with the service thereof by 
a penon fulfllUng a contract with the railwaY' adMmtlltNt.iM. 
•• Wlthout prejudice to an,-}lO¥te' to; JD8keI nt..eoataiDed l elsewba'e 5 
in this Act, the Central Government may make rul. aeuraUy to earry 
out the purpoleS of thl. Act. ! 
ZIG. Every rule made under this Act sba11 be laid, u soon as may be 
after it is IDlClllti beMe each HOUIIe -of ~ whiJ4t'it is in lIIilon, 
fot' a total p8l'Iod·of thtttt'da,. ... htdrmay be ecal.,.laId'iB ODe __ 10 
or in two or m4lt'e'l1IeeeadYe ~aad ~if, befere'. th~< dittay of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive .. ions ~ 
said, both Houses agree in maldnc· ,any madtIoat1oa in the rule or both 
Houses agree' that the rule shoUld not be made, the rule shall thereaftel" 
have eIfect only in such mod1fled form or be of no etreet, as the cue 15 
may be; so, liowever, that any such mocWleatlon or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule. 
211. (1) The lndian Railways Act, 1890 is hereby repealed. eof 1190. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Railways Act 1890 20 
(hf!ll'eindter referred to as the repealed Aet)-
(II) anytbiDg done or any action taken or purported to have 
beea daDe· Or' taJren· (including «By rule, DOtiftcetion, iD8pection, order 
or nOtiee m..- or issUed, or any appointmer1t or declaratlClft made or 
any Ucence, permission, authQrisation or exemption granted or any 25 
document or instrument exec~ted or any direet10n given or any 
proceedings taken or any penalty or fine imposed) undv the repealed 
Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
.Act, be deemed to have' been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act; : 30 
(b) any complaint made to the Railway Rates Tribunal. under sub-
section (1) of section 41 of the repealed Act but not disposed of before 
the commence'ment of this Act and any complaint that may be made 
to the said Tribunal against any act or omission of a railway adminis-
tration under the repealed Act shall be heard and decided by the,_ 
Tribunal constituted under this Act in accordance with the provisions 3::1 
of Chapter VII of this Ad.; 
(c) any applieation made to any Claims ColJlll1issioner under 
sub-section (1) of section 82C of the repealed Act but not diSposed of 
before the commencement of this Act and any application that may be 40 
made to any Claims Commissf,ener in relation to arty accident oceurred 
before:sucl1 commencement I~ be dtsposed of by my Claima Commis-
silmer' apPDtnted lUldet this Act in aeord8Me with the ~ of 
this Aet; and . , 
(d) every appeal from any llecbJion of the Claims CoDUirlasiOller 
under sub-section (2) of section 821i" of the re~alea Act shall, if not 45 
preferred before the commencement of the Act, be prefetred befme 
the High Court within a period of ninety days from sucb cO'll1l!iertC!l!-
ment: 

" \ 
Provided that the High COUl't may entertain s~ appeal after 
the expiry of the said period ot ninety days it it is satiafled that the 
appellant WU ,pJ2.vented by 1"&!Ient ·eBUIIe .from ftUng the appeal 
within the 'Said period . 
. (3) The mention of particular ~t~ in sub-section (2)shall .. Dot 
be held to prejudice or dect .the ~ .. 8PpUcation 4f ·section 6 of the 
lIot 11.7. General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to ·the effect ot repeal. 
THE SCHEl>ULE 
[See section l02(J)] 
EXTENT OF MONETARY LIABILlTY OF UtLWAY AUMImS'l'RATION FoR LOSS, 
DlSiROCTION, 1L'l'C •• OF ANIMALS IN CASIlS W1maI VALtJZ.HAS NO'i'.a.N .DBCLADD 
AT '1'HB TIME OF ENTR~ 
----_._------
Description of animals 
(1) 
_.t of.U.biUty 
of .rai1w:~y ~dmiDistrat1on 
-------------------
Elephants 
·HonIes 
;)lu1es, homed cattle or camels 
Dogs, donkeys, goats, pigs, sheep or other 
animals not mentioned above 
Birds 
Rs. 3,000 per head. 
Bs. l~:per lJaad. 
Rs. ~ .. per heed. 
RI. 80 per head. 
Rs. 30 per.head. 
---- '---" ----

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Railways Act, 1890 was enacted at a time when the 
railways in India were mostly managed by private companies. The 
Government of IDclia primarily played the role of a coordinating and 
regulating authority in various matters, such as, inter-railway movement 
of traffic, fixation of rates, sharing of revenue earnings of through traffic, 
apportionment of claims liability amongst the raUways, providing reason-
able facilities to passenger and ioods traftlc, etc. This role was accordingly 
reflected in the Act. But now, except for a very small portioR of the 
railways, the entire railway ~Jstem has become part of th~ Government 
of India. To give effect to the changes in the railway system from time 
to time, the Act had also undergone changes a number of times since ibl 
enactment in 1890. In addition, as some of the original provisions 
enacted in 1890 had continued w~thout any change, a need for ,their re-
placement by new provisions more responsive to the needs of the present 
day was felt and some other provisions have become redundant. There 
lias also been a demand, both within and outside Parliament, fo.r the 
re-enactment of the Act so as to reflect the large number of changes 
that have occurred in the railways. It has, therefore, become necessary 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to railways by a new Railway 
Act. 
2. The Bill, while giving effect to the changes that are necessary due 
to the change of circumstances, provides, among other things, for the 
following matters, namely:-
(i) The railways are being administered by zonal railways. 
This position had not been given effect .to in the Act. The Bill 
provides for the constitution of railway zones, abolition of existiJig 
zones and appointment of General Managers as heads of these railway 
administrations. 
(ii) Power has been given to the Central Government to fix the 
rates tor the carriage of passengers and goods over the railways 
instead of the existing provisions to fix only the maximum and 
mbWnum rates for such carriage and leaving the fixation of specific 
rates to the railway administrations. In addition, the railway qd-
ministrations are also being authorised to specify lump sum ntes for 
the carriage of goods. 
(iii) In accordance with certain j,udicial pronouncements, the 
Bill provides for statutory recognition of the railway receiPt as a 
negotiable bmtrument. 
(iv) The Bill specifically provides for limiting the monetary 
liability of railway administrations in ,respect ot payment ot com-
pensation for loss, damage, etc., of goods. Provision has. however, 
been made for 'full liability subject.to the condition that the 
consigno.r. while entrusting the goods to a railway administration for 
carriage, should declare the value of the goods and pay a percentage 
charge on such value. 
• 

1""''''--' 
f 
(v) The oftences included in the Act have been rationalised and 
a few new offence. have also been included in the Bill. Punishments 
for some of the offences had Dot been changed since the enactment 
of the Act. Penalties provided for the' offences under the Act have 
been made more stringent which would include, among other things, 
a minimum punishment for many of the offences. . 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the afoMsaid objects. 
4. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the provisions included • 
the Bill. 
Nzw DlLHI; 
The 2nd April, 1986. MADHAVRAO SCINDIA 

Notes em clcJuses 
ClaU8e 2 seeks to deftne certain words and expressions used in the 
BIll. . 
Clause 3--Su})'clause (1) provides for constitution of Government 
railways into zonal railway •. 
Sub-clause (2) provides that zonal railways existing immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be zonal rail-
ways under sub-clause (1). 
Sub-clause (3) provides that any unit of railways engaged in research, 
development, designing, construction or production of rolling stock, etc., 
may be declared as a zonal rallway. 
Sub-clause .(4) empowers the Central Government to abolish any 
zonal railway, or constitute any new zonal railway Or change the name 
or headquarters of any zonal railway and determine the area of their. 
jUrisdiction. 
Clause 4 provides for appointment of General Manager of a zonal 
railway in whom the superintendence and control of railway shall vest. 
Clauses 5, 6 and 7 provide for appointment of Chief Commissioner of 
Railway Safety and Commissioners of Railway Safety, and their duties and 
powers. 
Clause 8 lays down that the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a 
public servant. 
Clause 9 lays down· that railway administration shall afford all rea-
sonable facilities to the Commissioner in the discharge of his duties and 
exercise of powers. 
Cla.use 10 provides for the powers of railway administration to execute 
all necessary works in relation to construction and maintenance of rail-
ways. 
Oawe 11 confers on railway administration the power to alter the 
position of pipes, electric supply lines, drains or sewers. etc.. for the pur-
poses of exercising the powers under this Ac~. 
C1cwe 12-Sub-clause <a) provides that railway administration of the 
Government raUway shall not do anything on or to any works, lands or 
buildings vested in or in the possession of a State Government without 
the consent of that Government. 
Sub-clause (b) provides that a railway administration of a non-Gov-
emment railway shall not do anything on or to any works, lands or 
bUildings vested in or in the possession of the Central Government or a 
State Government without the consent of the Government concerned. 
CZ4uBe 13-Sub-clause (1) lays down that a railway admtnfstrattoa 
may take such steps as it may consider necessary to avert danpr to the 
l1'lf)vement of rolling stock or remove the obstruction caused by faD fIf 
any tree, post or structure, etc. 
.•.. _ , ..... -•..• _ ... _'j~. _-' .i~ ..• :.....·. W'O ...... __ •• _ .. 
66 

" . 
".. . 
Sub-clause (2) empowers a railway administration to enter upon an, 
lands adjoining the railway and to do all works necessary for the·purpoIe 
of repairing or preventing a slip or accident. 
Sub-clause (3) lays down that the Central Government on receipt of 
report under sub-clause (1) or (2) may direct that the work be stopped 
or be carried out on such conditions as may be specified by the Ontral 
Government. 
Clause 14-Sub-cla~se (1) provides that no suit shall lie agail11lt the 
railway administration to recover any amount for any damage or lOll 
caused in exercise of the powers conferred by clauses 10 to-
Sub-clause (2) provides that the amount of damage or loss shall be 
paid or tendered to the persons and if any dispute arises as to tile sull-
ciency of the amount or as to the persons entitled to receive such 
amount, the same shall be referred to the District Judge who shall decide 
it as an appeal under section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
Clause 15 provides for the nature of accommodation works and the 
circumstances in which such accommodation works may be carried out 
by a railway administration, . 
Clause 16-Sub-clause (1) provides that an owner or occupier of any 
land or the State Government or a local authority desiring any additional 
accommodation work may require the r"ilway administration to carry out 
such work at the cost of such owner, occupier, the State Government or 
the local authority, 
SUb-clause (2) provides that the works carried on under sub-section 
(1) shall be maintained at the cost of the owner, occupier, the State Go-
vernment or the local authority at whose request the works were done • . 
Sub-clause (3) lays down that in case of any difference between tlJe 
railway administration and the .owner, occupier or the State Government 
or the local authority, in relation to the necessity of or expenses incurred. 
on the construction of accommodation works, the same shall be referred 
to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final. 
Clause 17 provides that the Central Government may require boun .. 
dary marks or fences to be provided by a railway administration and, 
further provides that suitable gates, chainS, bars, etc., may be erected and 
renewed at level crossing or that person. be employed by a railwayadmi-
nistration to open and close such gates, chains or bars. etc. 
Clause 18 provides for construction of over close bricl~ and under-
bridges at a level crolsing at the instance of the State Government or 
the local authority in the interest of pUblic safety. 
CZ4tfBe 19 lays down that no railway shall be opened. lor the public 
carriage' ·of passengers until .the Central Government has sanctioned the 
opening thereof. 
Clause 20 lays down the formalities to be comp1i~with before 
tanction to the opening of a railway is -given by the Central Government 
Clause 21 lays down that the proviSions of clauses 19 and 20 shall !lpply 
to the opening of: additibnal lines of railway. de~~tion lines. o~ni~g o~ , 
stations, junctions, level crossings, introduction of electric ·traction, etc. 

68 
Clauae 22 provides that where an accident has occurred on a railway 
r~sultinl ina temporary suspension of traffic such railway may 
be opened for the public carriage of passengers without prior 
inspection by the Commissioner if the railway servant in charge 
of the works undertaken by reason of the accident certifies that 
opening of the lines of rails, works and temporary· diversion wlll not be 
attended with danger to the public and notice of the opening of such 
ifnes of rails, works or other diversion is sent by telegraph to the Com-
missioner. 
Clause 23 empowers the Central Government to close railway opened. 
for the public carriage of passengers on receipt of the opinion of the 
Commissioner. 
Cl4uae 2. lays down the conditions for re-opening of closed railway. 
Clcua8 25 enjoins on a railway administration a duty to obtain the 
previous sanction of the Central Government before using any rolling 
stock of a design or type different from that already running on any sec-
tion of the railway. 
Clause 26 provides that the powers of the Central Government relating 
to opening of railways may be delegated to the Commissioner subject to 
such conditions as may be specified. 
Clause 27 provides inter alila that the Central Government, before 
openillg a railway for the public carriage of passengers may make rules 
in respect of the duties of railway administration and the CommiSSioner, 
the arrangements to be made and the formalities to be observed before 
such opening of railway. 
Clause 28-Sub-clause (1) empowers the Central Government to fix 
rates for the carriage of passengers and goods and specify the conditions 
subject to which such rates shall apply. 
Sub-clause (2) empowers the Central Go~nt to fix rates or 
other charges including demurrage and wharfage and the conditions 
subject to which such rates or charges shall apPly. 
Cluuse 29 empowers the Central Government to classify commoditiel 
and alter rates therefor . 
. Cl4ure 30 empowers a railway administration to charge station to 
ltation rate, iDcreue, redUCe od caru;el such rates and withdraw, alter 
or amend the conditions attached to such rate and to charge any Ium~ 
sum rate. 
Cla.1IoIe 31 provides for establishment of a Railway Rates Tribunal 
!\nd quaUftcations of persons who may be Chairman and members of such 
Tribunal, etc. 
Clause 32 provides that the Tribunal may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, appoint ofBcers and employees for th. 
etBcient discharge of its functions under Chapter VUe 
Claue 33 lays down that the TrIbunal may stt at such places I\S it 
mayftnd convenient. 
Clause 34 provides for the. nature of campIaf'ftts against a raUwa,v 
administration Which may be made to the TrlbUDaL 

. ,~ 
, 
tlause 35 lays down the bar on the jurisdiction of Tribunal in certain 
matters such as cl8lSiftcation or re-classification of a commodity, fixation 
of wharfage and demurrage charges, fares levied for the carriage of 
passengers and freight levied for the carriage of luggage, parcels, etc. 
Clause 36 provides that the Tribunal shall be a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 for the purpose of taking evidence on oath, 
etc., and shall also be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of 
.ection 195 and ChaJj!ter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
CLause 37 lays down that the Central Government may make a refer-
eJ)ce to the Tribunal in respect of ml\tters specified in section 35. 
Clll'Use 38 enjoins on the Central Government a duty to give assi'S-
tance to the Tribunal. 
CLause 39.-(a) Provides that where lower rates are charged, the 
burden of proving that such lower rate does not amount to undue 
preference shall lie on the railway administration. 
(b) Provides that while considering the qu~tion of undue pre-
ference the Tribunal may take into consideration whether such lower 
rate charge is necessary in the interest of pUblic. 
Clause 40 provides for the finality of the decision of the Tribunal. 
Clause 41 bars the jurisdiction of courts in respect of matters which 
the Tribunal is empowered to deal with or decide. 
C1,ause .42 enunciates the reliefs the Tribunal may grant. 
Clause 43 confers on the Tribunal power of revision in certain 
circumstances. 
Clause 44 provides that the order of the Tribunal shall be a decree ot 
the civil court and shall be executed accordingly. 
Clause 45 provides that the Tribunal shall make an annual report to 
the Central Government of its proceedings. 
Clause 46 empowers the Tribunal to make regulations with the 
previous approval of the Central Government. Such regulations may 
inter aUa be made in .regard. to' the award of costs referen~ of any 
question to a member or oftlcer of the Tribunal for report the right of 
audience, the scale of fees, etc:. . ' 
C14use 47 provides for exhibition of timings of trains and table of 
tares at every station. 
Clau.'te 48 provides for issUe of tickets, the particulars to be given 
on each ticket and also provides for display of hours at station during 
which tickets may be i .. uecl. 
ClaUBe ~ lays down that the ticket lhall be deemed to have beea 
iasued subject to t~ availability of aacommodatlcm in the claII and for 
the train for which it is issued and provides for refund of difference of 
fare if the journey is performed in lower Cl8SL 
Clauae 50 provides for cancellation of ticket and .refund therefor. 
ClGue 51 prohibitlS the trazaater of tickets iasued in the name of a persoJL 
Clause 52 p.rovide. lot' exhibition of PUI and ticket durin, the joUl'ne1 
or at the end of joumey and I\U'rendtr thereof. . . . 

'. ,.". I" ........ ." 
Cl4use 53 prohibits the entry and travelling in any carriage withOut. 
proper pass or ticket. 
CUiuse 54 provides for the manner in which the person su1fering from 
infectious or contagiou'S disease may enter or travel in a carriage. 
Clause 55 empowers a .railway administration to fix the IlUlximum 
number of passengers which may be carried in each compartment. 
Clause 56 empowers a railway administration to earmark com part.:. 
ments. berths or seats in every train for exclusive use of females. 
Clause M enjoins on a railway administration a duty to provide and 
maintain efficient means of communication between passengers and the 
railway servants in charge of the train. 
, Clause 58.-Sub-clause (1) and (2) empower the Central Government 
to make rules regarding carriage of passengers and their luggage under 
Chapter VIII. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are 
enumerat,ed in sub-clause (2). 
Sub-clauses (3) and (4) empower the Central Government to provide 
for punishment for contravention of rules made under this clause and 
impose an obligation on railway administration to allow the inspection of 
such rules free of charge. 
Clause 59 imposes an obligation on every railway administration to 
maintain the rate-books Or other documents relating to rates and make 
them available for reference to any person without paym,ent of any fee. 
Clause 60 empowers railway administration to impose conditions 
with respect to receiving, forwarding, carrying or delivering of goods 
and maintenance of a copy thereof at each station where goods are receiv-
ed for carriage and make it available for reference of a,ny person without 
payment of any fee. 
Clcwae 61 provides for risk rates at which goods 'may be entrusted to 
railway for carriage. " • 
Clause 62 provides for execution of a forwarding note by a person 
entrusting goods for carriage by railway. 
CZ4'Ui1e 88.-SUb~ause (1) imposes an obligation on .railway adminis-
tratiOll to issue railway receip~ for the goods .entrusted to it. 
Sub-clause (2) lays down the circumstance under which the railway 
administration ,shall not be responsible for correctness of weight. descrip-
tion or classification or number of packages mentioned in railway receipt. 
Clause 64.-Sub-claUSe (1) provides for delivery of a statement of 
description of goods by owner, consignee or endorsee to a railway 
l1el'Vant. 
Slab-cl~use (2) empowenthe railway administration to refuse to 
accept the goods in the circumstances mentioned therein. 
Sub-clause (3) empowen the railway administration to charge the 
highest rate for any class of goods in cases mentioned therein. 
Sub-clauses (4)" (5) and .(S) empower the raUway administration to 
charge 1he rate not exceeding dou~le the highutrate for- any cluS of 
I~ in case the statement delivered under sub-clauae (1) is materially 
false and examination of geoiD' at' 'the cost of the oWner, etc. 

71 
ctou.e 85 lays down the manner of carriage of dangerous or ofteDllft 
100ds by railway. 
Cla.use 66 provides that the railway shall not carry any animal 
luffe.ri~g from infectious or contagious diaease. 
Clause 67 empowers the railway administration to carry goodS or t. 
devrate the route under the circumstances mentioned therein. 
Clause 68 prohibits a railway administration from giving undue or 
unreasonable preference in favoW' of any particular person or traftlc. 
Clause 69.-Sulb-clause (1) empowers the Central Government to give 
directions to. the railway administration with regard to- . 
(a) special facilities for the carriage of goods consigned by or to 
the Central Govemment or the State Government or any other JOOdt; 
(b) the route or the rate at which any goods may be carried; 
and 
(e) to restrict or refuse acceptance of any goods at or to any 
.tatlan. 
Sub-c1au'8e (2) provides that an o.rder under sub-clause (1) shan be 
in force for one year and may be renewed for a period not exceedin. 
one year at a time. 
Clause 70 empowers the Central Government to fix the maximum 
carrying capacity of a wagon or truck. 
Clause 71 provides for Jevy of punitive charges' for overloading a 
.wagon. 
Cba.use 72 p.rovides for passing of property in the consignment covered 
by a rail way receipt. 
Clause 7a lays down the right of stoppage in transit by consignor as 
an unpaid vendor and right of railway administration for unpaid f.reight. 
Clause 74 prOvides for delivery of the consignment on surrender of 
railway receipt. 
Clause 75 provides for the manner in which delivery of consignment or 
sale proceeds may be made where two or more persons claim the same. 
Clause 76 gives right to railway administration to re-measure .re-weigh 
or re-classify any consignment and. re-calculate the freight and other 
chargeo; and to collect any amount that has been omitted. 
Clause 77 provides for weighment of consignment at the request of 
the consignee or the endorsee and the circumstances under which suell 
weighment may not be permitted. 
Cla.use 78 absolves the railway administration from liabilities for deli-
very of consignment on production of railway receipt. 
C'Z4tI.se 79 provides for' open delivery of consignment if received in 
damaged condition. 
Clause 80 lays down that the consignee or the endorsee shall take 
delivery of the consignment or part thereof and in case of failure to take 
delivery wharfage charges. may be levied. . 
CZtlUe 81provldes for detention of consignment, part thereot er any 
other consignment of • penon from whom any charges are recoverable 

._ .. _...... ......."Ioy ._. • ._-_ ...... , 
72 
by a railway administration and the manner of diapoaal of such consign-
ment and rendering the surplus of sale proceeds to the person' entitled 
thereto. _ 
Clauae 82 provides for treating certain consignments as unclaimed 
and the manner of disposal of such consignments and rendering the 
lurp!us of sale proceeds to the person entitled thereto. 
Cla.use 83 provides for disposal of perishable consignment in the cir-
cumstances mentioned therein. 
Clause 84 lays down that right of sale under clauses 81, 82 and &3 
shall not be a bar to the recovery of freight or other charges, etc. by 
railway administration by suit. 
CZause 85.-sub-clauses (1) (2) empower the Central Government 
to make rules for carrying out the purposes of Ohapter IX. The 
matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Gov-
ernment are enumerated in detail in sub-clause (2). Sub-clauses (3) and 
(4) empower the Central Government to provide for punishment for 
contravention of rules made under this clause and impose an obligation 
on railway administration to allow the inspection of such rules tree of 
lberle. 
Clause 86 defines certain words and expressions used in Chapter X. 
Clause 87.-Sub-clause (1) empowers the' Central Government to de-
clare a station to be a notified station for the purposes of removing 
consignment without delay under the circumstances specified therein. 
Sub-clause (2) lays down the manner of giving notice of gooQs carried 
to a notified station. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that goods not removed from a notified 
station within seven days from the termination of transit may be sold 
unde:r sub-clause (1) of clause 88 by public a~ction. 
Sub-clause (4) provides that if the goods to be sold include essential 
commodities, the copy of statement may be sent to the repre-sentative 
of the Central Government, the State Govemment and the District 
Magistrate within whose local limits such notified station is situated. 
Clause 88 provides for the manner of disposal of goods not removed 
from notified 'Stations. 
CZause 89.-Sub-~laWie (1) lays down that railway administration may 
retain the freight and other charges and render the surplus to the per-
Ion entitled thereto. 
Sub-clause (2) provides that realisation of freight and other charps 
by public auction of the goods shall not bar recovery by suit of freight IIJld 
other charges by railway administration. 
Su1>clause (3) provides that any goods sold under sub-clause (1) shaD 
vest in the buyer or the transferee free from all encumbrances. 
Clause 90 empowers the Central Government to make rules for tM 
purposes of Chapter X. The matters in respect of, which such rl,Iles may 
~ made are enumerat,d in s\lb-elause (2)', ~I'" ' 

73 
CUw.se 91 'provi4es that a railway administration shall be .responsi-
ble far -the 1oS8~ destruction, damage, etc., "f--any consigr,:a:ment ariJing 
from any cause except the causes mentioned therein. 
ClaUse 92 laY'S' down, the' responsibility of the .railway administration 
in case the goods are loaded or delivered at a siding not belonging to a 
railway administration. 
Clause 93', lays down that a railway administration shall not be' res-
ponaible for aoy destruction, deterioration or damage of goods carried 
in open or defective vehicles at the request of the consignor. 
Clause 94-laY8 down that a railway administration shall not be liable 
for any 108'8, destruction, etc., for delay or detention in transit for the 
reuons beyond the control if railway administration or without negli-
gence on its part. 
Cl4ve 95 lays down that in case of traffic passing over railways in 
India and railways in foreign country the railway administration shall 
not be liable for any loss, destruction, etc., unless such loss has taken 
place over the railways of the railway administration. 
Clause 96 absolves a railway administration from responsibility in the 
absence of negligence or misconduct on its part for any loss, destruction, 
etc., of the consignment carried at owner's risk rate. 
ClGuse !Y1 provides for the responsibility of railways in C8'Ses of con-
signments which are in defective condition or are defectively packed. 
ClaU8e 98 lays down the nature of responsibility of railway admini-
stration after termination of transit. 
Clause 99 deals with the responsibility of the railway admini$tl'atlon 
for any loss, destruction, etc., of luggage. 
ClaU8e 100 absolves the railway administration of its responsibility 
fur any loss, destruction or injury to aJ;limal arising from freight or res-
tiveness of the animal or from overloading of wagon by the consignor. 
Clause 101 provides for exoneration from liability of railway adminis-
tration in cases specified therein. 
Clause 102 lays down the extent of monetary liability of the railways 
in respect of loss, destruction, damage, etc., of a con$ignment. 
Clause 103 provides for examination by railway administration of 
"oods of which value has been declared. 
Clause 104 provides the railway administration to which and the 
period within which the notice of claim for compensation or .refUnd of 
overcharge _ shaU be given for lOBS.' destruction, etc., of the goods carriecS 
by railway or for overcharges. 
Cia,," 105 lays down the railway administration against whom and 
the court where suit for damages, etc. of goods may be filed. 
ezau.e 106 absolves the railway adIWnistration of its relponsibilities 
and bar suit against it in cases the claim has been paid to a person on 
production of railway receipt. 
Clause 107 lays down the railway administration against whioh and the 
court where thE' suit for loss of life or persona] injury of a IH'ssenger may 
be filed. 

· . 
Clause 108 provides that burden of proof regarding monetary losi in 
suits for compensation ,for any loss, destruction, etc., lies on the person 
claiming compensation. 
Clause 109 deals with the liability of a railway administration in res-
pect of accidents at sea. 
Clause 110 empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry 
out the parposes of Chapter XI. The matters in respect of which the 
rules shall be made by the Central Government are enumerated in sub-
clause (2). 
c.tausc 111-Sub-clause (1) imposes an obligation on the station master 
or the railway $erv~mt in charge of the section where any railway acci-
dent takes place to give n notice of such accident to the District Magis-
trate, Superintendent of Police, etc. 
Sub-clause (2) imposes all obligation on the railway administration 
to give a notice of such accident to the State Government and the Com-
missioner. 
Clause 112 empowers the Commissioner to hold inquiry into any rail-
way accident resulting in the loss of human life or grievous hu.rt to a 
passenger or serious damage to railway property. 
Clause 113 provides that in cases where the Commissioner does not hold 
an inquiry under clause 112 the same may be held by the railway 
administration. 
Cl'ause 114 empowen; the Commissioner with the powers of the civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the matters 
enumerated therein. 
Clause 115 protects the person against civil or criminal -proceedings 
in respect of any evidence given by him in an inquiry before the Com-
missioner. 
Clau.se 116 deals with the notice of the inquiry the procedure to be 
followed and the preparation of the report. 
Clause 117 provides that no inquiry or investigation to be made if the 
Commissioner of Inquiry is appointed under the Commission of In-
quiry Act, 1952 to inquire into any accident, etc. 
Clause 118 provides for an inquiry by the railway administration in 
ar:cidents other than those mentioned. in clause 111. 
Clause 119 imposes an obligation on the railway administration to 
send a return of accidents to the Central Government. 
Clause 120 empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry 
out the purposes of Chapter XII. The matters in respect of which rules 
shall be made by the Central Government are enumerated in detail in 
~b-.clause (2) of this clause. 
Clause 121 deals with the various words and expressiCHlS used in 
Chapter XIII. 
Clau.se 122 provides for the extent of liability of the r8ilway adminis. 
tration in case of death or injury to a passenger or damage to his good. 
in an accideDt. 'j ~ ...... 
(:'atl,~e 123 provides for the appointment of Claims Commissioners. 

75 
Clause 124 lays down the persons who can make an application for 
.:ompcnsation under clause 122 and the time limit within which such 
applic,ltion may be made. 
Clause 125 provides for giving interim relief by railway administra-
tion in case of accidents, 
Clause 126 provides for the procedure to be fo~lowed and powers to 
be exercised by the Claims Commissioner. 
Clause 127 empowers the Claims Commissioner to decide the question 
as to the liability of the railway administration to pay compensation a'!1d 
the amount thereof and the person entitled to receive the same. 
Clause 128 lays down the procedure to be followed and compensation 
to be paid by the Claims Commissioner in case of death of a passenger bi 
an accident. 
Clause 129 provides for direction by the Claims Commissioner for 
medical examination of persons injured in an accident. 
Clause 130 provides for the manner in which the rates of compen-
sation payable in respect of injury, compensation for any loss of goods 
shall be determined by the Claims Commissioner. 
Cla~ 131 imposes an obligation on raHway administration to de-
posit the amount of compensation with the Claims Commissioner and 
payment thereof by the Claims Commissioner to the claimants. 
Clause 132 provides for an appeal to the High Court against the order 
of the Claims Commissioner and the limitation therefor and the finality 
of the order of the Claims Commissioner. 
C.lause 133 saves the right of a person to claim compensation recover-
able under any other law. 
Clause 134 empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of Chapter XIII. The matters in respect of 
which rules shall be made by the Central Government are enumerated 
in detail in sub-clause (2) of this clause. 
Clause 135 deals with the deftnition of certain expressions used in 
Chapter XIV. •. ,. "" '1~~ 
Clause 136 provides that this Chapter shall not apply to a railway 
servant to whom the Factories Act, 1948 or the Mines Act, 1952 or 
the Merchant Shipping Act. 1958 applies. 
Clauses 137 and 138 provide for limitation of hours of work and 
periodical rest for various categories of railway servants. 
t.1ause 139 lays down that a railway servant shall remain on duty .. 
until he is rel\eved. . 0. ',. '~~ ..... ·1 .. 
~"r~'Vlltll»"" ",PI." .. . 
Clouse 140 deals with the appointment of the stp, " ' '. " 
labour and their duties. 
Clause 141 empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of Chapter XIV. The matters in respect of 
which rules are to be made by the Central Government arE' en\1merqt~'d 
in st~b-~l~usc (2). 

76 
Clause 142 provides for punishment for travelling or attempting to 
travel fraudulently without a pass or ticket. 
Clause 143 provides for levy of excess charge and fare for travelling 
proper pass or ticket or beyond authorised distances and for punishment 
in case of refusal Qr failure to pay fare and excess charge. 
Clause 144 empowers the railway servant to remove persons from 
railway on failure or refusal to pay fare and excess charge. 
{,1ause 145 provides for execution of bond for good behaviour in 
cases mentioned therein. 
Clause 146 provides for punishment for interfering with means of 
communication in a train. 
, Clause 147 provides for penalty for unauthorised sale or transfer of 
ticket. 
Clause 148 provides for penalty for unauthorised carrying on of bust-
ne" of procuring and supply of railway tickets. 
Clause 149 prohibits unauthorised hawking and begging on railway 
an,d puuishment ·therefor. 
Clause 150 provides for punishment for drunke1ness or nuisance on 
:1 railway. ' 
Clause 151 provides for punishment for obstruction of railway ser-
vant whUe -on duty. 
Clause 152 provides for punishment for trespass upon a railway. 
,Cl.cw.aeB 153 and 154 respectively provide for punishment for making 
false .claiJXI. in case of injury or death of passenger or loss, damage, etc., 
of goods. 
,ClII-uses 155 and 156 respectively provide for punishment for mali-
ciously wrecking or attempting to wreck a train or for causing any damage 
or destruction of railway property. 
Clause 157 provides for punishment for maliciously hurting or attempt-
ing to hurt persons travelling by railway. 
Clauses 158 and 159 resp~ctive~y provide for punishment for endan-
gering safety of persons travelling by railway by wilful act or omission 
or negligent act or omission. 
Clause 160 provides for punishment Cl,lf a person for refusing to leave 
a reserved compartme.nt in which no berth or seat is reserved for him or 
for resisting lawful entry into a reserved compartment. 
Clauses 161 and 162 respectively provide for punishment for enter-
ing a carriage in motion and trQvelling on roof, steps or engine of a train. 
Clause 163 provide~ for punishment for altering or defacing a pass or 
ticket. 
, . 
{'14use 164 provides for punishment for contravention, of any pro-
vision of Chapter XlV or rules made thereunder. 
Clause 165 provides for punishment for driver or conductor of any 
vehicle on the premises of n railway for disobeying d.irections given by 
the railway servant. 
Clause 166 provides for puniRhment for a person opening or brf'aklng 
, lovel crossing gate 
, 

Clause 167 lays down the punishment for eattle·trespass. 
Clause 168 lays dnwn the punishment "for any person negligently 
driving or leading a vehicle Cleross an unmanned level crosSing. 
Clause 169 provides for punishment for entering a carriage or other 
place reserved for females. 
Clause 170 lays down punishment for any pel'!llon furnishing' 'fm. 
account of goods on requisition by railway servant. 
Clauses 171 and 172 respectively provide for punishme'ntfor unlarw-
fully bringing da'n,gerous and offe·nsive goods on a railway. 
Clause 173 provides for punishment for defacing public notices on 
raflway. 
Clause 174 prohibits smoking in a train when obje'Cied to by a.~ 
passenger and provides punishment therefor. 
ClaU'8e 17.5 provides for ,pu,nishmentfor travelling on a railway' by 
person suffering from infectious or contagious disease in conlraventioll 
of the provisions of this Bill. 
ClaUoSle 176 pr.ovides execution of bonG for good conduct by the 
guardian of a persen under the age of twelve years in cases 'of offenees 
mentioned therein. 
Clauses 177, 178 and 179 provide for levy of penalty on lltltl-GoWrn-
ment railways, mode of recovery at the penalty and that l~ ol·~ 
shall not preclude the Central Government from '~SO'l'ting to any 6th@' 
action against such railway" 
Clause 180 provides for pllnishment for a railway servant for dtwlk~ .. 
ness on duty. 
Clause 181 provides for punishment for a railway servant on duty' for 
ahandoriing. train without authority. 
Clause 182 provides for punishment for a'llypeIWn includtng a rail· 
way servant for causing obstruction to tl'ains. 
Clause 183 provides for punishment for railway servants on duty for 
endangering the safety of any person travelling on a railway. 
craue 184 lays down the punishment for a railway servant unneee ... 
sarily obstructing level crossing. 
c.tawe 185 provides for plInishment for a railway servant fumisblllg 
false returns. 
Clause 186 provides for punishment for a railway servant for maldng 
a false report in claims enquiry. 
Clause 187 provides for punishment for' a railway servant allowing 
persons suffering from infectious or contagious disease to travel with-
out making arrangements. 
CUlUse 188 provides for puniRhment for a railway servant omitting to 
give notice of accident. ' 
Clouse 189 provides for :\l'rest of a person without warrant fOf the 
offences mentioned therein. 

,8 
ClGUBe 190 provides for ppwer of arrest of person likely to abscond or 
not givipg correct name or address. 
Clauses 191 and 192 respectively provide for the court for trying the 
offences and the place of trial. 
Clause 193 empowers the railway administration to provide or main-
tain any mode of transport for the purposes mentioned therein. 
Clause 194 provi~ for an exemption to the railway administration 
from the payment of tax to any local authority unless directed by the 
Central Government. 
(..'lause 195 provides for exemption to the railway administration from 
the payment of tax to any local authority in respect of advertisement 
made on any p~rt of the railway unless directed by the Central Govern-
ment. 
Clause 196 provides that no civil court shall entertain any suit on 
proceeding for anything done or action taken or omission made by the 
Central Government or by the railway administration. 
Clause 197 provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceed-
ings shall lie against the Central Government, railway administration, 
railway servant or any other person for anything done in good faith or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Bill. 
Clause 198 provides for restril!ttion on attachment of rolling stock, 
machinery, plant, tools, etc., for the purposes of traffic on a railway in 
execution of any decree. 
Clause 199 lays down that the railway servants shall be deemed to be 
public servants for the purposes of Chapter IX and section 409 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860. 
Clause 200 provides that no railway servant can purchase or bid for 
any property put to auction by the railway or engage in any trade. 
Clause 201 provides for the procedure to be followed by a railway 
servant for delivery of property detained by him to railway adminis-
tration. 
Clause 202 provides that entries in the records or other documents of 
the railway administration shall be admitted in evidence and the method 
of their proof. 
Clauses 203 and 204 provide for the manner of service of notice on 
the railway administration and by the railway administration respec-
tively. 
Cl.ause 205 provides that where a notice, etc., is served by post it 
shall be deemed to have been served if it was properly addressed and 
registered. 
C.lause 206 provides for representation of railway administration in 
proceedings before Civil, Criminal and other Courts. 
Clause 207 empowers the Central Government to exempt any rail-
way' from all or any provisions of this· Bill. 

79 
Clause 208 provides for the matters supplemental to the definition 
of railway and· railway servant. 
Clause 209 empowers the Central Government to make rules generally 
to carry out the purposes of this Bill. 
Clause 210 provides that any rule and regulation made under 
this Bill shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
Clause 211 seeks to repeal the Indian Railways Act, 1890 and saves 
any action taken under the repealed Act. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
.10· ................. 'II ..... 
. I.:..~""'~· 
_ ..-. ... _ •• .,.~.~ ......... ,.10, ... ~~: ••• 
The Bill seeks to repeal and re-enact the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
TM; ~iij. q~" n()t provide for the constitutioQ. of any new authority nor 
does it include any new provisions whi~h would involve additional ex-
penditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. The expenses on the 
administration of the Government railways are separately voted by Par-
liament and not by virtue of the provisions of the Railways Act. The 
provisions of the Bill, if enacted and· brought into operation, would not, 
therefore, involve any expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
flo 
• 

MEMORANDt!M UEGARDING DELmATED LEGISLATION 
Cla!lse 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
:r~e6 to carry out the purpQ~~s, of Cl\"t~i ~ ~~~ ,o~ning of 
raJlways, The rules to be made, inlter alia, reblte to the duties of raU-
way administration and the Commissioner in regard to the opening of 
a railwa f for the public carriab'e of passengers, arrangements to be made 
and the formalities to be complied with before opening a railway for the 
public c'lrriage of passengers, the cases in which and the extent to which 
the procedures prescribed in this Chapter may be dispensed with. 
Clalose 46 of the Bill confers powers on the Railway Rates Tribunal 
to make, with the previous approval of the Central Government, regu-
lations consistent with the Bill and the rules generally. The Tribunal 
under tl-is clause may make regulations relating to the procedure for 
the effective discharge of its {ullctions, the award of costs, the reference 
of any question to a member or an officer of the Tribunal or any other 
person tor rfport after holding a local inquiry, the right of audience 
before the Tribunal, the disposal of any proceedings before it and the 
scale of fees for and in connection with the proceedings before +h", 
Tribunal. 
Clause 58 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rule~ 
to carry out the purposes of Chapter VIII. The matters in respect of 
which such rules may be made, inter alia, include reservation of seats 
or berths in trains, the amount of refund for cancellation of a ticket, the 
circumstances under which change of names of passengers having 
reserved seats or berths may be permitted, the carriage of luggage and 
the conditions for keeping luggage in the cloak rooms, the diseases 
which are infectious or contagious, conditions subject to which p8sseDgers 
suffering from infectious or contagious diseases Rlay be carried in any 
train. 
Clause 85 of tbe Bill confers powers on the Central Government to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of Chapter IX relating to 
carriage of gf)ods. The matters in respect of which rules may be made, 
inter aUa, relate to, the infectious or contagious diseases, the dangerous 
or often~,ive goods, rates of penalty charges for overloadin'g, the charges 
paya,?le for weighment, the manner of delivering a consignment with-
out railway receipt, the rnanneT Of delivery of consignment Or its sale 
proceeris to the person entitled thereto, the giving of open delivery and 
partial delivery certificate and the manner of sale of cons~gnment or 
part thereof, 
CIs use ~O empowers the Central Government to make rules for the 
purposes of Chapter X relating to goods booked to notified stations. The 
matters in respect of. which rules may be made relate to the factors to 
which the Central Government shall have regard. under clause (e) of the 
. first proviso of aub-section (1) of section 87, the fonn and the mann~ In 
which an. application be made under sub-section (2) of section 87, the 
{II 

82 
form in which the statement is required to be exhibited under sub-
section (3) of section 87, the manner in which the days of public auction 
may be notified and the manner of crediting to the railway administra-
tion the price of goods referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of 
the proviso to sub-trectlon (3) of section 88. 
Clause 110 empowers the Central Government to make rules fOf 
carrying out the purposes of Chapter XI relating to the responsibility of 
the rail way administration as carriers. The matters in respect of which 
rules may be made relate to the manner of packing of goods entrusted to 
railway administration, the goods for the purpose of sub~use (3) of 
section 98 and the amount on the gross weight of the consignment pay-
able by the railway administration fOr the loss, destruction, etc., of any 
consignment. 
Clause 120 of the Bill confers powers on the Central Government to 
make rules to carry out the purposes of Chapter XII relating to accidents. 
The matters in respect of which rules may be made, inter czlia, relate 
to the injury to property which may be considered serious, the forms of 
notice and the particulars of the accident, the manner of signing the 
notices, the duties of the Commissioner of Railway Safety, railway 
administration, railway servant, police officer and Magistrate on the 
occurrence of an accident, the nature of inquiry to be made into the 
causes of accident, etc. 
Clause 134 of the Bill confers powers on the Central Government to 
make rules to ('arry out the purposes of Chapter XIII relating to liability 
of railway administration for death and injury to passenger due to 
accident. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made 
relate to remuneration and allowances to be paid to the Claims Com-
missioner, compensation payable for death, the nature of injuries for 
which compensation may be paid and the amount of such compensation, 
the manner in which claims for compensation may be inquired into and 
determined by the Claims Commissioner, the matters in respect of which 
persons may be chosen to assist the Claims Commissioner under sub-
section (4) of section 126 and the functions of such persons. 
Clause 141 of the Bill confers powers on the Central Government to 
make rules for the purpose of Chapter XIV relating to regulation of 
hours of work and periods of rest. The matters in respect of which 
the rules may be made in this Chapter relate, inter alia, to the authori-
ties who may deels.re the employment of any railway servant as essen-
tially intermittent or intensive, the appeals against such declaration, the 
category of staff that may be specified under sub-clauses (iv) , (v) and (vi) 
o! clause (c) of section 135. the authorities by whom exemptions 
under sub-section (3) of section 138 may be made, the railway servants 
or classes of railway servants to whom clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of 
section 133 apply and the periods of rest to be granted to them and the 
payment of sup~rvisors of railway labour and their functions. 
Clause 210 of the Bill confers powers on the Central Government to 
make -rules generally to carty out the purposes of the Bill. 
As the matters in respect of which rules ~nd regulations under the 
aforesaid provisions are sought to be made are matters of procedure ,ar 
detail or matters in respect of which it is not practicable to make express 
provision in the legislation itself. the delegation of legislative power 
19 of a norm!!l character. 

I..OK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to Railways. 
(Shri Madhawcw SindiA, 
Mi.ister of State in tbe 
Depa.rtment of Ra.il1DGt/8) 