LOK SABHA 
CORHIGENDUM No. 2 
to 
THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL'S (DUTIES, POWERS 
AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 1969 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha ) 
1. In the docket psge ,-
for "(Shri Morarji Desai, Deputv Prime Minis_ter 
- and Minister of Finance.)rt 
read It (Shrimati Indira Gandhi! Prime Minister, 
Minister of Finance, M1nister of Atomic 
Energy and Minister of Planning.)" 
NEW DELHI; 
July 22. 1~9 
ASadha 31, 18 (Saka) 

·~ As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
_1", t' . , I 
THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL'S 
(DUTIES, l'NWERS AND CONDITIONS OF 
SERVICE) BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
to detenmine the conditions of service 'of the Comptrol.ler -and Auditor 
GeneTal of India and to prescribe his duties and power and for mat-
ters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1 .. This Act may be called the Comptroller and Auditor-General's Short 
S (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1969. title. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Deftni-
(a) "accounts", in re~ation to commercial undertakings of a G9v- tions. c· el"nment, includes trading, manufacturing and profit and loss accounts 
10 and balance sheets and other subsidiary accounts; 
(b) "appropriation accounts" means accounts which relate the 
expenditure brought to account during a financial year, to the several 
. c· . items specified in the law made in accordance with the provisions 
of the Constitution or of the Government of Union Territories Act, 

Salary. 
Term of 
office. 
Leave. 
1003, tor the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund 20 of 1961. 
of India or of a State, or of a Union territory having a Legislative, 
Assembly, as the case may be; 
(c) "Comptroller and Auditor-General" means the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India appointed under article 148 of the COD- S 
stitution; 
(d) "State" means a State specified in the First Schedule to the 
Consti tu tion; 
(e) "Union" includes, a Union territory, whether having a Legis-
lative Assembly or not. 10 
CHAPTER II 
SALARY AND <YI1HER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR-GENERAL 
3. There shall be paid to the Comptroller and Auditor-General a salary 
at the rate of four thousand rupees per mensem: r S 
Provided that if a person who, immediately before the date of assum-
ing office as the Comptroller and Auditor-General, was in receipt of, or, 
being eligible so to do, had elected to draw, a pension (other than a dis-
ability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the 
Government of the Union or any of its predecessor Governments, or 20 
under the Government of a State or any of its predecessor Governments, 
his Salary in respect of service as Comptroller and Auditor-General shall 
be reduced-
(a) by the amoUltt of that pension; and 
(b) if he had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion 2, 
of the pension due to him in respect of such previous service, the com-
muted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension; 
and 
(c) if he had, before assuming office, received, or become eligible 
for receiving, a retirement gratuity in resped of such previoWi lei'- 30 
vice, by the pension equivalent of that gratuity. 
4. The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall hold office for a term, 
of six years from the date on which he assumes such oftlce: 
Provided that he may, at any time, by writing under his hand address-
ed to the President, resign his office. 
E:rplanation.-For the purpose of this section, the term of six years 
in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor-General holding oftlce imme-
diately before the comimencement of this Act, shall be computed from 
the date on which he had assumed oftlce. 
3, 
5. (1) A person who, immediately before the date of assuming oftlce 4O 
II!! the Comptroller and Auditor-General, was in the service of Govern· 
ment may be granted during his tenure of oftlce but not thereafter, leave 
in accordance wi.th the rules for the time being applicable to the Service 
to which he belonged before such date and he shall be entitled to carry 
forward the amount of leave standing at his credit on such date, notwith •• , 
standing anything contained in section 6. 

3 
(2) .Any other person who is appointed as the Comptroller and Audi-
tor-General may be granted leave in accordance with such rules as are for 
the ti~ being applicable to a member of the Indian Administrative Ser-
vice. 
5 .(3) The power to grant or refuse leave to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General and to revoke or curtail leave granted to him, shall vest in the 
President. 
6. U) A person who, immediately before the date of assullling office 811 
ItJae :Comptroller and AUditor-General, was intbe service of Government 
1.0 ...... 1 _ deemed to have retired from service on the date on which he 
~ters upon of6ce as the Comptroller and Auditor--General and shall, on 
~i .. ~ .thesaid office, be eligible to-
(a) such pension as JDjay be admissible to him in accordance with 
the rules for the time being applicable to the Service to which he 
1'5 beloDCed, . his service as Comptroller and Auditor-General beini 
nekonedfor the purposes of those rules as continuing approved 
_mea countinar for pension in the Service to which he belon&ed; and 
(b) an additional pension of six hundred rupees per annum in 
<NIQ)eet ,of each completed year of service as Comptroller and Auditor-
.20 General, such service in respect of the person holding office as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General immediately before the commence-
ment of this Act being computed from the date on which he had 
entered upon offi.ce as the Comptroller and Auditor-General: 
Provided that the aggregate of all pensions payable to a person who 
2, had held ofBce as the Comptroller and Auditor-General, inclusive of the 
OGIIUDuted portion, if any, of his pension and the pension equivalent of 
<6e retirement gratuity, if any, which may have been admissible to him 
under the rules for the time being applicable to the Service to which he 
,",-ed. shall not exceed thirteen thousand, three hundred and thirty 
30 three rupees and thirty three paise per annum. 
(2) A .person who, immediaC)ely before the date or assuming office 
'u the Comptroller and Auditor-General, was in receipt of, or, had be-
eom.e eligible for receiving, a pension in respect of any previous service 
under Government, shall, on demitting office as the Comptroller and 
3S Auditor-General, be eligible t8 an additional pension of six hundred 
rupees per annum in respect of each completed year of service as Compo 
rtroller and Auditor-General: 
Ptovided that the aggregate of all pensions payable to a perSon who 
had held office as the Comptroller and Auditor.General, inclusive of the 
o commuted portion, if any, of his pension and the pension equivalent of 
4 the retirement gratuity, if any, received or receivable by him shall not 
exceed thirteen thousand, three hundred and thirty three rUpees and 
.... iriy -:three . paise per annum. 
(3) Any other person who is appointed as the Comptroller and Auditor-
4S General shall be eliiible on his retirement to suchpensioll not e:a:ceedlng 
dliI1een thoasand, tbree hudred and thirty three rupees andthiriy· thne 
paise .. annum as the President ma". by order, determine. 
Pension. 

Commuta-
\\onot 
I'GI\OD.. 
Right to 
subscribe 
to General 
Provident 
Fund. 
Other 
conditions 
ot 
iervice. 
Comptrol-
lerand 
Auditor. 
General 
to compile 
ac.counts 
of the 
Union 
and 
States. 
" ,. 'I'he Civil Pensions (Commutation) Rules for the time being in force 
shall, with such ada-ptations as may be made therein by the President, 
apply to a person who had held office as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General. 
8. Every person holding office as the Comptroller and Auditor-General 5 
shall be entitled to subscribe to the General Provident Fund (Central 
Services). 
9. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the other condi-
tions of service of a person holding office as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General including his emoluments during any period of duty out of India 10 
and his travellinar allowance while travelling on duty, shall be determbled 
by the rules for the time being applicable to a member of the Indian Ad-
ministrative Service holdinit the rank of Secretary to the GoveJ'lUlMllt of 
India: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall have effect so as to ~ve a IS 
person, who immediately before the date of assumine office as the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General, was in the service of Gov8rament, Jeas 
favourable terms in respect of any of the matters aforesaid than those to 
which he would be entitled as a member of the Service to which be belonc-
ed, his service as Comptroller and Auditor-General beinr treated for the ae 
purpose or this proviso as continuing service in the Service to which he 
belonr ed. 
CHAPTER III 
DUTIES AND POWER OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL 
10. (1) The Comptroll~r and Auditor-General shall be responsible- 2S 
(a) for compiling the accounts of the Union and of each State from 
the initial and subsidiary accounts rendered to the audit and accounts 
offices under his control by treasuries, offices or departments responsi-
ble for the keeping of such accounts; and 
(b) for keeping such accounts in relation to any of the matters 30 
specified in clause (a) as may be necessary: 
Provided that the PresidE'nt as respects the accounts of the Union, and 
the Governor of a State as respects the account of that State.. may, 
after consultation with the Comptroller and AUditor-General, by order, 
relieve him from the responsibility for compiling the accounts of any 35 
particular service or department of the Union or a State, as the case may 
be: 
Provided further that the President may, after consultation with the 
Comptn Her and Auditor-General, by order, relieve him from :the respon-
sibility for keeping the accounts of any particular class or character. 40 
(2) Where, under any arrangement, a person other than the Compt-
l'oller and Auditor-General haa before the commencement of this Act 
been rE'sponsible- ' 
(i) for compiling the accounts of any particUlar service or de-
partment of the Union or a State, or 45 
(ii) for keeping the accounts of any particular class or charaeter, 
such arrangement shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), continue to be in force unless, after consultation With the 

5 
Comptroller and Auditor-General, it is revoked In the case referred to in 
clause (i), by an order of the President or the Governor of the State, as 
the case may, and in the case referred to in clause (ii), by an order of 
the President. 
5 11. The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall, from the accounts 
compiled 'by him or by any other person responsible in that behaU, prepare 
in each year accounts (including, in the case of accounts compiled by him, 
appropriation accounts) shoWing under the respective heads the annual 
receipts and disbursements for the purposes of the Union, of each State 
10 and of each Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, and shall sub-
mit those accounts to the President or the Governor of a State or Admi-
nistrator of the Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, as the case 
may be, on or before such dates as he may, with the concurrence of the 
Government concerned, determine. 
IS 12. The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall, in 80 far as the ac-
'Counts for the compilation or keeping of which he is responaible enable 
him so to do, give to the Union Government, to the State Governments or 
to the Governments of Union territories having Legislative Assemblies as 
the case may be, such information as they may, from time to time, require, 
20 and render such assistance in the preparation of their annual financial 
statements as they may reasonably ask for. 
30 
13. It shall be the duty of the Comptroller and Auditor-General-
(a) Ito audit dl expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India 
and of each State and of each Union tenitory having a Legislative 
Assembly and to ascertain whether the moneys shown in the accounts 
as having been disbursed were legally available for and applicable to 
the service or purpose to which· they have been applied or charged, 
and whether the expenditure conforms to tt'he authority which 
governs it; , 
(b) to audit all transactions of the Union and of the States re-
lating to Contingency Funds and Public Accounts; 
(c) to audit all trading, manufacturlng, profit and 108s accounts 
and balance sheets kept in any department of the Union or of a State; 
and in each case to report on the expenditure, transactions or accounts 80 
35 audited by him. 
Comptrol-
lerand 
Auditor_ 
General 
to prepare 
andlubmit 
accounts 
to the 
President, 
Governors 
of Stat. 
and Ad_ 
ministra-
tors of 
Union 
Territor-
ies hav-
in.~ Legis-
lative~­
.embU •. 
Comptrol_ 
lerand 
Auditor-
General 
to give 
informa_ 
tionand 
render 
assistance 
to the 
Union 
and 
States. 
General 
provisions 
relating 
to audit. 

Audit of 
expendi-
tureof 
bodies or 
authorities 
ftnanced 
from 
Union 
orSta'-
revenues. 
Functions 
of C0mp-
troller 
and 
Au..litol'-
General 
in the 
caaeof 
vanta or 
loans 
liven 
to other 
authori-
tias or 
bodies. 
Audit of 
recejpts 
of Union 
or States. 
Audit of 
accounta 
cd 
stores 
aDd 
aoek. 
6 
U. Where any boo.y or authority is errtirely financed by grants or loans 
from the :Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of any Union 
territory having a Legislative Assembly, the Comptroller and Auditor-
General shall, subject to the provisions of any law for the time being In 
force applicable to the body or authority, as the case may be, audit all S 
expenditure of that body or authority. 
15. (1) Where any grant or loan is given for any specific purpose from 
the Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of any Union territory 
having a Legislative Assembly to any authority or body, not being a 
foreign State or international organisation, the Comptroller .and Auditor- 10 
General shall scrutinise the procedures by which the sanctiODingautho-
rity satisfies itself as to the fulfilment of the conditions, subject to which 
such grants or loans were given and shall for this purpose have right of 
access, after giving reasonable previous notice, to the books and accounts 
of that authority or body: 1 S 
Provided that the President, the Governor of a State or the Adminis-
trator of a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, as the case may 
be, may, where he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do in the pubUc 
interest, by order, relieve the Comptroller and Auditor-General, after 
consultation with him, from making any such scrutiny in respeot of any 20 
body or authority receiving such grant or loan. 
(2) Except where he is authorised so to do by the PreSident, the Gover-
nor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory having a Lep 
lative Assembly, as the case may be, the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
shall not ,have, while exercising the powers conferred on him by sub- 25 
section (1), right of access to the books and accounts of any corporation 
to which any such grant or loan as is referred to in sub-section (1) is 
given jf the law by or under which such corporation has been establish-
ed provides for the audit of the accounts of such corporation by an agency 
other than the Comptroller and Auditor-General: 30 
Provided that no such authorisation shall be made except after con-
sultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General and except after 
giving the concerned corporation a reasonable opportunity of making 
representations with. regard to tflhe proposal to give to the Comptroller and 
Auditor..Qeneralright of access to its books and accounts. 3S 
U. It shall be the duty of the Comptroller md Auditor..,General to 
audit all receipts which are payable into the Consolidated Fund of Lndia 
and of each State and of each Union territory having a Legislative Assem-
bly and tosatillfy himself that the rules and procedures in that behalf are 
designed to secure an effective check on the assessment, collection and pro- 40 
per allocation ~ revenue and are being duly observed and to make for this 
purpose such examination of the accounts as he thinks fit and report 
thereon. ~ . .at 
17. The Comptroller and Auditor-General shalL have ,authority to audit 
and report on the accounts of stores and stock kept in any nftice or depart- 4S 
ment of the Union or a State. 

7 
18. (1) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall. in eonnectien 
wiIth the performance of his duties under this Act, have authority-
(<<) to inspect any office of accounts under the control of the 
Union or of a State, including treasuries and such offices responsible 
~ for the keeping of initial Or subsidiary accounts as submit accounts to 
10 
~ 
(b) to require that any accounts, books, papers and ather docu-
ments which deal with or form the basis of or are otherwise relevant 
tc) the transactions to which his duties in respect of audit extend, shall 
be. sent to such place ashe may appoint for his inspeetion; 
(c) to put such questions or make such observations as he may 
consider necessary, to the person in charge of the oftlce and, to call 
for such information as he may require for the preparation of any 
account or repbrt which it is his duty to prepare. 
IS (2) The person in charge of any office or department, rthe accounts of 
which have to be inspected and audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General, shall afford an facilities for such inspection and comply with 
requests for information in 8S complete 8 form as possible and with aU 
reasonable expedition. 
20 19~ (1) The duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
in relation to the audit of the accounts of Government companies shall be 
performed and exercised by him in accordance with the provisions of the 
lof 1958. Companies Act, 1956. 
(2) The duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
35 in relation to the audit of the accounts' of corporations (not being com-
panies) established by or under law made by Parliament shall be perfor-
med ~nd exercised by him in accordance with the provisions of the res-
pective Acts. 
(:I.) The Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory 
30 having a Legislative Assembly may, where he is of opinion that it is 
necessary in the public interest so to do, request the Comptroller. and 
Auditor-:Gener~l to audit the a~ounts of a corporation established by law 
made 1>y the Legislature of the State or of the Union territory, as the case 
may' 'be, . and where such request has been made, the Comptroller and 
35 Auditor-General shall audit the accounts of such corporation and shall 
have, for the purposes of such audit, right of access to the books and ac-
co~nts of such corporation: ' 
Provided that no such request shall be made except after consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General and except after giving a rea-
40 sonable opportunity to the corporation to make representations with re-
gardtl) the proposal for such audit. 
ZOo (1) Save as otherwise provided in section 19, where rthe audit of 
t~ 8«Ol.lnts of any body or authority has not been entrusted to the Com-
ptroller and Auditor-General by or under any law made by Parliament, 
45 he shall. if requested so to do by the President or the Governor of a State 
or the Administrator of a Union territory having a Legislative Assem-
bly, as the ease may be, undertake the audit of the accounts of such body 
~''fluthority on such terms and 1!onditions as may be agI"ef"d upon between 
him and the concernecl Government and shan have; for tne purpolte8 ()f 
powers 
of Comp-
troller and 
Auditor-
General 
inconnec-
tion with 
audit of 
accounts. 
Audit of . 
Govern-
ment 
compan-
ies Bnd 
corpora-
tions. 
Audit of 
accounts 
of certain 
authorities 
ar 
bodies. 

Power Of 
Comptrol. 
ler and 
Auditor-
General 
to 
delegate 
functions. 
Power to 
make 
rul •. 
8 
such audit, riaht of access to the books and accounts of that body or autho-
rity: 
Provided that no such request shall be made except after consulltation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General may propose to the Presi- S 
dent or the Governor of a State or the Administrattor of a Union territory 
having a Legislative Assembly, as the case maybe, that he may be autho-
rised to undertake the audit of the accounts of any body or authority, the 
audit of the accounts of which has not been entrusted to him by law, if 
he is of opinion that such audit is necessary because a substan/tial amount 10 
has been invested in, or advanced to, such body or authority by the Cen-
tral or State Government or by the Government of a Union territory hav-
ing a Legislative Assembly, and on such request being made, the President 
or the Governor or the Administrator as the case may be .. may empower 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General to undertake the audit of the ac- IS 
counts of such body or authority. 
(3) The audit referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall 
not be entrusted to the Comptroller and Auditor-General except where 
the President or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union 
territory having a Legislative Assembly, as the case may be, is satisftet:l 20 
that it is expedient 80 to do in the public interest and except after giv-
ing a reasonable opportunity to the concerned body or authority to make 
representations with regard to the proposal for such audit. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Zl. Any power exercisable by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
under the provisions of this Ad, or any other A-ct may be exercised by 
such officer of hiB department as may· be authorised by him in this behalf 
by general or special order: 
Provided that except during the absence of the C~l11ptroller and Audi-
tor-General on leave or otherwise. no ofticer sball be authorised to submit 30 
on behalf of the Comptroller and Auditor-General any report which the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General is required by tbe Constitution ur the 
C'.overnment of Union Territories Act, 1963 to submit to the President or 20 nf 1963 
tbe Gov~rnor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory hning 
a Legislative Assembly, as the case may be~ 35 
22. (1) The Central Government may. after consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General. by notification in the Official Gezette, 
tm!lke rules tor carrying out the purposes of this Act in so far as they 
relate to the maintenance of accounts. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- .to 
going power, such rules may provide for all ot any of the fonowing 
matters. namely:-
(a) the manner in which initial and subsi'diary accounts shell 
be kept by the treasuries, offices and departments rendering accounts ... 
tt'l audit and account8 offtCI!i5: 

~ J/ 1953. 
(b) the manner in which the accounts of any particular service 
or department 'Or at. any particular class or character, in respect of 
which the Comptroller and Auditor-General has been relieved from 
the responsibility of compiling or keeping the accounts, shall be 
5 compiled or kept; 
(c) the manner in which the accounts of stores and stock shall 
be kept in any office ()'I' department 'Of the Union or a Statp. as the 
case may be; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be. or may be, pres-
[0 cribed by rules.1 
(3) Every rule matie under this section shall be IlBid. as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two successive sessions, and if. before the expiry of the session in 
15 which it is so laid or the session immediately following. both HoU!'es 
ligree in making any- modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not b£' made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effert only in such modjfied form or be of no effect, as the case may be. 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be withlfut 
20 prejutiice to the VlBlidity of anything previously done under that rule. 
23. The Comptroller and Auditor-General is hereby authorised to 
make regulations for carrying into effect the provisions of this Act in so 
far as they relate to the scope and extent ctf aUdit, including laying down 
for the guidance of the Government Departments the general princi-
25 pIes of Government accounting and the broad principles in regard to 
audit of receipts and expentiiture. 
24. The Comptroller and Auditor-General is hereby authorised to dis-
pense with. when circumstances so warrant, any part f1f detailed, audit 
of any accounts or class of transactions and to apply such limited check 
30 in relation to such accounts or tnmsactions as he may determine. 
Powert. 
make 
re,we-
tiona. z 
Power to 
dispense 
with 
detailed 
audit. 
25. The Comptroller and Auditor-General (Conditions of Service) Repeal. 
Act 1953. is her£'by repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 148 (3) of the Constitution provides that the salary and other 
conditions 'of :;ervicl' of the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be 
such :{s may be determined by law and until sOl determined, shall be as 
specified in the Second Schetiule to the Constitution. Further, article 
149 of the Constitution j'JYs down that the Comptroller and Auditor-
General shall perform ~u('h duties and exercise such powers in relatiol) 
to the acC"Ounts of the Union and of thf' States and of any other authority 
or body as may be prescribed by ar under any law made by Parli~ment 
anti until so prescribed, shall perform such duties ond exercise such 
powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States as were 
conferred on or exercisable by the Auditor-General of India immediate-
ly before the commencement m the Constitution. 
The conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General are 
at present governed by three separate sets of provisions, namely, pam-
graph 12 of the Second Schedule to the Constitution which refers to' 
salary and rights in respect of leave of absence and other con'ditions of 
service; the Comptroller and Auditor-General (Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1953 which regulates the term of office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General and his pensionary entitlements; end the Government 
of India (Audit and Accounts) Order, 1.936 made under section 166 of 
the Government of India Act, 1935. which continues to be in force in so 
far as the other conditions of service !:Ire CO'llcerned (mostly l~ave of 
absence and travelling allowance). 
The duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General in 
rE'lation to the accounts of the Union and of the States continue to be 
governeti by the provision~ of the Government of India (Audit and 
Accounts) Order, 1936, which remains in force in view of the provisions 
of article 149 of the Constitution. 
ThE' Bill seeks to provide comprehensively for the conditions of ser-
vice and duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General in 
replacement of the various provisions in thic; regard as referred to above. 
WhPe it broadly follows the existing provisions both in respect of condi-
ti11nS of service and t3uties and powers, it makes certain modiflNtions 
as indicated below:-
(a) Conditions of service 
(i) Pen.sion,-The Bill provides that a person who, immediately be-
fore assuming office as Comptroller and Auditor-General, was in th~ 
service of Government, sh911 be deemed to have retired from his previ-
ous service on the date on which he enters 1.100n office as the Comptroller 
nnd Auditnr-Glmeral, but fOT" 'Purposes of pension. service AS Comptroller 
I'md A\l";1nr-G~'nerI'l1 will he ('onntf'd as approv~ servir(" in the SE-rvl('p to 
TO 

11 
which he belonged. On demitting office, the Comptl'oller and Audito!"-
General will be ehgibl~ to pension under the rUles of the SeJ.'vice to Which 
he belonged and in addition, to an additional pension of Rs. 600 per annum 
for each completed year of service as Comptro!ier and Auditur-General, 
subJect to a maximwn of Rs. 13,33J.33 (equIvaLent of £1,000 at the pre-
devaluation rate of £l=.ks. 13.::J3), mc!uSlve ot the penslOn equivalent 01 
death-cuM-retirement gratUity. This is a slight modlfication 01 the eXist-
ing provision which did not provide for the penslUll equivalent of death-
cum-retirement gratuity bemg included in the ceiling. Funnel' tile same 
maximum limit wiH be applica.ble in future to aU Comptrollers and Audi-
tors-General appointed from any of the establiShed SerViCes irrespective 
vI the Service to which they belonged belore their appomtment. 'fnis 
will not affect the present incumbent whose existing conditions of service 
are protected by the provIsions of the Constitution. 
(ii) Otil£T condttion,s of se·rvice.-The Bill extends the beneht of the 
CivIl Pensions (Commutation) Rules tu the Comptroller and Autiitor-
Genel'al, and also provides that the other conditions of service of the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be determined by the rules 
applicable to a member 01 the Indian Adnunistrative Sen'ice holding the 
rank of a Secretary to the Government of IndJ,l, 
(b) Duties and ]-'owe1',s 
(i) The Bill provides for audit by the Comptrolier and Auditor-
General of all expenditure from the Consolid\1ted l<~und of India, of each 
State and of each Union territory having a Legislative Assembly and 
also of all transactions relating to the Contingency !"unds and Public 
Accou,nts. I I 
(i) The Bill provides for audit by the Comptroller dnd Auditor-
Ueneral of bddies or \1uthorities financed entirely by grants or loan from 
the Consolidated Fund of India or ofa State or of a Union territory 
having a Legislative Assembly. 
(iii) The Bill provides for scrutiny by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of the procedures by which an authority sanctioning a grant or 
a loan to any body or authority satisfies itself as to the fulfilment of the 
condition subject to which the grant or loan was given and for this 
purpose gives him the right of access to the books of the body or autho-
rity, with certain exceptions. 
(iv) The Bill provides for the audit by the Comptroller anti Auditor-
General of all receipts which are payable into the the Consolidated Fund 
, of India or of a State or of a Union territory having a Legislative Assem-
bly and to satisfy himself that the rules and procedures are designed to 
secure an effective check on assessment, collections etc. and to report 
thereon. 
(v) The Bill provides that the Comptroller and AutUtor-General shall 
if so requested by the President or the Govrnor of a State or the Ad-
ministrator of a Union territory, as the case may be. undertake the 
audit of the accounts of any authority or body not otherwise entrusted 
to him by or UDder any law made by Parliament. Such request will be 

12 
required to be made in public interest and after consultation with the 
Comptroller anti Auditor-General and efter giving a reasonable oppor-
tunity to the body or authority for making representations with regard 
to the proposal for audit by the Comptroller and Auditor-General. The 
Comptroller and Auditor-General may also propose to the President 
or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory 
having a Legislative Assembly, that he may be authorised to undertake 
the audit of any body or authority not entrusted to him. 
The notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the other provi-
sions of the Bill. 
NEW D'LHIj MORARJI DESAI. 
The 9th May, 1969. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to insert certain definitions which arE! 
largely based on the m~anings assigned to them in the Government of 
. .adia (Audit and Accounts) Order, 1936 which continues to govern 
me duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General in terms 
of article 149 of the Constitution. 
Clause 3.-The prOvision regarding the payment of salary at the rate 
of four thousand rupees per mensem is the same as paragraph 12 (1) in 
Part E of the Second Schedule to the Constitution. The provision re-
lating to reduction from salary of pension, other than a disability or 
wound pension, drawn, if any, by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
is analogous to paragraph 9 of Part D of the Second Schedule to the 
Constitution, applicable in the case of Judges of the Supreme Court 
Clause 4.-This clause provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-
General shall hold office for a term of six years from the date on which 
he assumes office and corresponds to section 2 of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General (Conditions of Service) Act, 1953 (21 of 1953). 
Clause 5.-This Clause will enable a Comptroller and Auditor-General, 
who was in the service of Government before assumption of office, to 
take leave in accordance with the rules of the service to which he be-
longed except that consequent on clause 6, it provides for the carry for-
ward of the amount of leave at credit immediately before the date of 
assumption of office when he will be deemed to have retired from his 
previOUS service. 
Clause 6.-This clause introduces a new provision that a person who, 
immediately before assuming office as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General was in the service of Government, shall be deemed to have re-
tired from his previous service on the date on which he enters upon 
office as the Comptroller and Auditor-General but for purposes of 
pension, service as Comptroller and Auditor-General will be counted 
as approved service in the Service to which he belonged. On demitting 
office the Comptroller and Auditor-General will be entitled to pension 
under the rules applicable to the Service to which he belonged and in 
addition an additional penSion of Rs. 600 per annum for each completed 
year of service as Comptroller and Auditor-General subject to a maximum 
in the aggregate of Rs. 13,333.33 (equivalent of £1,000 at the predevalua-
tion rate of £ l=Rs. 13.33), inclusive of the pension equivalent of death-
cum-retirement gratuity. This is a slight modification of the existing 
provision which did not provide for the pension equivalent of death-cum-
retirement gratuity being included in the ceiling.. Further the same 
maximum limit will be applicable in future to all Auditors General 
appointed from any of the established services irrespective of the Service 
to which they belonged before their appointment. 
Clause 7.-This clause seeks to extend the benefit of the Civil Pen-
sions (Commutation) Rules to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 

T~ 
. Clause B.-According to this clause, the Comptroller and Auditor-
General will be entitled to subscribe to the General Provident Fund 
(Central Services).' I 
Clause 9.-This clause provides that the other conditions of service 
of the Comptroller and Auditor-General i.e., those not speclftcaUy pro-
vided for in the Bill, shall be determined by the rules for the time being 
applicable to a member of the Indian Administrative Service holding the 
rank of Secretary to the Government of India and follows the existing 
provision. 
Clause 10.-The existing Order provides that the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General shall be responsible for keeping the accounts of the 
Union and of each State-except the accounts relating to Defence and 
Railways. The President or the Governor, as the case may be, has, 
however, the authority to relieve the Comptroller and Auditor-General, 
after consultation with him, from the responsibility for keeping the 
accounts of any particular service or department. The President may 
also relieve the Comptroller and Auditor-General from the responsibility 
for keeping the accounts of any particular class or character. In exer-
cise of these powers the Comptroller and Auditor-General has been 
relieved of the responsibility for the maintenance of accounts of certain 
seleded Departments (e.g. Food Deptt., Rehabilitation Deptt., Supply 
De?tt., Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, etc.). The ARC after considering the 
pros and cons of the scheme has recommended that as a general policy 
the responsibility for maintaining the accounts should continue to vest 
in the Comptroller and Auditor-General except where separate accounts 
offices have already been set up for the purpose. Clause 10 provides for 
the maintenance of the status quo with this diiferf'nce that the respon-
sibility vested in the Comptroller and Auditor-General will be in respect 
of compiling accounts and keeping them where necessary. This Clause 
also gives the President or the Governor, as the case may be, the power 
to l'fwoke any existing arrangement after consultation with the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor-General. 
Clause 11.-·This clause requires as at present the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General to prepare the annual accounts separately for the Union 
and each of the States and Union territories having Legislative Assem-
blies showing the receipts and disbursements and to submit them to the 
President, the Governor or the Administrator, as the case may be. In 
addition, where the accounts are compiled by him he has also to prepare 
an Appropriation Account showing the expenditure brought to account 
against the moneys authorised under the Appropriation Act and submit 
the same to the President, the Governor or the Administrator, as the 
case may be.! ! 
Clauae l2.-This clause casts a duty on the Comptroller and Auditor-
General to furnish such information to the Union Government or the State 
Governments or Governments of Union territories having Legislative 
Assemblies as required and as could be gathered from the accounts for 
the compilation or keeping of which he is responsible, and is based on 
the existing arrangementJ 
Clause l3.-This clause provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-
General will audit all expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India 
and of each State and of each Union territory having a Legislative 

15 
AIIembly, aU transactions relating to the Contingency Funds and Public 
Accounts and all trading, manufacturing and profit and loss accounts 
and follows the existing provisions. 
Clause 14.-This is a new provision which provides for audit by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of expenditure of bodies or authorities 
financed entirely by grants or loans out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India or of a State or of a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly. 
Clause I5.-This clause requires the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
to scrutinise the procedures by which any authority sanctioning a grant 
or a loan from the Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of a 
Union territory having a Legislative Assembly to any authority or body 
other than a foreign State or International Organisation satisfle~ itself 
aR to the fulftlment of the conditions subject to which the grant or 
loan was given. For this purpose the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
will have right of access after giving reasonable previous notice, to thE' 
books and accounts of the authority or body but in so far as a Corpora-
tion established by Law is concerned. if the Law establishing the Cor-
poration provides for the audit of its accounts by an agency other than 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General, he will not have right of access 
to its books and accounts unless he is so authorised by the President, the 
Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory, after consul-
tntion with the Comptroller 'and Auditor-General and after givin~ an 
opportunity to the concernE'd Corporation to make any representation 
with regard to such authorisation. Provision has also been made to 
empower the PreSident, the Governor or the Administrator as the case 
mny be, to relieve the Comptroller and Auditor-General from the res-
ponsibility of the scrutiny provided for in this clause in public interest 
nnd after consultation with thE' Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
Cta~e l6.-Under the existing arrangements. audit of receipts can he 
taken up by the Comptroller and Auditor-General with the approval of. 
or if required by the President or Governor. This clause empowers the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General to audit all receipts which are payable 
into the respective Consolidated Funds and to satisfy himself that the 
rules and procedures are designed to secure an effective check on assess-
ment, collections, etc .. and to report thereon as recommended by the Ad-
ministrative Reform~ CommiSSion and· as envisaged in article 151 of the 
Constitution. I 
Clause 17.-This clause vests the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
with authority to audit the accounts of stores and stocks and to report 
thereon. Under the existing arrangements he can do so with the approval 
of or if so required by the President or the Governor as the case may bf'. 
Clause 18 (1) (a) (b) & (e) ,-These sub-clauses give to the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor-General the authority which he even now has in respect 
of inspection of any office of accounts and production of documents for 
his inspection and also to put questions and make observations which 
he may consider necessary and to call for such information as he may 
require for the preparation of his reports. 
Clause 18 (2) .-This is a new provision which requires the accounts 
offices inspected or audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General to 
afford all facilities for such inspection or audit and to comply with re-
quests for information. 

16 
Clau.c:e 19.-This clause provides for the oonduct of audit by the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of Government oompanies in accoroanee 
with the provi~ions of the Companies Act, 1956 and of corporations estab-
lished by law in accordance with the provisions of the respective statutes 
establishing the Corporation. Where, however, a CorporatIon has been 
established by law made by a State or a Union territory Legislature the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General will audit the accounts of the Cor-
poration, if so requested by the Governor of the State or the Administra-
tor of the Union territory as the case may be, in public interest and after 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General and after giving 
a reasonable opportunity to the corporation to make representations with 
regard to the proposal for such audit. State or Union territory laws can-
not provide for such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General;s 
duties and powers are required to be regulated by an Act of Parliament 
under article 149 of the Constitution and hence this 'Provision. 
Clause 20.-This is an enabling provision. Under this clause the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General will at the request of the President or 
the Governor of a S'tate or the Administrator of a Union territory, as 
the case may be, undertake the audit of the accounts of any authority 
or body not otherwise, entrusted to him by or under any law made by 
ParHament. Such audit will be entrusted to the Comptroller and Audi-
tor-General only in public interest and after giving a reasonable oppor-
tunity to the concerned body or authority to make representations with 
regard to the proposal for such audit. This is a new provision which 
gives statutory recognition to what is known commonly aR 'col\,*"nt" 
audit. This clause also provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-
General may propose to the President. the Governor of a State or the 
Administrator of a Union territory that he may be authorised to under-
take audit of any body or authority not entrusted to him. 
Clause 21.-This clau"e provides for the delegation by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General to any officer of his department of the powers 
exercisable by him except in the matter of submission of Audit Report 
and follows the existing arrangement. 
Cliause 22.-This clause provides the usual authority to the Central 
Government after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
for framing rules in the matter of maintenance of Government accounts. 
The rules will be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
Clause 23.-This is a new provision enabling the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General to make regulation!': in regArd to the extent and RCOpe 
of "auditJ \ 
Clause 24.-This clause gives statutory authority to the Comptrollpr 
and Auditor-GenerRl to di!';penRP with thp rlptAilen I'\udit of any accounts 
pr C'la"R of t.ransllctions, 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Und~r clause 3 of the Bill, the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall 
be paid salary at the rate of Rs. 4,000 per mont,b subjec:t to' appropriate 
r~u«:tion in the c.Qse of persons in receipt of pension separately. The 
expenditure (charged) on this account would be Rs. 4l1,OOO per anuUlU. 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 6 of the Bill provides that a person wh", 
immediately before the date of assuming oflice as Comptroller and 
Auditor-General, was in the service of Government shall be eligible to 
such pension as may be admissible to him un~er the rules for the tim~ 
!leing applicable to the Service to which he belonged, his service as 
Comptroller and Auditor-General being reckoned for purpaaes of those 
n.t1es as continuing approved service counting for pension in the Service 
to which he belonged and in addition, to a penSion of Rs. 600 per annum 
m respect of each c-ompleted year of service as Comptroller and Auditor-
=Jenera!. 
Under sub-clause (2) of clause 6 of the Bill a per90n who imme'diately 
oefore the ciete of assuming office as Comptroller and Auditor-General 
"'as in receipt of, or was eligible for, pension in respect of any previaus 
s~rvice under Government, shall on demitting office as Comptroller and 
Auditor-General be eligible to an additional pension of Rs. 600 per annum 
in respect of each completed year of service as Comptroller and Auditor-
General. 
Any other pers~n who is appointed as Comptroller anU Auditor-
General will, under the provisions of sub-clause (3) of clause 6 of the 
Bill, be eligible on retirement to such pension, as t~e President may by 
order determine. 
In all the three cases mentioned above, the aggregate amount <1f pen-
sion inclusive of the additional pe9sion, commuted portion, if any, of 
pension and pension equivalent of retirement gratuity, if any, will not 
exceed Rs. 13,333.33 per annum. 
Under clause 9 of the Bill the travelling allowance Qf the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General while travelling on \:I.uty shali be determined by 
the rules for the time being applicable to a member of the Indian Ad-
ministrative Service holding the rank of Secretary to the Government 
of India. The annual expenditure (charged) ad this account will be of the 
order of Rs. 15,000. 
The duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General in re-
lation to the accounts of the Union, of the States and of the Umon terri-
tories having Legislative Assemblies and of other authorities or bodies. 
including keeping and compiling of accounts and audit of receipts and eX-
penditure. are provided for in clauses 10 to 20 of the Bill. Most of these-
duties and powers are 'being discharged or exercised, as the case may be, 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General even now. 
17 

18 
Clause 21 of the Bill provides that any power exercisable by the C~m­
ptroller and Auditor-General may be exercised by such officer of his De-
partment (the Lndian Audit and Accounts Department) as may be autho-
rised by him. The expenditure on this Department during 1969.70, (for 
which provision has been made in the Budget for 1969-70), is estimated 
to be of the order of Rs: 25.93 crores, (which includes charged expenaj·· 
ture of Rs. 47.65 lakhs), of which Rs. 5.80 crores is recoverable from Rail-
ways, Posts and Telegraphs and other departments or bodies whose ac-
counts are maintained or audited, or both, by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General. In addition a non-recurring provision of Rs. 1 crore has also 
been made for buildings. With expanding activities of Government, both 
Central and State, the work of the Comptroller and Auditor-General will 
also increase, leading to increase in staff. It is difficult however at this 
stage to indicate precisely the likely expenditure on the additional staff 
that might be required but the annual increase in expenditure due 
ttl expansion, normal increments etc: is expected' to be of the order of 
~ per cent 

Mt;MOHANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
~Iause 7 of the Bill empowers the President to make- such adallta-
tions in the Civil Pensions (Commutation) Rules as may be necessary. 
This is a matter which can hardly be provided in the Act. The delega-
tion is, therefore, of a normal character. 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 22 of the Bill provides that the Central Gov-
ernment may, after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill in so far as they relate to the maintenance 
of accounts. The matters which may be provided ·for in the rules have 
been specified in sub-clause (2). They, inter alia, relate to the manner in 
which initial and subsidiary accounts shall be kept by treasuries, oftlces 
and departments rendering accounts to the audit and accounts oftlces; 
the manner in which the accounts for the compiling and keeping of 
which the Comptroller and Auditor-General has been relieved of the res-
ponsibility,. shall be compiled or kept and the manner in which the 
accounts of stores and stock shall be kept in any office or department. 
Under sub-clause (3) of clause 22, the rules will be subject to the scrutiny 
of Parliament. These are matters of procedure and administrative detail 
and it is hardly practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The 
delegation is, thus, of a normal character. 
Clause 23 of the Bill authorises the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
to make regulations for carrying into effect the provisions of the Bill in 
so far as they relate to scope and extent of audit, including laying down 
for the guidance of the Government Departments the general prinCiples 
of Government accounting and the broad principles in regard to audit of 
receipts and expenditure. Since these regulations would be in the nature 
of departmental instructions by the Comptroller and Auditor-General or 
instructions for the guidance of Government Department, the delegation 
is of a normal character. 
19 

LOK SABHA 
A. 
lULL 
to detennine the conditions of service of Ethe Comptroller andl Awlitol'-Gencral of 
India aBd to prescribe his duties and powers and]fortmatters];Connected :therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Morarji Desai., 
Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister of Finance.) 