8m No. f' of 12U. 
THE YOUNG PERSONS (HARMFUL 
PUBLICATIONS) BILL, 1955 
O.4MP LIBJrAJf1. 
(As INTRODUCID IN LoIt SABRA) 

Bill No. 46 of 1255. 
THE YOUNG PERSONS (HARMFUL PUBLICATIONS) 
BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to prevent the dissemination of certain publications harmful to young 
per.on •. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Young Persons (Harmful Short title, 
Publications) Act, 1955. =:e::. 
j (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu mcnt. 
and Kashmir. 
(3), It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act,- OefiDidon8. 
10 (a) "harmful publication" means any book, magazine. pamphlet, 
leaflet, newspaper or other like publication which consists 
of stories told with the aid of pictures or without the aid 
of pictures or wholly in pictures, being stories portraying-
(i) the commission of offences; or 
IS (ii) acts of violence or cruelty; or 
.. (iii) incidents of a repulsive or horrible nature; 
in such a way that the publication as a whole would tend 
to corrupt a young person into whose hands it might fall, 

Penalty for 
•• ale, etc., of 
harmful 
pubUcatioDl. 
2 
whether by inciting or encouraging him to commit offences 
or acts of violence or cruelty or in any other manner 
whatsoever; 
(b) "State Government", in relation to a Part C State,' means 
the Lieutenant-Governor or, as the case may be, the 5 
Chief Commissioner; 
(c) "young person" means a person under the age of 20 yean. 
3. (1) If a person-
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any 
manner puts into circulation, any harmful publication, or IC) 
(b) for purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public exhibition or 
circulation. prints, makes or produces or has in his posses-
sion any harmful publication. or 
(c) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that 
any harmful publication can be procured from or throuSA IS 
any pertlOn, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend.to six 
months, or with fine, or with both. -
(2) On a conviction under this section, the court may order the 
destruction of all the copies of the harmful publication in respect of 20 
which the conviction was had and which are in the custody of the 
court Or remain in the possession or power of the person convicted. 
~ 4. (1) The State Government may, if it is of opinion after consulta· 
to decJue tion with the principal law officer of the State, whether called the 
=~lUb- Ad"ocate-General or by any other name, that any publication is a 2S 
forfeited. harmful publication, declare, by order notified in the Official Gazette, 
that every copy of such publication shall be forfeited to the Govern-
ment and every such notification shall state the ground for the order. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub'seetion 
(1) of section 6, where there is an order of forfeiture under sub- 30 
section (1) in respect of any publication it shall be lawful for any 
police officer to sei%e the same wherever tound in the territories to 
which this Act extends. 
A~peal to 5. Any person aggrieved by an 9rder of forfeiture passed by the 
~l~~~r State Government under section 4 may, within sixty da,rs of the 3S 
of foBeiture. date of such order, apply to the High Court to set aside such order, 
and upon such application the Hi8h Court may pa88 such order a. it 
dHmA It. 

3 
I. (1) Any police oftlcer or any other officer empowered in this Power to 
behalf by the State Government may seize any harmful publication. :!!:d 
bmnful 
(2) Any magi&trate of the flrli cla88 may, by warrant, authorise publicatioDl. 
any police officer not below the rank of Bub· inspector to enter and 
S search any place where any stock of harmful publications may be 
or may be reasonably suspected to be, and such police officer may 
seize any publication found in such place if in his opinion it is a 
harmful pUblication. 
(3) Any publication seized under 8ub-section( 1) shall be produo-. 
10 ~ ed, all soon as may be, before a magistrate of the ftl'lt clasa, and any 
publication seized under sub-section (2) shall be produced, 88 IOOD 
as may be, before the court which issued the warrant. 
(4) If in the opinion of the magistrate or court such publiaation 
is a harmful publication, the magistrate or court may cause it to be 
IS destroyed, but if, in the opinion of the magistrate or court, such 
publication is not a harmful publication, the magistrate or court 
shall dispose of it in the manner provided in sections 52!, 524 and 
V of 1198. 525 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. 
"I. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Offences 
20 V of 1898. Procedure, 1898, any o1!ence punishable under this Act shall be 'Ar:;c:o th~! 
cognizable. cognizable. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Pictorial and other publications containmg stories ot the glorifica-
tion of crime. violence and vice, known as "horror comics", are being 
circulated in India in large quantities. The dissemination of such 
stories is likely to encourage anti-social tendencies among children 
and exert a harmful influence on young persons. So far as the im-
port into India of pictorial publications is concerned the Government 
of India have imposed a ban under the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (VIn • 
of 1878). The object of this Bill is to prohibit the production in India 
of such literature or of any variant and its circulation within India. 
G. B. PANT. 
NKW DBLHI; 
The 22nd August, 1955. 
4 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to prevent the dissemination of certain publications harmful to 
young rersons. 
(Shri GOf)ind Ballabh Pant. 
" Minister of Home Affairs.) 