BIU No. l' or 19S7 
THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCILS BILL, 19.51 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN" LOK SARMA) 
• 

or 1950. 
It; 
Bill No. 46 of 1957 
THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCILS BILL. 1957 
(1'0 BE IN'l1tODtJCBD IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the creation of a Legislative Council for' the State of 
Andhra Praduh and the increasing of the 8treng'th of the Legi8-
lative Councils of the Statu having such Caunci" 4M fOT m4t-
ters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Legislative Councils Act, 1957. 
z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) each of the words and expreS8ions defined in the Repre-
sentation of the People Act, 1950, but not defined in this Act, 
shall have the same meaning as in that Actj 
(b) "sitting member" means a person who immediately 
before the commencement of this Act is a member of a Legisla-
tive Council. 
Short title. 
Defin j tiona. 
3. (1) As from such date as the President may by order appoint, Crea~on ~r 
there shall be a Legislative Council for the State of Andhra Pra- ~:~~~: 
deshj and as from that date, in sub-clause (0) of clause (1) of AIldhn 
article 168 of the Constitution, after the words "States of", tht! PrIdc.h. 
15 words "AndhraPradesh" shall be inserted. 
(2) In the said Council, there shall be 90 seats of which-
(0) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the 
electorates referred to in sub-clauses (0), (b) and (c) of clauae 
(3) of article 171 shall be 31, 8 and 8 respectively; 

Increase in 
the Itrenath 
of the Bihar 
LcPllatiVC 
Council. 
? 
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the mem-
bers of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh in accord-
ance with the provisions of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall 
be 31; and 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the , 
Governor of Andhra Pradesh in accordance with the provisiol18 
of sub-clause (e) of that clause shall be 12. 
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the 
President, after consultation with the Election Commission, shall by 10 
order, determine-
(a) the constituencies into which the State of Andhra Pra-
desh shall be divided for the purpose of elections to the said 
Council under each of the sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause 
(3) of article 171; 
(b) the extent of each constituency; and 
(c) the number of seats to be allotted to each constituency. 
(4) As soon as may be after such determination, steps shall be 
taken to constitute the said Council in accordance with the provisions 
IS 
of this Act and of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and the 1950. 
Representation of the People Act, 1951. 20 1951. 
4. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Council of 
Bihar shall be increased from 72 to 96 and of those seats-
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electo-
rates referred to in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) 
of article 171 shall be 34, 8 and 8 respectively; 2S 
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by members 
of the Legislative Assembly of Bihar in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be 34; and 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the 
Governor of Bihar in accordance with the provisions of sub- 30 
clause (e) of that clause shall be 12. 
(2) The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Bihar) Order, 
1951, shall, until other provision is made by law, have effect sub-
ject to the modifications directed by the First S~hedule. 
(3) As soon as may be after the. commencement of this Act, 3~ 
elections shall be held to ftll-
(4) the additional seats allotted to the several councll 
constituencies by the said Order as modified by this Act, and 

3 
(b) the additional seats to be filled by the persons referred 
to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), 
u if those seats had become vacant. 
(4) In order that, as nearly as may be, one-third of the mem-
, bers of the said Council may retire on the 6th May, 1958, and on 
the expiration of every second year thereafter, the Governor of 
Bihar shall, after consultation with the Election Commission, make 
by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the terms of 
office of the members to be elected to fill the additional seats under 
10 sub-section (3). 
5. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Council for ~:=~ 
the State of Bombay to be re-constituted under section 34 of the of the 
37 of JSls6. States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall be increased from 72 as fixed f~:;~live 
by sub-section (3) of that section to 108. " Council. 
37 of 1,,6. 
IS (2) The said section shall be amended as follows:-
(a) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) for the figures "72", the figures "108" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in clause (a), for the figures and word "24, 6 and 
6", the figures and word "39, 9 and 9" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in clause (b), for the figures "24", the figures 
"39" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "this Act", the 
words and figures "the Legislative Councils Act, 1957" shall be 
as substituted; and 
(c) in sub-section (5) ,-
(i) for the words "the appointed day", the words "such 
commencement" shall be substituted; and 
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted. 
30 t. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Council for Increase in 
the State of Madhya Pradesh to be constituted under section 33 of ~~e ~~Dlth 
the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall be increased from 72 as Madhya 
fixed by sub-section (2) of that section to 90. ~~1d!~ive 
(2) The said section shall be amended as follows:-
35 (a) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for the figures "72", the figures "90" shall be sub-
.tituted; 
Council. 

Inaeuein 
the Itrength 
of the 
Madral 
Legislative 
Council: 
.. 
(ti) in c~ause (a), for the figures and word ··24, 6 and 
6", the figures and word "31, 8 and 8" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in clause (b), for the figures 1124", the figures 
"31" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words IIthis Act", the words S 
and figures "the Legislative Councils Act, 1957" shall be sub-
stituted; and 
(c) in sub-section (4),-
(i) for the words . lithe appointed day", the 
words IIsuch commencement" shall be substituted; and 10 
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted. 
7. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Council of 
Madras shall be increased from 50 to 63 and of those seats--
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the elec-
torates referred to in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) IS 
of article 171 shall be 21, 6 and 6 respectively; 
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the mem-
bers of the Legislative Assembly of Madras in accordance with 
the provisions of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be 21; 
and 20 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the 
Governor of Madras in accordance with the provisions of sub-
clause; (e) of that clause shall be 9. 
(2) The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Madras) Order, 
1951, shall, until other provision is made by law, have effect subject 25 
to the modifications directed by the Second Schedule. 
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act,-
(a) elections shall be held to fill-
(i) the additional seats allotted to the local authorities' 
constituencies and the teachers' constituency by the said 30 
Order as modified by this Act; and 
(ii) the additional seats to be filled by the persons re-
ferred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), 
as if those seats had become vacant; 
(b) one person shall be nominated by the Governor of 35 
Madras to fill the additional seat under clause (c) of the laid 
sub-section. 

J1 ot 19,6. 
a 
(4) In order that, as nearly as may be, one-third of the membe1'8 
of the said Council may retire on the 20th April, 1958, and on the ex-
piration of every second year thereafter, the Governor of Madras 
shall, after consultation with the Election Commission, make by 
5 order, such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the terms of office 
of the members to be elected under clause (a) of sub-section (3) 
and of the member to be nominated under clause (b) of that sub-
section. 
8. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Council for Inc:rea1C 
10 the State of Mysore to be re-constituted under section 36 of the :ren~1 of 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall be increased from 52 as fixed ~ ~y~re 
by sub-section (3) of that section to 63. Co~~~ve 
(2) Sub-section (3) of the said section shall be amended' as fol-
lows:-
IS (a) for the figures "52", the figures "63" shall be substituted; 
20 
(b) in c1ause (a), for the figures and word "18, 4 and 
4", the figures and word "21, 6 and 6" shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (b), for the figures "18", the figures "21" shall 
be substituted; and 
(d) in clause (c), for the figure "8", the figure "9" shall be 
substituted. 
t. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Council of Increue 
Punjab shall be increased to 51 and of those seats- ~~ren~h of 
the Punjab 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by electora- Legislative 
tes referred to in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) of Council. 
article 171 shall be 17, 4, and 4 respectively; 
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected· by the mem-
bers of the Legislative Assembly of Punjab in accordance with 
the provisions of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be 18; 
and . 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the 
Governor of Punjab in accordance with the provisions of sub-
clauae (e) of that clause shall be 8. 
(2) ru from the commencement of this Act, the Delimitation of 
35 Council Constituencies (Punjab) Order, 1951, shall, until other pro-
vision is made by law, have effect subject to the modifications direct-
ed by the Third Schedule, and in the said Order as so modified, any 
reference to the State of Punjab shall be construed as a reference to 

e 
that State as formed by section 11 of the States Reorganisatioll 
Act, 1956. 
(3) As from the commencement of this Act,-
(a) every sitting member of the said Council representina 
immediately before such commencement any local authorities' 
constituency specified in column 1 of the Table below shall be 
deemed to have been elected to the said Council by the local 
authorities' constituency specified against that c~mstituency in 
column 2 of the said Table:-
TABLE 
1 2. 
\ 
Ambala-cum-Karnal (Local Authorities) cons- Punjab South (Local Authorities) consd-
tituency. tu~ncy. 
Gurgaon-cum-Rohtak-cum-Hissar-cum-Simla Punjab South (Local Authorities) conati-
s 
Ie, 
(Local Authorities) constituency. tuency. 15 
Hoshiar.Pur-cum-~gra-curn-cturdaspur 
(Local Authorities) constituency. 
Jullunder-curn-Ferozepure-curn-Arnritsar-
cum-Ludhiana (Local Authorities) consti-
tuency. 
Punjab North (Local Authorities) consti-
tuency. 
Punjab North (Local Authorities) consti-
tuency ; 
(b) every sitting member of the said Council representing 
immediately before such commencement the graduates' consti-
tuency or the teachers' constituency shall be deemed to have 
been elected to the said Council by that constituency as altered 
20 
by virtue of sub-section (2); 25 
(c) every sitting member of the said Council elected by the 
members of the Legislative Assembly of the former State of 
Punjab and every sitting member of the said Council elected 
under clause (b) of sub-section (2J of section 37 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall be deemed to have been duly 30 37 of 19". 
elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the pr~ \ , 
sent State of Punjab. 
(4) As soon as may be after such commencement, elections shall 
be held to fUl- ' 
(a) the additional seats allotted to the several council COlli- 35 
tituencies by the Delimitation of Council Constituencies 
(Punjab) Order, 1951, as modified by this Act; 
(b) the additional seats to bt: filled by persona referred to 
in clause (b) of sub-section (1)-. 
u if those seats had become vacant. 40 
, 

'I 
(5) The said Council shall be deemed to have been first consti-
tuted on the date on which the Legislative Council of the former 
State of Punjab was first constituted. 
(6) In order that, as nearly as may be, one-third of the members 
5 of the said Council may retire on the 26th April, 1958, and on the 
expiration of every second year thereafter the Governor of Punjab 
shall, after consultation with the Election Commission, make by order 
such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the terms of office of the 
sitting members elected under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of tee-
37 of J956. 10 tion 37 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and of the members 
to be elected under sub-section (4) of this section. 
'7 of 1956. (7) Section 37 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall be 
716 L.S.-2. 
amended, and shall be deemed always to have been amended, as 
follo1'ls:-
15 (a.) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and ftgures 
"Until the said Council has been re-constituted in aecordance 
with the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of this section 
and of any other law for the time being in force and has beeIl 
summoned to meet for the first time", the words "Until other-
20 wise provided by law" shall be substituted; 
(b) sub-sections (3) and (4) shall be omitted. 
(8) In this section, the expression, "the former State of Punjab" 
means the State of Punjab as it existed immediately before the 
1st day of November, 1956. 
25 10. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Council of ~ncrease 
n. Uttar Pradesh shall be increased from 72 to 108 and of those seats- :r~ of 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the elec- ~:r 
torates referred to in sub-clauses (a.), (b) and (c) of clause (3) Legislativo 
of article 171 shall be 39, 9 and 9 respectively; Council. 
30 (b) the number to be fllled by persons elected by the mem-
bers of the Legislativ~ Assembly of Uttar Pradesh in accordance 
with the provisions of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be 
39; and 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the 
35 Governor of Uttar Pradesh in accordance with the provisions 
of sub-clause (e) of that clause shall be 12. 
(2) The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Uttar Pradesh) 
Order, 1951, shall, until other provision is made by law, -have effect 
subject to the modifications directed by the Fourth Schedule. 
40 (3) As from the commencement of this Act-
(a.) every sitting member of the said Council representing 
-immediately before such commencement a graduates' constitu-
ency or a teachers' constituency the extent of which is altered 

IncrealC 
in the 
strength of 
the Welt 
Benlal 
Leaislative 
Council. 
8 
by virtue of sub-section (2) shall be deemed to have been elect-
ed to the said Council by that constituency as so altered; 
(b) every sitting member of the said Council representing 
immediately before such commencement any local authorities' 
constituency specified in column 1 of the Table below shall be 5 
deemed. to have been ei'ected to the said Council by the local 
authorities' constituency specified against that constituency in 
column 2 of the said Table:-
T.uLE 
2 
Uttar Pradesh North-West (Local Autho- Meerut (Local Authorities) constituency. 
ritiel) conltiruency. 
UttarPradeshl!llorth-Bast(Local Authorities) Rohilkhand (Local Authorities)constiruency 
con.tituency . 
10 
Uttar Pradesh West (Local Authorities) Alra (Lo~al Authorities) constituency. 15 
constituency. 
Uttar Pradesh Central (Local Authorities) , Lucknow (Local Authorities) constituency. 
constituency. 
Uttar Pradesh South (Local Authorities) Allahabad (Local Authoritics) constituency, 
constituency. 
Uttar Pradesh Bast (Local Authorities) Varanasi (Local Authorities) constituency. 
constituency. 
(4) As soon as may be· after such commencement, elections shall 
be held to ftll-
20 
(a) the additional seats allotted to the several council cons- 25 
tituencies by the said Order as modified by this Act; and 
(b) the additional seats to be filled by persons referred to 
in clause (b) of sub-section (1), 
as if those seats had become vacant. 
(5) In order that, as nearly as may be, one-third of the members 30 
of the said Council may retire on the 5th May, 1958, and on the ex-
piration of every second year thereafter the Governor of Uttar 
Pradesh shall, after consultation with the Election COmmission, 
make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the terms 
of office of the members to be elected uncier sub-sectior. (4). 35 
11. (l) The total number -of seats in the Leeislative Council of 
West Bengal shall be increased from 51 to 75 and of those seats-
(a) the numbers to be .filled by persons elected by the 
electorates referred to in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of 
clause (3) {:If article 171 shall be 27, 6 and 6 respectively; 40 

• (b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the mem· 
bers of the Legislative Assembly of West Bengal in accordance 
with the provisions of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be 
27; and 
5 (c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the 
Governor of West Bengal in accordance with the provision.c; of 
sub-clause (e) of that clause shall be 9. 
(2) The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (West Bengal) 
Order, 1951, shall, until other provision is made by law, have effect 
10 subject to the modifications directed by the Fifth Schedule. 
(3) As from the commencement of this Act,-
(a) every sitting member of the said Council representing 
immediately before such commencement the Calcutta (Gradua-
tes) constituency and every such member representing the Cal-
15 cutta (Teachers) constituency, the extent of which is altered by 
virtue of sub-section (2) shall be deemed to have been elected to 
the said Council respectively by the Calcutta (Graduates) cons-
tituency and the Calcutta (Teachers) constituency as so altered; 
(b) every sitting member of the said Council representing 
20 immediately before such commencement any of the council cons-
tituencies specified in column 1 of the Table below shall be 
deemed to have been elected to the said Council by the council ' 
constituency specified against that constituency in column 2 of 
the said Table:-
25 TABLE 
West Ben,al South (Graduates) consti- West Bengal (Graduates) constituency. 
tuency 
WestBeD,aIWest(Graduates)constituency West Benaal CGarduates) cODstituency. 
30 West Ben,al North (Graduates) cortsti- West Benaal EGraduates) constituency. 
tuency. 
Burdwan Diviaion(Telchers)constituency. West Benlal (Te~cbers) constituency. 
PrClidency Division South (Teachers) West Ben,ll (Telchers) constituency. 
constituency . 
35 Presidency Division North (Teachers) West Bengal (Teachers) constituency. 
constituency. 
Darjcclin, (Local Authorities) consti- Wt:st Ben,al North (Local Authorities) 
tueDCY. constituency. 
West Ben,al North (Local Authorities) West Bengal North (Local Authorities) 
40 COIlstituency. constituency. 

. .:..,~ 
I 2 
Nadia-Munhidabad (Local Authorities) Welt Ben,al East (Local Authoriti •• ) COD,8-
constituency. tituency. 
Calcutta-24-Parsanas (Local Authoritiel) Weat ~eDsal South (Local Authoritiea) 5 
constituency. consntuency. 
Hoolly-How,.h(Local Authoritiel) cons- Weat Bensal Central (Local Authorities) 
tituency. conatituency. 
Burdwan Division North (Local Authori- Wcst Bensal Welt (Local Authorities) 
Amendment 
of Act 43 of 
1950. 
ties) constituency. cOD,stituency. 
(4) As soon"as may be after such commencement elecUons shall 10 
be held to flll-
(a) the additional seats allotted to the several council cons-
tituencies by the said Order as modified by this Act; and 
(b) the additional seats to be filled by persons referred to 
in clause (b) of sub-section (1), 15 
as if those seats had become vacant. 
(5)' In order that, as nearly as may be, one-third of the mem-
bers of the said Council may retire on the 4th June, 1958, and on 
the expiration of every second year thereafter the GOTemor of 
West Bengal shall, after consultation with the Election Commission, 20 
make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the terma 
of office of the members elected under sub-section (4). 
lZ. In the Representation of the People- Act, 1950,-
(a) in sec::tion 10, in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) for the words "Mysore and Punjab", the words "and ~5 
Mysore" shall be substituted; and 
(ii) for the words, brackets and figures "sub-section 
(2) of section 36 and sub-section (2) of section 37", the 
words, brackets and figures "and sub-section (2) of section 
36." shall be sub.tituted; 

5 
10 
15 
20 
!25 
35 
11 
(b) for the Third Schedule, the followm, Scbedu1eIlaaU bet 
IUbttttuted, namely:-
"THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See .ection 10) 
AnOCGhcm of .eat. in the Legilladu. Coutadl8 
»amll of State 
Total Number to be elected or nominated under 
number artielu71(3) 
of 
seats Sub-
clau. 
(41) 
3 
Sub-
ela.ae 
(6) 
Sub-
claulC 
(c) 
5 
Sub-
clauae 
(I) 
6 
Sub-
e1.ute. 
<-> 
7 
I. Andhra Pradesh 90 
96 
loB 
31 8 
a 
8 
• 
31 
3" 
39 
31 
12 
2. Bihar 12 
3. Bombay 
3. 
39 9 
I 
6 
6 
9 
8 
6 
6 
•. Madhya Pradesh 
s. Madras 
31 
21 21 9 
9 
8 
6. Mysore 21 2J 
7. Punjab 17 18 
8, Uttar Pradesh 
9. Weat BeDial 
51 
106 
75 
39 
27 
" 9 
6 
" 9 
6 
39 
21. 
(c) in the Fourth Schedule,-
(i) before the heading "BIHAR", the followma heedina 
and the entries thereunder shall be ineerted, name1,.:-
"AlmHRA PaA.oBSH 
1. Municipalities. 
2. District Boards. 
3. Cantonment Boards. 
4. City and Town Committees. 
5. Class I Panchayats, that is to say, PanehayatB 
notified by the State Government in the Offteial Guette 
as Panchayats which exercise jurisdiction over an area 
containing a population of not leu than five thouaand 
and whose income for the ftnanclal year immediateI,. 
preceding the date of the notification was not lese than 
ten thousand rupees. 

AaeMment 
efAct 43 of 
195'1. 
Notification 
for certain 
elections to 
Leaislative 
Councils. 
12 
6. Class II Panchayats which have been notified for 
the appointment of whole-time executive officers."; 
(ii) under the ht!ading "MADHYA PRADESH", for the en-
tries, the following entries shall be substituted, namely:-
"1. MWlicipalities. 
2. J anapada Sabhas. 
3. MandaI Panchayats. 
4:. Cantonment Boards. 
5. N otifted Area Committees. 
6. Town Area Committees."; 
(iii) under the heading "MYSORE", the following entries 
shall be added at the end, namely:-
"4. Notified Area Committees. 
5. Village Panchayats with a population of not 
5 
10 
less than five thousand." 15 
13. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951,-
(a) after section 15, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"15A. For the purpose of constituting the Legislative 
Council of the State of Madhya Pradesh and re-constituting 20 
the Legislative Councils of the States of Bombay and Mysore 
under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. and constituting 37 of 1956 • 
. the Legislative Council of the State of Andhra Pradesh 
under the Legislative Councils Act, 1957, the Governor of 
each of the aforesaid States shall by one or more notifica- 25 
tions published -in the Official Gazette of the State on such 
date or dates as may be recommended by the Election Com-
mission, call upon the members of the Legislative Assem-
bly of the State and all the council constituencies to elect 
members in accordance with the provisions of this Act and go 
of the rules and orders made thereunder."; 
(b) in section 74, after the words "elections held", the 
words, figures and letter "in pursuance of the notifications issued 
under section 15A or" shall be inserted; 
(c) in section 156, in sub-section (J), after the words "cons- 35 
titution of the Council" I the words "or in the case of the Legis-
lative Council. of Bombay or J't1ysore, upon its re-constitution" 
shall be inserted. 

13 • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 4: (2)] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUBNCIIIi 
(BIHAR) ORDEIl, 1951 
5 In the Table,-
(a) in the third column relating to graduates' constituencies, 
for the figures "2", "2", "I" and "1", the figur~ "3", "2", "2" and 
"1" shall respectively be substituted; 
(b) in the third column relating to teachers' constituencies, 
10 for the figures "1", "I", "2", and "2", the figures "2", "I", "3" and 
"2" shall respectively be substituted; 
15 
20 
(c) in the third column relating to local authorities' consti-
tuencies, for the figures "6", "6", "6" and "6", the figures "8", 
"8", "9" and "9" shall respectively be substituted. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 7 (2) ] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES 
(MADRAS) ORDER, 1951 
In the Table,-
(a) in the third column relating to the teachers' constitu-
ency, for the figure "4", the figure "6" shall be substituted; 
(b) in the third column relating to t~ local authorities' 
constituencies, for the figures "4", "4", "4" and "4", the figures 
"5", "5", "6" and "5" shall respectively be subltituted. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 9 (2)] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES 
(PUNJAB) OaDER, 1951 
In the Table,-
(a) iR the third column relating to graduates' constituency, 
for the figure "3", the figure "4" shall be substituted; 
(b) in the third column relating to teachers' constituency, 
for the figure "3", the figure "4" shall be subltituted; 

14 
(e) for the etri. under the heading "Loeal Autlioriti.' 
Ccmstltuencl_", the folloWing entri.. .hall be subltituted, 
umely:-
...... jab .onb (Local Autbo-
rldIII) 
Amriu.r, GurdlfJ:ur, X'Il'I., Hoft ill-
pur, le.purth.I., ]ullundur, Ludhirnl 
and Perozepur District •. I S 
ruat.b C81\tral (Local Autho-
lid .. ) 
Puajab South (Local Autho-
rides) 
Pati.la, Pltehalrh Slhib,Blrnlla,Bhltinda 
and SanllUr Districts. 
Simla, lC.ohilt.n, Amb.Ja, K'lllll, Rohlllc, 
Gurpon, Mohindera.rh and His81r 
Diltricts. 
THE :rOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 10 (2) ] 
3 
6", 
MODmUnON'S IN 'I'H8 DBLIKITATIO)I' OJ' Comrcn. CO)l'8TI'l'UBNClBll 
10 
(U'!'l'Aa PaADaR) ORDu, 19S1 15 
I'or the Table appended to the Order, the following Table .hall 
be Mlbltituted, namely:-
"TABLE 
Name of CODItituenC)' Bneut ofconatltuency No. of 
leat.. 20 
Uttar Pradelh Welt (Graduates) 
Uttu IIa4eth But (Gaduate.) 
Uttar Pradesh Welt (Teachen) 
Meerut ('Local.uaaoritiet) 
AIra (Leca1Alltboritial) 
A11ahaM4 (Local Autboritiee) 
V ...... (Local AutboddeI) 
Lacbow (Local Authorld .. , 
• 11' .. "..4 (Local Authorld .. ) 
Gra4uJst .. • C~u 
MeelUt, Alra, ]banli and Allahabad 
Divilioas. 
ICumaon, Rohilthand. Lucknow, 
PaiAbad, Gonkhpur and Varanui 
Divilioas •• 
Tide""'" C~ 
Mlerat, Apa, Jhanli and Allahabad 
Divilioas. ~ 
Kumaon, R.obilldland, Lucltnow, 
PaiAbad, Gonkhpur and Varanui 
Divilione. 
u.l AutlltwidR' CtnUritulru:iIJ 
Meetat Divi.lon 
Alb DiviliOft 
• Allahabad aDd ,JhInli DiviliODI 
, VaranlaiaDd. Gorakhpur Divi.ionl 
Luc:kDow ad Paizabld DiviliODI 
I\obUkNndaDd Kumaon DlvilioDl • 
7 
, 
6 
6 
7 
S", 
li5 
35 

. I. 
15 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 11 (2) ] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES 
(WEST BENGAL) ORDER, 1951 
.• :.1' 
5 For the Table appended to the said Order, the following Table 
shall be substituted, .namely:-
Name of constitUency 
10 Calcutta (Graduates) 
15 
West Bengal (Graduates) . 
120 
!:I5 Calcutta (Teachers) 
30 
West Bengal (Teachers) 
35 
"TABLE 
Extent of constituency 
Graduates' Constituencies 
Calcutta as defined in clause (II) of section 5 of 
the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 (West 
Bengal Act XXXIII of 1951), together with 
the Fort William, and that part of Hastings 
North of the South edge of Clyde Rowand 
Strand Road to the river bank. . -. . 
Burdwan division; and Presidency Division 
[excluding Calcutta as defined in clause 
(II) of section 5 of the Calcutta Municipal 
Act, 1951 (West Bengal Act XXXIII of 1951), 
together with the Fort William, and that part 
of Hastings North of the South edge of 
Clyde Rowand Strand Road to the river bank]. 
Teachers' Constituencies 
24-Parganas district; and Calcutta as defined 
in clause(ll) of section 5 of the Calcutta Muni-
cipal Act, 1951 (West Bengal Act XXXIII 
of 1951). together with the Fort William, 
and that part of Hastings North of the South 
edge of Clyde Rowand Strand Road to the 
riverbank. 
Burdwan division; and Presidency division 
[excluding 24-Parganas district and Calcutta 
as defined in clause (11) of section S of the· 
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 (West Benaal 
Act XXXIII of 1951). together with the Fort 
William and that part of Hastings North of 
the South edge of Clyde Rowand Strand 
Road to the river bank]. • • • • 
Local AUthorities' Constituencies 
40 West Bengal North (Local Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri and Cooch-Behar districts. 
Authorities). 
West Bengal East (Local West Dinajpur, MaIda, Murshidabad and Nadia 
Authorities). districts. ..• . • • • • 
West Bengal West (Local Burdwan division (excluding Howrah and 
45 Authorities). Hoogly districts) 
West Bengal Central HowrahandHoogtydistricts. 
(Local Authorities). 
West Bengal South (Local 
Authorities) 
716 L.S.-3. 
24-Parganas district; and Calcutta IS defined 
in clause (r I) of section 5 of the Calcutta Muni-
cipal Act, 1951 (West Bengal Act XXXIII of 
1951), together witp the Fort William and 
that part of Hastings North of the South 
• edge of Clyde Rowand Strand Road to the 
riverbank. 
No. of 
seats 
3 
3 
3 
3 
, 
7 
, 
7". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The States Reorganisation Act provided for the establishment 
of a Legislative Council for the enlarged State of Madhya Pradesh, 
malOng the total number of States with bicameral Legislatures 8. 
Subsequently, the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh passed 
a resolution in accordance with article 169 (1) of the Constitution 
recommending the creation of a Legislative Council for that State. 
The Seventh Amendment of the Constitution raised the maxi-
mum limit set in article 171 (1) for the strength of a State Legisla-
tive Council from one-fourth to one-third of the strength of the 
State Legislative Assembly. It was represented by some Members 
of Parliament as well as by some State Governments that compar-
ed to the Legislative Assemblies the strength of the Legislative 
Councils was meagre and that the Constitutional amendment should 
be availed of to increase that strength. Resolutions to this effect 
were passed by the Legislatures of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, 
Madras, Mysore, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh. 
This Bill accordingly seeks to provide for the creation of • 
Legislative Council for Andhra Pradesh and for increasing the 
strength of the Legislative Councils of the other States having such 
Councils. At present the strength of a Legislative COWlcil bears no 
relation either to the population or to the strength of the Legislative 
Assembly of the State. In the Bill it is proposed to fix the strength of 
each Legislative Council at roughly 30% of the strength of the 
corresponding Legislative Assembly, except in the case of Uttar 
'Pradesh and Bombay which have the largest Assemblies and in the 
case of Punjab which has the smallest. The following table sets 
out the present position, the States' proposals and the proposals 
contained in the Bill in this respect. 
Name'of State 
Strength of Legislative Council Strength of 
-- --- ----------- Legislative 
Prese~lt State's Proposal Assembly 
proposal in the Bill 
--_ .. _.- .---- -~---- -- --- --------------- -------
I. Uttar Pradesh 72 loR loR 430 
2. Bombay 72 108 108 396 
3· Bihllr 72 .. 96 318 
4· Andhra P,adesh . 96 90 301 
S· Madhya Pradesh. 72 96 90 288 
6. West Bengal SI 7S 7S 2S2 
7· MY80re S2 69 63 208 
8. Madras so 63 63 20S 
9· Punjab. 40 51 51 154 
NEW DELHI; A. K. SEN. 
The 18th July, 1957. 
11 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 3.-This clause fixes the strength of the Andhra Pradesh 
Council at 90, which is 30 per cent. of the strength of the L.egislative 
Assembly of that State. The distribution of these seats among the 
five categories specified in article 171 (3) is broadly as provided 
therein, except that the number of members to be nominated by 
the Governor is fixed at 12 instead of 15, and the three seats so 
saved, are distributed among the other four categories. In sub-
clauses (3) and (4) provision is made for delimitation of the council 
constituencies and for the constitution of the Council as soon as 
practicable after such delimitation. 
Clause 4 and the first Schedule.-The total membership of the 
Bihar Gouncil is Increased from 72 tJ 96, which is 30 per cent. of 
the strength of the Bihar Legislative Assembly. The number of 
persons to be nominated by the Governor will, however, continue 
to be 12. The number of persons to be elected by graduates and by 
teachers will be 8 each which is exactly one-twelfth of the total 
membership. The remaining 68 se"lts are equally divided between 
the representatives of local authorities and the representatives of 
the Bihar Legislative Assembly. 
Sub-clause (2) and the First Schedule provide for the amend-
ment of the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Bihar) 
Order, 1951, which is necessary because of the increased represen-
tation given to the various council constituencies. 
Sub-clause (4) empowers the Governor to modify, in consulta-
tion with the Election Commission, the terms of office of the addi-
tional members to be elected so that one-third of the total number 
of members of the Council may retire on the 6th May, 1958, and 
every second year thereafter. 
Clause 5.-1t is proposed to increase the strength of tb.e Bombay 
Council from 72 [as fixed by section 34 (3) of the States Reorgani-
sation Act, 1956] to 108. While the number of nominated members 
• will remain 12 as at present, the number to be elected by graduates 
and by teachers will be raised from 6 to 9 which is one-twelfth of 
the total strength. The remaining 78 seats will be equally divided 
between the representatives of local authorities and the representa-
tives of the Legislative Assembly. 
17 

18 
Clause 6.-The strength of the Madhya Pradesh Legislative 
Council, fixed at 72 by section 33 (2) of the States Reorganisation 
Act, 1956, is increased to 90. The distribution of seats will be the 
same as in the case of the Andhra Pradesh Council which will have 
an equal strength. 
Clause 7 and the Second· Schedule.-It is proposed to increase 
the strength of the Madras Legislative Council from 50 to 63 and 
distribute those seats among the five categories as recommended 
by the Madras Legislature. Other provisions of the clause are on 
the same lines as those of clause 4 in respect of Bihar. 
Clause B.-The strength of the Mysore Council, fixed by sp.ction 
36 (3) of the States Reorganisation Act at 52, is increased by this 
clause to 63 which is nearly 30 per cent. of the strength of the 
Mysore Assembly. The distribution of seats among the five cate-
gories is the same as in the case of Madras. 
Clause 9 and the Third Schedule.-The present Punjab Council 
was constituted under sub-section (2) of section 37 of the States 
Reorganisation Act by adding to the former Punjab Council six 
members elected by the members of the former PEPSU Legislative 
Assembly. Sub-sections (3) and (4) of that section provide for a 
complete re-constitution of the Council with a total strength of 40 
members only. Even when that Act was under consideration in 
Parliament it was felt that a wholesale re-constitution should not 
be necessary in Punjab as in Bombay or Mysore and that some 
method should be devised for continuing the old Council with suit-
able representation for the PEPSU area. 
Now that the Constitution permits the strength of the Council 
to be increased to 51 (which is less than one-third of the total 
membership of the Punjab Assembly), it is proposed to modify 
section 37 of the States Reorganisation Act by omitting sub-sec-
tions (3) and (4) and thereby obviating the necessity of reconsti-
tuting the existing Council. That Council will be treated as the 
permanently constituted Council for Punjab, but its number will 
be increased to 51. The nominated element will remain unaltered 
at 8, the representation given to graduates and teachers will be 
increased in each case from 3 to 4, that given to the local authori-
ties will be increased from 13 to 17, and that given to the Legisla-
tive Assembly from 13 to 18. It is further proposed in oSub-clause" 
(2) and the Third Schedule to reduce the number of local authori-
ties' constituencies to 3 and to delimit them afresh so as to give fair 
representation to all the ~eas now forming the State of Punjab. 
Ancillary provisions have also beeb made for the holding of elec-
tions to fill additional seats ahd for modifying the terms of ofHce of 
the sitting mem~ers elected under section 37 (2) (b) of the States 

19 
Reorganisation Act and of the members to be elected to fill the 
additional seats. 
Clause 10 and the Fourth Schedule.-This clause increases the 
strength of the Uttar Pradesh Council from 72 to 108 as recommen-
ded by the Legislature of that State. The nominated element will 
remain 12 as at present and the distribution of seats among the 
other four categories will be the same as in the case of Bombay. 
In view of the larger number of seats to be filled by the several 
council constituencies, it is proposed in sub-clause (2) and the 
Fourth Schedule to revise the Delimitation of Council Constituen-
cies (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1951, thoroughly on the lines recom-
mended by the Election Commission. The reqUisite ancillary pro-
visions are contained in sub-clauses (3), (4) and (5). 
Clause 11 and the Fifth Schedule.- The total number of members 
of the West Bengal Council is proposed to be increased from 51 to 
75. The nominated element will, however, remain unaltered at 9, 
the representation given to graduates and teachers will be increa-
sed in each case from 4 to 6, and the remaining 54 seats will be 
equally divided between the representatives of the local authori-
ties and the representatives of the Legislative Assembly. In this 
case also, it is proposed in sub-clause (2) and the Fifth Schedule 
to revise the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (West Bengal) 
Order, 1951, thoroughly as recommended by the Election Commis-
sion. 
Clause 12.-A new Schedule is proposed to be substituted 
for the existing Third Schedule to the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950, showing the revised strength and composition of 
all the Legislative Councils. The Fourth Schedule to that Act is 
also" proposed to be amended giving a list of the local authorities 
in Andhra Pradesh for the purpose of election by the local authori-
ties' constituencies and modifying the list of local authorities in 
the new State of Madhya Pradesh and Mysore. 
Clause 13.-Ths clause makes three amendments in the Repre-
sentation of the People Act, 1951. The main amendment is the 
insertion of a· new section 15A enabling the Governors to issue the 
initial notifications for the constitution of the Legislative Councils 
of Andhra· Pradesh· and Madhya Pradesh and for the reconstitu-
tion of the Legislative Councils of Bombay and Mysore. 

ANNEXURE 
I. RESOLUTIONS OF THE STATE LEGISLATURES 
1. Andhra Pradesh.-Resolution passed by the Andhra Pradesh 
Legislat1ve Assembly on the 5th December, 1957, by a majority of 
189 for and 65 against the total membership of that Assembly on that 
date being 297:-
"This Assembly recommends to the Parliament that a 
Legislative Council may be created in the State of Anclhra 
Pradesh and that necessary legislation may be passed under 
clause (1) of article 169 of the Constitution of India containing 
such provisions for the amendment of the Constitution as may 
be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and also 
such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions as 
the Parliament may deem necessary.". 
2. Bombay.-Resolution passed by the" Bombay Legislative 
Council on the 21st June, 1957 and by the Bombay Legislative 
Assembly on the 24th June, 1957:-
"This House resolves that having regard to the size and 
population of the New State of Bombay, and keeping in view 
the provisions contained in article 171 (1) of the Constitution of 
India, the strength of the Bombay Legislative Council be increas-
ed by 36, thereby bringing the total number of members to lOB." 
3 .. Madhya Pradesh.-Resolution passed by the Madhya Pradesh 
Legislative Assembly on the 19th December, 1956:-
"This House is of the opinion that the strength of member-
ship of the Legislative Council for Madhya Pradesh to be consti-
tuted in pursuance of the provisions of the States Reorganisation 
Act, 1956, should be increased to 96 from 72 and accordingly 
requests the State Government to move the Central Govern-
ment for taking necessary action in the matter.". 
4. Madras.-Resolution passed unanimously by the Madras Legis-
lative Council on the 21st December, 1956 and by the Madras Legis-
lative Assembly on the 24th December, 1956:-
Legislative Council 
"This House recommends to the Government of India that 
the strength of the Madras Legislative Council be raised to 63 
and thut the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the elec-
torates referred to in sub-clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of 
clause (3) of Article 171 of the Constitution shall be 21, 6, 6, 
21 and 9 respectively." 
20 

21 
Legislative Assembly 
"This House recommends to the Government of India that 
the strength of the Madras Legislative Council be raised to 63 
and that the numbers to be filled under sub-clauses (a), (b), (c), 
(d) and (e) of clause (3) of Article 171 of the Constitution 
shall be 21, 6, 6, 21 and 9 respectively.". 
5. Mysore.-Resolution passed by the Mysore Legislative Assem-
bly on the 26th December, 1956 and by the Mysore Legislative 
Council on the 27th December, 1956:-
"WHEREAS the total number of seats in the Legislative Coun-
cil of the State of Mysore as fixed by sub-section (3) of section 
36 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, is 52, which is one-
fourth of the total number of 208 seats fixed for the Legislative 
Assembly of the State; 
AND WHEREAS under clause (1) of Article 171 of the Consti-
tution of India, the total number of members in the Legislative 
Council of a State shall not exceed one-third of the total number 
of members in the Legislative Assembly and it is considered 
desirable tb.lt the number of members in the Legislative 
Council of the State of Mysore should, as nearly as may be, 
be one-third of the nu;rtber of members of the State Legislative 
Assembly; , ...... 1 
Now THEREFORE, this House recommends that the total 
number of members in the Mysore Legislative Council be fixed 
at 69.". 
6. Punjab.-Resolution passed by the Punjab Legislative Assem-
blyon the 21st March, 1957:-
"That in view of the increase in the area and population, in 
the number of graduates, teachers and local bodies in the State 
of Punjab and in the number of Members of the PWljab Legis-
lative Assembly, as a result of the reorganisation of the State, 
this Assembly is of the opinion that the strength of the Punjab 
Legislative Council should be increased to 51 wh~ch is 1/3rd of 
the total number of Members 01 the Punjab L~gislative Assembly 
and, therefore, it recommends to the Government to take neces-
sary steps to bring abou,t the said increase in the strength of the 
Punjab Legislative Council.". ' 
7. Uttar Pradesh.-Resolution passed by the Uttar Pradesh Legis-
lative Assembly on the 20th December, 1956 an,d by the Uttar Pradesh 
Legislative Coun~il on the 28th December, 1956:-
"W ~ <m lI'~ :ir~'«f l«f ~ f<fi ~'~ sr {~ R<rr.f 'if~er,\ ~ ~ 
~ Cf~~ ~ \,~' ij- ~i Cf,r ~ or:; Cfi\{r \iITlf a'1fr W ,~l q m~ 
~l~~;f ~ r~~ ~~ ~<m"{ ij- ~~l'l' f~ :.mr I". 

22 
II. EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION 
168. (1) For every State there shall be a Legislature which shall CoDl~OD 
. d of Le .. a-consIst of the Governor, an latures in 
States. 
(a) in the States of Bihar, Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, 
Madras, Mysore, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, two 
Houses; 
(b) in other States, one House . 
• • • • • • 
III. EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL ACTS 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950 (43 OF 1950) 
• • • • 
The State Legislative Councils 
10. (1) 
• • • • 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply in relation to the Legis-
lative Councils of Bombay, Mysore a~ Punjab as proVisionally 
constituted under sub-sec jon (2) of section 34, sub-section 
(2) of section 36 and sub-s~ction (2) of section 37 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
• • • • 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[Sec section 10] 
ALLOCATION OF SEATS IN THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCILS 
-------- -------.-----------
Name of State Total Number to be elected or nominated under 
number article 171(3) 
of 
seats Sub- Sub- Sub- Sub- Sub-
clause clause clause clause c:1ause 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (.) 
1 3 4 S 6 7 
I. Bihar 7" "4 6 6 "4 12 
2. Bombay . 72 24 6 6 24 12 
3· Madhya Pradesh 72 "4 6 6 "4 12 
Allocation of 
aeats in the 
Legislative 
CoundlL 
4. Madras. . so 16 6 4 16 8-
S· Uttar Pradesh 72 24 6 6 
~ 
12. 
6. Mysore. S2 18 4 4 8 
7· Punjab . 40 13 3 3 13 8 
8. Weat Bengal . 51 17 4 4 17 9 

21 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 27 (2) ] 
LocAL AUTHORITIES FOR PURPOSES OF ELECTIONS TO LWGmLATIn 
. COUNCn..s 
• • • • • 
MADHYAPMDJ:sH 
1. Municipalities. 
2. District Boards. 
3. Cantonment Boards. 
•. Notified Area Committees . 
• • • • • 
1. Municipalities. 
2. District Boards, and District Local Boards. 
3. Cantonment Boards. 
• • • • • • • 
THE R~RESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, U~51 (.0 or ID31) 
• • • • • • 
Publication 74. After the elections held in any year in purauaDCe of the DOti-
orrelu1tlor ... 1.._ 
elections to fications issued under section 16, there shall be notified by IoUG 
the ~tat~ appropriate authority in the Official Gazette the names of tlle mem-
Lell,laltve C 'I •. d b .. "'-Council, and hers elected for the various ounCI constituenCle8 an y "" ..... mem-
of name I of bers of the Legislative Assembly of the State at the said elections personl Dominated together with the names of any persons nominated by the Governor 
tcoo ~llh under sub-clause (e) of clause (3) of article 171. 
. una . • • • • • • 
Term of 1~. (1) The term of office of a member of the Legislative Councll 
~~bc:or of a State, other than a member chosen to fill a casual vacancy, shall 
State LepI· be six years, but upon the first constitution of the Council the 
~~tCoun. Governor, shall, after consultation with the Election Commission, 
Madhya 
Prldelh 
Lepalative 
CounciL 
718 L.S.--4. 
make by order such proVision e.s he thinks fit for curtailing the term 
of oftlce of some of the members then chosen in order that, u nearly 
as may be, one-third of the members holding seats of each cl ... 
shall retire in every second year thereafter . 
• • • • • • 
TIm SrATBS REORGANISATION ACT, 1936 (3'1 or 1056) 
• • • • • 
The Legislative Couneill 
u. (1) 
• • • • • • 

H 
(2) In the said Council there ahall be 72 _ta of which-
(a> the numbers to be ftlled by persona elected by the elee-
toratee referred to in 8ub-c1aUle5 (a), (b) and (c) of clause 
(3) of article 111 smll be 2'. 6 and 6 respectively; 
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the mem-
bers of the Legislative Assembly in accordance with the provi-
sions of sub-clauae (d) of the said clause shall be 24; and 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the 
Governor in accordance with the provisions of 8ub-clause (e) 
of that clause shall be 12. 
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the 
President, after consultation with the Election Commission, shall 
by order detennine-
(a) the· constituencies into which the said new State shall 
be divided for the purpose of elections to the Council under 
each of the sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) of arti-
cle 171; 
(b) the extent of each constituency; and 
(d) the number of seats allotted to each constituency. 
(') As BOon as may be after the appointed day, steps shall be 
taken to constitute the said Council in accordance with the provi-
sions of this section and the provisions of the Representation of the 
:~:~ !::~: People Act, 1950 and the Representation of the People Act, 1951: 
Provided that the election referred to in clause (b) of sub-sec-
tion (2) shall be held only.fter the general election to the Legisla-
tive Assembly of the new State of Madhya Pradesh has been held. 
M. (1) 
• • • • • • 
(3) After sueh reeonltitutlon as aforesaid, there shall be 72 seats 
in the said Council of which-
(a) the numbers to be ftlled by persons elected by the electo-
rates referred to in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) of 
article 171 shall be 24, 6 and 6 respectively; 
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the mem-
bers of the Legislative Assembly in accordance with the provi-
.wna of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be 24; and 
Bomb., 
Lepllat". 
<AuRell • 

Myaor. 
Lepllative 
Council. 
Puaj." 
Letl".tive 
COUDdl. 
• 
II 
(e) the number to be ftlled by persoJUI nominated by the 
Governor in accordance with the provisiona of sub-clauae (e) gf 
that clause shall be 12. 
(4) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the 
President, after consultation with the Election Commission, shall by 
order dete~e--
(a) the constituencies into which the said new State shall be 
divided for the purpose of elections to the Council under each 
of the sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) of article 171; 
(b) the extent of each constituency; end 
(c) the number of seats allotted to each constituency. 
(8) & soon u may be after the appointed day, steps shall be 
taken to constitute the said Council in accordance with the provisions 
of this section and the provisions of the Representation of the 
People Act, HI50 and the Representation of the People Act, 1951: :: ~ !:~~: 
Provided tbat the election referred to in clause (b) of sub-sec-
tion (3) shall be held only after the general election to the Leetsla-
tive Assembly of the new State of Bombay has been held. 
• • • .. • • 
38. (1) 
• • • • • • 
(3) After such reconstitution as aforesaid, there shall be 52 
eeats in the said Council of which-
<a> the numbers to be IDled by persons elected by the elec-
torates referred to in 9Ub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause (3) 
of article 171 shall be 18, 4 and 4 respectively; 
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the mem-
hers of the Legislative Assembly in accordance with the provi-
sions of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be 18; and 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the 
Governor in accordance with the provisions of sub-c1ause (e) 
of that clause shall be 8. 
• • • • 
37. (1) 
• • • • 
(2) Until the said Council has been reconstituted in accordance 
with the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of this section and 

H 
of any other law for the time being in force and has been aum-
meed to meet for the first time, the said Council shall constat of-
(.) all the sitting members of the Legislative COUDcil of 
the existing State of Punjab; and 
(b) six persons to be elected in such manner as may be 
prelCribed by the members of the Legislative Auembly of the 
exlatins State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union from 
amongst persons who are not members of that Assembly. 
(3) After such reconstitution as aforesaid, there shall be .to 
.. ta m the said Council of which-
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the 
electorates referred to in sub-clauses (a>, (b) and (c) of clause 
(3) of article 171 shall be 13, 3 and 3 respectively; 
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the 
members of the Legislative Assembly in accordance with the 
provi,sions of sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be 13; and 
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the 
Governor in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (e) 
of that clause shall be 8. 
ft) The provisiona of sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 34 
Ihall apply in relation to the said Council as they apply in relation 
to ~e Leg;lslative Council for the new State of Bombay . 
• • • • 
IV. D]!:LIMlTATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES ORDERS, 
1851 
1. Tu DJa.amo4.TIOB or CoUNCIL COHSTlTt1ENCIJ'.S (BIHAR) OUER, 1951 
• • • • • • 
In pursuance of section 11 of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), the President is pleased to make the 
following Qrder, namely:-
1. This Order may be called the Delbnitatlon of Council Cons-
tiHUeRCiet (Bihar) Order, 1951. 

27 
2. The constituencies into which the State of Bihar shall be 
divided for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Council of 
the State from (a> the graduates' constituencies, (b) the teachers' 
ronstituencies and (c) the local authorities' constituencies in the 
said State, the extent of each such constituency and the number 
of seats allotted to each such cOllltituency sh~l be as shown in 
the followinJ Table:-
TABLE 
Name of eonltituency &tent of eonetituency 
Patna Divilion (Graduatel) . • Patna DWiIion • 
Tirhut Diviaion (Graduatel) . Tirhut Division . 
Bhqalpur Divilion (Graduatel) . Bbaplpur Diviaion 
Chota Nlapur Division (Gradu-
atel) . • • • • Chota Nqpur DiYision 
T,odIm' Comtitllmms 
Patna Division (Teachen). • Patna DiYilJon. • 
Tirhut Division (Tcachen) • • Tirhut Division. . 
Bhagalpur Division (Teache~ . Bbqalpur Div~ . 
Chota Nlllpur Division (T era) Chota Nqpur Division 
Local .Au,lwritiu' Cam",,","", 
Pama (Local Authorities). • Patna Divilion . 
Tirhut (Local Authoritics) • • Tirhut Division. . 
Bhaplpur (Local Authorities) . Bhaplpur Division • 
Chota Nqpur (Local Authoritie.) Claota Naapur Division 
• • • • • 
Number 
of Seate 
2 
2 
I 
I 
, 
• I 
2 
a 
6 
6 
6 
6 
• 
2. THB DELIMITATION or COUNCIL CONSTlTUZNCIBS (MADIlAI) 
0Im .. , 1951 
In pursuance of section 11 of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), the President is pleased to make the 
following Order, namely:-
1. This Order may be called the Delimitation of Council Cons-
tituencies (Madras) Order, 1951. 
2. The constituencies into which the State of Madras shan be 
ciivided for the purpose .of elections to the Legislative Council of 

28 
the State from (a> the graduates' constituencies, (b) the teaehers' 
conatituencies and (c) the local authorities' constituencies in the 
aaid State, the extent of each such constituency and the number of 
seats allotted to each such constituencies shall be as shown in the 
following Table:-
Name of Constituency 
Madras (Graduates) • 
Mad •• (Teachen) 
TABLE 
Extent of Conatituency 
GnttIuatu' CorutitfllJlCY 
. Entire State 
TMCIMr,' CorutituMley 
. Entire State 
Local AlltllOritw, COJIIritll4Plcill 
No. of 
Seats 
, 
4 
Madru-cum~Chingleput-cum-North The Madru, Chin,leput and North Areat .. 
Arcot (Local Authoritiu). Districta. , 
South Aroot-cum-Tanjore-cum- The South Areot, Tanjore and TiruchJ- 4 
Tiruchirappam (Local Author!- rappalliDistrictl. 
ties). 
M.adurai~-Rarnanathapuram- The Maciurai, Ramanathapuram, Tirunel~ .. 
cum-Tirunelveli-cum-Kanyaku- vell and Kanyakumari Districts. 
marl (Local Authorities). 
Salcm-cum-Coimbatore-cum-Nil- The Salem. CoUnbatore and Nilairis Dis- .. 
airia (Local Authorities). trieta. 
• • • • • • 
3. THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIIS (PuNJAB) 
ORDER, H~51 
In pursuance of section 11 at the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), the President is pleased to make the 
following Order, namely:-
1. This Order may be called the Delimitation of Couneil COI1l-
tituencies (Punjab) Order, 1951. 
2. The constituencies into which the State of Punjab shall be 
divided for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Council of 
the State from (a) the graduates' constituency, (b) the teachers' 
constituency end (c) the local authorities' constituencies in the 
said State, the extent of each such constituency and the number 

19 
of seats allotted to each such constituency shall be as shown in 
the following Table:-
Name of Con,tituency 
Punjab (Graduates) 
Punjab (Tcachera) 
TABLE 
Ihtent of Con,tituency 
Gradl4atll' Corulinmu:y 
Entirc State 
TI4CMrI' Corutinmu:y 
Entirc State 
Local Authontiu' Coruti~ 
Number 
of Scats 
3 
3 
Ambala-cum-Karnal (Local Autho- Ambala and Kamal Districtl . Z 
ritiel.) 
Gurpon-cum-Rohtak-cum-Hiaaar- Gurgaon, Rohtak, HiaSlr and Simla Dis- 4 
cum-Simla (Local Authoritics.) trietl. 
Hoahiarpur-cum-Kangra-cum- Hoshiarpur, Kansra and Gurdaspur Dis- 3 
Gurdaspur (Local Authorities.) tricts. 
Jullundur-cwn-Fcrozcpur-cum- Jullundur, Fcrozepur, 
Amritaar-cum-Ludhiana (Local Ludhiana Districts. 
Authorities.) 
Amritsar and 
• • • • • • 
4. THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES (U'l"1'AR PRADESH) 
ORDER, 1951 
• • • • • • 
In pursuance of section 11 of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), the President is pleased to make the 
following Order, namely:-
l. This Order may be called the Delimitation of Council COllI-
tituencies (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1951. 
2. The constituencies into which the State of Uttar Pradesh 
shall be divided for the purpose of elections to the Legislative 
Council of the State from (a) the graduates' constituencies, (b) the 
teachers' constituencies and (c) the local authorities' constituencies 
in the said State, the extent of each such constituency and the 

. 
number of seats allotted to each such constituency shall be .. 
shown in the following Table:-
TABLE 
Name of CoIlltituenq EztCDt of Conatituency 
GrUIGUI' CorutiIlUlfcia 
Uttar Pradesh West (Gnduates) 
Uttar Pradesh But (Graduatea) 
Meerut, Alta, Jhanli, Allahabad and 
FaizalU Divwool. 
Rohilkhand, KumallD, Luc:know, Banana, 
and Gonkhpur Division •. 
TItJdNr,' CMI~ 
Uttar Pradsh Welt (Teachers) Meerut, Alta, Jhanai, Allahabad and 
Fliaabad DivWooa. 
Uttar Pradesh Bast (Teachers) • Rohilkhand, Kumaun, Lucknow, Banana, 
and Gonkhpur Divisions. 
LoCtJl Au'lIori,iu' CDJUriUlIIICiu 
Uttar Pradesh, North Welt (Local 
Authorities). 
Uttar Pradesh, North But (Local 
Authorities). 
Uttar Pndesh West (Local Autbo-
rities). 
Uttar Pradesh Central (Local Au-
thorities). 
Debra Dun, Bijnor, Saharallpur, Muzdar-
1'Iapl', Meerut and Bulandshahr Diltrlcts. 
Tchri Garbwal, Garhwal, Almon, Nailli 
Tal, Moradabad, Rampur, BareiUy, 
Pilibhit and Budaun Districts. 
Aliprb, Mtltbura, Blah, Aara, Mainpuri 
and Btawah Di~tric:ta. 
Khcri, Shahjahanjlur, Hardoi, Sitapur. 
Lucknow, Bara Banki, Gonda, Bahrak:h 
and Unnao Districtl. 
Nwuber 
of Seat. 
3 
Uttar Pradesh South (Local Autbo- Jhanai, JaIauD, Hunirpur, Banda, A11aha- '4 
rities). bad, Furutbabad, Kanpur, Fatehpur, 
Sultanpur. Pntapprh and Rae Bardl 
Districtl. 
Uttar Pradesh But (Local Autho- Faizabad, Jaunpur, Bald, Gonkhpur. 
rities). Deoria, AzamPrh, Ballia, Ghazipur, 
Banaru and Mirzapur Diatricta . 
• • • • • • 
5. THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITt1ENCI13 (WIrBT BOGAL) 
ORDu, 19S1 
• • • • • • 
In pursuance of section 11 of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), the President is pleased to make the 
following Order, namely:-
1. This Order may be c,ued the Delimitation of Council COlli-
tituencies (West Bengal) Order, 1951. 

11 
2. The constituencies into which the State of West Bengal shall 
be divided for the p'J,lrpose of elections to the Legislative Council 
of the State from (a) the graduates' constituencies, (b) the 
teachers' constituenciefl and (c) the local authorities' constituencies 
in the said State, the extent of each such constituency and the 
number of seats allotted to each such constituency shall be as 
shown in the following Table:-
TABLE 
Name of Constituency Extent of Constituency 
Graduates' Ctmltiu'lItdu 
Calcutta (Gradwtes) 
W~lt Bc.ngal South (Graduates) 
West Bengal West (Graduates) 
West Bengal North (Graduates) 
Calcutta (Teachen) 
Burdwan Division (Teacl1en) 
Presidency Division South 
(Teachers). 
Presidency Division 
(Teachers). 
North 
Calcutta as ddined in clause (I I) of Section 
3 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1923 
(Bengal Act III of 1923), together with 
the Fon William, the Esplanade and 
that pan of Hastings North of the 
South edge of Clydci Rowand Strand 
Road to the. river bank. 
24-Parganas, Hooghly and 
Districts. 
Howrah 
Midnapore, Bankura, Purulia, Birbhum 
pnd Burdwan Districts. 
Nadia, Munhiclabad, MaIda, West Dinaj-
pur, .Cooch Behar, JalpaiiUri and 
Darjeeling Districts. 
T,acMrs' CtmltitlUncHS 
Calcutta as defined in clause (I 1) of Section 
3 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1923 
(Bengal Act III of 1923), together with 
the Fort William, the Esplanade and 
that pan of Hastings Nonh of the South 
edge of Clyde Rowand Strand Road to 
the river bank. 
Burdwan Division 
24-Parpnu, Nadia and Murshidabad Dis-
tricts. 
Maida, West Dinajpur, Cooch Behar, 
Jalpaiguri and Darjeeling Districts. 
Local Authorities' ConstitlU1lcUS 
Darjeelinl (Local Authorities) Darjeeling District 
W~t Bengal North (Local Autho- Jalpaiguri, Cooch Behar, Malda and West 
rities). Dinajpur District •• 
Nadla-Murshidabad (Local Au- Nadia and Murthidabad Districts. . 
thoritiea). 
---_._----- -----_._-_. - -.---.- ._--_ ... ---_ .. 
No.oi 
Sean 
1 
1 
1 

32 
Name of Constituency Extent of Conltituency 
Calcutt&-Z4-}'arpnas 
Authorities). 
(Local Calcutta as defined ill clause (I I) of Section 
3 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1923 
(Scngal Act III of 1923), together with 
the Fort William, the Esplanade and 
that part of Hutinp North of the South 
edge of Cly4c Rowand Strand Road 
to the river bank, and 24-Parpnu 
District. 
No. of 
Seatl 
6 
HOOIhly-Howrah (Local Authori- Hooghly and Howrah Districts 3 
ties). 
Burdwan Divis ion North (Local Burdwan Division excludina the Hooghly 4 
Authorities). and Howrah Districts. 
• • • • • • 

• 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the creation of a Legislative Council for the State 
. of Andhra Pradesh and the increasing of the strength of tho 
Legislalive Councils of the States having such Councils and 
for matters connected therewith. 
(Shrt Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister of LarD.) 
GIPND-LS lat-7I6 LS-I9-1-'7-1,600 