THE CENTRAL SANSKRIT UNIVERSITY BILL, 2018
By
SHRI KUNW AR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
1.  Short title and commencement.
2.  Definitions.
3.  Establishment of University.
4.  Objects of University.
5.  Powers of University.
6.  Jurisdiction.
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed.
8.  Visitor.
9. Officers of University.
10.  Chancellor.
11.  Vice-Chancellor.
12.  Pro-Vice-Chancellor.
13.  Deans of Schools.
14.  Registrar.
15.  Finance Officer.
16.  Controller of Examinations.
17.  Librarian.
18.  Other Officers.
19.  Authorities of University.
20.  Court.
21.  Executive Council.
22.  Academic Council.
23.  Board of Studies and Academic Boards.
24.  Finance Committee.
25.  Other authorities of University.
Bill No. 46 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

(ii)
26.  Power to make Statutes.
27.  Power to make Ordinances.
28.  Regulations.
29.  Annual  Report.
30.  Annual   Accounts.
31.  Returns and Information.
32.  Conditions of service of employees.
33.  Right to appeal.
34.  Filling of casual vacancies.
35.  Special Mode of Appointment.
36.  Committee.
37.  Honorary Degree.
38.  Convocations.
39.  Alumni Association.
40.  Student's Council.
41.  Delegation of Powers.
42.  Protection of action taken in good faith.
43.  Power to remove difficulties.
44.  Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and
to be laid before Parliament.
45.  Transitional provisions.
CLAUSES

Bill No. 46  of 2018
THE CENTRAL SANSKRIT UNIVERSITY BILL, 2018
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA  SINGH  CHANDEL , M.P.
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a Central Sanskrit University at Mahoba in the State of
Uttar Pradesh to promote Sanskrit language, literature, research in old Sanskrit
manuscripts and its use in different subjects like computer, science, mathematics
and social sciences with inter-disciplinary approach and for matters connected
therewith  or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty- ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Sanskrit University Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University;
(b) "academic staff'" means such categories of staff as are designated as
academic staff by the Ordinances;
(c), "Board of Studies" means the Board of Studies of a Department of the
University;
(d) "Chancellor", "Vice-Chancellor", and "Pro-Vice-Chancellor" mean,
respectively, the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the
University;
(e) "College" means a college maintained by the University;
(f) "Court" means the Court of the University;
(g) "Department" means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of
Studies;
(h) "distance education system" means the system of imparting education
through any means of communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting,
webcasting, correspondence courses, seminars, contact programmes or the
combination of any two or more such means;
(i) "employee" means any person appointed by the University and includes
teachers and other staff of the University;
(j) "Executive Council" means the Executive Council of the University;
(k) "Faculty" means a Faculty of the University;
(1) "Finance Committee" means Finance Committee of the University;
(m) "Institution" means an academic institution, not being a college,
maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University;
(n) "Regulations" means the Regulations made by any authority of the
University under  this Act for the time being in force;
(o) "Statutes" and "Ordinances" mean, respectively, the Statutes and the
Ordinances of the University, for the time being in force;
(p) "teachers of the University" mean Professors, Associate Professors,
Assistant Professors and such other persons as may be appointed for imparting
instruction or conducting research in the University; and
(q) "University" means the Central Sanskrit University as incorporated under
this Act.
3. (1) There shall be established, in the State of Uttar Pradesh a Central Sanskrit
University.
(2) The headquarter of the University shall be at Mahoba in the State of
Uttar Pradesh.
(3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor and the first members of the
Court, the Executive Council and the Academic Council, and all persons who may
hereafter become such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such
office or membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of the
University.
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall
sue and be sued by the said name.
Definitions.
Establishment
of University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
4. The objects of the University shall be to promote Sanskrit language, literature,
research in old Sanskrit manuscripts and its use in different subjects like computer,
science, mathematics and social sciences with inter-disciplinary approach.
5. (1) The University shall have the following powers, namely:—
(i) to provide for instructions in Sanskrit language and literature as the
University may, from time to time, determine and to make provisions for research
and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge for furtherance of the
objects of the University;
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine,
diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on
the basis of examinations, evaluation or any other method of testing, on persons,
and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic
distinctions for good and sufficient cause in the manner prescribed by the
Statutes;
(iii) to organise conferences, seminars on Sanskrit language and literature;
(iv) to organise and to undertake extra-mural studies, training and extension
services;
(v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed
by the  Statutes;
(vi) to provide facilities through the distance education system as it may
determine;
(vii) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Associate Professorships,
Assistant Professorships and other teaching or academic positions, required by
the University and to appoint persons to such Principalships, Professorships,
Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships or other teaching or academic
positions;
(viii) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the
University may determine and to withdraw such recognition in the manner
prescribed by the Statutes;
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or educational
institution, including those located outside the country, as teachers of the
University for a specified period;
(x) to create administrative, Ministerial and other posts and to make
appointments thereto;
(xi) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or
authority or institution of higher learning, including those located outside the
country, in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine;
(xii) to collaborate with any other college or university, research institution,
industry association, professional or any other organisation, in India or outside
India to conceptualise, design and develop specific programmes as part of
education and research, training programmes and exchange programmes for
students, academic staff and others;
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals
and prizes;
(xiii) to establish and maintain Colleges and Institutions;
(xiv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that
purpose to enter into such arrangements with other institutions, industrial or
other organisations, as the University may deem necessary;
Objects of
University.
Powers of
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(xv) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and
other programmes for teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;
(xvi) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus
Professors, Consultants, Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to
the advancement of the objects of the University;
(xvii ) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a
Department, as the case may be, in accordance with the Statutes;
(xviii) to determine standards of admission to the University, which may
include  examination, evaluation or any other method of testing;
(xix) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;
(xx) to establish and maintain a health care centre for the benefit of the
students and employees;
(xxi) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of
the employees;
(xxii) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to
make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare;
(xxiii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees,
including their Code of conduct;
(xxiv ) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the
employees, and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed
by the University to be necessary;
(xxv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold and
manage, and to dispose of, without the previous approval of the Central
Government, any property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment
properties for the purposes of the University;
(xxvi) to borrow, without the approval of the Central Government, on the
security of the property of the University, money for the purposes of the
University;
(xxvii) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental
or conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects.
(2) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-section ( 1), it shall be the endeavour
of the University to maintain an all-India character and high standards of teaching and
research, and the University shall, among other measures which may be necessary for
the said purpose and take, in particular, the following measures, namely:—
(i) admission of students and recruitment of Faculty shall be made on all-
India basis;
(ii) admissions of students shall be made on merit, either through Entrance
Tests conducted by the University or in combination with other Universities, or
on the basis of marks obtained in the qualifying examinations;
(iii) encourage inter-University mobility of Faculty;
(iv) introduce semester system, continuous evaluation and choice based
credit system and enter into agreements with other Universities and academic
institutions for credit transfer and joint degree programmes;
(v) introduce innovative courses and programmes of studies with provision
for periodic review and restructuring;
(vi) ensure active participation of students in all academic activities of the
University, including evaluation of teachers;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(vii ) obtain mandatory accreditation from National Assessment and
Accreditation Council  or any other statutory accrediting agency; and
(viii) introduce e-governance with an effective management information
system.
6. The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of India.
7. The University shall be open to all persons irrespective of caste, creed, race or
class.
8. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.
(2) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
9. The following shall be the officers of the University:—
(1) the Chancellor;
(2) the Vice-Chancellor;
(3) the Pro-Vice-Chancellor;
(4) the Deans of Faculties;
(5) the Registrar;
(6) the Finance Officer;
(7) the Controller of Examinations;
(8) the Librarian; and
(9) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of
the University.
10.  (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and
shall, if present, preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring
degrees and meetings of the Court.
11. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as
may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of
the University and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the
University and give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.
12. The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms
and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as
may be prescribed by the Statutes.
13. Every Dean of School shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
14. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents
and authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
Jurisdiction.
University
Open to all
Classes,
Castes and
Creeds.
Visitor.
Officers of
University.
Chancellor
Vice-
Chancellor
Pro-Vice-
Chancellor.
Deans of
Schools.
Registrar.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
15. The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
16. The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such manner and shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
17. The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on such terms and
conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may
be prescribed by the Statutes.
18. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
19. The following shall be the authorities of the University:—
(1) the Court;
(2) the Executive Council;
(3) the Academic Council;
(4) the Board of Studies and Academic Boards;
(5) the Finance Committee; and
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the
authorities of the University.
20. (1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers
and  sanctions, namely:—
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the
University and to suggest measures for the improvement and development of the
University; and
(b) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
21. (1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the University.
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members
and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Executive Council shall have adequate number of members from
among the women:
Provided further that such number of members as may be prescribed by the Statutes
shall be from among the elected members of the Court.
22. ( 1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the
Ordinances, coordinate and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of
the University.
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members
and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Academic Council shall have such number of members as may
be prescribed by the Statutes shall be from among the elected members of the Court.
23. The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
24. The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be
prescribed by the Statutes.
Finance
Officer.
Controller of
Examinations.
Librarian.
Other
Officers.
Authorities of
University.
Court.
Executive
Council.
Academic
Council.
Board of
Studies and
the Academic
Boards.
Finance
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
25. The Constitution, powers and functions of other authorities, as may be declared
by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed by the
Statutes.
26. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies
of  the University, as may be constituted, from time to time;
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said
authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters
relating to those authorities and other bodies for which it may be necessary or
desirable to provide;
(c) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic
distinctions; and
(d) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by
the  Statutes.
27. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and
certificates  of the University;
(c) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies and other
Committees; and
(d) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be,
provided for by the Ordinances.
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with the previous
approval of the Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended,
repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by
the Statutes.
28. The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of
the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes
or the Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
29. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction
of the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by
the University towards the fulfillment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court
on or before such date as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the Court
shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments,
if any.
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1), shall also be
submitted to the Central Government, and that Government which shall, as soon as may
be after it is submitted, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
30. (1) The annual accounts and balance sheet of the University shall be prepared
under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or by such persons as he may authorise on his behalf.
Other
Authorities of
the
University.
Power to
make
Statutes.
Power to
make
Ordinances.
Regulations.
Annual
Report.
Annual
Account.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be
submitted to the Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive
Council.
(3) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to
the Visitor, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as
may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
31. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other
information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may,
from time to time, require.
32. (1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written
contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be
furnished to the employee concerned.
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any
employee shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration
consisting of one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated
by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.
33. Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution
maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the
Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or
of the Principal or the management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be,
and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision
appealed against.
34. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  members) of
any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the
person or body who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become
vacant and the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a
member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person
whose place he fills would have been a member.
35. The Executive Council may appoint a person of high academic distinction and
professional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Associate Professor or any
other equivalent academic post in the University on such terms and conditions as it
deems fit:
Provided that the Executive Council may also create supernumerary posts for a
specified period for appointment of such persons.
36. (1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special
Committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are
not members of such authority.
(2) A Committee appointed under clause (1) may deal with any subject delegated
to it subject to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.
37. The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council
and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members
present and voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion,
make such proposals.
38. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees shall be held in
such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
Returns and
Information.
Condition of
Service of
Employees.
Right to
Appeal.
Filling of
casual
vacancies.
Special Mode
of
Appointment.
Committee.
Honorary
degrees.
Convocations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
39. There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.
40.  There shall be constituted in the University, a Student's Council for every
academic year, consisting of—
(i) the Dean of Students Welfare who shall be Chairperson of the Student
Council;
(ii) twenty-five students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the
basis of merit in studies, sports and extra-curricular activities; and
(iii) twenty-five elected representatives of students in the manner prescribed
by the Ordinances.
41. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority
of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or
person under his or its respective control and subject to the condition that overall
responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the
officer or authority delegating such powers.
42. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer or other employee
of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
43. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of
three years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that order.
44. (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be
published in the Official Gazette.
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the
Statute, Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or
Regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute, Ordinance or
Regulation.
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the
power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement
of this Act, to the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective
effect shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially
Alumni
Association.
Student's
Council.
Delegation of
powers.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Statutes,
Ordinances
and
Regulations to
be published
in the Official
Gazette and
to be laid
before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may
be applicable.
45. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes,—
(a) the first Chancellor and first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the
Visitor in such manner and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and each of
the said officer shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five years as may be
specified by the Visitor;
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the
Visitor and each of the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more
than thirty One members and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated
by the Central Government and shall hold office for a term of three years; and
(d) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty-one
members, who shall be nominated by the Central Government and they shall hold
office for a term of three years:
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the
same shall be filled by appointment or nomination, as the case may be in the
manner prescribed by the Statutes.
Transitional
provisions.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
"mÙkja ;RleqnzL; fgeknzs'oSo nf{k.ke~A o"kZ rn~Hkkjra uke Hkkjrh ;= larfr** means in the
north side of sea and south of Himalaya there is a sacred land known as "Bharat Varsh"
and their generations are called as "Bhartiya". This Shaloka is taken from "Vishnu
Puran" which describes physical boundary of India (Bharat V arsh).The first and
authentic description of Indian boundaries is available only in old Sanskrit literature.
No one can imagine India without Sanskrit. But despite of many institutions of Sanskrit
in country, at present condition of Sanskrit language is dismal and not known to be a
language of common man.
Sanskrit is not only mother of different Indian languages but also of some foreign
languages. It is important to highlight here that relation between Sanskrit language and
Indian scheduled and non-scheduled languages are symbiotic in nature and as a result,
development of Sanskrit means development of other languages also. Sanskrit literature-
V ed. Brahman, Aranyak, Upanishad, Paran, Bhaishya,  etc. are source of fundamental
and behavioural knowledge of different fields like science and human life. So for fast
development of India, common people should have basic understanding about Sanskrit.
The great scientists of modern era like Schopenhauer, Niels Bohr, Einstein, etc. all
have studied Upanishads. Utilitarian thoughts for social system like "Satyamev Jayate
(
lR;eso t;rs )","Vasudhaiv Kutumbakam ( olqèSo dqVqEcde )" etc. are taken from ancient
books and were written in Sanskrit only.
These ancients scriptures are source of great knowledge and with following the
morals contained therein. India can become world leader in near future. But for this
there should be basic understanding of Sanskrit amongst common people. This is only
possible when there shall be use of Sanskrit language in research and development of
computer science, traditional science, mathematics and different social sciences and
imparting of compulsory education of Sanskrit in all level and kind of education
institutes.
To promote teaching of Sanskrit and its use into modern science and technology
establishment of Central Sanskrit University is inevitable.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
January 30, 2018.
11

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish a Central Sanskrit University as a body
corporate to at Mahoba in the State of Uttar Pradesh to promote Sanskrit language,
literature, research in old Sanskrit manuscripts and its use in different subjects like
computer science, mathematics and social sciences with inter-disciplinary approach.
After enactment of the Bill, the Vice Chancellor will be appointed, who will prepare the
Vision Document and the Draft Project Report under the guidance of the statutory
authorities of the University. The actual financial requirements of the University will be
worked out on the basis of the Draft Project Report. It is expected that the proposed
University would require about rupees  one thousand crore during the next Plan period.
The expenditure would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India through the
University Grants Commission under the budgetary provisions of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development.
12

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
1. Sub-Clause (2) of clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Vice-Chancellor to make
the first Ordinances of the University with the previous approval of the Central
Government and provides that the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or
added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
The matters in respect of which Ordinances may be made, or as the case may be,
amended, repealed or added to, relate to admission of students, courses of study,
medium of instruction and examination, the manner of co-operation and collaboration
with other Universities, institutions and other agencies, the setting up of a machinery
for redressal of grievances of employees and other such matters.
2 . Clause 28 of the Bill enables the authorities of the University to make
Regulations, consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct
of their own business and that of the Committees, if any, appointed by them and not
provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by
the Statutes.
3. Clause 41 empowers that any officer or authority of the University may delegate
his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective
control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the
powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such
powers.
4. Clause 43 empowers the Central Government, by order published in the Official
Gazette, to make provisions to remove certain difficulties, which may appear to be
necessary or expedient and such an order is not to be made after the expiry of a period
of three years from the commencement of the Act and such order shall be laid before
each House of Parliament.
5. Clause 44 provides that every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under
the Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and they shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
6. The matters for which the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be made
pertain to matters of procedure or detail and it is not possible to provide for them in the
Bill. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of normal character.
.
13

MGIPMRND—4056LS(S3)—09-02-2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a Central Sanskrit University at Mahoba in the State of
Uttar Pradesh to promote Sanskrit language, literature, research in old Sanskrit
manuscripts and its use in different subjects like computer, science ,
mathematics and social sciences with inter-disciplinary approach
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel , M.P.)