5
Short title and 
commencement.
AS introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 46 of 2023
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF ILL-EFFECTS OF DRUG 
ADDICTION IN SCHOOLS BILL, 2023
By
Shri Dilip Saikia, M.P.
a
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of ill-effects of drug addiction in schools 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Ill-effects of Drug
Addiction in Schools Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Advisory Council” means the Advisory Council for teaching  
ill-effects of Drug Addiction constituted under section 6; 
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government 
of State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(d) “School” means a primary or a middle or a secondary or a senior 
secondary level school imparting education to children, by whatever name such 
institution is called.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify, that ill-effects of drug addiction shall be taught as a compulsory 
subject in all schools from such class onwards as may be determined by the Central 
Government on the recommendation of Advisory Council constituted under  
section 6.
4. The appropriate Government shall immediately after issuance of the 
notification under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching about the  
ill-effects of drug addiction in schools within its jurisdiction.
5. Subject to such rules, as may be prescribed, the appropriate Government 
shall ensure appointment of such number of teachers with such qualifications, 
as may be specified, for teaching about the ill-effects of drug addiction  
 in schools.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within three months of the coming 
into force of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an 
Advisory Council for teaching ill-effects of drug addiction.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of such number of persons, having 
special knowledge or practical experience in the field of dealing with drug addiction 
or narcotics, as the Central Government may deem fit.
7. The Advisory Council shall perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus for teaching about 
the ill-effects of drug addiction for each class; 
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which the subject 
of the ill-effects of drug addiction is to be taught in schools; 
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of 
teachers to be appointed in schools for teaching the subject of ill-effects of drug 
addiction; 
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the institutions which 
may be given recognition for training of teachers teaching ill-effects of drug 
addiction for the purpose of their appointment in schools; and
Definitions.
Compulsory 
teaching of  
ill-effects 
of Drug 
Addiction in 
schools.
Appropriate 
Government to 
issue directions 
for compulsory 
teaching of  
ill-effects of 
drug addiction 
in schools.
Appointment 
of Teachers.
Constitution 
of Advisory 
Council.
Functions 
of Advisory 
Council 
teaching  
ill-effects 
of drug 
addiction.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

(e) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government and the school authorities 
with a view to ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
8. The appropriate Government shall derecognize such schools, which do not 
comply with the provisions of section 4, after giving such institutions a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by 
Parliament in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for carrying out 
the purpose of this act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Derecognition of 
schools for 
non-compliance 
of the provisions 
of the Act.
Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds.
Overriding 
effects of the 
Act.
Power to 
make rules.
5
10
15
20
3

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The increasing drug addiction among children has become a serious problem 
in the country.  These days even small children are falling in the trap of drugs. 
Till now it was believed  that the children of the poor sections who do not go to 
school, usually the children who lead a nomadic life in railway stations, bus stops 
or other places get addicted to drugs but now even the children of elite families 
are also vulnerable. Sometimes due to craze of fashion and  some other time on 
the instigation of friends, these innocent children get trapped in the vortex of drug 
substances. According to a survey by the Government of India, about 1.8 crore 
children and adolescents in the age group of 10 to 17 years, consume a variety 
of intoxicants including alcohol, opium, cocaine, cannabis (bhang). Financially 
prosperous children are consuming heroin, opium, cocaine, brown sugar etc. On 
the other hand, poor children starting from beedi, liquor, cigarette go on to consume 
charas, ganja, cannabis (bhang), opium, cough syrup etc.
No one in the society respects the person who is a drug-addict. Drug-addict 
person quarrels with his family members after getting intoxicated, due to which 
the atmosphere of the house becomes vitiated. Its biggest impact is seen on the 
education of children.
Therefore, children should be specially taught in schools about the bad 
consequences of drugs by including these in the curriculum so that they can keep 
themselves aloof from the bad addiction of drugs.
Hence this Bill.
 New Delhi; DILIP SAIKIA
January 19, 2023
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for appointment of teachers in all schools.  
Clause 6 provides for constitution of Advisory Council for teaching ill-effects of drug 
addiction by the Central Government. Clause 9 provides for payment of adequate 
funds to the State for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, 
it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore will 
be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to 
be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, 
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of ill-effects of drug addiction in schools
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Dilip Saikia, M.P.) 