1
THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
SHRIMATI BHARTI PARDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938.
   BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 2025.
   (2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),–
(a) after sub-section (6C), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–
Bill No. 46 of 2025
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
4 of 1938.

2
   “(6D) “health insurance premium” means the amount payable by a
policyholder to maintain active health insurance coverage;”; and
(b) after sub-section (16C), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:–
“(16D) “senior citizen” means a male aged sixty years and above and a
female aged fifty-eight years and above.”.
 3. After PART IV A of the principal Act, the following PART and sections
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:–
                                                “PART IVB
REGULATION OF HEALTH INSURANCE FOR SENIOR CITIZENS
101D. (1) Every insurer shall offer age-sensitive health insurance plans to the
senior citizens with graded premiums, taking into account the financial
vulnerabilities .
 (2) The health insurance plans for senior citizens under sub-section (1) shall
include coverage for common geriatric conditions and pre-existing diseases after a
waiting period not exceeding one year.
 (3) No insurer shall increase health insurance premiums for senior citizens by
more than five per cent. every year without prior approval from the Authority.
(4) Every senior citizen shall have the right to port his health insurance policy
between insurers without loss of benefits or additional waiting periods.
101E. (1) The Authority shall monitor compliance with the provisions of section
101D and may issue guidelines in this behalf.
 (2) If any insurer violates the provisions of section 101D, such insurer shall
be liable to penalties as prescribed by the Authority.
101F.  Every insurer involved in health insurance business shall submit annual
reports to Authority detailing premium structures, claims processed and measures
taken to ensure fairness for senior citizens in such manner as may be prescribed.”.
Insurer
involved
health
insurance
business to
submit
Annual
report.
5
10
15
20
25
Insertion of
new
PART IVB.
Regulation
of Health
Insurance
for Senior
Citizens.
Monitoring
and
Compliance
by the
Authority.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Insurance Act, 1938 was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating
to the business of insurance. The Act deals with the life insurance business, general
insurance business and the health insurance business, etc. However, the Act does
not address the concerns of the health insurance of the senior citizens. The need is
to address the financial burden posed by rising health insurance premiums for senior
citizens.
The present Bill aims to regulate annual premium increases to ensure
affordability and accessibility for individuals on fixed incomes. It mandates insurers
to design financially inclusive plans, ensuring comprehensive coverage for common
geriatric conditions and pre-existing diseases with minimal waiting periods.
Additionally, it introduces the right to seamless portability of health insurance policies,
allowing senior citizens to switch insurers without losing accrued benefits.
The present Bill seeks to establish a robust monitoring framework through
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) to enforce
compliance and issue necessary guidelines to promote equity in healthcare access.
By creating public awareness campaigns senior citizens may be educated about
their rights, while dedicated grievance redressal mechanisms will address insurance-
related concerns promptly. By encouraging innovation in health insurance policies
tailored to senior citizens and bridging urban-rural healthcare disparities, this
amendment aims to uphold the dignity and well-being of senior citizens, ensuring
healthcare an accessible necessity rather than a financial burden.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Insurance Act, 1938 with a view to
include and regulate the health insurance of the senior citizens in the country.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                   BHARTI PARDHI
 January 20, 2025
3

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACTS FROM THE INSURANCE   ACT, 1938]
(ACT NO. 4 OF 1938)
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context,—
(1) * * * * *
(6C) “health insurance business” means the effecting of contracts which
provide for sickness benefits or medical, surgical or hospital expense
benefits, whether in-patient or out-patient travel cover and personal
accident cover;
    *   *  * * *
(16C) “Securities Appellate Tribunal” means the Securities Appellate
Tribunal established under section 15K of the Securities and Exchange
Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);`
     *   *  * * *
Definitions.
4

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Insurance  Act, 1938.
(Shrimati Bharti Pardhi, M.P .)