THE WORKING ELEPHANTS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2016
By
SHRI P. KARUNAKARAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for measures for the protection and welfare of working elephants and
for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.( 1) This Act may be called the Working Elephants (Protection and Welfare)
Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 46 of  2016
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) ''Board'' means the Working Elephants Protection and Welfare Board
constituted under section 3;
(ii) "Fund" means the Working Elephants Protection and Welfare Fund
constituted under section 6;
(iii) " mahout" means any person who is responsible for driving, training or
taking care of an elephant;
(iv) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(v) "working elephant" means any elephant which is domesticated and put to
work for earnings by any person or institution by whatever name called.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board to be known as the Working Elephants Protection and Welfare Board for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(i) an eminent person having special knowledge or
practical experience in the field of animal sciences or a
veterinary doctor,
(ii) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge
of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change;
(iii) the Secretary to the Government of India in
charge of the Ministry of Finance,
(iv) two persons representing the owners of timber
depots where working elephants are engaged in work,
(v) two persons representing the owners of circus
companies where working elephants are engaged in work,
(vi) two persons representing the zoological gardens
situated in various parts of the country,
(vii) three persons representing the places of
worship of various faiths where working elephants are
engaged for any purpose,
(viii) ten persons representing the State having
largest population of working elephants,
(ix) five persons representing the working elephant
owners,
(x) one person representing the mahouts,
to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and other members of the Board, shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
Working Elephants Protection and Welfare Board shall have the power to take steps for
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
5. The Board shall—
(i) cause to conduct study on the problems relating to working elephants and
suggest measures to overcome them;
Definitions.
Chairperson;
ex-officio member-Secretary;
member;
member;
member;
member;
member;
Working
Elephants
Protection
and Welfare
Board.
member;
member; and
member.
Powers of the
Board.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(ii) create infrastructure for better healthcare of the working elephants and
for their transportation from one place to another;
(iii) provide for better care and maintenance of working elephants through
measures such as inserting electronic chips in their body which shall keep a complete
record of life history, health and movement of working elephants;
(iv) provide special sanctuaries for working elephants and deploy experts in
animal science and veterinary doctors in such sanctuaries to ensure that elephant
population is sustained and enhanced;
(v) work in close collaboration with States having high population of working
elephants and creation of facilities including facilities for proper food, drinking
water and sanitation for the working elephants;
(vi) create awareness among public to treat domesticated elephants in just and
friendly manner;
(vii) prescribe guidelines regarding training, pay and conditions of service of
mahouts; and
(viii) provide for welfare measures for working elephants when they get old and
are not able to work.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Working Elephants Protection and Welfare Fund with a corpus
of rupees two thousand and five hundred crore.
(2) The Central Government, the State Governments and the working elephant owners
shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
from individuals, organisations or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
7. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Working
Elephants
Protection
and Welfare
Fund.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India inhabits around 50 per cent. of the wild elephants and 20 per cent. of captive
elephants in Asia. In India, the elephants have been an inseparable part of the religion and
the cultural heritage of the country for many centuries. The domestication of elephants in
India dates back to many centuries, from Indus V alley Civilisation to V edic period of Indian
history. During the medieval period of Indian history, elephants were considered as symbol
of superior army, gallantry as well as status in the society. With the domestication of elephants,
their role as worker also came into being and elephants were assigned jobs which were not
possible by human apart from being part of the army. The working elephants still forms part
of our society in various regions of the country. Consequently, it is now time to recognise the
contribution of the working elephants and to give them adequate care and protection.
To role of State in this context becomes utmost important and the State should
endeavour to provide for protected sanctuaries for these animals to rest and also for breeding
for certain number of months every year, among other things.
The Bill, therefore, proposes to constitute a Board as well as a separate Fund for the
welfare of the working elephants recognising the need for their protection and providing
them with better conditions while at work or otherwise.
N
EW DELHI; P. KARUNAKARAN
February 8, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Working Elephants Protection and
Welfare Board. Clause 5 provides that the Board shall undertake certain welfare measures for
working elephants. Clause 6 provides for constitution of Working Elephants Protection and
Welfare Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore per
annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of
rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for measures for the protection and welfare of working elephants and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri P. Karunakaran, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4232LS(S3)—29.02.2016.