     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 46 of 2021
THE CONSTITUTION  (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
By
DR. D. RA VIKUMAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2. For article 129 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
“129.(1) The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the
powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
(2) The power to punish for contempt referred to in clause (1) shall be subject to
law made by Parliament in this behalf, including:–
(a) the definition of what constitutes contempt;
(b) the different classes of contempt;
(c) the nature and maximum extent of punishment that may be
imposed on a person found guilty of contempt;
(d) the period of limitation within which a proceeding for contempt may be
initiated for contempt that is not in the nature of a continuing contempt; and
(e) the modes of purging contempt by a person found  guilty of contempt.
(3) No proceeding for criminal contempt of the Supreme Court shall be initiated
for expression of any subjective opinion as to a judgment, judge or the Court.
(4) No proceeding for criminal contempt of the Supreme Court shall be initiated
without formal and specific articles of charge personally served upon the person
accused.
(5) Any person accused of criminal contempt of the Supreme Court shall be
entitled to all rights conferred by or recognised in Part III of this Constitution and the
rights recognised as basic due process guarantees of a criminal trial,
including :—
(a) the right of presumption of innocence and the right not be punished
except when proved beyond reasonable doubt to be guilty of such contempt;
(b) the right to be represented by counsel of his choice;
(c) the right against being compelled to testify against himself;
(d) the right of such person, if found guilty, to file an appeal within thirty
days to a larger bench of the same Court.
(6) No person accused of contempt of the Supreme Court shall be detained or
taken into custody in connection with such accusation or proceeding unless he has
been found guilty and a punishment of imprisonment has been imposed on him:
Provided that the court that imposes a sentence on a person found guilty of criminal
contempt may suspend the same to enable such person to file an appeal if he so
desires.
(7) The Supreme Court may appoint one or more advocates or senior advocates
as prosecutors to conduct the trial of the person accused of criminal contempt of the
Supreme Court.
(8) The Supreme Court may direct an examination or cross-examination of any
judge of the Supreme Court on an application made by a person accused of criminal
contempt.
(9) Nothing contained in clauses (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8) shall limit  the powers
of the Supreme Court to punish summarily for contempt when such contempt is in the
face of such court.
5
Substitution
of new
article for
article 129.
2
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(10) Subject to clauses (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (9), Supreme Court may make
Rules  of Procedure regulating the exercise of the power to punish for contempt of
itself.”.
3. In article 142 of the Constitution, in clause (2), for the words, “subject to the
provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament,” the words “Subject to the
provisions of article 129 and law made in this behalf by Parliament,” shall be
substituted.
4. For article 215 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
“215. (1) Every High Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the
powers of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
(2) The power to punish for contempt referred to in clause (1) shall be subject to
law made by Parliament in this behalf, including:—
(a) the definition of what constitutes contempt;
(b) the different classes of contempt;
(c) the nature and maximum extent of punishment that may be imposed on a
person found guilty of contempt;
(d) the period of limitation within which a proceeding for contempt may be
initiated for contempt that is not in the nature of a continuing contempt; and
(e) the modes of purging contempt by a person found guilty of contempt.
(3) No proceeding for criminal contempt of the High Court shall be initiated for
expression of any subjective opinion as to a judgment, judge or the Court.
(4) No proceeding for criminal contempt of the High Court shall be initiated
without formal and specific articles of charge personally served upon the person
accused.
(5) Any person accused of criminal contempt of the High Court shall be entitled
to all rights conferred by or recognised in Part III of this Constitution and the rights
recognised as basic due process guarantees of a criminal trial, including :—
(a) the right of presumption of innocence and the right not be punished except
when proved beyond reasonable doubt to be guilty of such contempt;
(b) the right to be represented by counsel of his choice;
(c) the right against being compelled to testify against himself;
(d) the right of such person, if found guilty, to file an Appeal to the Supreme
Court.
(6) No person accused of contempt of the High Court shall be detained or taken
into custody in connection with such accusation or proceeding unless he has been
found guilty and a punishment of imprisonment has been imposed on him:
Provided that the court that imposes a sentence on a person found guilty of criminal
contempt may suspend the same to enable such person to file an appeal if he so
desires.
(7) The High Court may appoint one or more advocates or senior advocates as
prosecutors to conduct the trial of the person accused of criminal contempt of such
court.
Amendment of
article 142.
Substitution
of new
article for
article 215.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

(8) The High Court may direct an examination or cross-examination of any judge
of that court on an application made by a person accused of criminal contempt.
(9) Nothing contained in clauses (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8) shall limit the powers of
the High Court to punish summarily for contempt when such contempt is in the face
of such court.”.
(10) Subject to clauses (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and (9), each High Court may make
Rules of Procedure to regulate the exercise of the power to punish for contempt of
itself.”.
4
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Some of the judgments of the hon’ble Supreme Court in respect of the higher
judiciary’s powers to punish for criminal contempt appear to indicate that the said
powers are untrammeled and are not in any way limited by the provisions of the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.   Such a reading appears to be based on the present,
open-ended wording of articles 129 and 215 of the Constitution.  The founding texts
such as the Constituent Assembly Debates also do not appear to have dealt with the
issue in detail.
An organ of the State having untrammeled, unlimited power in respect of any
matter is an incongruity in a modern constitutional democracy that respects the
fundamental and human rights of all persons. Public criticism of all institutions
including the courts is crucial in a democracy constituted by “We the People”.
Allowing the courts to exercise unlimited power to punish for contempt, even assuming
that the courts will only use such power sparingly, causes a chilling effect on free
expression.
The power to punish for contempt of court is not only desirable but also necessary
for administration of justice. However, the provisions of criminal contempt, particularly
of the form that is not committed in the face of the court are a colonial vestige and
several modern democracies have done away with “scandalising the court” as
constituting criminal  contempt – for it is no longer seen as a reasonable restriction
on the right to free expression.
The Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 and the 2006 Amendment thereto attempted
to make progress in moderating contempt powers and rationalizing it with citizens’
right to free expression.  Section 13 (a) that provides that no action that does not
substantially interfere or tends to interfere with the due course of justice may be
punishable for contempt. Section 13(b) recognises truth as a valid defence in contempt
proceedings.  However, the open-ended interpretation of Articles 129 and 215 that
the judicial pronouncements have given necessitates a constitutional amendment to
ensure that these legislatively recognised safeguards are effectively realised.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to bring the
powers of the Supreme Court and each High Court to punish for contempt of itself to
be circumscribed by certain basic guarantees and further circumscribed by law made
by Parliament such as the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 and the amendments thereto.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;          D. RA VIKUMAR
February 8, 2021
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
129. The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers
of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
*                      *                      *                      *                      *
142. (1)     *                     *                       *                      *
(2)  Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the
Supreme Court shall, as respects the whole of the territory of India, have all and
every power to make any order for the purpose of securing the attendance of any
person, the discovery or production of any documents, or the investigation or
punishment of any contempt of itself.
* * * * *
215. Every High Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers
of such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
* * * * *
Supreme
Court to be
a court of
record.
Enforcement
of decrees
and orders of
Supreme
Court and
orders as to
discovery, etc.
High Courts
to be courts
of record.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
( Dr. D. Ravikumar, M.P . )