• of 1MB. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABA ON 
BUI No. 17 of IH9 
THE OILFIELDS (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) 
AMENDMENT BILL, [969 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Oilfiel.ds (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Oilfields (Regulation and Develop- Short 
ment) Amendment Act, 1969. title 
and 
S (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of com. 
10 
IS 
January, 1968. mence 
ment. 
Z. In sub-section (2) of section 6 of the Oilftelds (Regulation and Amend. 
Development) Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), ment ot 
for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- ;ectlon 
"(i) the collection of royalties, and the levy and collection of fees 
or taxes, in respect of mineral oils mined, quarried, excavated or 
collected;". , 
3. After section S of the principal Act, the follOWing section shall be Inser. 
inserted, namely: - tion of 
new lee. 
tion SA. 
"SA. (1) The holder of a mining lease granted before the com- Royal. 
mencement of the Oilftelds (Regulation and Development) Amend- tie. 1n 

respect 
of mineral 
oils. 
Inser-
tion of 
new 
Schedule. 
2 
ment A.!t, 1969, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the ins-
trument of lease or in any law in force at such commencement, pay 
royalty in respect of any mineral oil mined, quarried, excavated or 
collected by him from the leased area after such commencement, at 
the rate for the time being specified in the Schedule in respect of - 5 
that mineral oil. 
(2) The holder of a mining lease granted on or after the com-
mencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amend-
ment Act, 1969, shall pay royalty in respect of any mineral oil mined, 
quarried, excavated or collected by him from the leased area at the 10 
rate for the time being specified in the Schedule in respect of that 
mineral oil. i I 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2), no royalty shall be payable in respect of any crude 
oil, casing-head condensate or natural gas which is unavoidably lost IS 
or is retUrned to the reservoir or is used for drilling or other opera-
tions relating to the production of petroleum or natural gas, or both. 
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Schedule so as to enhance or reduce the rate at 
which royalty shall be payable in respect of any mineral oil with 20 
effect from such date as may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that the Central Government shall not-
(a) fix the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral oil to 
as to exceed twenty per cent. of the sale price of the mineral 
oil at the oilfields or the oil well-head, as the case may be, or 25 
(b) enhance the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral 
oil more than once during any period of four years.". 
4. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following Schedule shall 
be inserted, namely:-
1. Crude oil: 
"THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 6A) 
RATES OF RoYALTY 
Rupees ten per metric tonne. 
2. Casing-head condensate: Rupees ten per metric tonne. 
30 
3. Natural' gas: 
1 
Ten per cent of the value of the 35 
natural gas obtained at well-head.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sections 5 and 6 of the Oilfte1ds (Regulation and Development) Act 
1948 (53 of 1948) empower the Central Government to make rules fo; 
regulating ~e grant of mining leases and for prohibiting the grant of 
such leases In respect of any mineral oil as also for the development of 
mineral oil resources. Clause (i) of sub-section 2 of section 6 of the Act 
empowers the Central Government to make rules for "the levy and 
collection of royalties, fees or taxes in respect of mineral oUs, mined, 
quarried, excavated or collected". 
The Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959 were formulated in exer-
cise of the powers conferred by sections 5 and 6 of the said Act. Rule 14 
of the said Rules, inter alia, had stipulated that royalty at the rate of 
Rs. 7.50 per metric tonne of crude oil and casing-head condensate and 
at 10 per cent. of the value at the well-head of the natural gas obtained 
by the lessee, shall be paid 
The rate of royalty was decided upon by the award of the late Prime 
Minister in 1962. This award provided for a review of the rate of 
royalty after a period of four years. This was done and the Prime Minis-
ter has now given an award which provides for an increase in the rate 
of royalty payable for crude oil, etc. from Rs. 7.50 to Rs. 10,000 per metric 
tonne, with effect from 1st January, 1968. The enhanced' rate has, 
therefore, to be applied not only to leases granted in future but also re-
trospectively to all leases with effect from 1st Ja;nuary, 1968. This 
object cannot be achieved by amending the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
R~les, 1959. It is necessary to make appropriate provisions in the Act 
itself for imposing a liability to pay enhanced rates of royalty in the 
existing leases also, notwithstanding anything contained in the instrument 
of the concerned lease. It is, accordingly, conSidered. necessary to amend 
the Oilftelds (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 80 as to make 
provisions for the payment of royalty in the Act itself and to take power 
to enhance the royalty by notification subject to limitations analogous 
to those contained in sub-section (3) of section 9 of the Mines and 
Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957. 
The Bill is designed to give effect to the above proposals. 
NEW DI:LHJ; TRIGUNA SEN. 
The 26th April, 1969. 
a 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section, namely section 6A, 
in the Oilftelds (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948. Sub-section 
(4) of the proposed section 6A confers a power on the Central Govern-
ment to enhance or reduce, by notification in the Official Gazette, the 
rates of royalty in respect of any mineral oil specified in the Schedule 
and that sub-section further empowers the Central Government to specify 
the date from which such enhanced or reduced rates of royalty shall be 
payable. The power proposed to be conferred by the said sub-section 
is, however, subject to the restrictions specified in the proviso thereto. 
It is not possible to specify the quantum of the increase or decrease of 
the rates of royalty in the Bill. The delegation of the legislative power 
is, therefore, of a normal character. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
b'raAc.'T noM 'I'D 0D..rII:uIs (Rllcnn.ATlC»1 .urn DEVII:LOPMDlT) Ac:r, 1948 
(63 0 .. 1948) 
• • • • • 
t. (1) • • • • • Power k> 
mw 
(.2) In particular, aDd without prejudice to the aenerality of UIe fore- rulela, 
~ power, such rules may provide for all or my of the folloWinl retpeCV 
rnattns, namely: _ mineral 
deveJoJl-
• • • • • 
(i) the levy and collect1onof royalties, fees or taxes in respect 
01 mineral oila mined, quarried. excavated or collected; 
• • • • • 
•• ; .I 
6 
ment . 

LOR SABHA 
A 
BIu.. 
. ',. "J, 
fufther 10 ameDd the Oilfieldl (Rega1atiou aDd Developman Act, 
1948· 