AI; INTRODUCED IN LoK: SABRA ON 
10 MAY 19B~ 
.. No. 47 011989 
THE SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK--OF INDIA 
BILt.,· 1989 .', 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER 1 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
" 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
'%"aeAnitjww 
CHAPTER n 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT Boo or 
INDIA AND CAPITAL THEREOF 
3. ~tablishment and incorporation of Small Industries Development 
BaDk',oI. IBma. 
4. Authorised capital. 
CHAPTJim. m 
~<J&MJ:Nr OF 'DI&' SMAU. 'IKDUB'l'RlQ iMJRt 
5. Management. 
6. Constitution of Board. 
7. Managing Director. 
8. Disqualifications. 
9. VacaUon a.ud r~icmof ,GfBCe ,by DirectGrs. 
10. Casual vacancies in office of Managing Director. . . .. 
11. Meetings of'the 'Baara. 
12. Committees. 
CHAl'nm IV 
BUSINI'SS OF THE ~ lbDIUIWiuEs BAHJt 
13. Business of Small; Industries Bank. 
14. Loans by Central Government. , 
15. Borrowings and acceptance of deposit, ~·th.s.auiI:idUR~ 
Bank 
( i ) 
364 LS-l , 

(ii) 
CLAUSE 
. 1 
1S. Investment. , ~. : " r, 
17. Power to tranafe.r rights. 
18. Power to acquire rights. 
19. Loans iJl foreign. currency. 
,. 20. Grants. donations, etc., to the Small Industries Bank. 
CHAP'l'b V 
21. Small Industries Development Assistance Fund. 
22. Credits to Small Industries Development Assistance Fund. 
23. Utilisation of Small Industries Development Aasistanc:e FuDcS. 
24. Debits to Small Indusu-ies Development Assistance Fund. 
25. Accounts and audit of Small Industries DevelopmeDt Aalstance 
Fund. 
26. Liquidation of Small Industries Development Auiltanc:e Fund. 
CHAPTER VI 
27. Small Industries General Fund. 
28. Preparation of accounts and balance sheet. 
29. Disposal of profits accruing to Small Industries GeDeral Fund. 
30. Audit. 
31. Saving. 
CHAPTER vn 
32. Transfer of part of business of Development Bank. 
CHAPTER VnI 
33. Staff of Small Industries Bank. 
,M. Delegati_ of powers. 
36. Returns. 
.\ 
38. ObUgations as to ftdelity and seereey. " ., , 

LOt( SA!HA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE SMALL INDUSlRISs DEVELOPMSNT BANK OF DJDIA BILL, 1q89 
(~fl.s in troduced in Ink sa~a) 
1. page (iii), agains t clause No. 37,-
for 11 in va lida te act" read "to in valida te acts" 
2. Page (iii), against clause No.48,-
fQ r "Ac t 28 (") f' 1891" reaQ. "Ac t 18 0 f 1891" 
3. page 3, line 18,-
for.. "Sm') 11 " read "Small" 
4. Page 3, line 19,-
fo r "be " ~ad "by" 
5. Page 4, agamst line 18, in the marginal citation,-
fo r '~61 'J f 1986" r.ea d "6 1 0 f 198 1 II 
6. Paf.'e 4, line 22,-
for "1'0 rm" r.ed.Q. "fro m" 
7 • Fag e 5, 1 in e 26,-
8. Page 10, liIle 2, 
f'J;:' '~!'econ:..menJa l..Lv.1!l l'cad "accomanda tien" 
9. page 14, l.i.ne 32,-
for "er.:..!Jpl::;yee" read "employee" 
10. Page 20, line 33,-
for_ "specied" r\)ad "sl')ecified," 
11. Page 21, jn the marginal heading to clause 42,-
fQ.I: "small Indutr-ies" r.ead "Small Ind us tries" 
12. Page 26, lines 19 and 20,-
for.. ':insert Bank", insert the words ", the' 
!:..Q2.Q.. 'insert the words" or from the' 
.' 3. Page 27, 1 ine 7,-
~_ __for 'tince" read ''Hence'' 

(jj i ) 
CLAuau 
37. Defects in appointment not invalidate act. etc. 
38. Rights of Small Industries Bank in case of default. 
39. Power to seek assistance of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or 
DistJrict Magistrate. 
40. Power to call for repayment before agreed period. 
41. Special provisions for enforcement of claims by Small Induatrlel 
Bank. 
42. Small Industries Bank to have access to recordJ 
43. Validity of loan or advance not to be questioned. 
'"" Indemnity of directors .. 
45. Protection of action taken under this Act. 
48. Nomination by deposito.rs or holders of bonds or other securlti-. 
47. Arrangement with Small Industries Bank on appointment of 
directors to prevail. 
48. Act 28 of 1891 to apply in relation to Small Industries Bank. 
49. Act 10 of 1949 not to apply to Small Industries Bank .. 
50. Act 43 of 1961 not to apply to Small Industries Bank. 
51. Liquidation of Small Industries Bank. 
52. Power to make regulations. 
53. Amendment of certain enactments. 
It. Power to remove difftcultie.. 

Bill No. 47'of 1989 ---_._--
THE SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDlA 
BILL, 1989 
A 
BILL 
to ~.tab«Sh the Small Industries Development Bank of India as the prin-
cipal financial institution fOT the pr&moti&n, financingandc!tvelop-
ment of i7J..dMstry in the sm.a.U-scale sector and to ~rdin4te the 
functions of the institutions enga.ged in the promotion, financi1l.g or 
developing industry in the small-scale sector and for matters conneCt· 
eel tAerewit1to. or i.ftcideetal thereto; 
BII it eRaC!ted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the, Republic of 
lndia as follows:-
CHAFfER:! 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Small Industries DevelQpu1ent Bank 
of India Act, 1989. 
(2) It. extends to the whole of India.. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
10 different provisions of this Act. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Board" means the Board of Directors ot the Small Industries 
~eIopment, Bank .of India referred to in section 5; 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Defini-
tions. 

2 
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairman referred to !n clause (4) 
of sub-section (1) of section 8; 
(c) "Court" means the High Court within the local limits ot Wh08e 
jur1sd1ct1on,--
(i) the defendant or respondent or, where there is more than 5 
one defendant or respondent anyone of them-
) " 
(1) has his registered office, or 
(2) carries on the whole or part of his business, 
at the time of commenceme!1t of any legal proceedings agaiDlt 
him under this Act, or 10 
"(ii) the cause of action for such legal proceedings, wholly or 
in l'Qrl. arises; 
(d) "Development Bank" means the Industrial Development Bank 
of India established under section 8 of the Industrial Developmalt 
Bank of India Act, 1964; 15 180t18M. 
(e) "Director" means a Director nominated under sub-section (1) 
C)f section 6 and includes the Managing Director; 
(f) "export" means f'.q>Ort frOm Indilt of products or services of 
any industrial concern in small-scale sector; 
(g) "import" means import into India of services or goods in- 20 
eluding all materials, commodities and articles in a solid. liquid or 
gaseoU8 state and all forms of energy for the use of any industrial 
concern in the small-seale sector; 
(h) ''industrial concern in the small-scale sector" means an 
industrial concern as defined in clause (e) of section 2 of the Indus- 25 
trial Development Bank of India Act. 1964, and which is regarded 88 18 of 18M. 
a amall-scale undertaking under section 11B of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951; 6S of 1951. 
(i) "Managing Director" means the Managing Director apPOinted 
under sub-section (1) of section 7; I 30 
U) "National Small Industries Corporation" means the National 
Small Industries Corporation Limited registe.red under the Companies 
Act, 1956; 
(Jc) "notification" means a notification published in the Offtetal 
Gazette; '35 
. (1) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under 
this ACt; 
. ,(m) "Small Industries Bank" means· the Small IndU$tl:i_ Deve~ 
lopment Bank of India established under sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(n) "State Small Industries Corporation" means a State Corpo- 40 
ration, registered under the Companies Act. 1956, for small industries ; 
in a State; 
(0) "State Financial Corporation" means a financial corporation 
established under section 3 or section 3A or an institution notified 
under section 46 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951; 4 
1 of 1866. 
lof 1858. 
63 of 19~1. 

1011958. 
18 of 196-4. s 
a 
(P) "State Industrial Development Corporation" meana a State 
Corporation registered under the Companies Act, 19~6, for the develop-
ment of industries in a State; 
(q) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964, ahal1 
have the meanings respec4ively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER Il 
EsTABLISHMENT OF THE SMALL LNDUSTlUES DEVELOPMENT BANlC OJ' 
INDIA Am) CAPITAL TIIEREOF 
10 3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of 
this Act, a corporation to be known as the Small Industries Develop-
ment Bank of India. 
(Z) The Small Industries Bank shall be a body corporate with the 
1 S name ato.resaid having perpetual succession and a common seal witb 
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispoae 
of property and to contract, and may, by that name, sue or be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Smoll Industries Bank shall be at Luclmow 
or at such other place as the Central Government may be notiAcation. 
20 specify. 
(4) The Small Industries Bank shall establish offices, branches 01' 
agencies at any place in or outside India. 
,. (1) The authorised capital of the Small Industries Bank shall be 
two hundred and fifty crores of rupees: 
25 Provided that the Development Bank may increase the said capital up 
to one thousand crores of rupees. 
30 
(2) The issued capital of the Small Industries Bank shall be wholly 
subscribed by the Development Bank. I I 
CHAPTER DI 
MANAGEMENT OF THE SMALL INDUSTRIES BANK 
5. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the 
affairs and business of the Small Industries Bank shall vest in a Board of 
Directors, which may exercise all powers and do all acts and things which 
may be exercised or done by the Small Industries Bank. 
3S (2) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Small Indue-
tries Bank shall be guided by such directions in matters of pOlicy involviDg 
public ·interest as theCeDtral-· Government, in·" conaultation with 'the 
Development Bank, or the Development Bank, may give in writing. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in regulations made under this Act. 
40 the Ch8irm.an shall also have powers of general superintendence and 
direction of the affairs and business of the Small Industries Bank and ~y 
also exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exerclMd 
Of done by that Bank. 
·F..stab. 
llah-
ment 
and in-
corpora-
tionof 
SmalllD-
dustries 
Develop-
ment 
BaDltof 
India. 
Autho· 
ri8ed 
capital 
Manale-
ment. 

Casual 
vacancies 
inoftlce 
of 
ManagiD, 
Director. 
Meetings 
otthe 
Board. 
Com· 
mittees. 
Busi-
nl!SS ot 
small 
Indus· 
tries 
Bank. 
6 
(2) Any Director may resign his of6ee by giving notice thereof in 
writing to the authority that nominated him and on his resignatiObbeing 
accepted by such authority or if his resignation is not sooner accepted, 
on the expiry of three months from the receipt thereof by such nominating 
authority, he IiIhall be deemed to have vacated hiB office. 5 
leo If the Managing Director is, by infirmity, or otherwise rendered 
incapable of carrying out his duties or his absence on leave or otherwise 
in clreumstances invol ... ing the vacation of his: oftice, the Development 
Bank may appoint another person to act in hiS place during his absence. 
11. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall 1'0 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business 
at its meetings as may be prescribed 
(2) The Chairman or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a 
meeting of the Board. any Director nominated by the Chairman in this 
behalf and in the absence of sUch nomination, any other Director, elected IS 
by the Directors present from amongst themselves at the meeting, shall 
preaide at the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board 
shall be decided by a majority of votes of the Directors present and 
voting, and in the event of an equality of votes. the Chairman. or in his 20 
absence, the person presiding. shall have a second or casting vote. 
12. (1) The Board may oconstitute such committeelil whether consist-
ing wholly of Directors or wholly of other persons or partly of Directors 
and partly of other persons for such PUrpOliles as it may think fit. 
(2) 'nte members of a committee shall be paid such fees and allow- 2S 
ances as may be determined by the Board for attendIng the meetings of 
ally committee constituted under sub-section (1) and for attending to any 
other work of the Small Industries Bank. 
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINESS OF THE SMALL INDUSTRIES BANK 
U. (1) The Small Industries Bank shall fun.::tion as the principal 30 
financial institution for the promotion, financing and development of in-
dustrial oconceFns in the smal!-scale sector and shall also coordinate the 
functions of institutions engaged in promoting, financing and developing 
the industrial eoncerns in the small-scale sector and may carry on and 
tran!!act any of the following business, namely:-
• 3' 
(i) granting loans and advances to any State Finaneial Corpora-
tion. State Industrial Development Corporation. State Small Indus-
tries Corporation, .c;.cheduled bank, State Cooperative Bank or such 
other financial institutions, as the Central Government may, on the 
recommendation of the Development Bank, specify. by way of 40 
refinance on su.ch teml5 and condit:ons as it may deem fit to imp0'3e. 
of any loans or advances granted to industrial concern. in the small-
scale sector by such corporation, bank or institution. which are re-
payable within a period not exceeding twenty-five years; 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
35 
40 
45 
'1 
(ii) eccepting t dilcounting or rediscounting bills of exchange and 
promissOl'y notes made, drawn, accepted or endorsed by industrial 
concerns in the small-scale sector or by any person selling products 
manufactured by an industrial concern in the small-scale sector; 
(iii) subscribing to, or purchasing stocks" shares, bonds ~ deben-
tures of, any State Financial Corporation, State Industrial Develop-
ment Corporation, State Small Industries Corporation, National 
Small Industries Corporation or such other financial institutions, as 
the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Deve-
leprnent Bank, specify; 
(iv) granting lines of credit or loans and advances to any State 
Financial Corporation State Industrial Development Corporation, , 
State Small IndustrieA Corporation, National Small Industries Cor-
poration or such other financial institutions as the Central Govern-
ment may, on the recommendation of the Development Bank, specify; 
(v) granting loans and advances to any industrial coneem in 
the small-seale sector or subscribing to, or purchasing, or lmder-
writing the iSSUE; of stocks, shares, bonds or debentures of, any such 
concern: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to 
preclude the Small Industries Bank from granting loans or advances 
to, or subscribing to the debentures of, an industrial concem in the 
small-scale sector, the amounts outstanding thereon may be conver-
tible at the option of the Small Industries Bank into stocks or shares 
of that concern within the period the loan, advance or debenture is 
repayable. 
Explanation.-ln this clause, the expreSSion "the amounts out-
standing thereon" used in relation to any loan or advance, shall mean 
the principal, interest and other ~harges payable on such loan or 
advance as at the time when the amounts are sought to be ronverted 
into stocks or shares; 
(vi) granting loans and advances-
(a) to any person exporting; or 
(b) to any person outside India, in connection with the 
p.xport; or 
(c) fol' the execution of turn-key projects outside India by 
any industrial concern in the small-scale sector; 
(vii) granting loans and advances to a scheduled bank or any 
other bank or such flnancial institutions as the Central Government. 
may, on the recommendation of the Development Bank, specify, by 
way of refinance of loans and advances granted by it for purposes 
of export; 
(!)iii) accepting, collecting, discounting, rediscountIng, purl!hasing 
selling or negotiating in or outside India, bills of exchange or promis-
sory notes ariSing out of transactions, relating to export or import 
and granting of loans and advances in or outside India against such 
bills or promissory notes; 

8 
(i:r) granting, opening, issuing, confirming or endorsing lettt'Ts 
of credit and negotiating or collecting bills or other documents drawn 
thereunder; 
(x) granting lines of credit to the Government of any foreign 
State or any financial institution or person outside India for the S 
purpose of export or impo1t; 
(xi) financing export from or import into India of machinery, 
equipment or other assets including vehicles. ships and aircraftIJ all 
lease, sub-lease or hire-purchase basis by or for any industrial concern 
in small-scale sector; 10 
(:rii) buying or selling of, or entering into such other dealiniS 
in, foreign exchange. as may be necessary for the discharge of the 
functions of the Small Industries Bank; 
(xiii) opening of any account in any bank in or outside India or 
making of any agency arrangements with, or acting as an lIient or 15 
correspondent of, any bank l or other institution in or outside India. 
(xiv) transferring for consideration any instrument relating to 
loans and advances granted by it to any industrial concern tn the 
small-scale sector; 
(xv) granting loans and advances to any person for PW'POSeR of 2() 
investment in any industrial concern in the small-scale sector; 
(m) guaranteeing loans raised from, or credit arra'!'lgements 
made with, any bank, financial institution or other lending agency' in 
any country outside India in foreign currency, with the approval of 
the Central Government, by industrial concern in the small-scale 25-
sector; 
(xvii) guaranteeing deferred payments due from any industrial 
coneem in the small-scale sector; 
(xviii) guaranteeing-
(a) loans raised by industrial concerns in the small-scale 30 
sector which are floated in the public market, or 
(b) loans raised by any industrial concern in the small-scale 
sector from any scheduled bank or State Co-operative B3nk or 
State Financial Corporation or State Industrial Cor-po.l'ation or such 
other financial institutions as the Central Gove.rnment may. on 35 
(the rE:~mendation of the Development Bank, specify) 
(m) guaranteeing the obligations of any scheduled bank or 
State Co-operative Bank or State Financial Corporation or State 
Jndustrial Development Corporation or State Small Industries Cor-
poration or such other financial institutions as the Central Govem- <to-
ment may. on the recommendation of the Development Bank, specify, 
arising out of, or in connection with, underwritin',J the issue of stocks, 
shares. bonds or debentures of any industrial concern. in the small-
scale sector; 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
9 
(xx) providing factoring services to any industrial concern in the 
small-scale sector; 
(xxi) providing technical and financial con'Jultancy, merchant 
banking and extension services; 
(xxii) undertaking activities for promotion of industry in the 
small-scale sector including entrepreneural development programmes, 
raw material purehase, ma.rketing support and promotion of, or 
financial support to. agencies engaged in such activities; 
(xxiii) acquiring, with the app.roval of the Central Government 
on the recommendation of the Development Bank, the und~rtaking 
including the business. assets and liabilities of any institution the 
principal object of which is the promotion or development of indllstrJ 
in the small-scale sector in India, or the grant of financial assistance 
fElr such promotion or development; 
(xxiv) leasing. sub-leasing or giving on hire or hire-purchase 
any movable or immovable assets to any industrial rancern in the 
small-scale sector; 
(xxv) undertaking research and surveys for evaluating or dealing 
with marketing or investments and undertaking and carrying on 
techno-economic studies in connection with the rlevelopment of 
indust.ry in the small-scale sector. 
(xxvi) providing technical, legal. marketing and administrative 
assistance to any industrial concern in the small-scale sector or any 
person for promotion, management or expansion of any industrhll 
concern in the small-scale sector; 
(xxvii) planning. promoting and developing inrtustries in the 
small-scale sector; 
(xxviii) promoting, forming or conducting or aSSOCiating in the 
promoti,on, formation or conduct of companies, subsidiaries, societies, 
30 trusts or such other association of persons as it may deem fit; 
(xxix) acting as agent of-
(a) the Central Government or of the Reserve Bank or of 
the Development Bank. or 
(b) such other Government or person as the Development 
35 Bank may authorise; 
(xxx) doing any other kind of business which the Central Gov-
ernment may, on the recommendation of the Devel~pment Bank, 
authorise; 
(xxxi) generally doing such other acts and things as may be 
40 incidental to. or consequential upon, the exercise of its powers or the 
discharge of :ts duties under this Act or any othe~ law for the time 
being in force including sale or transfer of' any of its assets. 
(2) The Small Industries Bank may receive in conslderation of any 
of the services mentioned in sub-section (1) such commission, brokf!rage, 
.. , interest, remuneration or fees 2'& may be aiI"eed upon. 

Loans by 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Borrow-
inaaand 
accept-
ance of 
deposits 
by the 
Small 
Industries 
Bank. 
Invest-
ment. 
10 
(3) The Small Industries Bank shall not grant any loan or aclvance or 
other financial recommendation on the security of its own bonds or 
debentures. 
14. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, adv8Dce to the Small Industries Bank-
S (a) an interest free loan of such amount and repayable in such 
instalments and in such other manner as may be determined by 
the Central Govenunent; and 
(b) such further sums of money by way of loan on such terms 
and conditions as may be agreed· upon: 
Provided that the Central Government may. en a request bein, mad~ IO 
to it by the Small IDdustries Bank, increase the number of iaataiment& 
or .lter the amount of any instalmeat or vary the date on which any in-
stalment is payable under clause (a). 
1!S. (1) The Small Industries Bank may, fo.r the purpose of carrying 
out its functions under this Act.- IS 
(a) issue and sell bonds and debentures with or without the 
guarantee of the Central Government; 
(b) borrow money from the ReserVe Bank-
(i) repayable on demand or on the expiry of the fixed peTiods 
not exceeding ninety days from the date on which the monE"Y 20 
is so borrowed against the security of stocks, Nnds and securities 
(other than immovable property) in which a trustee is authorised 
to invest trust money by any law fo!' the time being in f(\rce in 
India; 
(ii) against bills of exchange or promissory notes arls1n~ out 25 
of bona fide commercial o,r trade transactions, bearing two or 
more good signatures and maturing within five years from the 
date of the borrowing; 
(iii) out of the National Industrial Credit (Long Term 
Operations) Fund established under section 46C of the Reserve 30 
Bank of India Act, 1934, for any of the purposes specifted in that 2 of 1934. 
section; 
(c) borrow money from the Development Bank or such other 
authority, organisation or institution as may be generally or special-
ly approved by the Development Bank; 35 
(d) accept deposits repayable after the expiry of such period and 
on SUch terms as may be generally or specially approved by the 
Developmen: Bank. 
(2) The Central Government may, on a request being made to it by 
the Small Industries Bank, guarantee the bonds and debentures issued by 40 
that Bank as to the repayment of principal and the pgyment of interest 
at such rate as may be fixed by that Government .. 
18. The Small Industries Bank may invest its funds in the sec~ritiea 
of the Central Government or of any State Government or in deposits with 4S 
any scheduled bank, I 

1 of 1956. 
46 of 1973. 
11 
17. The rights and interests of the Small Industries Bank (including 
any other rights incidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advance 
granted. or any amount recoverable. by it may be transferred by the Small 
Industries Bank. either in whole or in part. by the execution or isCJuc of 
5 any instrument or by the transfer of any instrument by endorsement, or 
in any other manner in which the rights and interests in relation to such 
loan or advance may be lawfUlly transferred, and the Small Industries 
Bank may, notwithstanding such transfer., act as the trustee for the 
transferee. 
10 18. The Small Industries Bank shall have the right to acquire. by 
transfer or assignment, the rights and interests of any public financial 
institution a!'; defined in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 (includ-
ing any other rights incidental thereto) in .relation to any loan or advance 
granted, or any amount recoverable by such institution, either in whole 
15 or in part. by the execution or issue of any instrument or by the trans-
fer of any instrument or in any othtr manner. 
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act. 1973. or in any other enactment for the time being in force 
relating to foreign exchange, the Small Industries Bank may, for the 
20 purposes of granting loans and advances under this Act, borrow, with 
the previous consent of the Central Government and the Development 
Bank, foreign currency from any bank or finandal institution fn any 
foreign country or otherwise. 
(2) The Central Government may. where necessary_ guarantee any 
25 loan taken by the Small Industries Bank under sub-section (1) or any 
part thereof as to the repayment of principal and the payment of inter-
est and other incidental charges. 
(.1) All loans and advances granted by the Small Industries Bank 
out of foreign currency borrowed under sub-section (1) shall be express-
30 ed in terms of foreign currency as equivalent of Indian currency calcu-
lated in accordance with the rate of exchange prevailing at the time of 
grant thereof. and the amount due thereunder shall be repayable in 
equivalent Indian currency, calculated in accordance with the rate of ex-
.change prevailing at the time of repayment of such loan or advance. 
35 
40 
45 
(4) Unless otherwise provided by the Central Government, any loss 
or pro lit in connection with any borrowing of foreign currency under 
sub-section (l) for the purpose of granting loans and advances under 
this Act, or with its repayment to the concerned foreign lending agency, 
on account of any fluctuations in the exchange accruing-
fa) during the period within which the loan or advance is re-
payable by the industrial concern in the small-scale sector or the 
puiod of actual repayment thereof by the concern, whichever if!! 
longer, shall be reimbursed by. or paid to, as the case may be, the 
r~ipient of such loans and advan-ces; 
(b) after the expiry of the period specifted in clause (a) ,-
(i) shall be borne by the Small Industries Bank in respect 
of nonnal market fluctuations in the rate of foreign exchon,g!; 
Power to 
transfer 
rights. 
Power to 
acquire 
rights. 
Loans in 
foreign 
currency. 

Grants, 
donations, 
etc, to 
the Small 
Industries 
Bank. 
Small 
Industries 
Develop-
mentA8-
sistance 
Ftmd, 
12 
(iri) shall be reimbursed by, or paid to, as the case may be, 
the Central Government in respect of ftuctuations other than 
the Dormal market ftuctuations in foreip exchange. 
Explanation.-If any question arises as to whether any fluctuation as 
aforesaid is a normal market fluctuation or not. the same shal~ be declo- 5 
ed by toe Central Government whose decision thereon shall be flnal. 
20. The Small Industries Bank may rec€ive gifts, grants, donations, 
benefactions or other monies from Government or an~v other source. 
CHAPTER V 
SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE FUND 
21. (l) With effect from such date as the Central Government may. 
by notification, appoint, the Small Industries Bank shall establish and 
maintain, a special fund to be called the Small Industries Development 
Assistance Fund. 
10 
(2) The Small Industries Bank may, at any time., establish any fund 15 
as part of the Small Industries Development Assistance Fund for such 
purpose or purposes as may be approved by the Central Govemment on 
the recommendation of the Development Bank, or establish any other 
fund as may be required by or under any law foJ' the time being in 
force. 
Credits to 22. To the Small Industries Development Assistance li'und shall be 20 
Small C'redited-
Industries 
Develop-
ment As-
sistance 
Fund. 
Utilisa-
tion o'f 
Small 
Industries 
Develop-
ment As-
sistance 
Fund. 
Debits to 
Small 
Industries 
Develop-
mentAl-
sistance 
Fund. 
(a) all amounts received for the purpose of that Fund by way 
of loans, gifts, grants., donations, benefactions or otherwise from 
Government or any other source; 
(b) repayments or recoveries in respect of loans, advances or 25 
other facilities granted from the Fund; 
(c) income or profits from investments made from the Fund; and 
(d) income accruing or arising to the Fund, by way of interest 
or otherwi!ie, on account of the application of the Fund in accordance 
with tha provisions of section 23. l 30 
23. The Small Industries Bank may disburse or spend from the Small 
Industries Deve)opment Assistance Fund, any amount for such purposes 
as the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Develop-
ment Bank, specify_ 
2~. (I) To the Small Industries Development Assistance Fund shall 35 
be debited-, 
(a) such amounts as may from time to time be disbursed or 
spent under section 23;' I ' 
(b) such amounts as may be required for discharging the liabi-
lities In respect of loans received for the purpose of that Fund; 40 
(e) any loss arising on account of investment made out of that 
F'und; and 

13 
(d) such expenditure arising out of, or in connection with, ihe 
ad~nistration and application of that Fund as may be determined by 
the Board. ! : 
(2) No amount shall be debited. to the Small Inciustries Develop;. 
5 ment Aseistance Fund except as provided for in sub-section (1). 
25. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of Small Industries Develop-
ment Assistance Fund shall be prepared in such form and mannet as may 
be prescribed. 
Acco~ta 
and audit 
ot Small 
Industriel 
Develop. 
mentA.-
tdstance 
Fund. 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Small In· 
10 dustries Development Assistance Fund to be closed and balanced as on 
the 31st day of Marc~ each year or such other date as the Development 
Bank may specify. l I 
(3) The Small Industries Development Assistance Fund shall be 
audited by one or more auditors appointed by the Development Bank 
IS under section 30 who shall make a separate report thereon. 
(4) The proviSiOns of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) ot section 30 .hall. 
so far as may be, apply in relation to the audit of the Small Industries 
Development Assistance Fund. I . : 
(5) The Small Industries Bank shall furnish to the Central Govern· 
20 ment and the Development Bank within foW' months from the date OD 
which the accounts of the Small Industries Development.A.sistaDce 
Fund are closed and balanced. a copy of balance-sheet and accounts to-
gether with a copy of its auditors' report and a report on the operation 
of that Fund during the relevant year and the Central Government 
25 shall, as soon as may be after they( are received by it. cause the same to 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 
26. The Small Industries Development Assistance Fund shall not be 
closed or wound up save by order of the Central Government and in 
such manner as that Government may, on the recommendation of the 
30· Development Bank. direct. 
CHAPTER VI 
SMALL INDUSTRIES GENERAL FuND, ACCOWTS AND AUDIT 
Z7. All receipts of the Small Industries Bank other than those which 
are to be credited to the Small Industries Development Assistance Fund 
35 under this Act shall be credited to a fund to be called the Small Indus-
tries General Fund and all payments by the Small Industries Bank. other 
than those which are to be debited to the Small Industries Development. 
Aalistance Fund, shall be made out of the Small Industries General 
Fund 
28. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Small Industries Bank 
40 shall be prepared in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Small In-
dustries Bank to be closed and balanced as on the 31st day of March 
each year or such other date, as the Development Bank may specify. 
Liquida. 
tion of 
Small 
Industries 
Develop-
mentAl-
aiBtance 
Fund. 
Small 
Industriel 
General 
Fund. 
Prepara· 
tion of 
accounts 
and 
baJaDoe. 
sheet. 

Disposal 
of profits 
ac:cruiq to 
aman 
Industries 
Gederal 
FtiDd. 
Audit. 
. ' 
Saving. 
14 
29. (1) The Small Industries Bank may establish a reserve fund to 
which may be transferred such sums as that Bank may deem fit out of the 
annual profits accruing to the Small Industries General Fund. 
J •... 
,(2) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, deprecla- S 
tlQn of assets and for aU other matters for which provision is necessary 
or '~xpedie~t or' which is usually provided 'fOr by bankers and for "the 
reserve fund referred to in sub-section (1), the Small Industrial Bank 
shall, transfer the balance of the net profits to the Development Bank. 
1IO~.j(1)·The aecounts of the Small IDdus~ Bank shall be audited ' 
by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors under sub seci~ (1)01 10 
~tj.~l,l-;:~ of, .~e.Companies~~t, 1956 who shall be appointed by the lof 1956. 
~e:V:.eio,pm~t.B~·for such term and on such remuneration as the Deve-
lopment Bank may fix. 
, , (2) The auditors shall: be supplied :with. a copy of·the ~ual balapce-
BE!et of·the Small Industries Bank and it sl)a!l be their duty to examine 15 
it together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto and they 
~~ll have a list delivered to them of all books kept by the Small Indus-
tries Bank and shaH at all rettsonable times have access· to the books. 
,'1,j", -I' '"'-. 
accounts.· vouchers and other documents of the Small Industries Bank . . " 
" I , .' . ~. : '. ~ , J ... I, I _ • 
; .:; j ,(3) The auditors may, in relation to su~h accounts, examine' 'any 20 
J:P~e~f: ,O~~ ~ny ofticer or ~ther employee of the Small IndurtrlesBank 
,a.nd, .. ~ be entitled torequ~re from the Board or ()fficers or other em-
ployees ~f the SmaU Industries BaDk such information and explanatiOn 
as they may think necessary jf~r the performance of their duties. 
(4) The auditors shall make a report to the S~al1 Indu,stries Bank 25 
upon the annual balance-sheet and accounts examined by them and in 
every such report they shall state whether in .their opinion the ba~,:, 
sheet is a full and. fair balance-sheet containing all necessary particulars 
and p.roperly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the state of 
affairs of the Small Industries Bank and in case they had called for 30 
any explanation or information from the Board or any .oftl.cer or other 
~loyee of ~e Sm!lU Industries Bank whether it has been given and 
whether. it is satisfactory.. . . 
(5) The Small Industries BaQlc.. shall fumish, to, t,Qe ~P?'~l qov-
ernment and the DevelOpnfent Bank within four months from ilie da~ 35 
on"which ita aeCeunts are :c1osedand ba~ced,' a <i9:PY ot itsWlante-sheet 
and accounts together with a copy of the auditors' report and a r.!'txn-t 
.of the working of the Small Industries Bank during the relevant 'year, 
'ana the Central Govemment shall, as soon as may be after they are 
received by it, cause the sarne to be laid before each House of Parlis- 40 
~ent. 
., 
St. Save as otherWise provided in sub-section (4) of.s~tl~ 25, noth-
'1, " • ,. ,"! ' '. ."_ .j,. 
fng contained in tbts Chapter shall apply to the Small Industries Develop-
ment Assistance Fund. 

15 
CHAPTER VII 
. TRAM!P'Ill :01' PAM' OF BUSINBBS OF DEVELOPMENT BANK 
JZ. (1) On such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoInt,';the b1JlfiDess, assets and liabilities, rights, interests, privileges 
and pbligattons of the Pevelopment Bank relating to the Sm'all Iil.dustries 
Development Fund and the National.Equity Fund (hereinafter in this 
s~ctio'l ,referred to as Funds) shall stand transferred to, and veSt in, the 
email Industries Bank. 1 ' 
. Explfm4flO7l.-"Small Industries Development Fund" and "National 
Equl"ty 'FUnd" mean the Small Industries Development Fund and Natio-
nal Equity Fund referred to as such in the books and accounts of the 
Development Bank on the day immediately preceding the date appointed 
in this Bub-aection. i 
(2) For the transfer to. and vesting in, the Small Industries Bank 
IS under .sub .. section (1) pf~he Funds, that Bank s~all pay to the ' Deve-
lopment Bank such amount and on such terms and conditions as the 
Development Bank may determine. I :,' 
(3) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attQ1'ney, 
grants of legal representation and other itlstruments of whatever nature 
20 which relate to the Funds and ~hich are subsisting or hav-
ing effect immediately before the date referred to in. sub-,ection (1) 
and to which the Development Bank is a party or which are in lavpur of 
2S 
30 
3S 
the Development Bank sbaU,- : I 
(a) if they relate exclUSively to the Funds, be of full force 
and effect against or in favour of the Small IndustrIes 
Bank and may be enforced and acted upon as fully and effectively as 
if, I instead 'of the Development Bank, the Small Industl'ie~ "'Bank 
had been 8 party thereto or as if they had been issued in favour of 
the Small Industries Bank; and 
'(b) if they relate not only to the Funds but also to any 
of . the other business or functions of the Development Bank, 
be of full force and effect against or in faVour of both the Develop-
ment Bank and the Small Industries Bank and may be enforced or 
acted Upon as fullV and effe~tive1v as if. in addition to the Develop-
ment Bank the 8m'lll Innu~tl'ies Bank had also been II. PRtiV t~ere­
to or a~ if they had been i~sUed iI', favour of ilie Deve}opment Bank 
and also the Small Industries Bank. 
"(4) If. on the date. referred to in sub-section (1). any suit, appeal or 
other legal proceeding of whatever nature relatin~ to the Ftmds 
40 is pending, the same shall not abate. be discontinued O'r be in 
any wav prejud;dally affected bv rea,;'m of the transfer to the SmnH 
Industries Bank of the B1l.siness of the Development Bank or of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may,-
(a) where it relates exclusively to the Funds, be continued, 
prosecuted and enforced by Pf ~gainst the Small Industries Bank; 
,and l 1 4S 
Transfer 
of pari; of 
buslneM 
of Deve-
lopment 
Bank. 

., 
(b) where it relates not only to the Funds but also to any of 
the other business or functions of the Development Bank, be con-
tinued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Development 
Bank and the Small Industries Bank or. if the Central Governmeat 
by order in writing so directs, by or against such one of them, .. S 
may be specified 1n such order. I I 
(5) If any question arises as to whether any contract, deed, bond, 
~ment, power of attorney, grant of legal representation or other 
instrument referred to in Bub-section (3) or any sult, appeal or other 
legal proceeding referred to in suh-section (4) relates or relate exclu- 10 
sively to the Funds it shall be referred to the Development Bank for 
decision and the deciSion of the Development Bank thereon shall be final. 
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Industrial Development Bank of India Act. 
18 of 1964. 1964, or any other law or any instrument having force bY' virtue of the IS 
Staftat 
Small 
Indultriea 
Bank. 
said Act or other law. 1 ! 
CHAPTER WI 
MISCJ!:LLANEOUS 
33. (1) The Small Industries Bank may appoint such number of 
ofBce.rs and other employees as it considers necessary or desirable for 20 
the efficient performance of its functions and determine the terms and 
conditions of their appointment and service. 
(2) At any time before the expiry of six months from the appointed 
day, the Development Bank may. in public interest, transfer to the 
Small Industries Bank such members of its staff whom the Develop- 2S 
ment Bank considers as relevant to, or SUitable for, the functions of the 
Small Industries Bank, as on deputation with the Small Industries Bank. 
but such members shall hold office by the same tenure and upon the 
same terms and conditions of service as respects remuneration leave, 
Provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits as they' would 30 
have held such office if the Small Industries Bank had not been estab-
lished and shall continue to do so until the Development Bank either 
on its own motion or at the request of the Small Industries Bank re~ 
calls such member of staff to its service. 
Provided that every member of the stat! so transferred may elect to 3S 
go b'lck to the Development Bank by exercising an option in writing fo 
that effect before the expiry of a period of nine months from the appoint-
ed day, and on the exercise of such option, the Development Bank shall, 
before the expiration of a period of eighteen months. from the appointed 
day, take back such member of the st,aff and he shall be deemed to Itave 40 
been on deputation to the Small Industries Bank during the period he 
was a member of the 'staff of the Small Industries Bank. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act. 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the absorption 14 of 1947. 

~. • .... ,. • l. 11 
of any member of the staff by the Small Industries Bank in its re2UIar 
service under this section shall not entitle such employee to any com-
pensation under that Act or other law and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
5 E~lanation_For the purposes of this section, "appointed day" 
means the date of establishment of the Small Industries Bank under 
section 3. 
34. The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to any 
Director or committee constituted under section 12 or to any officer or 
10 other employee of the Small Industries Bank. subject to ~uch conditions 
and limitations. if any, as may be specified in the order. such of its powers 
and duties under this Act as it may deem necessary. 
35. The Small Industries Bank shall furnish from time to time to the 
Central Government. the Reserve Bank and the Development Bank such 
15 .returns as they may require. 
31. (1) The Small Industries Bank shall not. except as otherwise 
required by this Act or any other law. divulge any information relatinft 
to, or to the atTairs of. its constituents except in circumstances in which 
it is, in accordance with the law or practice and usage customary among 
20 bankers necessary or appropriate for the Small Industries Bank to 
divulge such information. 
(2) The Small Industries Bank may. for the purpose of the efficient 
discharge of the functions under this Act. collect from or furnish to the 
Central Government. Reserve Bank. Development Bank. State Bank. any 
25 subsidiary bank, nationalised bank or other scheduled bank, State Co-
operative Bank, State Financial Corporation. State Industrial Develop-
ment Corporation. State Small Industries Corporation or the National 
Small 'Industries Corporation or such other institutions as may be speci-
fied by the Development Bank. credit information or other information 
30 as it may consider useful for the purpose, in such manner and at such 
times, as it may think fit. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-section. the expression 
"credit information" shall have the same meaning as in clause (c) of 
2 of 1934. section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934. subject tl) the modi-
35 fication that "banking company" referred to therein shall mean a bank. 
corporation 01' other institution referred to in this sub-section. 
(3) Every Director, member of a committee. aurlitor, officer or other 
employee of the Small Industries Bank or the Development Bank whose 
services are utilised by the Small Industries Bank under the provisions 
40 of this Act. shall, before enterin,{! upon his duties, make a declaration of 
fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the First Schedule to this Act. 
37. (1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of any committee of the 
Small Industries Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board or 
45 the committee, as the case may be. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Returns. 
Obliga-
tions as to 
fidelity 
and 
secrecy. 
Defects in 
appoint-
ment 
not to 
invalidate 
acts, ~tc. 

Rights of 
Small 
Industries 
Bank 
in i:aBe of 
default. 
Power'" 
seekaa-
sistance 
of Chief 
Metro-
politan 
Magistrate 
or 
District 
Magistrate. 
18 
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a Director shall 
be deemed to be invalid merely on the .ground that. he was disqualified 
to,be· a Director or that t~re was any other defect in his 'appointment. 
38. (l)Where any industrial concern in the small-scale sector, which 
is under a liability to the Small 'Industries Bank under an agreement; S 
makes any default in repayment of any loan or advance or any instill-
ment thereof or in meeting its obligations in relation to any guanntee 
gjvep by 'the Small Industries Bank or otherwise fails to comply With the 
terms of its agrp.ement. with the Small Industries· Bank,' 'the Small 
Industries Bank shall have the right to take over the management, or 10 
po~ession, or both of such industrial concern in the small-scale sector, as 
well as the right to transfer by way of lease or sale and reaUse the property 
pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the Small Industries 
l3ank.' , 
(2) Any transfer of property made by the Small ~ndustrtes Bank,in 15 
exercise of its powers under sub-section (1). shall vest in tbe transferee 
~ rights in or to the property transferred as if the transfer had been 
made by the owner of the property. 
(3) The Small Industries Bank shall have the same rights and powers 
with respect to goods manufactured or produced wholly or partly from 20 
go<?dsforming part of the securitY held by it as it had with'respeet to 
the original goods. . 
(4) Where any action has been taken against an industrlnl concern 
iJl .~he. small scale se~tor under the provisions of sub-section (1), all costs, 
charges and expenses' which in the opinion of the Small rndt1stri~ Bank 25 
have been properly incurred by it as incidental thereto shaD be recover-
able from the industrial concEU'll in the small-scale sector and the money 
,wh~chis received by it shall, in the absence of any contract to 'the con-
trary, be held by it in trust to b.e applied firstly, in pSyment of !rUch 
cost-s, charges and expenses and, sec9ndly, in ciischarge of the debt due 30 
to the Small Industries Bank, and tl;1e residue of the money so received 
shall be paid to tbe person entitled thereto in accordance with his rights 
and interests. 
(5) Where the Small Industries Bank takes over the management or 
possession of an iD(~ustrial concern in the small-scale 5ector under the 35 
provisions of sub-section (1), the Small Industries Bank shall be 
deemed to be the owner of such concern, for the purposes of suits by 
or"'~,gafnst the concern, and shall sue and be sued in the name Of the 
concern. 
39. (1) Where any prpperty, effects o,r actionable claims are sold ,or 40 
leased in pursuance of any power conferred by section 38, the Small 
Industries Bank or any other person authorised by U may. for the 
purpose of ,taking into IC'iStody or under control any such oronerty. ~ffects 
or actionable claims. request, in writing. the chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate O,rthe District Maltistrate witbin whose jurisdiction any such 45 
property. effects, actionable claims. books of accOl.}nt or other documents 
relating thereto may be situated or found. to take possession the~of,· 
and the Chief Metropolitan Mamstrate or the District Magistrate sball, 
on such ;request being made to him,- ' 
'.' (0) take possession of such property. effects, action~ble c1aims, SO 
or books of account or other docu:mentsrelating thereto'; and .. 
(b) forward them to the Small Industries Bank or ~uch other 
person, as the case may be. 

19 
(2) For the purpose of securing compiiance with the proVisions of 
s\lb-section (1), the Chief Metropolitan Megistrate or the District 
~trate may tak~ or cause to be taken such steps cmd use, or cause 
to be used, such force as may, in his opinion, be necessary. 
S f,(~J N~ act, of the Chief Metropolitan Megistrate or the District 
M:agistrate ,dokle in pl.U'suance of this section shall be called in q~on 
in an>, co~rt orbt,fore any authority. 
. . . 
, ,400, Notwithstanding anything in any agreement to the contrary~ ~e 
Small Industries Bank may, by notice in writing, require any industrial 
10 ~qrn in _ the small-scale sector to whJ.,ch, it has granted ~ylo~ or 
~V;N;lCe. to discharge forthwith in full its liabilities to the Small 
Ind\Uliries :&l'lk-:;-
(a) if it appears to the Board that false or misleadin,g informa-
ttoninany material particular was given in the application for the 
1'5 loan or advance; or 
(b) if the industrial concern in the small~scalesector has failed 
to comply with the terms of its contract with the Small Industrles 
Bank in the matter of the loan or advance; or 
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the industrial 
20 concern in the small-scale sector is unable to 'pay its debt or that 
proceMings for liquidation may be commenced in respect thereof; or 
(d) if the property pledged. mortgaged, hypothecated or!assiiried 
to the Small Industries Bank as security for the loan or. advance is 
not insured and. kept insured by the industrial concern in the small-
25 scale sector to the satisfaction of the Small Industries . Bank; or 
depreciates in value to such an extent that, in the opinion of the 
Board, further securi~y to the satisfaction of the Board should be 
given and such security is not given; o.r. .'. 
(e) if, without the permission of the Board, any machinery. 
" 'I' 
30 plant or other equipment, whether forming part of, the secUrity or 
otherwise, is. removed from the premisE!$ of the industrial concern 
in the small-scale sector without being replaced; or 
(f) if for aw rea:;;on it is necessary to protect the interests of 
the Small Industries Bank. 
35 41.(1) Where an industrial concern in the small-scale sector, in 
breach of any agreement, makes any default in repayment of any loan 
or adVance or any instalment thereof o.r in meeting its obligations in 
relation to any guarantee given by the Small Industries Bank or oUler-
wise fails to comply with the terms of its agreement with that Bank. 
40 or where the Small Industries Bank requires any industrial CQQ.cern in 
,~e small-scale sector to ~ake repayment of any loan or advance under 
section 40 and such iiid,ustrial concern fails to make such repaYment, 
-hf 1882. then. with<1Ut prejudice to the provisioIHI of sectiori 38 of this Aet and 
section 69 of the Transfer' of Property Act, 1882, any o·fReer of that, Bank, 
45 generally or specially authorised by that bank in this behallf. may apply 
to the Court for one or more of the following reliefs. namely:-
(a) for an order for the sale of the property assigned, ('barged, 
. hypotq.ecated, mortgaged or pledged to that Bank as security for the 
loan or advance; or 
SO (b) for enforcing the liability of any sUrety; or 
Power to 
caD for 
repaymeDt 
·before 
agreed 
period. 
Special 
PI'OYi-
sions for 
enlorce-
mentol 
claims by 
Small 
Indus-
tries 
Bank. 

(c) for an ad interim injunction restraining the industrial cOD-
cem in the small-scale sector from transfe.rring or removing its 
machinery, plant or equipment from the premises of such industrial 
concern without the permission of the Small Industries Bank, where 
such transfer or removal is apprehended. 5 
(3) An application under sub-section (1) shall state the nature and 
extent of the liability of the industrial concern in the small-scale sector 
to the Small Industries Bank, the ground on which it is made and such 
other particulars as may be necessary for obtaining the relief prayed for. 
(3) Where the application is for the reliefs mentioned in dause . (cd 10 
and clause (c) of sub-section (1). the Court shall pass an ad interim 
order attaching the security. or so much of the property of the industrial 
ooncem in the small-scale sector as would on being sold realise in its 
estimation an amount equivalent in value to the outstanding liability 
of such industrial concern to the Small Industries Bank together with .15 
costs of the proceedings taken under this section with or without an 
ad interim injunction restraining such industrial concem from trans-
ferring or removing its machin~ry, plant or eqUipment. 
(4) Where the application is for the relief mentioned in clause (b) 
of sub-section (1), the Court shall issue a notice calling upon the surety 20 
. to show cause on a date to be specified in the notice as to why the 
liability should not be enforced. 
(5) Before passing any o.rder under sub-section (3) or issuing a 
notice under sUb-section (4). the Court may, if it thinks fit, examine the 
ofticer making the application. 2S 
(6) At the same time as it passes an order under sub-section (3), the 
Court shall issue to the industrial concern in the small-scale sector or 
to the owner of the security attached, a notice accompanied by copies 
of the o.rder, the application and the evidence, if any, recorded by the 
Court calling upon such indUstrial concern or owner, to show cause on a 30 
date to be specified in the notice, as to why the ad interim orde,r of 
attachment should not be made absolute or the injunction confirmed. 
(7) If no cause is shown, on or before the date specled in the notice 
under sub-section (4), the Court shall forthwith order the enforcement 
of the liability of the surety. 
(8) If no cause is shown on or before the date specified in the notice 
under sub-section (6), the Court shall fonhwith make the ad interim 
order absolute and direct the sale of the attached property or confirm the 
injunction. 
3S 
(9) . If cause its shown, the Court shall proceed to investigate the 40 
claim of the Small Industries Bank in accordance with the provisioDs 
contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in so far as such prov{o 8 of 1908. 
sions may be applied thereto. 
(10) Afte.r making an investigation under Itlb-section 
Court may-
(9), the 
(a) confirm the order of attachment and direct the sale of the 
attached P1'lOperty; 
4S 

5 
(b) vary, ~he order of attachment so as to .release a portion of 
" t,he property from attachment and direct the sale of the remainder 
-:.. ,pf the atiached property; . 
(c) re1easethe property from attachment; 
(d) confirm or dissolve the injunction; or 
i I 
'! (e) di\ect t~e enforcement of the liability of t,.e surety or rejl!Ct 
the clajm made in this behalf: 
I' 
1 PJooY,ided that .-when rnakling"an.orcier unPe.r clause (c) or m&king an 
o ..... ~.'rejecting the· claim to en~pctthe ~ility of the sucety under 
1,JCI.se o(B), the Court may make such .furthe.rorder .~it thinks neces-
sary to protect the interests of the Small. Industries 8aZlk and may 
apportion the cost of the proceedings in such manner as it thinks fit: 
·.1>rovided further that uriless the Small Industries Sank intimates to 
t~~~Court that it will not appeal against any order releasing any property 
1~ from attachment or rejecting the claim to enforce the liabi11ty of the 
,lsurety, such order shall not be given effect to, until the expiry of the 
period fixed under sub-8ection (12) within which an appeal may be 
p*fI'ed or, itAlD .appeal is. Fef~rr~, unless the Court eDl:ROwer-
ecMCt~··appe~ ftQm~ ,dpdsiWls of the said ColU't otb«;rwi~e ~ts. 
20 UfIW. ~ t\1e appe~ i, ,disposed. of .. 
(11) An order of attachment or sale of property under this .elltioa 
shall be carried into effect as far as practicable in the manner provided 
'0I1801l. 'I~')~ C~de ,of qildl Procedilr~" 1~, for the attac~entor Bale .of 
p~t:~ in e~i~ ,of ,a decree as if the Small Industries Bank were 
25 tlw!,deoree holdw_ 
(. 
~, IE1~~ Ally partyagriev;eci by an Qrder under sub-section (7) I sub· 
t~9f3j~ .00 Qr ,1JU~ec.tion (10) ~ay, within thirty ~ .from the date 
Of:l~ ,QI'<ier, apJl-to ,the .Coutt empowered to heat appeaJ,s from the 
decisions of the Co1r!d.which,JII~d ~he or~ and upon .s~~h appeal the 
30 appellate Court may, after hearing the parties, pass such orders as It 
thinks proper . 
. ' ,(1'.7.) Where pl'ooeeclin ... for UquidatiQllin respect.of an industrial 
l.coacerll in theamaU4Cale sector Jun,e eommenoed before .an ,application 
ia,made .undersu1HectiQn (1). nP'thiag itt this . section eball .be cOBitr\1ed, 
35 a.~giviftg to the SIMllrindustriea~lIDkaDY preference Oyer the other 
c~ of·suc:b induatrJal·concem,JIOt,CODferred on it·by any other law. 
(14) For the ;removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any Court 
cg~ten~ ~o grant. ~ of interi'f!'!. i~iunction ulld~r this section shall 
~ " ~ ;hay,e the powe,r to appoin~ a rec;:'eiver and to exercise all the other 
40 PBlIVtp:sm,cidental th~eto. 
, : ,a. (t) ;TheSmal! Industries .BaokchaU have free ,a~QeSs to all such 
rteeataof· any institation' which seeks to avail of any credit facilities 
l·l.f~.ilte ·Smalllnd1l8trie6 ,Bank and :to all such records of any such 
person who seeks to avail of any crejiit facilities from IUc:h institution, 
45 perusal whereof may appear to the Small Industries Bank to be neces-
., 1u ,eonnectionwnh .he providing of finance or other ass~tance to 
SW* 1nIrtltution or therelnancing of any loan or advance made to such 
penon by the borrowing ~titu~jon. 
SmaIl 
Indo.. 
lries 
Bank to 
have ac-
ceato 
records. 

Validity 
of loan 
orad· 
vance not 
to be 
ques-
tioned. 
Indem_ 
nity of 
Direc-
tors. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
tak<:n 
under 
this 
Act. J 
Nomina-
tion by 
deposi. 
ton or 
holders of 
bonds or 
other 
securi· 
tiC'l. 
22 
(2) The Small Industries Bank may require any institution or persoD 
referred to in sub-section (1) to furnish to it copies of any of the records 
referred to in that SUb-section and the institution or the person, as the 
case may be, shall be bound to comply with such requisition. 
43. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained lit S 
any other law for the time being in force. the validity of any Joan or 
advance granted by the Small Industries Bank in pursuance of the pr0-
visions of this Act shan not be called in question merely· on the grouad 
of non-compliance with the requirements of such other law as afOfellllll 
or of any resolution, contract, memorandum, arUcles of aasoc:iation or· •• , 
other instrument: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall render valid any loan or 
advance obtained by any company .:>r co-operative society where aucb 
company or co-operative society is not empowered by its memorandum 
10 obtain loaua or advances. 1.S 
44. (1) Every Director shall be indemnified by the Small industrlel 
Bank against aU losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relatsoa 
to, the discharge of his duties, except such as are caused by bts on 
wilful act or default. 
(2) A Director shall not be responsible for any other Director or for 20 
any officer or other employee of the Small Industries BBDk or for IIl1 
loss or expenses resulting to the Small Industries Bank or from the 
insufficiency or deficiency of the value of. or title to, any property or 
security acquired or taken on behaH of the Small Industries BAnk or toe 
insolvency or wron~ul act of any debtor or any person under obUgatkJD 25 
to the Small 'Industrtes Bank or anything d.one in good faith In tlie ... 
cution of the duties of his office or In relation thereto. 
45. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Small In-
d1lstries Bank, Chainnan or any Director or any ofIlcer or other employee 
of such Bank 'or any otru.r person authorised by that Bank to d;acbarp 30 
any functions under this Act for any lou or damage caused or likely to be 
caused by anything which is in good faith done at intended to be done Ia 
pursuance of this Act or any other law or provillon haviag the foroe of 
law. 
4.6. (1) Notwithstanding anythinJ contained in any other law, wheN 35 
a nomination in respect of any deposits, bonds or other securities kepi 
with or issued by the Small Industries Bank is made in the prescribed 
manner, the amount due on such deposita. bonds or other securities .un, 
on the death of the depositor or holder thereof, vest in, and be pay.bIe 
to, the nominee subject to any right, title, inteJ'elt or claim of IDy oU. 40 
person, in relation to such deposits, bonds or other securities. 
(2) Any payment by the Small Industries Bank in accordance wt~ 
the provisions ot sub-section (1) shall be a full discharge of ita UabIB.,. 
in respect of such deposits, bonds or IeCUrities. 

1011111. 
".-' 
~- ... 
47. (1) Where any arrangement entered ·into· by -the Small Industrie:s 
Bank with an industrial concern in the small scale sector provides for 
the appointment by the Small Industries Bank c.f one -or more directors 
of such industrial concern, such provision and any appointment of direc-
5 tors made in pursuance thereof shan be valid and effective notwith-
ltanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956, 
or In any other law for the time being in force or in the memorandum, 
articles of association or any other instrument relating to that industrial 
concern, and any provision regarding share qualification, age-limit, 
10 number of directorships, removal from office of directors and such like 
conditione contained in any such Jawor instrument aforesaid, shall not 
apply to any director appointed by the Small Industries Bank in pur-
luance of the arrangement as aforesaid .. 
(2) Any directnr appointed. as afo.resaid shall-
15 (4) hold oftlce during the pleasure of the Small Industries Bank: 
and may be removed or substituted by any person by order in 
writing of the Small Industries Bank; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability' by ,reaSOn only of his 
. being a director or for anything done or omitted to be done in good 
20 faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in 
relation thereto; 
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be 
taken into account for computing the number of directors liable to 
such retirement. 
25 48. The Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 shall apply in relation 
to Small Industries Bank as if it were a bank as defined in section 2 of 
that Act. 
... Nothing contained in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, except 
aection B4A and section MAD. thereof. &hall apply ~ the Small Indus· 
3O tri.Bank. 
50. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Income· 
Tax Act, 1961 or in any other enactment for the time being in force 
retating to income-tax or any other tax on income. profits, or gains, the 
Small Industries Bank shall not be liable to pay income-tax or any 
35 other tax in respect of-
(a) any income, profits t:Jt pins aecruing or arising to the Small 
~ Industries Development Assistance Fund or any amount received in 
that Fund; and . I 
(b) any income. PI'Oftts or gains derived or any amount received 
to by the Small Industries Bank. 
Arrange.-
ment 
with 
Sl1lallln. 
dustries 
Bank on 
appoint-
mentof 
directors 
to pre-
vail. 
Al,t 18 of 
IS!)l to 
apply in 
rdation to 
Small 
Indus-
tries 
Bank . 
ActIO of 
1949 not 
to apply 
to Small 
Indus-
tries 
Bank. 
Act 43 
of 1961 
not to 
apply to 
Small In-
dustries 
Bank. 

Uquida-
tion of 
Small In-
duatries 
Bank. 
Power to 
maltere-
gulatiDu. 
Amend· 
ment.of 
certain 
enact-
ments. 
Power to 
remove 
difft-
cult1e8. 
14 
51. No provYlon of law reiatina' to the wiDdiDgup of oompauies iOr 
ccn:poJ:atiODS Ihall ilPplr to the Smalllad~iea ,BanAl 'and that Bank shall 
not be placed in llqwdation save byordv of the 'Cctral Government and" 
in such manner as it may direct. " 
52. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the ])evelop- 5 ,t.l'i,'r ,-.,! 
ment Bank. by notiii.cation, make reaWatioDS Dot inconsistent with the 
provisions of Chis Act to provide lor aU matters for which provision is 
necessary Of expedient for the purpose of Sivina effect to the provisions 
of this Act. : .,( .. , _ .. _, ~ __ . J • ....J... w*tJI,1 « 
(2) In particUlar, and without prl!!j11d1te' tc:r the ~aaneratit1 of ~ fore- ' 10 
going Power, such regulations may' provide 10r-
(a) the times and ~es of the meetioii of the Board aD4i' the 
procedure to be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of 
aeedon 11 includmg quorum nece.wary for the trensiletion of ~ r 
business' . 15 , ," . 
(b) the form and manner in whic;h the balance-sheets and the 
accouilts of the Small Industries ~velopment.A.nstance Fund 
under sub-sec'tion (1) of section 25 ~nd the Small lhdustries Bank (,. 
under sub-section (1) of section 28 shalJ.be prepared; 20 
(c) the manner in which nominations may be made in terms of 
sub-section (1) of section 46; 
(d) generally the efficient conduct of the aft8i.l's of the Small 
Industries Bank; •. '. 
(e) any other matter which is to be.. or may be, prescribed. ~ 25 
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as &Gon ... 
may be after it is made, before each HOuse of Parliament. while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or mo.re successive sessions and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 30 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation 
or both IIousea agree that the Ngtilation' Bould' not be 'made,·thEj reewa-
ticn shall thereafter haft·eft~ obly iri sueh modlflec!,'fe.m ozi'bJ·ot flO 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modiAblltlOnet :,t 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre- 35 
vioualy done under that regulation. 
53. The enactments specified in Parts I, II, III and IV of the Second 
SChedule to this Act Shall be amen lied in the maimer ~edthetetriand 
such amendments shall take effect' on the date of establishment of we 
Small Indl"stties Bank. 
,', 
54. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 40 
Act, the Central Government ~ay. in OQMUltation w.ith tb.e Development 
Bank, by order, doan)1'thing, notrinpo~t wUh.8\&Qb proviaicea, fw the 
purpose of removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of three 45 
years from the date on which this Act receives theusent of the President. (,' 

.I.. 
, 
. --, 
(. . ~, 
_. ~ 
THE FlRST SCHEDULE 
[Seeseet1on 36(3}] 
Declaration oj fidelity and secrecy 
It .............. " .. , , .. "' .. , do hereby declare that I will 
. 5 faithfUlly, tnw, aad, to the. best;, of my &kill and ability execute and per-
~ form the duties required of me as curector, member of """ .. , ,I, , , , 
•• , , , , , , , , , .. committee, auditor, ofticer, other employee (as the case' 
... be) otthe, Small lndustries Development Bank of India and which 
tf' .... 1 I'8l1ne ·to· the ofti.ce or poaWOIl. held by me in or in relation to 
10 Ailei..tci,blDk. .... ,.I.~J_:_Lal'" 
I further declare that 1 will Dot COlliInunicate or allow to be communi-
cated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating 
to the afi:alcs of the Small Industries Developmellt Bank of India or to 
the aftairs of .. any .penm . .b,aViD.gl.8Dy 'dealaing with the said Bank, nor 
15 will 1 allow any such person $e u.,ect. ,or have accesa to any books or 
document. belonging to or in the possession of the said Bank relating 
to· tt.baAi,wl.ot iDe Aid BIm,IQ. -or tbeb1l8iness of any person having 
any dealing with the said Bank. 
20 
25 
30 
40 
Signed before me. 
'THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
~el section 53) 
.AMi:lmJollll'T or CERTAIN DACTMENTS 
PART I 
(Signature) 
A.:MBImMKN'lll TO· TBI: ~ BMZ! 01' INDIA ACT, 1934 
(2 or 1934) 
L M1 Mttion 2,.after clause ~e), insert the following clause, namely:-
'( el)"Small Industries Bank" means the Small Industries Deve-
lopment Bank of India established under section 3 of the Small 
Industries DevelOpment BUlk, of India Act, 1989;'. 
2. In ~ ,1~ 
(a) in clause (4G), aftet th~ words "the Reconstruction Bank", 
iDaeti Itbe WIOrda "Gt, ,~, 1 Small Industries Bank" i 
(b) in clause (4H) I after the wotds "the Development Bank", 
insert the words "or·tbe Small Indutrie. Bank"; 
(el in clause (+f), for the words "or the Reconstruction. Bank", 
substitute the words "the Reconstruction Bank or the Small Indus-
tries Bank"; I 
(d) in clause (12B), for the words "the Reconstruction Bank", 
substitute the words "the Reconstruction Bank or the Small Indus-
tries Bank". 
3. In section 42, in sub-clause (ii) of clause (e) of the Explanation to 
sub-section (1), after the WQl'ds "or from the National Bank", insert th~ 
words "or from the Small Industries Bank", 

• '" 
4. In section 46C, in sub-section (3), indauaea (c) and (d), after the 
words "or the Reconstruction Bank" wherever they occur, iDMrt the worda 
"ar the Small Industries Bank". 
PART It 
AJw:NDMENT TO THE lNDUS'l'RlAL D!sPuTES Act, 1iMll· 
(14 OF 1947) 
In section 2, in clause (bb), after the words. "the Industrial Dev. 
lopment Banlq of India," insert the words "the Small Industries Dev~ 
ment Bank of India established under section 3i of the Small lwiuatDII 
Development Bank of India Act, 1989,". 
PART UtI 
AMENDMENT TO THE BANKING B&Gl1LA1'ION Ac£,1948 
(10 or 1949) " .1 
1. In section 5, after clause (n), insert the followmg clau.ae. namalJ:-r 
10 
'( ni) "Small Industries ,Bank" means the Small Industries 15 
Development Bank of India established under section 3 of the Small 
Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989;'. ,. 
2. In section 18. in sub-section (1), in the Explanation, in clause (a), 
in sub-clause (ii), after the words "or from the National Bank", insert 
Bank", insert the words ", the Small lJildustries Bank,". 20 
3. In section MA, in sub-section (3), after the words "the National 
Bank", insert the words ",the Small; Industries Bank". 
4. 10 section 36AD, in su}).section (3), after the words l'the National 
Bank", insert· the words ",the Small Industries Bank,". 
5. In section 56, in su.lH:lause (ii) 0:( clause (a) ,of the E~ 2S 
under clause (j), after the words "the National Bank", insert the word8 
I,. the Small Industries Bank,". 
PART,IV 
AMENDMENT TO THE PAYKBNT OF BoNus AI!I, 1_ 
(21 01' 1965) 
In section 32, in clause (IX) ,after sub-clause (f), the following sub-
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(fa) the Small Industries Development Bank of Indiaestab-
lished under sec.t.ion 3 of the Small Industries Development Bank 
/., 
30 
of India Act, 1989.". I' '5 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
. Ihere has been a long standing demand of the tiny and small industries 
that there should be an apex bank for them. The intention of the Gov-
er~ent to establish the' Small Industries Development Bank of India 
tcf strengthen and broad-base the existing institutional arrangements to 
~eet the requirements of industries in the small-scale sector was made 
cl~ar in the budget speech for the year 1988-89. Hnce this Bill. 
2. In this Bill, it is proposed to establish a statutory corporation 
known as 'the Small Industries Development Bank of India', wholly 
owned subsidiary of the Industrial Development Bank of India, to func-
tion as principal financial institution for the promotion, financing and 
development of industry in the small-scale sector and to coordinate the 
functions of the institutions engaged in the promotion, financing or deve-
lbplng industry in that sector. lt is also proposed that the Bank would 
gtve SpeCial attention to the export oriented industrial units in' that 
sMtbr .. 
3. The resources of this Bank will mainly comprise of contributions 
from 'the Industrial Development Bank of India in the form of loans and 
mares and may' include' market borrowings and short-term and long-
term funds from the Reserve Bank of India and loans from the Govern-
lIleIli of India. . I~ is alsQ proposeQ' to transfer to this Bank the business 
y,sets.: and liabilities, rights, interests, privileges and obligations of the 
l~trial Development BJUlk of India relating to the Small Industries 
Development Fund and the National Equity Fund . 
. 'NBW Da.HI; S. B. CHAVAN 
The 2nd May, 1989. 
27 

Nat. Oft t14tL8e. 
Clause 2 seeks to define certain expressions used in the Bill. ~ . 
expression "industrial concern in the small-scale sector" has been defl:o~ 
as an industrial concern within the meaning of section 2(c) of the I~cS~ 
trial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 and which is regarded •• 
small-scale undertaking for the purposes of the Industries (Dev.elo.p~"!lt 
and Regulation) Act, 1951. The definition is comprehensive enough to 
cover all forms of small-scale industdal units or enterprises lne4ulng 
those in the tiny and decentr~d sector. 
Ola'lL8e 3 provides for the establishment of the Small Industries Deve-
lopment Bank of India and establishment of its offices, branches and 
agencies. ' ': I 
Clause 4 provides fo:r the authorised capital .ot . the Small lndua~! 
Development Bank. Its authorised capital will be Ra. 250 croll8l,w*, 
may be increased up to Rs. 1000 crores by the Development Bank. .. 
issued capital will initially be subscribed by the Development Bank. ' 
Clause 5 provides for the management ,of ·the SmaUIadutrle8 I~ 
and for the vesting of the affairs and b\1siDess.of .t1lat Bank ill aBoutlJ4 
Directa.rs. : 
Claus.e 6 provides for the constitution of the Board of I>ireetors ·headed' 
by the Chairman. The Chairman of the Developemnt Bank, if he S. • 
whole-time Chairman and if he is nota whole-tbne Chainnan, the M8DaI.-. 
ing Director of that Bank, shall be the ex o1Jicio Chairman of the proposed 
Bank, In addition there will be thirteen Directors, two representing the 
Central Government, one representing the Reserve Bank and ten other. 
from various institutions and fields. The Managing Director of the Small 
Industries Bank shall be the ex of!icio Director. It also provittds ,far'Jthe 
term of office of, and the fee and allowances payable t.,' the ,Dlrectort~ 
Clause 7 provides for the appointment of the Managing Director of the 
Small Industries Bank and his powers and duties. It also provides for 
the salary and allowances payable to him and other conditions of service 
including tbe term of office. 
Clause 8 provides for the disqualifications to hold the ofRce of, or COD-
tinue as, Di:rector. ' 
Cla'U • .'~e 9 provides for the vacation of the oftlce and resignation by the 
Directors. ' ,., :' 
Clause 10 empowers the Development Bank to appoint a person to act 
as the Managing Director in case of, casual vacancy in the office of the 
Managing Director. I 
Clause 11 provides for the meetings of the Board and the manner in 
which such meeting! are to be conducted. 
.I, I ' 
11 • .-' '8 
,.' •• , ... " ... :'1 • :~.'""·'I· ,...... -.. ', .. '''.I '.'-: 
.' ,/,.",.,.; 

l'~ I!"~rs' tAe,Boud to QolJ8iitute. vadoua, ,cqmm.itieea.and 
provides far the fee and, allowances payable ) ,to the. ,members.eIf 1...m 
c~uunittees. 
Clause 13 provides for the business whioh, lUle' Small, :lDdPakift.. BalIk 
shall transact. The business. which is at present being transacted 
by·the·~velopmenti'Bmk relating to irtdastr-ies in the 1ftIUdl-scale'aec\or, 
Shin' be trlt1Sac~d by·the proposed' bank in.ter alia·ft'anting loans-and. 
savances' to 8J1y'"State-1rinancialCOfpOration, etc .. bank,-etc.'by way _·af 
refinancing of any' lOEll'lS .. or . Udvances " granted to' 'indttStrial eoncern':lD 
tbe. ~,.Jl scale. sector. 
Accepting discounting or"rec:.discounting ot bills Of '~ehange,··etc. II18de 
h¥.JDduatrlal conc~ in the small scale sector. 
".1JiMMbiJIg,tC!J£!'Dreh.i.siJ18'a4loeks, lah8l'es,boncis,·or debentures. of . ..., 
State FinancialLCorporatkm" e1c. 
'"tJNm:tng·luatls· a11d arn11ees' to~-bidustrial eoncern in'ihe ... 8DiI!f1l··wale 
sector. 
Guaranteeing the obligations of the schedule banks, etc. in contJ.~b!i 
Wllth 4be .tsMleliof ::·"~ks,.j*. 
• ... illg~aD.~~Jto·;Id1y.linduBlria1 oon~ern in the small"scale ~r. 
Planning, promoting and ,developing industries in small saaleiHCt#. 
j -,=l,aue 14. ,provicies for the loans to the Small Industries Bank by the 
€Jeatr~l. Government . 
. £!Mt:Iiltf! 15 em.pawers !the !Sm.all ,Induswies Bank to issue and.sell ,boada. 
dl!~,,·etc.,· with'·or·'Without .guarantee of the Central, Qovemmemt 
and to borrow money from the Reserve Bank or from the Developmetlt 
:a.M. or: suah other authority or organisation, etc., as may be approved by 
the, Devalppment Bank. It further provides that the Central Government 
may.. 011 a request being made by the Bank, guarantee the bonds and 
d~r1tlttes' ·iSltnedby' it. 
Clau.se 16 empowers the Small Industries Bank to invest its funds in 
f:!w!' ~i4!s~'" ~ QMettrlment or·in depoeits 'with the--BCheduled J:JaDlrB. 
Clau.se 17 enipowers the Small Industries Bank to transfer its rights 
attd Mt8ft!litt!f'inrelation to auy;Joanor.advances. 
Clause 18 empowers the Small IndttstriesBank to acquire the rights 
and interests of any public financial institution . 
. C1.a.u,se .19 empowers the Small Industries Bank to borrow amounts in 
fprt;ign. curamcy with the. previous consent of the Central Government 
and the Develpproent Bank. It further provides for giving guarantee 
by the Central Government far such loans, if necessary. 
: CJaJue ~'. enables .the Small Industries Bank to receiVe gifts, grants, 
etc., from ~ent- ,or 'any- other sources. 
Cllcl'U.$e 21 deals with the establishment of Small Industries Development 
AssWance fUnd. 
Clause 22, specifies the nature of t1ae. amount, Cll8dited, -to the ; Small 
blduatries Development Assistance Fund. 

30 
Clause 23 provides the manner of utiliaation of the Small IndUstries 
Development AssistMnce Fund. 
Clause 24 specifies the amounts to be debited to the Small Industries 
Development Assistance Fund. 
Clause 25 deals with the preparation of the balaDce-sheet and account. 
of the Small Industries Development Assistance Fund and the audit 
thereof. It also provides for laying before each House of Parli~t the 
copy of the balance-sheet, accounts and audit report, etc. 
Clawe 26 deals with the manner of closing and winding up of the 
Sm~ Industries Development Assistance Fund. 
Clawe 27 provides that the receipts of the Small Industries Bank 
other than those credited to the Smalllnduatries Development .A.sailtaDat 
Fund shall be credited to the Smalllndustries General. Fund. 
Clause 28 deals with the preparatiOll of balance-sheet and accounta of 
the Small Industries Bank. 
Clause 29 provides for establishment of a reserve fund to which . .nain 
amounts of annual profit to the Bank shalJ. be credited. 
Clawe 30 deals with the audit of the accounts of the Small Indusiriea 
Bank. It also provides for laying of the auditors' report and the l'eport 
of ita working before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 32 provides for transfer of assets, liabilities, rights, interests, 
privileges, obligations of the Development Bank relating to the Small 
Industries Development Fund aDd the National Equity Fund to the Small 
Industries .Bank and vesting of such business, etc., in the SmalllDduatriea 
Bank. , .I..U 
ClaU8e 33 deals with the transfer of staff of the Development Bank to 
the proposed Bank with an option to come back to the Development Bank. 
Clause 34 deals with the delegation of powers to any Director or Com.-
mittee or any officer or other employee of the Small 'Industries Bank. 
Clo.us8 35 provides fQ1: furnishing of returns as may be required,. by tbe. 
Central Government or the Reserve Bank or the Development Bank. 
Clawe 36 provides for the obligations of Directors, members of the 
committee, officers and other employees of the Bank as to fidelity 
and secrecy. I 
Clauae 37 provides that the acts or proceedings of the Board, etc., shall 
not be questioned on the ground of any vacancy or defect in the constitu-
tion of the Boar:i or on the ground that a person is disqualified to be a 
Director or any defect in his appointment as such Director. 
Clause 38 empowers the Small Industries Bank to take over the 
management or possession of any industrial concern in the smalt..scale 
sector which makes any default in repayment of loan, advances, etc. 
Clause 39 empowers the Small Industries Bank tA> seek assistance of 
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate for getting 
the order under clause 38 enforced. 

31 
ezau,e 40 empowers the Small Industries Bank to call for repayt1leDt 
before the agreed period under certain circumstances. 
Cl4uae 41 provides for th~ special prOvisions for enforcement of claims 
by the Small Industries Bank in High Courts. 
Clause 42 enables the Small Industries Bank to have free access to the 
reeorda of any institution which seeks to avail of any credit facility from 
& l' 
Cl4un 48 ensures that the validity of any loan or advance granted by 
the Small Industries Bank shall not be called in question. ( 
Clause 44 provides that every Director shall be indemnified by the 
Small Industries Bank against all losses, etc., incurred by him except such 
as are caused by his own wilful act or default. 
ClcJuse 45 protects the Directors, omeers, etc., for any action taken In 
good faith. ' 
Clawe 46 seeks to provide for nomination by depositors, holders of 
bonds or securities kept with the small-scale industries. 
Clause 47 provides that the arrangement with the Small Industries , 
Bank for appointment of directors of any industrial concern shall prevafi 
ad such appointment shall be valid and e1!ectlve. 
, . Clauses 48 and 49 seek to regulate the appUcation of the Bankers' 
B~ks Evidence Act, 1981 and" to a limited extent, the Banking Regula .. 
tlon Act, 1949 to the Small Industries Bank. 
Clame 50 seeks to exempt the Small Industries Bank from income-tax 
and other direct taxes at income, profit or gains on the lines of sbnila.r 
exemption given to the Development Bank. 
Clause 51 provides that the Small Industries Bank shall not be placed 
in liqUidation save by an order of the Central Government. 
Clame 52 empowers the Board, with the previous approval of the 
Development Bank, to make regulations for the purposes of giving effect 
to the provisions of this Act. It further provides that every regulation 
made shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Clame 53 provides for the amendment of the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949 and the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965. 
Clause 54 empowers the Central Government to remove any difficulty 
In giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. 
/ 

ClaUse -1. ',of the BU1' provides that the- Central (lQvernmeu.t ... 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, advance .. 
to the Small Industries Bank an interest-free loan of such amount as may 
be.1i ...... ed· b,yl\he-,Cantital ·G(}Vemment' atid a;ffurih .. r~ GD~.&h 
terms and conditiona.'ti'may,be ' agreed,up6n.' 14J1 !SinoC,poII!IH:Ite!a.,lb.f 
stage to visualise the a~ounts that the Central Govel1lm~nt ~ay mw 
avaHabN' to tli~!' 'Small Industries Development Sank ot 'Ind& untMt 1lfe , 
a~a:ici"cl8use. ' 
, \' .',. 
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 15 provides that the Central Government 
~;Y, in certain circumstances. guarantee the :l'epaym8lltof.prilacip~~ 
the payment of interest in respect of bonds and debentures issuej..b, tbf., 
Small Industries Bank. Sub-clause (2) of clause 19 provides for a similar 
g1ltrfA~;\ if n~ssaty, in re!IJ~' of loan 'ratsedby th~ ShtlI1' 'Illditttt! res 
Bank in foreign cUrrenCy. The ~tent' ~ of t.his contfngent"l lilibtilft, 
deJ?ends upon the size of the market borrowings., 1be eJJ:a~ 8lQQWlt 
cabnbt 'be visualised at this stage under the aforesaid cIa_. 
3. Clause 19(4) (b) (iilf pf'O\tt~ that; ift' cerm.nl,~ft~L. ~ , 
loss mf~.nnec~ion with the borrowing of the foreign c~~ ~sub-cw.e 
(11' of t1iat clause shall be reimbursed by the Central'GovernlDen~ 1fiit .. 
~tee tnvol~s U&biffty of a contingent natUre and 'the exf»Ult 'of ,uc1i. 
l;ability for any establishment· known only aft~r the Bank start{talie;. 
t~ca:dng. 
4.I !'to other provision of the Bm involves any other expencmure," 
recurring or non-recurring, out of the Consolidated FUnd of lnd!8. 
32 

MEMORANDUM REGARDItHG, DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clausedl!pnmdea xtRatthe SmaU:lnduBtriea· DwelopJll8l'ltIAaiitistance 
Fund which will be held and marut.aed by the Small Industries Bank may 
be wound up, if necessary, in stich manner as the Central Government 
may, by order. direct. ClAuse 51 makes similar provision is regards the 
~rfndU8~ries, Bank. 
2. Clause 52 empowers the Board of Directors of the Smalt"Imtt1Itti. lJ 
Bank to make Degulation with the previous appl'Oval of the-Development 
Bank for matters relating to the times and places of the meeting$, of tpe 
~dJ a!fttAt1te preeedUre' to be f611tiwed'in' such meetings. tht f6rtn· ahd 
manner in which tl1'ebalimce-:sheet of the Small IndUstrie.' DeveloPmettt" 
Assistance Fund and the Small Industries Bank shall be prepared, and 
tbe manner in which nominations may be made in terms of clause 46. 
:jr"~~,tb\ matter" withrespeat to ,which ~egulatioRS M or~rlq~ 
t4p,. ~~-w:ovisici~: ar.e sought to be made are, ma~ters of ~~ 
or det~pr Inat~rs. _Pl ,~p~t of . which it is not practicable to') __ 
express provisions in the legislation itself, the delegation of legislative 
peMr " .... a B01'Inar:chaNOter. 
J ~ • r 
" 
• I· "', 
I l. __ _ 
. I 
33 
, .. 
_, ~ 1 
.. ~ 

ANNEXURE 
BrraACTS FROM TID: RBS1!:RVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, IBM 
(2 OF 1934) 
• • • • • 
" 
I. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject' 
Ol "COQtat., 
• • • • • 
17. The Bank shall be authorised to carry on and transact ~ 
aa,Ver.td kinds of business hereinafter specified, namely:-
• • • • • 
(40) the making of loans and advances to, and the purchaslDg 
of bonds and debentures of. the Development Bank or the Exim Bank 
or the Reconstruction Bank out of the National Industrial Cred1t 
"(Long Term Operations) Fund established under section 48C; 
(48) the making to the Deveropment Bank" of loaDl aDd 
advances 
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed peri0d8 
not exceeding ninety days. from the date of such loan or 
advance against the security of stocks. funds and securities 
(other than immovable property) in which a trustee is autho-
rised to invest trust money by any law for the time being In 
torce in India; or " 
(b) against the security of bills of exchange or promissory 
notes, arising out of bona fide commercial or trade transaetions 
bearing two or more good signatures and maturing within five 
years from the date of such loan or advance; 
(4-1) the making to scheduled banks, the Development Bank, the 
Exim Bank or the Reconstruction Bank, the Industrial Finance Cor-
poration and any other financial institution as may, on the recommen-
dation of the Bank. be approved in this behalf by the Central Gov-
ernment ot loans and advances repayable on demand or otherwiae 
and against such security and on such other terms and conditions 
as may be approved in this behalf by the Central Board tor the 
purpose ot ena"oling S'Uch banks, or financial institution, as the cue 
may be, to purchase foreign exchange from the Bank for the pur-
poI8 of financing the import of capital goods or for such other 
purpoaes as may be approved by the Central Government; 
• • • • 
! 
(12B) the making of loans and advances in foreign currenclee 
to 1Cbedu1ed banks, the Development Bank, the Exim Bank or ~. 

. ~ ,( 
260f 1962. 
Reconstruction Bank, the Industrial Finance Corporation, any State 
Financial Corporation and any other financial institution 81 may, 
on the recommendation of the Bank, be approved by the Central 
Government and on such terms and conditions as may be spedfted 
by the Central Board in this behalf, against promissory note. of IUCh 
bank or financial institution, as the case may be: 
,.' ~ .... 
Provided that the borrowing bank or financial institution, u 
the case may be, furnishes a declaration in writing to the effect 
that-
(0) it has made loans and advances in foreign currencies 
for financing international trade or for the import of capital 
goods or for such other purposes as may be approved by the 
Central Government; and 
(b) that the amount of loans or advances so made and out-
standing at any time will not be less than the autatandiDg 
amount of the loans or advances obtained by it from the BaDk; 
• • • • • 
42. (1) Every bank included in the Second Schedule shall main-
tain with the Bank an average daily balance the amount of which thaJl 
not be less than three per cent. of the total of the demand and· time 
liabilities in India of such bank as shown in the return referred to in 
SUb-section (2): 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the Gazette of India 
increase the said rate to such higher rate as may be specified in the 
notification so however that the rate shall not be more than fifteen per 
cent. of the total of the demand and time liabilities. 
E:rplanotion.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "average daily balance" shan mean the average of the 
balances held at the close of business on each day of a fortnight; 
• • • • • 
(C) ''liabilities'' shall not include-
(i) the paid-up capital or the reserves or any crecltt 
balance in the profit and loss account of the bank, 
(ii) the amount of any loan. taken from the Bank or from 
the Development Bank or from the Exim Bank or from the 
Reconstruction Bank or from the National Bank. 
(iii) in the case of a State co-operative bank, alJo any loan 
taken by such bank from a State Government Or from the 
National Co-operative Development I Corporation es1abil.1sbed 
under the National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 
1962 and any deposit of money with such bank representing the 
reserve fund or any part tl)ereof maintained with it by any 
co-operative SOCiety within its area of operation; 
• • •• • • 

Matiooal 
IDclUltrial 
Credit 
(loDa 
term 
operatioal) 
Fund. 
die.' (1) ,. • . • • .,. 
," '~)'-'The am:ount in the said fund shall be applied p1the'~:only 
~]:hEffoUowing objects, namely:- . 
'., 
:,.1 ~ : . 
• • • • 
(c) the making to the Exim Bank or the Recomtruction'Lnk. 
as the . case may be, of loans and advances for th!L p~_ of any 
nl!ntsttress "bf the' Exlm Bank or the :Reconstruction Bmk, U. ~. cue 
·~inlY' be; ••• 
. . . (d) the. purchasing of bonds and debentures issUed. by the Ex1m 
'11atl3't or' the' Reconstruction Bank, as the case may be. 
• • • • 
"EXTRACT FROM THE IN1;)uSTRIAL DISPPTES AcT, IN? 
(14 OF lp47) '0' . 
• • • • • 
DebItton.. 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the 8U"ject or 
0;1 eoiMttt~ .. , 
:,1 ' .. 
.:"," /,J 
. , ',' 
Interpre-
tation. 
' .. • • • • 
·.(lXJ) "banking eompany":means abankiDg compllDy 18 ....... dIi 
section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, haviIq) bflllit:Wnor 
other establishments in more than one State, and includes the 
niJlpOR1Import Bank of Iridia, the Industrial RecODBtnJcfden :'ank 
' .. ,: of Ibdta,: the Industrial Development Bank of India, the~RelMnerBlD1k 
',of of,~dia, the State Bank of -India, a correspondinfvnar lbaakil"" 
stituted under sectiOn 3, of ~he Ban 1dng Companies (Jirqaisl.dDn mad 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, a corresponding new bank con-
stituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Aeqtir.tflon· and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980,· and any· subsidiary· bank as 
~(Un Ute State' Bank of· India (Subsidiary· Bank,). &:tj ,t959j 
'.Hi 
m,o!. _ 
'JI i,t 
In,:,. 
. "/\ 
• • • • • 
. ExTR~-FROM' 'rHE BANKtNG 'REGuLA'nON'A~, 't~9 
(10 OF 194\) 
, r:" .. • • • • 
I " 
" ",I.'~' Ulis..:M-t, [,unless there is anything I'epugnantin 4he-:abject or 
context,-
• • • • • 
100f 1,..,. 
!l of 1970. 
4001 1'10. 
38 of 1''' • 
~. "n, l., \ r 

26 of 1881. 
.. 
37 
18. (1) Every banking company, not being a scheduled bank. Cash re-
shalJ maintain in India by way of cash reserve with itself or by serve. 
way of balance in a current account with the Reserve Bank or by 
way of net balance in current accO'unts or in one or more of the 
aforestlid ways, a sum equivalent to at least three per cent. of the 
total of its demand and time liabilities in India as on the last Fri-
day of the second preceding fortnight and shall submit to the 
Reserve Bank before the twentieth day of every month a return 
showing the amount so held on alternate Fridays during a month 
with particulars of its demand and time liabilities in India on such 
Fridays or if any such Friday is a public holiday under the Nego-
tiable Instruments Act, 1881. at the close of business on the preced-
ing working day. 
ExpZanation.-In this section, and in section 24,-
(4) "liabilities in India" shall not include-
• • • • • 
(ii) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from 
the Dewlopment Bank or from the Exim Bank or from the 
RecolWtructon Bank or from the National Bank by the 
banking company; 
• • • • • 
34.A. (1) • • • • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section "banking company" includes 
the Reserve Bank, the Development Bank, the Exim Bank. the Recon-
structiOn Bank, the National Bank, the State Bank of India, a corres-
ponding new bank, a regional rural bank and a subsidiary bank. 
• • • • • 
PART lIB 
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTIVl'nBS IN RELATION TO BANKING COMPANIES 
J6AD. (1) • • • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section "banking compqy" includes the 
ResE>t'Ve Bank. the Development Bank, the Exim Bank. the Reconstruc-
tion Bank. the Nati~nal Bank, the State Bank of r.4ia, a corresponding 
ntw bank, a regional rural bank and a 'Subsidiary buk. 
• • • • • 
PART V 
.. The provisions of this Act, as in force tor the time being, shall 
apply to, or in relation to, co-operative societies .. they apply to, or 
in relation to, banking companies subject to the following modificatiOns. 
namely:-
• * • • • 
j)rodue-
lion of 
document 
of coafidc 
lial 
nature. 
Punish • 
menta fer 
certaiB 
:ldivities 
in relation 
&0 Bankinl' 
~'On'f'aDie,. 
Ad to 
.. ppiy to 
Co-opera-
ti¥c Socie-
tiel. 
5~to 
:e. . 

Cashrc.. 
seI'ft 
Act not 
to apply 
to cer-
tain 
eluaes 
of em-
ployees. 
38 
(j) for section 18, the following section shall be substituted. 
namely:-
"18. (1) Every co-operative bank, not being a State c0-
operative bank for the time being included in Ute ~nd Sche-
dule to the Reserve Bank of Jndia Act .. 1934 (hereinafter 
referred to as a· "sched-uled State Co-operative Bank"), 'ihall 
maintain in. India by way of cash reserve with itself or by 
. way ofba~ce in a ,current account with the Reserve Bank: or 
the State .co-operatlve bank of the· State concerned or' by way 
of net balance in current accounts. or, in the cue of a primary 
oo-operative bank. with the central co-operative bank of the 
district concerned, 'or in one or more of the aforesaid ways, a 
sum equivalent 10 at least three per cent. of the total of its 
demand and time liabilities in India, as on the last Friday of 
the second preceding fortnight and shall submit to the Reserve 
Bank. before the 15th day of every month a return showing the 
amount so held on altemate Fridays during a month with parti-
.culars of its demand and time liabilities in India on such Fridays 
or if any such Friday is a public Holiday under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act. 1881, at the c10se of business on the preceding 
working day. 26 ()f 1881 
Explanation.-In this section and in section 20{-
... 
• 
(a.) "liabilities in India" shall not include-
.. .. .. .' 
(ii) any advance' taken from Ii' State Government, 
the Reserve Bank, the Development Bank. the Exim 
Bank, the Reconstruction Bank, the National B~nk or 
from the National Co-operative Development Corpora-
tion established under section 3 of the National Co-
operative Development Corporation Act, 1962 by the 
co-operative bank; 
• • • • 
ExTRACTS FROM THE PAYMENT OF BONUS Mr, 1966 
(21 or 1985) 
• • • .. • 
32. Nothing in this Act shall apply, to-
.. • • ... • 
2 of 1934. 

LOK SABRA 
It. 
BILL 
to establish the Small Industries Development Bank of India as the 
principal financial institution for the promotion, financing and d~ 
lopment of industry in the small-scale sector and to co-ordinate the 
functions of the institutions engaged in the promotion, financing or 
developing industry in the small-scale &ector and for matters con-
nected therewith Or incidental thereto. 
(Shti S. B. Chaoon, 
Miftiater of Fift41r.ce) 