, 
" 
5 
of 1947 •. 
10 
As INTRODUCED IN' LoK SABRA 
24 - 5 .7 
Dill No. 47 or 19" 
THE ANTI-CORRUPTION LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1967 
A 
BILL 
fu.rther to amend the antk.ornc.ption laws. 
BE it enactec;l Iby Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Anti-Corruption Laws Short title 
(Amendment) Act, 1967. and com· 
mcncement. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day 
of May, 1967. 
2. (1) Notwithstanding- Amendment 
of anti· 
(a) the substitution of 'new provisions for sub-section (3) of co~ptlon 
section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (hereinafter ~ili,n 
referred to as the 1947-Act ) by section 6 (2) (c) of the Anti- to oenain 
Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964 (hereinafter referred fr~~ 
to as the 19M-Act); and 

Repeal an.! 
saving. 
2 
(b) any judgment or order of any court, 
the said sub-section (3) as it stood immediately before the commence-
ment of the 1964-Act, shall apply and shall be deemed always to have 
applied to and in relation to trials of offences punishable under 
sub-section (2) of section 5 of the 1947-Act pending before any court S 
immediately before such commencement as if no such new provisiO'ns 
had been substituted for the said sub-section (3). 
(2) The accused person in any trial to and in relation to which 
sub-section (1) applies may, at the earliest opportunity available to 
him after the commencement of this Act, demand that the trial of the 10 
offence should proceed from the stage at which it was immediately 
before the commencement of the 19M-Act and on any such demand 
being made the court shall proceed with the trial from that stage. 
(3) For the removal of doubt it is hereby provided that any 
('A)urt-
(i) before which an appeal or application for revision against 
any jUdgment, OJ'der or sentence passed or made in any trial 
to which sub-section (1) applies is pending immediately before 
the commencement of this Act, or 
(Ii) before which an appeal or application for revision 20 
against any judgment, order or sentence passed or made before 
the commencement of this Act in any such tdal, is filed after 
such commencement, 
shall remand the case for tr!al in oonformity with the provisions of 
this section. 2S 
3. (1) The Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 1967 
J 5 hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act. 
3 of 1987. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under sub-section (3) of section 5 ,of the Preve'ntion of Corrup-
tion Act, 1947, as it stood immediately before the commencement of 
the Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964, in a trial for 
the offence of criminal misconduct in the discharge of official duty, 
on proof of the fact that the accused person or any other person on 
his behalf was in possession, without being able to satisfactorily 
account for the same, of pecuniary resources or property dispro-
portionate to his known sources of income, a presumption would 
arise that the accused was guilty of the offence; and if the accused 
failed to rebut the presumption, the court could convict him on the 
strength of the presumption alone. By the 1964-Act afore-men-
tioned the law on the subject was made more stringent; possession 
of pecuniary resources of property disproportionate to one's known 
sources of income was made by itself a substantive offence and 
certain new provisions were substituted for the said sub-section (3). 
No saving provision was made in the amending Act in respect of 
cases pending immediately before the commencement of that Act, 
as it was assumed that the presumption contained i'n the said sub-
so.ction would continue to apply to such cases by virtue of section 6 
of the General Clauses Act, 1897. In Criminal Appeal 62-D of 
1966, the Punjab High Court took a contrarv view and held that the 
presumption was not saved. The non-availability of the presump-
tion in respect of such pending cases might, in all probability, have 
resulted, in a number of such cases, in acquittal of the accused 
persons. Government, apart from becoming liable to pay compensa-
tion or arrears of salary to officers under suspension, might have been 
forced to allow corrupt officers to go unpunished. Thus, it beo:!ame 
urgently necessary to revive with retrospective effect the provisions 
, relating to the presumption contained in the said section 5 (3) in 
r£:spect of cases so pending. The Anti-Corruption Laws (Amend-
mrmt) Ordinance, 1967 was promulgated for this purpose. At the 
same time, to ensure fair trial to accused persons, the Ordinance 
provided for de novo trial of such pending cases from the stage which 
they reached immediately before the commencement of the amend-
ing Act of 1964. 
2. The Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance by an Act of Parlia-
ment. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 17th May, 1967. 
Y. B. CHAVAN. 
. '. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for de novo trials of the cases 
affected by it from the stage at which they were immediately before 
the commencement of the Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 
1964. Where such case is at the trial stage, such de novo trial is 
necessary only if the accused person makes a demand in that regard. 
In regard to cases in appeal the court before which the appeal is 
pending, or, as the case may be, is filed has to remand the case for 
such de novo trial. Having regard to the number of cases which 
may be affected by the clause, it will not be necessary to appoint any 
additional special judges for the trial of those cases. However, in 
respect of such cases some additional expenditure of a non-recurring 
nature may be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India, in 
connection with miscellaneous matters. While it is difficult to make 
a definite calculation of such additional expenditure (as that will 
depend inter a.Ua upon the number of cases in which de novo trial is 
demanded), it is estimated that such expenditure will be approxi-
mately Rs. 10,000. 
4 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the anti-corruption laws. 
(ShYi Y. B. ChafJatl, 
Minister of Horne Affairs) 