Dill No. 47 of 1957 
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE FOREIGN mcCHANGE RIDULATION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1957 
(As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 5, line 32, 
for "busines" ~ "business" 
2. Page 8, line 38,-
after "in" omit "the" .-
3. Page 14,-
in the marginal heading to Section 8, !.2!: "important" 
~ tlimp~rt and" 
4. Page 16, line 4,-
for "of" ~ "or" 
NEW DELHI 
26th July, 19~? 

Blll No. 47 of 1957 
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
(As ITNRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Fcreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. 
BE it enacted by Parlinment in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of Indra as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Foreign Exchange Regulation Short title. 
(Amendment) Act, 1957. 
7 of 1947. 5 Z. In section 1 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 Amend~ent 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), sub-section (4) shall of sectIOn I. 
be omitted. I i 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
10 namely:- ' ! 
C (a) "Appellate Board" means the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Appellate Board constituted by the Central Gov-
ernment. under sub-section (1) of section 23E; 
(ai) "authorised dealer" means Q person for the time 
15 being authorised under section 3 to deal in foreign exchange; 
20 
(aii) "bearer certificate" means a certificate of title to 
securities by the delivery of which (with or without endorse-
ment) the title to the securities is transferable; 
(aiii) "certificate of title to a security" moons any dOCu-
ment used in the ordinary.course of business as proof of the 
possession or control of the security, or authorising or pur-
Amendment 
of section 2. 

r '. 2 
porting to authorise, either by an endorsement or by deli-
very, the possessor of the doc1.iment to transfer or receive 
the security thereby represented; 
(aiv) "coupon" means '3, coupon representing dividends 
or interest on a security;'; S 
(ii) in clause (b), after the words "postal notes", the words 
"postal orders" shall be inserted; 
(iii) after clause (b), the 'following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- I 
'(bb) "Director of Enforcement" means the Director of 10 
Enforcement of Foreign Exchange Regulation appointed by 
the Central Government for the purpose of enforcinl the 
provisions of this Act;'; 
(iv) in clause (e), for the word "issued", the words "created 
or issu~" shall be substituted; IS 
(v) in clause (f), after the words "refined or not", the 
words "and jewellery or articles made wholly or nufthIy of 
gold" shall be inserted; 
(vi) in clause (k), after the words "sub-units of unit 
trusts", the words ''ruld includes certificates of title to securi- zo 
ties" shall be inserted; 
(vii) in clause (1) ,-
(a) for the word "means", the word "includes" shall be 
substituted; and 
(b) after the words "or elsewhere", the words "and ~S 
jewellery or articles made wholly or mainly of silver" shall 
be inserted. 
AmeD~CDt 4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the 
of ICCtiOD 3· words I "under this section", the -words "shall be in wri,ting and" 
shall be inserted. 
Ameudm 5. In sub-section (2) of section 8 of the principal Act, for the 
of 1CCti~. words "jewellery or precious stones, or Indian currency notes, bank 
notes or coin", the words "or precious stones or Indian currt.."11~" 
shall be substituted. I . 
Amendment 6. In section 9 of the principal Act, in clause (a) ,for the word 3S 
of tectiOJl 9. "owns", the words "owns or holds" shall be substituted. 

10 
l 
1. In section 13 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) for the words "No person shall", the words and 
figures "Notwithstanding anything contained in section 81 
of the Companies Act, 1956, no person shall" snaIl be subs-
tituted; I 
(ii) after clauae (d), the following clause shall be in-
serted, namely:- I , 
"(e) acquire, hold or dispose of any foreign securi-
ty". 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
-law, no transfer of any share of a company registered in 
Amendment 
of acctioD 
13. 
IS India made by a person resident outside India to another 
person also resident outside India shall be valid unless such 
transfer is confirmed by the Reserve Bank on an application 
made to it in this behalf by the transferor or the trans-
f~ree.". 
20 8. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion of . d I . Dew section shall be mserte , name y. - I 13A. 
'13A. (1) Notwithstanding an1thing contained in any other ReitrictiODi . 
law or in any contract, agreement or other instrument, the: !e!~~D~f 
holder of any security or cless of securities notified in this be- certain "tu-
:as half by the Central Government in respect of which. the princi- riti~8. 
pal or interest or both is for the time being payable outside 
India in any country or place so notified shall not be entitled 
except with the general or special permission of the Reserve 
Bank, to have any such payment made at any place in India. 
30 (2) In this section, the expressions "holder" and "security" 
shall have the same meanings as in sub-section (5) of section 
13.' • 
. 9. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words "document of Amof ~eJlt acc:t.ioa title" wherever they occur, the words" certificate of title" shall be r .. 
" substituted. 

Amendment 
of .ectlon 
J5· 
Amendment 
of lection 
16. 
10. In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words IIno person 
shall in India issue any bearer security or coupon or so alter any 
document that it becomes a bearer s£curity or coupon", the words 
"no perion shall, in India, and no person resident in India shall, 
outside India, create or issue any bearer certificate or coupon or so 5 
alter any document that it becomes a bearer certificate or coupon" 
shall be substituted. I 
11. In sub-section (2) of section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-
clause (i) of clause (b), for the words "documents of title", the 
words "certificates of title" shall be substituted. 10 
:r~e!~~:: 12. In ~ub-sect1on (1) of section 17 of the principal Act, for the 
11. words "upon any trust under which", the words "so that" shall be 
substituted. 
Amendment 
of,ection 
II. 
13. In section 18 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), for the words "a company", the 15 
words "any business" shall be sub.stituted; 
(b) after sub·section (3), the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law, no transfer of an interest in any business in 20 
India made by a person resident outside India to any person 
also resident outside India shall be valid unless such trans-
fer is confirmed by the Reserve Bank on an' application 
made to it in this behalf by the transferor or the trans-
feree. 25 
, (3B) Except Vjith the general or special permission of 
the Reserve Bank, no person resident in India shall transfer 
any interest in any business in India, or create any interest 
in such business, to or in favour of a national of a foreign 
State."; 30 
(c) in sub-section (4) ,-
(i) for the words "any company", the words "any firm 
or company" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "any such person", the words "any 
person controlling such firm or company" shall be substi- 35 
tuted. 
ID!~ of 14. After section 19 of the principal Act, the following sections 
~;A aect~ shall be inserted, namely:-
19B. 
Cuetody of 
dOCl''llent •• 
"19A. Where, in pursu;mce of. an o:rder made under sub-
section (2) of section 19 or of a search warrant issued under 40 

S 
sub-section (3) of the said section, any book or other document 
is furnished or seized, and the Director of Enforcement has 
reasons to believe that the said document would be evidence 
of the contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of 
S any rule, direction or order made thereunder, and that it would 
be necessary to retain the document in his custody, he may 
so retain the said document for a period not exceeding four 
months or if, before the expiry of the said period of four months, 
any proceedings under section 23-
10 (a) have been commenced before him, until the cijsposal 
IS 
2.0 
35 
of those proceedings, inc:luding the proceedings before the 
Appellate Board, if any, or 
(/» have been commenced before a Court, until the 
document has been filed in that Court. 
19B. (1) The Central Government or the Reserve Bank 
may, at any time cause an inspection to be made by one or more 
of its officers, of the books and accounts and other documents 
of any authorised dealer. 
(2) It shall be the duty of every authorised dealer and, 
where the authoris~d dealer is a company or a firm, of every 
director, partner or other officer of the authorised dealer to 
produce to any offlcer making an inspection under sub-section 
(1) all such books, accounts and other documents in his custody 
or power and to fW'nish him with any statement or information 
relating to the affairs of the authorised dealer as the said officer 
may require of him within such time as the said officer may 
specify. 
(3). Any per:.on making an inspection under sub-section (1) 
may examine on oath any authorised dealer or his agent or, 
where the authorised dealer is a company or a firm, any 
director, partner or other officer of the authorised dealer in rela-
tion to its busines. 
(4) If any person fails to produce any book, account or 
other document or to furnish any statement or information 
relating to the authorised dealer which, under sub-section (2) 
it is his duty to produce or furnish; or to answer any question 
relating to the business of the authorised d~ler which he is 
asked. by an officer making an inspection under this section, he 
shall be deemed. to have contravened the provisions of this 
Act.". 
Inspection 

6 
Amendment 15. In section 22 of the principal Act, after the words and figures 
of aection "under section 19", the words, figures and letters "or with any aa. 
Amendment 
of ICction 
It]. 
requirement under section 19B" shall be iDBertec:L 
16. In section 23 of the principal Act,-
(a) for SUb-section (1), the following sub-sections shall 5 
be substituted, namely:-
u(1) If any person contravenes the prOVISIOns of sec-
tion 4, section 5, section 9 or sub-section (2) of section 12 
or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder, he 
shall- It) 
(a) be liable to such penalty not exceeding three 
times the value of the foreign exchange in respect of 
which the contravention has' taken place, or five 
thousand rupees whichever is more, as may be adjudg-
ed by the Director of Enforcement in the manner IS 
hereinafter provided, or 
(b) upon conviction by a Court, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
(lA) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of 20 
this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder, 
other than those referred to in sub-section (1) shall, upon 
conviction by a Court, be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine. 
or With both. 2S 
(lB) .AIJ.y Court trying a contravention under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (lA) and the authority ad-
judging any contravention under clause (a) of sub-section 
(1) may, if it thinks fit, and in addition to any sentence or 
penalty which it may impose for such contravention, direct 30 
that any currency, security, gold or silver, or goods or any 
other money or property, in respect of which the contraven-
tion has taken place, shall be confiscated to the Central 
Government and further direct that the foreign exchange 
holdings, if any, of the person committing the contraven- 35 
tion or any part thereof shall be brought back into India 
or shall be retained outside India in accordance with the 
directions -made in this behaH. 
ExplaMtion.-P'or the purposes of this 5ub-seetion, 
property in resped of which contravention has taken place 40 

II of I9zz. 
7 
shall include deposits in a bank, where the said property 
is converted into such deposits."; 
(b) in sub-section (2) J for the words "one thousand", the 
words "two thousand" shall be substituted; 
5 (c) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections 
mall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) No Court shall take cognizance-
(a) of any offence punishable under sub-section (1) 
except upon complaint in writing made by the Director 
10 of Enforcement, or 
IS 
(b) of any offence punishable under sub-section 
(IA) of this section or under section 54 of the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922, as applied by section 19 of this 
Act, except upon complaint in writing made by the 
Director of Enforcement or any officer authorised in 
this behalf by the Central Government or the Reserve 
Bank by a general or special order: 
Provided that where any such offence is the contraven-
tion of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule, direc-
20 tion or order made thereunder which prohibits the domg' 
of an act without permission, no such complaint shall be 
made unless the person accused of the offence has been 
given an opportunity of showing that he had such permis-
sion. 
30 
(4) Nothing in the first proviso to section 188 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall apply to any offence 
punishable under this section.". 
17. After section 23B of the principal Act, the following sections InsertioDlof 
h 11 b . rted I . new sections S a e mse , name- y.- z3C to 23F 
"23C. (1) If the person committing a contrave,ntion is a Offe~ b1 
company, every person who, at the time the contravention was comp8lllCi. 
committed, was in-charge of, and was responsible to, the com-
pany for the conduct of the business of the company as well as 
the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to punishment if he proves that 
the co~travention took place without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention. 

Power to 
adjudicate. 
Appeal •• 
8 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where a contravention under this Act has been committed by 
a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken 
place with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any 
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 5 
other officer of the company, such directpr, manager, secretary 
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes 
a firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in 
the firm. 
Ie 
23D. (1) For the purpose of adjudging under clause (a) of IS 
sub-section (1) of section 23 whether any person has committed 
a contravention, the Director of Enforcement shall hold an 
inquiry in the prescribed manner after giving that person a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard and if, on such inquiry, 
he is satisfied that the person has committed the contravention, 20 
he may impose such penalty as he thinks fit in accordance with 
the provisions of the said section 23: 
; 
Provided that if, at any stage of the inquiry, the Director 
of Enforcement is of opinion that having regard to the circum-
stances of the case, the penalty which he is empowered to 25 
impose would not be adequate, he shall, instead of imposing any 
penalty himself, make a complaint in writing to the Court. 
(2) While holding an inquiry under this section, the Direc-
tor of Enforcement shall have power to summon and enforce 
the attendance of any person to give evidence or to produce a 30 
document or any other thing which, in the opinion of the 
Director of Enforcement, may be useful for, or relevant to, the 
subject matter of the inquiry. ~ 
(3) Any sum paid by way of penalty or any currency, 
security, gold or silver or goods or money or any other property 3S 
confiscated under section 23 shall vest in the Central Govern-
ment. 
23E. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
the Official Gazette, constitute an Appellate Board to be called 
the FOhign Exchange Regulation A:1peUate Board consisting .of 40 

9 
a Chairman and another member to be appointed by the Central 
Government for hearing appeals against the orders of the 
Director of Enforcement made under section 23. 
5 
(2) Any person aggrieved by such an order may, after 
depositing the sum imposed by way of penalty under section 23, 
and within thirty days from the date of the order, prefer an 
appeal to the Appellate Board: 
10 
]5 
20 
2S 
30 
Provided that the Appellate Board may entertain the appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satis-
fied tha~ the appellant was prevented by suffic:ient cause from 
filing the appeal in time. 
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (2), the 
Appellate Board may, after calling for a report from the Direc-
tor of Enforcement and after making such further inquiry as it 
thinks fit, confirm, modify or set aside the order appealed 
against, and the decision of the Appellate Board shall be final; 
and if the sum deposited by way of penalty under sub-section 
(2) exceeds the amount directed to be paid by the Appellate 
Board, the excess amount shall be refunded. 
(4) The Appellate Board may call for the records of any 
proceeding in which the Director of Enforcement has made an 
order under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 23 and make 
such order in the case as it thinks fit. 
(5) No order of the Director of Enforcement made under 
section- 23 shall be varied by the Appellate Board so as to pre-
judicially affect any person without giving him reasonable 
opportunity of being heard; and subject thereto, the Appellate 
Board shall follow such procedure in respect of the proceedings 
before it as mey be prescribed. 
23F. If any person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the Penalty for 
. th A n B contraven-Dll"ector of ~orcement or e ppe ate oard, or fails to tion ororder 
comply with any of their directions or orders, he shall, on con- m!lde bYr 
viction before a Court, be punishable with imprisonment for a ~f~~~!'n~nt 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both." ~pcll.te 
3S 18. In sub-section (1) of section 24 of the principal Act, after the Amendm~nt 
words "is prosecuted", the words "or proceeded against" shell be ~!. sectIOn 
40 
Inserted. 
19. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after Amendm.ent . of section clause (b), the follOWIng clause shall be inserted, namely:- 27. 
U(bb) prescribe the manner in which inquiries may be 
held under this Act and the procedure to be followed in respect 
of the proceedings before the Director of Enforcement or the 
Appellate Board.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (7 of 1947) is a tem-
porary Act due to expire on the 31st day of December, 1957. When 
it was enacted, it was hoped that the world trade and economic con-
ditions would stabilise themselves after the initial 'post-war period, 
but this anticipation has not been fulfilled. India still continues to 
be short of foreign exchange and it is necessary to ensure that our 
foreign exchange resources are conserved in the naiional interest. 
The trend of events in this and other countries further indicates that 
the shortage is likely to continue for an indefinite period, and it is 
difficult to visualise at this stage that in any foreseeable future it will 
be possible to dispense with the exchange control aIto-gether. An-
other important factor is the development programme under the 
Second Five Year Plan which compels us to husband and utilise our 
external resources properly. In the circumstances, the continuance 
of .the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act is unavoidable and it is 
proposed to place it on a permanent footing. 
2. The e~perience gained in the working of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act has brought to light certain lacunae which hamper 
proper administration of the Act and the investigations and the legal 
proceedings ther.eunder. This opportunity is, therefore, being taken 
to carry out certain other amendments in the Act with a view to re-
move'these defects. The most important of these amendments is 
the one providing for departmental inquiry and adjudication of 
foreign exchange offences by an authority constituted by Government 
on the lines of th~ Sea Customs Act. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. 
NEW DELHIj T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI 
The 13th July, 1957 . 
.. 
JO 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 (iii) of the Bill and the proposed section 23E (1) in clause 
17 thereof contemplate the appointment of a Director of Enforcement 
and the constitution of an Appellate Board. They have been em-
powered to adjudicate upon the contravention of certain provisions of 
this Act under the proposed sections 23D and 23E of clause 17. An 
Enforcement Unit with a Director at its head is already functioning 
for dealing with cases arising out of contraventions of the Act. A 
provision for Rs. 3,15,000/- has been made in the budget for the 
current year for this Unit. No extra expenditure is, therefore, likely 
to be involved on account of the implementation of the proposals for 
adjudication proceedings of the Bili. Moreover, it is expected that 
there would be some savings on ac'count of litigation expenses pro- / 
vided in the budget for court cases. If, however, there is any addi-
tional expenditure for the implementation of these proposals, it is 
likely to be offset by the savings from litigation expenses. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 19 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 27 of the Act 
authorises the Central Government to· make rules prescribing the 
manner in which inquiries may be held under this Act and the pro-
cedure to be followed in respect of the proceedings before the Director 
of Enforcement and the Appellate Board. These are procedural 
matters. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of • 
normal character. 

'J8 of J944. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATION 
ACT, 1947 (7 OF 1947). 
• • • • 
1. (1) 
• • • • 
Short title. 
eJ:tent, 
commence-
ment and 
(4) It shall remain in force up to the thirty-first day of Decem- duration. 
ber, 1957. 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject Interpreta-
tin or context,- _ 0 • 
(a) "authorised dealer" means a person for the time being 
authorised under section 3 to deal in foreign exchange; 
(b) "currency" includes all coins, currency notes, bank 
notes, postal notes, money orders, cheques, drafts, travel-
ler's cheques, letters of credit, bills of exchange and promissory 
notes; 
• • • • 
(e) "foreign security" means any security issued else-
where than in India, and any security the principal of or inter-
est on which is payable in any foreign currency or elsewhere 
than in India; 
(f) "gold" includes gold in the form of coin, whether legal 
tender or not, or in the form of bullion or ingot, whether re-
fined or not; 
• • • • 
(k) "security" means shares, stocks, bonds, debentures, 
debenture stock and Government securities, as defined in the 
Public Debt Act, 1944, deposit receipts in respect of deposits 
of securities, and units or sub-units of unit trusts, but does not 
include bills of exchange or promissory notes other than 
Government promissory notes; 
(1) "silver" means silver bullion or ingot, silver sheets and 
plates which have undergone no process of manufacture sub-
sequent to rolling and uncurrent silver coin which is not legal 
tender in India or elsewhere; 
• • • • • 
3. (1) 
• • • • • 
13 
Authori!led 
deale1'l in 
foreign ex-
cbqc. 

14 
(2) An authorisation under this section-
(i) may authorise dealings in all foreign cWTencies or 
may be restricted to authorising dealings in specified foreign 
currencies only; 
(ii) may authorise transactions of all descriptions in 
foreign currencies or may be restricted to authorising specified 
transactions only; 
(iii) may be granted to be effective for a specified period, 
or within specified amounts, and may in all cases be revoked 
for reasons appearing to it sufficient by the Reserve Bank. 
• • • • • 
8. (1) 
• • • • • 
Reltrictiool 
on important 
export of 
certain 
c:urreucy and 
bullion. (2) No person shall, except with the general or special per-
mission of the Reserve Bank or the written permission of a person 
authorised in this behalf by the Reserve Bank, take or send out 
. of the States any gold, jewellc;.·y or precious stones, or Indian cur-
rency notes, bank notes or coin or foreign exchange other than 
foreign exchange obtained from an authorised dealer. 
Acquisition 
by Central 
Government 
of foreign 
exc:banp. 
• • • • • 
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, order every person in, or resident in, the States-
(a) who owns such foreign exchange as may be specified 
ih the notification, to offer it, or cause it to be offered for sale 
to the Reserve Bank on behalf of the Central Government or to 
such person, as the Reserve Bank may authorise for the purpose, 
at such price as the Central Government may fix, being a price 
which is in the opinion of the Central Government not less 
than the market rate of the foreign exchange when it is offer-
ed for sale; 
• • • • • 
ReJU1ation 13. (1) No person shall, except with ~e general or special per-
of ~~ mission of the Reserve Bank,-IDd UlllDler 
of .ecanties. 
(4) ,take or send any security to any place outside India; 
• • •• • 

IS 
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the ~~~~~ 
Official Gazette, order every person by whom or on whose behalf 
a security or document of title to a security specified in the order 
is held in the States to cause the said security or document of title 
to be kept in the custody of an authorised depository named in 
the order: 
Provided that the Reserve Bank may by order in writing per-
mit any such security to be withdrawn ftom the custody of the 
authorised depository subject to such conditions as may be spe-
cified in the order. 
(2) No authorised depository may part with any security cover-
ed by an order under sub-section (1) without the general or spe-
cial permission of the Reserve Bank except' to, or to the order of, 
another authorised depository. 
(3) Except with the general or special permission of the 
Reserve Bank, no authorised depository shall-
(a) accept or part with any security covered by an order 
under sub-section (1) whereby the security is transferred into 
the name of a person resident outside India, or 
(b) do any act whereby he recognises or gives effect to 
the substitution of another person as the person from whom 
he directly receives instructions relating to such security 
unless the person previously so instructing him and the per-
son substituted for that person where immediately before the 
substitution resident in India. 
(4) Except with the general or special permission of the Reserve 
Bank, no person shall buy, sell or transfer any security, or document 
of title to a security, covered by an order under sub-section (1) un-
less such security or document of title has been deposited in accord-
ance with the order. 
(5) Except with the general or special permission of the Reserve 
Bank, no capital moneys, interest or dividends in respect of any 
security covered by an order under sub-section (1) shall be paid in 
the States except to or to the order of the authorised depository 
having the custody of the security. 
(6) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "authorised depository" means a person notified by the 
Central Government to be entitled to accept the custody of 
securities and documents of title to securities, and 
(b) "security" shall include coupons. 

Ref 
OIl 
eJ:p 
cer 
cur 
but 
F 
c 
• ( 
16 
Restrictions 15. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
b~a~!~U~e~_ Gazette, order that except with the general or specilll permission 
ritiea. of the Reserve Bank no person shall in the States issue any bearer 
Acquisition 
by Central 
Government 
. of foreign 
aecurities. 
Restriction 
OD aettle-
ment. 
security or coupon of so alter any document that it becomes a bearer 
security or coupon.' -
. , 
16. (1). 
• • • • • 
(2) On the issue of a notification under clause (a) of sub-section 
(1),-
• • • • • 
(b) the owner of any of the securities to which the notifi-
cation relates and any person who is responsible for keeping 
any registers or books in which any of those securities are 
registered or inscribed, or who is otherwise concerned with the 
registration or iilscrirtion of any of those secUlities, shall do all 
such things as are necessary or as the Central Government or 
the Reserve Bank rnuy order to be done, for the purpose of 
securing that-
(i) the securities and any documents of title relating 
thereto are delivered to the Central Government and, in 
the case of registered or inscribed securities, that the 
securities are registered or inscribed in the name of the 
Central Government or of such nominee of the Central 
Government as it may specify, and 
• • • • • 
17. (1) No person resident ,in the States shall, except with the 
general or special permission of the Reserve Bank, settle any 
property, otherwise than by will, upon any trust under which a 
person who at the time of the settlement is resident outside India, 
elsewhere than in territories notified in this behalf by the Reserve 
Bank, will have an interest in the property, or exercise, other than 
by will, any power for payment in favour of a person who at the 
time of the exercise of the power is resident outside India elsewhere 
than in such notified territories. 
• • • • • 
Certain pro-
vilion as to 
companies. 
18. (1) 
• • • • 
(3) Except with the general or sPecial permission of the Reserve 
Bank, no person resident in the States shall do any act whereby 

11 
a company which is controlled by persons reflident in' India ceases 
to be 80 controlled. 
(4) Except with the general or special permission of the Reserve 
B~, no person resident in the States shall lend any money either 
to any company (other thWl a banking company) which is controlled 
directly or indirectly by persons resident outside India elsewhere 
than in the territories notified in this behalf by the Reserve Bank 
or to any such person. 
Explanation I.-The companies referred to in sub-section (1) 
are companies not incorporated under any law in force in the States 
in the case of which any of the following conditions is fulfilled:-
(a) that the company is by any means controlled (directly 
or indirectly) by persons resident in the States; or 
(b) that more than one-half of the sums which, on a liqui-
dation thereof, would be receivable by holders or share or loan 
capital, would be receivable directly or indirectly by, or for the 
benefit of, persons resident in the States; or 
(c) that more than one-half of the assets which, on a liquida-
tion thereof, would be available for distribution after the payment 
of creditors, would be receivable directly or indirectly by, or 
for the benefit of, pt:Isons rebldent in the States; or 
(d) that more than one-half-
(i) of the interest payable on its loans and loan capital. 
if any, or 
(ii) of the dividends payable on its preference share 
capital, if any, or 
(iii) of the dividends payable on its share capital, if 
any, not being preference share capital, 
is receivable directly or indirectly by, or for the benefit of, 
persons resident in the States. 
Explanation lI.-Where the identity of the persons by whom, or 
for whose benefit, any sum, assets, interest or dividends are directly 
or indirectly receivable depends on the exercise by any person resi-
dent in the States of a power vested in him in that behalf, the sum, 
assets, interest or dividends shall, for the purposes of this sub-section, 
be deemed to be receivable directly or indirectly by, or for the 
benefit of, persons resident in the States. 
• • • • 

Rei 
00 
exp 
eer 
CUI 
bal 
I 
c 
Falae atate-
men~. 
22. No person shall, when complying with any order or direction 
under section 19 or when making any application or declaration to 
any authority or person for any purpose under this Act, give any 
information or make any statement which he knows or has reasonable 
cause to believe to be false, or not true, in any material particular. 
penaJ~ and 23. (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act 
proce ure. or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder shall be pupish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years 
or with fine or with both, and any Court trying any such contraven-
tion may, if it thinks fit and in addition to any sentence which it 
may impose for such contravention, direct that any currency, security, 
gold or silver, or goods or other property in respect of which the 
contravention has taken place shall be confiscated . 
• • • • 
(3) No court shall take cognizance ~f any offence punishable 
under this section or under section 54 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922, as applied by section 19 of this Act, except upon complaint in II of I9U. 
writing made by a person authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government or the Reserve Bank by a general or special order: 
Provided that where any such offence is the contravention of any 
of the provisions of this Act or any rule, direction or order made 
thereunder which prohibits the doing of an act without permission, 
no such complaint shall be made unless the person accused of the 
offence has been given an opportunity of showing that he had sucb 
permission. 
(4) If the person committing an offence punishable under this 
section is a company or other body corporate, every director, manager, 
secretary, or other office!' thereof shall, unless he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diligence to prevent its commission, be deemed to be guilty 
of such offence 
• • • • 
Burden of 24. (1) Where any person is prosecuted for contravening any 
::~:aes. provision of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made there-
under which prohibits him from doing an act without permission, 
the burden of proving that he had the requisite permission shall be 
on him. 
• • • • 
GIPND-L.S. 1-16 M. of Law-23-7-67- 1600 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article I I 7 of the 
Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, the 
consideration of the Bill. 
GlPD-LS Iit-728 LS-22-7-57- J ,6oo 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 