T"oK SABRA. 
CORRIGENDA. 
to 
THE STATE AGRICULTUlUa.L CREDIT CORPORAT rom BILL, 1968 
(To be/AA introduced in Lok Sibha ) 
1 • Page 5, 11r.·~ 7,-
'l.,0E., "on" read II of" 
2. Page 6, line 7,-
after "and" insert " " , 
3. Page 9, in the marginal heading to olause 18,-
for "member" read "members" - -
4. Page 9, line 32,-
Ilor" read "of" 
-
5. Page 11, in the marginal heading to olause 22,-
for "borrowing" ~ "borrowings" 
6. Page 11, line 22,-
m "Every" ~ "The" 
7. Page 11, line 25,- 1 
after "Fund" .insert " )" 
8, Page 11, in the marginal heading to clause 24,-
.2.IUU ;, of" 
9. Page 14, line 25,-
in the marginal oi tation !2.£ "1958" reaq "1956" 
10. Page 16, line 22,-
~Lt the marginal citation 
11. Page 30, line 3,-
f,or "carring" read "carrying" 
"10 of 1941 
12. In the docket page, !2.~ "territorie" ~_e.S "territories" 
13. Correot line numbers on pages .4, 8 and 19. 
NE\f DEIl:II; 
lay'. 1968 • Va1sakha 13, 1890 {Sakal 

As I!f'lW)DVCID 11'1 LoK SABRA ON 
_.", Ie .. " nf! ~ ~~t.t: 
\ ,I ~ 
L BID No tZ of It" 
THE STATE AGRICULTURAL CREDIT CORPORATIONS 
BILL, 1968 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRZLlMlNAaY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
INCORPORATION OF STATE AGRICULTURAL CRBDJT CoRPoRATIONS AJn) THEDl 
CAPITAL 
3. Establishment of State Agricultural Credit Corporatiolll. 
4. Head office and other oftlces. 
5. Share capital and shareholders. 
6. Restrictions on transfer of shares. 
CHAPl'ERIII 
MANAGDrlENT OF THE CoItPoaATIOJr 
7. Management. 
8. Corporation to be guided. by directiODl of Central Govel'J)o. 
ment. 
9 COllltitution of Board. 
10. Managing direetor. 
11. Term of oftlce of direetors other than managm, director. 
12. Disqualification&. 
13. Vacation of seats of directol'8. 
(i) 

· (ii~ , 
CLAUSES 
14. Executive Committee and other committees of the Corpora-
tion. 
IS: . 'Meetings of Board and committees. 
, . 
16. Director. of Board or members of a committee nat to vote 
in certain cases. 
17. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts. etc. 
18. Fees and allow.anees of directors and members Of committees. 
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINESS AND FuNDs or THE CORPORATION 
19. Business which the Corporation may transact. 
20. Borrowing by the Corporation. 
21. Deposits with the Corporation. 
22. Limits on borrowings and deposita. 
23. Corporation to maintain two funda. 
24. Stabilisation Fund. 
25. Reserve Fund. 
26. Payment of dividend. 
27. Investment of surplus funds. 
28. Recovery of moneys due to the Corporation. 
29. Acquisition or transfer by the Corporation of business, asset. 
and liabilities from or to co-operative societies. 
30. General meetings. 
31. Accounts. 
32. Audit. 
as. Retuma. 
CHAPTER V 
CHAPTER VI 

(Iii) 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER VII 
ApPLICATION OF CERTA1N l .. CTS TO THE CORPORATIOJr 
34. Certain provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, .. 
apply to the Corporation. 
35. Certain provisions of the Reserve Bank of India'Aet, 1934, 
to apply to the Corporation. 
36. Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934. and Banking RejlUlatlon 
Act, 1949, not to apply except as otherwise provided. 
37. The Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, to apply. 
38. Corporation to be deemed .to be a co-operative society for the 
purposes of Income-tax Act. 1961. 
39. Court, Tribunal, etc., not to require production of report on 
inspection made by the Rese~e Bank. 
CHAPl'ER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
40. Declaration of ftdelity and secrecy. 
41. Indemnity of director. 
42. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
43. Liquidation of the Corporation. 
44. Reserve Bank to submit report. 
45. Staff of the Corporation and delegation of powers. 
46. Power of the Central Government to make rules. 
47. Power of the Board to make regulations. 
48. Amendment of Act 10 of 1963. 
THE SCHEDULE 

s 
BIU No. 17 of I'" 
THE STATE AGRICULTURAL CREDIT CORPO-
RATIONS BILL, 1968 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment in the States and Un.ion. ten-itorif, 
of Agricultural Credit Corporations and for matter, connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
Pul.DoNABY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the State Agricultural Credit CO!-- Short 
porations Act. 1968. title aDd 
cOIn· (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- menee. 
ment may, by noti1ication in the Official Gazette, appoint, and menl 

Deftni-
tiona. 
I 
different dates may be appointed for different States or for different 
Union territories. 
%. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "agricultural marketing society" means a co-operative 
society the objects of which include the marketing of agricultu- 5 
ral produce; 
(b) "agricultural operation" includes animal husbandry, 
dairy farming, pisciculture and poultry farming; 
Ezplcnction.-The expression "pisciculture" incluth!s the 
development of fisheries, both inland and marine, catching of 10 
fish and all activities connected therewith or incidental thereto; 
(e) "agricultural processing society" means a co-operaUve 
society the objects of which include the processing of agricultu- . 
ra! produce; 
(d) "agricultural produce" includes the produce of an agri- IS 
cultural operation; 
(e) "appropriate Government" means,-
(i) in relation to any Corporation established in a Union 
territory, the Central Government, and 
(ii) in relation to any Corporation established at any 20 
other place, the State Government; 
<f) "banking company" has the meaning assigned to it In 
clause (e) of section 5 of the Bariking Regulation Act, 1949; 
(g) "Board", in relatioD to the Corporation, means the Board 
of directors of the Corporation; 2S 
(h) "ea-operative farming society" means a co-operative so-
ciety the objects of which include the cultivation of land on a 
co-operative basis; 
(0 "Corporation", in relation to a State or Union territory, 
means the Agricultural Credit Corporation established under 30 
section 3 in that State or Union territory, as the case may' be; 
(j) "director" means a member of the Board; 
(k) "Food Corporation" means the Food Corporation of 
India established under the Food Corporations Act, 1964; 
(I) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules maQe under this 35 
Act; 
1t 

, 2ol1934 . .. 
18 of 1959 
r 
• 
10 
3 
(m) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India con-
stituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(n) "subsidiary bank" has the meaning assigned to it in the 
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959; 
(0) "Central C()oo()perative Bank", "Co-operative Bank", ClCo-
operative Society", "Primary Agricultural Credit Society", 
"Scheduled Bank", "State Bank" and "State Co-operative Bank", 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in section 2 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
CHAPTER II 
INCOIU'ORATION OF S~ATI: AGIlICULTURAL CREDIT CORPORATIONS AND THEIR 
CAPITAL 
3. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Establish-
OfBcial Gazette, establish in any State or Union territory an Agri- ment of 
IS cultural Credit Corporation under such name as maybe specified in State 
the notification: Agricul-
tural 
Provided that no such Corporation shall be esiablished in any gredit 
State or Union territory other than the States of Assam, Bihar, ti:~:.or.­
Orissa, Rajasthan and West Bengal and the Union territories of 
20 Manipur and Tripura, except wHh the previous approval of the Cen-
tral Government, and no such approval shall be given by the Central 
Government except after consultation with the Reserve Bank. 
(2) The Corporation established under this Act shall be a body 
corporate by the name specified in the notification referred to in 
2S sub-section (1), having perpetual succession and a common seal with 
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dis-
pose of property, and to contract, and may by that name sue or be 
sued. 
4. (1) The Corporation shall establish its head office at such Head 
30 place in the State or Union territory as the appropriate Government office 
may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank, specify. and other omell. 
(2) The Corporation may, after consultation with the appro-
priate Government, establish offices or agencies at other places in 
the State or Union territory, as the case may be. 
3S 5. (1) The authorised capital of each Corporation .baU be lOeh Share 
Bum as the appropriate Government may initially fix but it shaU, in capital 
DO case, be leu than ODe Q'OI'8 of rupees or more thllll ave croI'el of :!r.. 
rap ... : bol ..... 

• 
Provided that where the authorised caPital iDitially fixed is lea 
than five crores of rupees, the appropriate Government may, from 
time to ti:ne, increase the authorised capital to such sum not exceed-
in, five crores of rupees: 
Provided further that where the appropriate Government is not 5 
the Central Government, the initial fixation of the authorised capital 
and any subsequent increase or reduction thereof, shall be made with 
the prior approval of the Central Government. 
(2) The authorised capital of each Corporation shall be divided 
into such number of shares as the appropriate Government may 10 
determine and shall be issued as fully paid-up shares to the parties 
nlentioned in sub-section (3) at such times and in luch maDDer and 
to luch extent as the appropriate Government may determine ud 
each of such shares shall have the same face value. 
(3) Out of the capital issued under sub-section (2),- 15 
(a) in the case of a Corporation established in a State, the 
Central Government shall subscribe for thirty per cent. of the 
share capital, and in the case of a Corporation established in a 
Union territory, the Central Government shan subscribe for fifty 
per cent. of the share capital; 20 
(b) the Reserve Bank. shall subscribe for twenty per Cellt. 
of the share capital; 
(c) in the case of a Corporation established in a State, the 
State Government shall subscribe for twenty per cent. of the 
share capital; 25 
(d) the Food Corporation, State Bank, subsidiary banks and 
bankin, companies may subscribe for, in tbe a,greJate, thirty 
per cent. of the share capital: 
Provided that nODe of the said parties shall subscribe for 
more than fifteen per cent. of the share capital. 
(4) The parties referred to in sub-section (3) shall sublcribe for 
the shares before such date as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Central Government by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette. 
30 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the Central Gov-
ernment shall determine the number of shares which an to be 
allotted to the parties referred to in clause (d) of that sub-section: :35 
Provided that if any of the parties referred to in clause (d) of 
sub-section (3) fails to subscribe for any share allotted to it, IUeIl 

I 
share shall be subscribed for by the Central Govemment. the "lerw 
Bank and the appropriate Government in such proportions as may be 
determined by the Central Government: 
Provided further. that the shares subscribed for by the CeDtrai 
, Govel'lUlleDt, the Reserve Bank and the appropriate Governmeat, In 
pUl'l1lallce of the provisions. of the foregoing proviso, may be tra ... • 
ferred to any party who is elipble under clause (d) on sub·section 
(3) to subscribe for sueh shares in the first instance, so, however, 
that the total number, of shares held by any of the parties referred 
10 to in that clause does not exceed fifteen per cent. of the share eapltlll 
of the Corporation. 
S. Save as otherwise provided in the second proviso to sub-sectlon ~ 
(5) of section 5, the shares of the Corporation shall not be transfer- !:r: 
able. .. 1 .: of IhU'II. 
CHAP1'ER ITr 
MANAGEMENT OF THE CORPORATION 
1. (1) The general superfJitendence, direction and management of !Ianap-
the affairs and business of the Corporation shall vest in a Board of ment. 
directors who may exercise all the powers and discharge aU the 
:ao functions which may be exercised or discharged by the CorpOratiOD 
and are not by this Act expressly directed or required to be done by 
the Corporation in general meeting. 
(2) The Board in discharging its functions shall act on buslDe .. 
principles, regard being had to public interest. . 
2S 8. In the discharge of its functions, the Corporation shall be guld- ~orpor .. , 
eel by such directions in matters of policy involving public interest to ~ iI 
as the Central Governmem may, in consultation with the Reserve ,wded bJ 
Bank, give to .it in writing and, if any question ariBes whether a dlree- direet.lOal 
tion relates to a matter of policy involving public interest, the decJ- of 
30 sion of the Central Government thereon shall be final ~=_ 
mant-
I. The Board of directors of the Corporation shall conS'ist of the ean.utu. tiOD f1l following, namely: - .. ,---. ..." "w" Bout. 
(a) one director to be nominated by the Central Govern-
ment who shall be the Chainnan of the Board; 
35 (b) two directors nominated by the appropriate Govern-
ment, one of whom shall be a person who has special knowledge 
of co-operation and who is not an employee of the Central or 
State Government or· of -the Reserve Bank, State Bank, 1Ubt1-
diary bank, banking company, or Food Corporation; 

8 
(c) one director to be Dominated by the Reserve Bank: 
(d) two directors to be elected in such manner .as JIl'V be 
prescribed by the parties subscribing for shares in pursuance of 
the provisiC'llS of clause (d) of lub-eectioD (3), and lub-aectlon 
(5) of section 5; , 
(e) a man~ging director .. to be appointed by theCentraJ 
Govemmentand .except in the case of first appointment, after 
consultation with the Board. 
10. (1) The managing direCtor shaD-
(a) be a whole-time oftlcer of the Corporation; 
(b) perform such duties as the Board may, by regulations 
or otherwise, assign to him: 
(c) hold oftice for such term, not exceeding ftve years, as 
the Central Government may specify at the time of the appoint-
10 
ment and be eligible tor re-appointment; IS 
(en .r~lve . such salary and . allowances and be governed 
·.by.such .terms and conditions 'of service as the Central Govern-
ment ma),-
(i) in the case of first appointment determine. or 
(ii) in the cae of anv subSequent appointment, deter- 20 
mine after consultation with the Board. 
(2) The Central Government may, after conl1i11tation with the 
f:4Mrd·and· for sufBcient CaWle, remavethe managing director from 
otftce: . 
Prov~ded that no managing director shall be so removed unle. 25 
be has been given an opportunity of sbow1Dg cause against' his re-
moval. 
. . 
(3) If the ma~gi~,(iirector J.s bYI.1p~ity or,'?them~ ~nde­
red inCApable of carfytng out his duties or' is 'absent on leave OJ' 
otl1e~se . In .. circumlSta~ces ' not 'inVo~$g the ~~tion of his ap- 30 
pointmel1;t, tl).~ :.Central Government ma" ~er consultation with 
~he Bo~,' appoint another perIonto act in bJ. place during hil 
ao~nce. 

I 
,IL (l) A aomm.tec! c:Urecnar. oUler tAu the ~M d.tD!Ir.tot. Tenn ul 
= hold dee during the pleasure of. the -,tQQri:.ty lJOmi~ oMce of 
ciirecton 
other than 
(2) All elected ~tor shall hold alice for a period. of An> manatiD; 
S ;years from the date'of'hhJeletrt1on: '. d.ireC'tOr. 
Provided that 8n et~t'ect. ~tor shall continue 1A oftlce until ' 
the election of his auccesaor. -' , ", ", ' 
Q. No pe1'I1OD ~ be a d,irecto~ ,who,- Disquau_ 
10 
(4) except in the CU4t oi tu managing 4irector, is • aala- ficatiolll. 
ried oB;icial of the Corporation, or 
"'.,' ... ' , ",. :",: : '. 
(~ is, 01' at allY time ~ been, adJuQaeQ insolvent or ~ 
IlUpeDdedpaymeDt of his q.ebts or baa com'po~ed with ~ ere. 
W~~~ , 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands 10 declared by a com-
pe~~ cowt, Ql' '., , 
(d) is or has been convicted at an oftence which, in the 
opiniOn of the Central.' Govemment, iDvoivel'moral t\ll'(>Hude. 
U. (1) Ifa dir8Ctor,-
Vacation 
(4) becomea subJect to any dlsquaJ.if1cation apecifted in He- of Beata 
tieD 12, or' , Of c!irec-20 
(b) is absent wlthout leave of the :board for more tban 
three 'eon&eeutlve meetinp 1.bereof, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
(2) 'l'be managina dU-ector 01: anY other director may resign his 
2501lice Dy glV1ll.g notlce meteot in wtitirig to dlemthority by whieh 
he W~' appolUteC1 or nominated, or if he is a' director elected under 
clause (a) of section II, to the Board, and on such reslgnatlon being 
acc~pt~d, shall be deemend to have vacated his ot!ice. 
, to .... 
14. (1) '.rhe jjuard lnay constitute an Executive Committ~e con- Executiw 
30 SlstlDg at tne l:11auman of the Board, who snail be the ChaIrman committee 
thel'eot the managing director and two other directors, ol.e 01 whom and o~ . ' , comnut-ihaJ,l be a person nommated by the appropriate Government under tees of 
cJ.ause (b) of section 9. the Cor. 
(2) The Executlve Committee shall discharge such functiollll as paratieb.·. 
3S may be prescribed, or may be delegated to it, by the Board. 
(3) The Board may constitute such other committe.:s, whether 
JOnslsung "wholly of directors or wholly of other persons or parQy 

J)Jreetofa 
of Board 
or mem_ 
bers of 
a COIIn-
mitt. 
DOt to 
•• til 
eerta!a 
.... 
f::. '. 
• 
of d1rectol8 .and partly of other peI'8ODS; as it may thiDk fit tor·1I1C:h 
purpoeea u it may decide. 
Ii. (1) The Board or the Executive Committee or any other 
committee &ha.U meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at 5 
ita meetings as may be prescribed. 
(2) Three directors personally present at any meeting of the 
Boar~ and two members personally present at a meeting of a com-
mittee ahall'be the quorwn. !Dr suc.\lmeeting. 
(3) If, for any reason, the Chairman of the Board or of any com- 10 
mlUee is unable to attend any meeting of the Board or the Commit-
tee, .. the case may be, the members present at the meeting IIhall 
elect one of them to presidt! at the meeting. 
(4) U for any reason a director nominated under clause (a), IS 
clause (b) or clause (c) of section 9 is unable to atte~d an7 meet-
ing of the Board or of any committee if he is a member thereof, the 
Government or the Reserve Bank by which such director was no-
minated may depute any other person to attend such meeting and 
the person so deputed shall, for the purposes of the said meeting, 20 
be deemed to be a director noI:linated under clause (a), clause (b) 
or clause (c), as the case may be, of the said section 9 or a member 
of the committee concerned. 
• 
(5) All questions which may come up before any meeting of the 
Board or a committee shall ·be decided by a majority of votes of 25 
the members present, and in the event of an equality of votes, the 
Chairman of the Board or of the Committee, as the case' may be, or 
in hia abaence the person presiding, shall have a second or casting 
yo~ 
11. Every director or member of a committee who has an, 30 
direct or Indirect pecuniary or other interest in any matter comins 
up for consideration at a meeting of the Board or a eo~ttee 
IIhall, as soon as possible, after the relevant facts or circumstances 
have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at 
.uch meeting and the disclosure so made shall be recorded in the 35 
minutes of the meeting of the Board or of the Committee, u the 
ease may be, and no such director or member shall thereafter take 
any part in any deUberation or decision of the Board or committee 
with respect to that matter nor shall his presence at such meetins 
be taken Into 8CooUDt for the purpose of determining the quorum 

• tot the meeting at the time of such deliberation OI'votiDg, ancI it he 
does vote, his vote &hall be void: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to 
such director or member of a committee by reason only of his be-
S ing a shareholder holding not more than two per cent. of the paid-
up capital in any public company as defined in the Companies Act. 
1956, or in any other Corporation established by any law for the 
time being in force in India or In any co-operative society, with 
which or to which the Corporation has entered into or made, or pl'C)o 
10 poses to enter into or make, a contract, loan. arrangement or pl'C)o 
~ .!;.:,..,j....! 
17. (1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of any of its com- Detec:t.. 
mlttees shall be questioned or be invalid on the ground merely of!'Il appoint-
the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, menta 
IS the Board or the cOmmittee, as the case may be. not to 
invalidate 
(Z) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director acts, etc. 
or member of any committee shall be deemed to be invalid merely 
on the ground that he was disqualified to be a director or member 
or that there was any other defect in his nomination or appointment. 
20 18. Every pirector and every member of a committee shall be Fees an4 
paid such fees and allowances as the Board may, by regulations, allOW&ll-
detennine, for attending the meetings of the Board or~ as the cue ces of 
may be, any of its cOmmittees, or attending to any other work of :;ctora 
the Corporation: member 
of com-
25 Provided :that no fees shall be paid to the Chairman, managing mitt .... 
30 
director or any other director, if he is an oftlcer of the Government, 
Reserve Bank, State Bank, subsidiary bank, banking company or 
!i'ood Corporation. 
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINESS AND FuNDS OF mE CQIUIORATIOK 
19. Subject to the provisiOns of this Act, the Corporation may 
transact the following kinds or bUSiness, namely:-
(a.) the granting of loans and advances, repayable within 
a period, not exceeding five years, to agriculturists, agricultural 
35 marketing SOCieties, agricultural processing societies, Central 
Co-operative Banks, co-operative farming societies or primary 
qricultunl credit societies for agricultural operationa or for 
Buein_ 
which 
the Cor. 
poratiOD 
may 
tran.act. 

II 
~ Qtb,~~ QP8I'1.Uou CODllected therewith II the Boud may by 
regulations determine; 
(b) ~e, .dra~b1B, ~g, acce~ting, disco~tiD& bu)'inC, 
selling. collecting IlI1d dealing in bills ot exchange, hundies, 
~!9missory not~, cO\lP~s, draits... b~ of lading, r8ilwaY. rec~i- S 
p~, warrants, debentures, certificates, sCrips and other blstru·;; 
menta, and securities whether tra:iisf~rabie or negotiable or n~t; 
tc) tile gr8llt1ng and issuing of letters OIl credit aM aequi-
Mg, holding, itSuing on commtsJon, underwriting and dealin, 
in stock, funds, shares, debentures, debenture stock, bo~ 10 
obligations, securities and investments of all kinds; 
(~) the purchasing and seWng of bonds, scrips or other 
forms of securities on behalf of constituents or others the nego-
tiating of loans and advances, the receiving of aUldnds of bonels. 
scrips or valuables on deposit ot for safe custody or otherwise, IS 
providing of safe deposit vaults, and eoll*tmg and transmittiDg 
money and securities; 
(e) the carrying on of agency business of any description 
including the clearing and' forWarding of' gOOdS, giving' of recei-
ptJ and discharg~; 20 
(1) the entering into contracts of indemnity, suretyBhtp or 
guarantee with specific security or otherwise; 
(g) receiving in consideration of the services mentioned in 
clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) such commissionu may be 
"..-
agreed upon; 2S 
(h) managing or selling of any propery which mar come 
into the possession of the Corporation in satisfac~ion or part 
satisfaction of any of its claims; . . 
(i) acquiring or holding of any property or any right, title 
or interest in any property which may form the security or a 30 
part of the security for any loan or advance or which may be 
connected with any business of the Corporation; 
(j) any other kind of business which the Central Govern-
ment may, on the recommendation of the Reserve Bank, autho-
*; ~ 
(k) generally the doing of such th~ngs and ·fnatters as ma~' 
be incidental to or consequential upon the discharge of lts func-
tions wider this ACt~' 

Jot 193'-
5 
11 
ZOo Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Corporation may. 
for the 'purposes of carrying out its functions under this Act.-
(a) re-discount with or sell to the Reserve Bank or borrow 
money from that Bank and for that purpose, the Corporation 
shall be deemed to be a State Co-operative Bank within 'the 
meaning of clause 2(a), clause 2(b), clause 2(bb) and clause 
(4) of .s~<;tion n, sub-section (2) of section 46A and sup-s,ection 
(2) of section 46B of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(b) borrow money from the CenCral Gov8I'Dmeat or the 
10 State . Govenimeat or such other authority or institution a. '.p. 
proved in this behalf by the Central Govemment.· on sUch term. 
and conditions as may be agreed upon. 
Borrow-
in, by 
the Cor-
poratioD. 
ZI. The Corporation may, with the prior approval 01 the Reserve Depos1U 
~ank, accept depos)ts .frOIJl the !lPpropt"iate, Govern.men~. a local ~:= 
,IS ,authority or any other person whether incorporated or not. tion. 
2Z. The aggregate of the amounts borrowed and dep()sits acc.epted 
by the Corporation and outstandinf,t shall not at any time exceed ten 
times the amount at 'the paid-up share capital and the reServe fund 
,of the Corporation or, with the prior approval of the Central Gov-
.ao"fllIDment. fifteen times the amount of such paid-up share capltel and 
reserve fund. 
Limitaon 
borrow-
ingand 
deposits. 
13. Every Corporation shall establish two separate funds, name- Corpor •• 
ly:- tion to 
ma:ntain 
(a) Agricultural Credit(St~bilfsation) Fund (hereinafter re- two 
2S lerred to as the ,Stabilisation Fund, and fundt!. 
(b) Reserve Fund. 
K. (1) To the Stabilisation Fund shall be cre<Jit~ such sum, ,not 
;being less than ten and not more' than Meen :per cent. .8' t~e 
Corporation may deem! fit from. out of' its net annual profits before 
30 declaring a dividend. 
(a), Subject to . such conditions as may be specffted by the' Board 
by regulations, the amount lying to the credit of the StabilisatiOn 
Fund shall be utilised solely for the purpose of makillg lolJPS or 
advances with a view to enabling any C,o-operative society or other 
35 person to pay its or his dues in cases where, in the opinion of the 
Corporation, such. soc1e~y or other person is unable.to, pay such duel 
:tn:tbDe';01Mg'to drought, famine or other ,natural ~u.. 
Sf.abili· 
sationot 
Fund. 

11 
Rllerye 15. (1) To the Reserve Fund shaD be credited such sums not beina 
1'uDd. more than fifteen per cent. as the Corporation may deem fit ou·t of 
its net annual profits before declaring a dividend. 
Payment 
ofdivl-
dend. 
Reoo •• 17 
ofmODe)'l 
due to 
the Cor-
poratloD. 
Acqu1l1-
tion or 
tranater 
by the 
Corpora-
Uonof 
(2) The amounts lying to the credit of the Reserve Fund shall be 
utilised solely for such purposes as the Board may by regulations , 
specify . 
.. After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, deprecia-
tion of assets and all other matters which are usually provided for 
by bankers, and after crediting to the Stabilisation Fund under sec-
tion 24 and to the Reserve Fund under section 25, the Corporation IC 
may, out of its annual net profits, declare a dividend. 
1:1. All moneys belonging to the Corporation which may not, for 
the time being, be required by it shall be- ' 
(4) deposited with the Reserve Bank or with any agency of 
the Reserve Bank or in consultation with the Reserve Bank with 15 
a Scheduled Bank, State Co-operative Bank or Central Co-opera-
tive Bank; or 
(b) invested in the securities of the Central Government or 
any State Government or in securities in which a trustee may 
invest money under clause (a), clause (b), clause (bb), clause 20 
(c) or clause (d) of section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882; or 
(c) utilised in such other manner as may be approved by 
the Reserve Bank. 
28. Where any amount is due to the Corporation in,respect of loans 
or advances or other financial accommodation granted by it to any. a5 
penon, the Corporation or any penon authorised by it in writing 
in this behalf, may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, 
make an application to the appropriate Government for the recovery 
of the amount due to it, and if the appropriate Government, or ftuch 
authority, as the State Government may specify in this behalf, i, 30 
satisfied, after following such procedure as may be prescribed, that 
any amount is so due, it may islUe a certificate for that amount to 
the Collector, and the Collector shall proceed to recover that amount 
in the same manner and under the same condition as if it were an 
arrear of land revenue. 35 
21. (1) Subject to the provisions of any law relating to co-opera-
tive societies for the time being in force, the Corporation may-
(4) acquire the whole or any part of the. business, includfnl 
the assets and UabWties of a co-operative society; 

13 
(b) transfer the whole or any part of its business, including busines*, 
its assets or liabilities to a co-operative society. Ol.eta and llabi-
(2) The terms and conditions relating to such acquisition or trans- !ti::m 
fer, if agreed upon by the Board and the co-operati\lle society con- operative 
S eemedmall be submitted to the Reserve Bank for its approval and seoetiea. 
that Bank may by order in Writing (hereafter in this section refer-
red to as the order of approval) accord tts approval thereto: 
Provided that where such acquisition or transfer involves the ac-
quisition. of the assets of the co-operatlve society or a transfer of the 
10 Uabilities of the Corporation to the co-operatlve society, no such 
approval shall be accorded by the Reserve Bank, unless it is satis-
fied that--
IS 
20 
(i) the co-operative society has given notice of the proposed 
acquisition or transfer, in such manner as may be provided under 
the law relating to co-operative societies applicable to it, to all 
its members and creditors, giving them the option, of demanding 
payment of their share or dues, as the case may be, and 
(ii) all the members anel crecUton have assented to the pro-
posal or deemed to have assented thereto by virtue of any mem-
ber or creditor failing to exerciSe his optioD within such period 
as may be specified in accordance with such law relating to cO"-
operative societies for the time being in foree. 
(3) The terms and conditions as approved by the Reaerve Bank 
shall come into effect from the date specified by the Bank in this be-
2S half in the order of approval and be bincUng upon the Corporation 
.and its sha-eholders and creditors and if such law relating to c0-
operative societies sO,provides be binding also upon the co-operative 
society and its shareholders and creditors. 
(4) If for any reason the tenns and conditiens cannot come into 
30 effect on the date specified in the order of approval, the Reserve 
Bulk may fix another suitable date for that purpose. 
(5) On the date on which the terms and conditions as aforesaid 
come into effect, the business, assets and liabilities of the Corpora-
tion, or as the case may be, the co-operative lOCiety conc:enaed, shall, 
35 by virtue of and in accorda~ -with the provisions of the aforesaid 
order of approval, and if such law relating to co-operaUve aoci6tles 
so provides, stand transferred to, and become the business, assets 
and liabilities of the co-operatfve society or the Corporation. as the 
cue lI1ay be. 

14 
CHAPTER V 
GENERAL MEETINGS 
(;eneral 30. (1) A general meeting (in this Act referred to as an annual 
meetinp. general meeting) of the Corporation shall be held at the Head Oftlce 
of the Corporation within three months from the date on which the S 
annual accounts of the Corporation are closed, and any other gene-
ral meeting may be convened -by the Board at any other time:' 
Provided that the Central Government may extend the time with-
in which any annual general meeting shall be held, by a period not 
exceeding one month. 10 
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting shall 
be entitled to discuss the balance-sheet and profit and loss account 
of the Corporation, the report of the Board on :the working of the 
Corporation for the period covered by the accounts and the auditor's 
report on the balance..sheet and accounts. IS 
CHAPTER VI 
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND UTt1RNS 
Accounts. 31. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts including the profit and 
Audit. 
1068 account of the Corporation shall be prepared and maintained 
in such form and manner as may ,be prescribed. 20 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Corpora-
tion to be balanced and closed on the ~eth day of June each year. 
32. (1) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited. by an 
auditor duly qualified to act as audiltor under sub-section (1) of fieC-
tion 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 who shall be appointed by the 2S 1 f 1908 
Board with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank and shall re- 0 • 
ceive such remuneration from the Corporation as the Board may,' 
with the approval of the Reserve Bank, fix: 
Provided that the first auditor shall be appointed by the Central 
Government within one month from the establishment of the Cor- 30 
poration on such tenns and conditions as the Central Government 
may determine. c. 
(2) The auditor so appointed shall hold office b-om the concluaion 
of the annual general meeting of the Corporation until the conclu-
sign of the Dext annual ieneral meetm,: ~ 

15 
Provided that the flm auditor shall hold offtce until the conclu-
sion of the first annual general meeting. 
(3) The Corporation shall supply its auditor with a copy of its 
annual balance-sheet and it shall be the duty of the auditor to exa-
5 mine such balance-sheet together with the accounts and vouchers 
relating thereto and he shall have a list delivered to him of all books 
kept by the Corporation and shall at all reasonable times have access 
to the books, accounts, vouchers and other documents of the Corpo-
ration. 
10 (4) The auditor may. in relation to the accounts of the Corpora-
tion of which he is the auditor, examine any director or any officer 
or employee of the Corporation and shall be entitled to require from 
the oftlcers of the Corporation such infonnation and explanation as 
he may think necessary for the performance of his duties. 
15 (5) The auditor shall make a report to tho Corporation upon the 
annual balance-sheet and aceount!; examined' by him and in every 
such report he shall state whether in his opinion the a~ounts exhi-
bit a true and fair view,-
(11) in the case of the balance-sheet, of the state of affairs of 
20 the Corpol'8tion atf: the end of the year, and 
(b) in the case of the profit and loss account. of the profi{ 
or loss for the year, and. in case he had called for anv explana-
tion or information from thl'! Board. whether i1: has been given 
and whether it is satisfactory. 
25 (If) Witthout prejudice to anythins.! contained in the oreceding sub-
sections, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may, if so 
requested by the Central Government. examine and report upon the 
accounts c:Jf. the Corporation and any expenditure incurred' by him in 
connection with such examination and reoort shall be payable by 
30 such Corpol'8tion to the Comptroller and Auditor-Generlll of IndIa. 
33. (1) The Corporation shall furnish, from time to time, to the Retuna&. 
appropriate Government and to the Reserve Bank such returns as 
the appropriate Government or -the Reserve Bank may reauire. 
(2) The Corporation shall fuTnish to all its shareholders within 
3S three months from the date on which the annual accounts of the 
Corporation are closed, or within such further time not exceeding 
one month as the Cf'ntral Government may specify, a copy ot the 
balance-sheet as at the close of that year and a proftt and loss ao-
aount for the year, the auc:Utor's report and a report of the Board 1)1\ 

Certain 
provisioll8 
GItha 
Banking 
Regula_ 
tion Act, 
1949, to 
apply 
to the 
Corpora-
tion. 
Certain 
provisioll8 
GItha 
Reserve 
Bank of 
India Act, 
1934, to 
apply 
to the 
Corpora-
tion. 
Reserve 
Bank of 
India Act, 
1934 and 
Banking 
Regula-
tion Act, 
1949, not 
to apply 
except a. 
otherwise 
provided. 
18 
the working of the Corporation during the year, and copies of the 
said balance-sheet, profit and loss account and reports shall be pub-
liahed in the Official Gazette. 
(3) The Corporation shall furnish a statement in such form as 
may be prescribed of its assets and liabilities as at the close of bust.. S 
ness on the last Friday of each month or if that day is a public holi-
day under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, as at the clc;>se of 26 of 1681. 
business at the preceding working day, to the Reserve Bank within 
ten days from the date to which the statement relates. 
CHAPTER vn 10 
APPLIcATION OF CEK'rAlN AcTS TO 'l'IDl COBPORATIOl( 
34. The provisions of sections 8, 9, 20, 20A, 21, 23, 24, 26, MA, 35 
[exclud:iDg sub-section (4)], MA, clause (a) of su,b..section (1) of 
section 36, and sections 41, 47, 50, 53 and 54 of the Banking Begula-
ti0li Act, 1949, shall apply to or in relatwn to the Corporation as they IS 10 of 1949. 
apply to or in relation to co-operative banks. 
3l. The provisions-· of sections 18 and 42 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934, shall apply to or in relation to the Corporation as 
they apply to or in relation to a State Co-operative Bank. 
36. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, nothing contained. ill 20 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949, shall apply to or in relation to the Corporation. 
2 of 19M. 
2 of 1934. 

, 18 of 1881. 
"" 
43 of 1961. 
1 of 1872. 
1'7 
37. The Bankers' Books Evidence Act. 1891, shall apply to or IB The 
'reiaij,QD to the Corporation as it applies to or in relation to • baBt :::era' 
as defined in section 2 of that Act. Evl~ 
Act,latl 
to ...,. 
38. For the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961, or any ~ ~ 
5 enactment for the time being in force relating to any to on iaeome. tion 
proftts or aains the Corporation shall be deemed to be a co-opaathoe tdo be 
'ty ~~ soae . to be a 
co-opera. 
tlve ....,.. 
for the 
pu~ 
otlMc~ 
tax Mt, 
1081. 
39. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Court, 
Act, 1m, or an.y other law for the time being in force, no Court, TribunaI, 
10 Tribunal or other authority shall have power ,to require the Corpora- :c., not 
tioD, the Reserve :Bank or any offtcer of the Corporation or the Reaerve pr::!~ire 
Bank to produce before such Court, Tribunal or other authority the tion Of 
i report of any inspection, or any copy thereof, made by the Rle8erve rt!POl1, on 
BlInk in pursuance of section 35 of the Banking Regulation Act, inspectio:', 
10 Of 1949. IS 1949, as applied to the Corporation under section 34. ::de by 
Reeerve 
Bank. " 
CHAPTER VIII 
MIscI:LI.A.m:ous 
•. Every director, member of a committee, auditor, ofticer or Decl .... 
,. other employee of the Corporation shall, before entering upon his Uon of 
20 duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out ft~lity 
~~~ed~ m lecrecy. 
41. (1) Every direC'l;or shall be indemnified by the Corporation Incfemai6I 
against all lossE'S and expenses incurred by him in the discharge of of -.c_ 
his duties except such as are caused by his own wilful act Or' defaul~ ter. 
25 (2) A director shall not be responsible for anything done .. 
oInitted to be done by any other director or officer or other employee 
• of the Corporart;ion or for any 1099 or expenses resulting to the Cor-
peration by the insufficiency or deficiency of value of, or title to, ..,. 
property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the Corporatioa 

18 
in good faith, or by the wrongful act of any auditor or any person 
under obligation to the Corporation, or by anything dane in good 
faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation thereto. 
Protec- 4.2. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Corpora-
tion of tian or the Central or State Government or the Reserve Bank or S 
:=: in any director or officer of the Corporation or of the Central or State 
,ood faith. Government or of the Reserve Bank or any other person authorised. 
by the Corporation to discharge any functions under thi's Act, for 
any loss or damage caused' or likely to be caused. by anything which 
is in good faith done or iDtended to be done in pursuance of this 10 
Act. 
Liquida-
tion 
of the 
Corpora-
tion. 
Reserve 
Bank to 
submit 
report. 
Stall 
of the 
Corpora-
tion and. 
delep-
tlon of 
powers. 
G. (1) No provision of law relating to the winding up of com-
panies or corporations shall apply to the Corporation and the Corpo-
ration shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central 
Government made in consultation with the State Government and 15 
in such manner as it may direct. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), any 
order made by the Central Government for the liquidation of a 
Corporation may provide for all matters for effectively winding up 
the affairs of the Corporation, including the repayment of capital, 20 
disposal of any fund established under this Act, the transfer of the 
business, property, assets and liabilities, rights, interests, privileges 
and obligations of whatever nature of the Corporation to such insti-
tution or institutions as the Central Government may direcl and 
payment, receipt or disposal of compensation arising out of such 25 
transfer. 
44. The Reserve Bank shall, on the expiry of a periOd of five 
years, from the date of establishment of the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation in a State or Union territory and thereafter at an inter-
val of five years and within such time as the Central Government 30 
may specify, submit a report to that Government as to the working 
of the Corporation and forward a copy thereof to the State Govern-
ment concerned. 
45. (1) The Corporation may appoint such officers, advisers and 
employees as it considers necessary for the efticient performance of 35 
its function and determine, by regulations or otherwise, their condi· 
tions of appointment and service and the remuneration payable to 
them. . 
(2) The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to the 
Managing Director or to any other officer of the Corporation, subject 40 

19 
to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified, such 
of its powers and duties under this Act as it may deem. necessary. 
M. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Power 
OfBciaJ. Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this of the 
S Act. Central 
Govern-
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the :: to 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow- ruleJ, 
ing matters, namely:-
(a) functions which shaUbe discharged by the Executive 
10 Committee; 
20 
(b) rules of procedure with regard to the transaclion 01 
business at a meeting of the Board; 
(c) rules of procedure with regard to the transaction 01 
business at a meeting of any comuiittee constitUlted by the Board; 
(d) the procedure to be followed by the State Government 
or the authority specified by the State GovernmeD't for issuina 
the certifiC8Jte under section 28; 
(e) the manner in which the general meeting shall be 
convened, the quorum therefor, the procedure to be followed 
thereat and the manner in which voting rights may be exercised; 
(1) form and manner in which accounts shall be maintained 
the balance-sheet and profit and loss account shall .be prepared.; 
(g) form. in which statement of assets and liabilities shall 
be furnished; 
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be 
prescribe~ 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
30 in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not ,be made, the rule ihaU 
thereafter have eftect only in such modified form or be of no effect 
35 as the case may lbe; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any.thine 
previously done under that rule. 

ftawer 
of the 
Board to 
make 
regula-
tiou. 
.&t. (J) The Board may, after consultation with the Reserve 
Bank, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters for 
which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of giviDC 
etrect to the provisions of this Act. S 
(.2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoIng provisions, such regulations may provide for all or any of 
the 1oDo$g matters, namely:-
(4) duties which the managing director shall perform.; 
(b) fees and allowances which may be paid to every dircc- 10 
tor for aUending any meeting of the Board or any committee 
thereof or for attending to any other work of the Corporation; 
(c) duties, conduct, salaries and allowances and conditions 
of aervice of oftlcers and oiher employees of the Corporatit>n; 
{d) eS'tabtishment and maintenance of provident and other IS 
benefit funds for the employees of the Corporation; 
(e) the delegation of powers and functions to the officers 
and employees of the Corporation; 
(1) the purposes connected with agricultural purposes for 
which the Corporation may grant loans and advances; 
(g) the conditions subject to which the amount in the 
Stabilisation Fund may be utilised; 
(h) the manner in which the amount in the Reserve Fund 
may be utW.sed; 
20 
(i) conditions which the Corporation may impose on any 2S 
108&1 or advance made by it; 
(3) any other matter which is, or may be, necessary for the 
emciAmt conduct of the affairs of the Corporation. 
(!) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
a-ve Bank may at any time within three months from the com- 30 
meDteID8Ilt of thi.s Act make regulations with regard to any of the 
matten .wpecifted in suib-section (2) but the regulatiON so made may 
be ~ed or modifted by the Board in exercise of the p~ 
conferred on it by sub-section (1). 

21 
48. In clause (1) of section 2 of the Agricultural Refinance Cor- Amend-
poration Act, 1963, after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause mentl~ 
shall be inserted, namely:- !fet1983. 
"(iii) an Agricultural Credit Corporation established unaer 
S section 3 of the State Agricultural Credit Corporations Act, 
1968.". 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 40) 
I, ............ , do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly 
10 and to the best of my judgment, skill and ability execute and per-
form the duties required of me as a director, oftlcer, employee or 
auditor (as the case may be) of the Agricultural Credit Corpora-_ 
tion and which properly relate to any oftlce or position in the said 
Corporation held by me. 
IS I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be 
communicated to any person not legally entitled thereto any in-
formation relating to the aft'airs of the Corporation nor will 1 
allow such person to inspect or have access to, any books or docu-
ments belonging to, or in the possession of, the Corporation and 
20 relating to the business of the Corporation. 
Signed before me. 
Date ........... . 
~ ... ! ... --

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The question of supply of adequate agricultural credit ha~ 
assumed vital importance in the context of our aim to achieve 
self-sufficiency in food production as early as possible. While the 
co-operative mlOvement has made considerable progress over the 
years in the matter of proviSion of agricultural credit, the progress 
has not been uniform throughout the country and there are certain 
areas particularly, the States of Assam, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa 
'lQnd Rajasthan and the Union territories of Manipur and Tripura 
where the existing co-operative credit agencies are unable to take 
care of the full credit needs of the fanners. It has, therefore, 
be~ felt that supplementary arrangements should be devised for 
the supply of institutional agricultural credit in those parts of the 
States and Union territories where the co-operative credit agencies 
are not suftlciently developed. 
2. The object of the Bill is to enable the States and Central 
Government to set up Agricultural Credit Corporations in the 
above-mentioned States and Union territories. It will also he open 
to any other State or Union territory to set up a Corporation on 
similar lines with the prior approval of the Central Government. 
The proposed Corporation will provide short and medium tenn 
credit for periods not exceeding 5 years. Each Corporation will 
have an authorised capit&l between Rs. 1 crore and Rs. 5 crores, 
depending on the requirements of each State or Union territory, the 
share capital heinl! contributed: by the ~enrtral Government, the 
State Government, the Reserve Bank, the State Bank and its sub-
sidiaries, other commercial banks and the Food. Corporation. The 
Bill also contains provisions for the transfer of the business and 
assets and liabilities of the Corporation to co-operative societies 
and from the co-operative societies to the Corporation with the 
prior approval of the Reserve Bank and subject to the require-

23 
ments of the respective State laws relating to the co-operattv. 
societies. 
3. Opportunity is also being taken to amend the Agricultural 
Refinance Corporation Act, 1963, to enable that Corporation to 
provide necessary funds to the proposed. Agricultural Credit Cor-
poration for its lending operations. Notes on clauses explain in 
detail the various provisions of the Bill. 
NEW DBLlII; 
The 17th April, 1968. 
--
MORARJI DESAI. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of le'tter No. F.11/75/66-SB, dated the 26th April, 1968 from 
Shri Morarji Desai, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of Bill 
to provide for the establishment in the States and Union territories 
of Agricultural Credit Corporations and for matters connected there-
with or incidental thereto, recommends the introduction of the Bill 
in the Lok Sabha under clause (1) of article 117 and its consideration 
under clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution. 

Notes on clauses 
C'la.use 2 provides for the definition of certain words and ex-
pressions used in the Bill. Agricultural operation, in accordance 
with the proposed definition, will include animal husbandry, dairy 
farmllng, pisciculture and poultry farming. 
CIat&B8 3 seeks to empower the appropriate Government to 
establish an Agricultural Credit Corporation in each of the five 
States of Assam, Bihar, Orissa, Rajasthan and West Bengal and 
the two Union territories of Manipur and Tripura. It will also be 
open to any other State or Union territory to set up a similar cor-
poration after obtaining the prior approval of the Central Gov· 
ernment. 
CZaUBe 4: provides for the location of its head office and other 
oftiee. and agencies of the Corporation. 
C14t&Be. 5 and 6 provide for the capital structure, ownership of 
the Corporation, allotment of shares and related matters. The 
authorised capital of each corporation will be between Rs. I and 
as. 5 crores, depending on the requirement of each State or Union 
territory and would be contributed mainly by the Central Gov-
ernment (30 per cent.), the State Government (20 per cent.) , the 
Reserve Bank (20 per cent.). The remaining shares (30 per cent.) 
would be contributed by the State Bank of India and its subsidiaries, 
other commercial banks and the Food Corporation in such propor-
tion as may be specified by the Central Government. 
C'la.u..es 7 and 8 seek to vest the power of general superintend-
ence, direction and management of the affairs of the Corporation 
in its Board of directors, subject to such directions in matters of 
policy involving public interest as may be given by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank. 
ClaUle 9 provides that the Corporation will be managed by a 
Board of directors consisting of. 7 persons: the Chainnan and . the 
IDlIUlBging director to be nominated by the Central Government, 
two, one of whom shall ·be non-ofticial, to be nominated by the 
Central or State Government, as the case may be, one director to 
be nominated by the Reserve Bank and two directors to be elected 

.. , 25 
by the other ahareholders in accordance with the prescribed rules 
from the residuary shareholders holding 30 per cent. of the shares. 
Olause 10 provides for matters connected with the appoint-
ment, tenure and removal of the managing director. 
ClAuses 11 to 13 provide for the term of oftice of a director 
other than the managing director, disqualifications of a director 
and VacatiOD of his ofAce. 
Clause 14: deals with the composition and functions of the Execu-
tive and: other committees of the Board, subject to such rules as may 
be prescribed. 
CIaUia 15 to 18 provide for the meetings of Board of directors 
and its committees, fees and allowances of directors anel members 
of committees and matters connected therewith subject to any 
rules and regulations that may be made for such purpose. It has 
been provided that intereS'ted directors shall not participate at 
these meetings. 
Clause 19 specifies the classes of business which the Corpora-
tion will be authorised to perform;. The principal business of the 
Corporation will be to grant loans and advances for periods not 
exceeding five years for agricultural and allied operations, 
10 agriculturists, agricultural marketing and processing societies, 
Central Co-operative Banks, Co-operative farming societies or pri-
mary agricultural credit societies. It will also be authorised to 
perform other types of business which a c().operative bank is 
generally authorised to transact. 
Clause 20 seeks to authorise the Corporation to obtain funds from 
the Reserve Bank on the same tenns and conditions as a State C0-
operative Bank and also from 'the Central Government, State Govern-
ment or such other authorities and institutions as may be approved 
by the Central Government. 
Clauses 21 and 22 seek to authorise the Corporation to accept de-
posits and lay down a limit for the total amounts of its borrowings 
and deposits in relation to its paid up capital and reserve fund. 
Clau.e. 23 to 25 provide for the establishment by the Corpora-
tion of two separate funds, namely, Agricultural Credit Stabilisa-
tion Fund and Reserve Fund and the order of contribution that 
the Corporation may make to these funds out of iots annual profltl. 

26 
Clause 26' provides for the payment of divldend. by the Corp()l'a-
tion after allowing for the necessary provisions usually made' by 
the bankers and after affording credit to the two funds. 
Cla'U.8e 27 provides for the investment of surplus funds of the 
Corporation in trustee securities or with the Reserve Bank or with 
any agency of the Reserve Bank or with any scheduled bank, State 
Co-operative Bank or Central Co-operative Bank ~n. consultation with 
the Reserve Bank. 
Cl4use 28 seeks to authorise the Corporation to make anappli-
cation to the appropriate Government fOf the l"E!cc)Very of its dues 
as arrears of land revenue .. 
Clause 29 provides for the transfer of the business and the assets 
and liabilities of the Corporation to the co-operative societies or 
from the co-operative soc:ieties to the Corporation with the approval 
of the Reserve Bank, subject to the requirements of the respective 
State laws relating to co-operative societies. 
Clause 30 deals with the general meeting of the Corporation. 
Clauses 31 to 33 provide for the preparation of balance-sheet, 
profit and loss account, audit and submission of returns to the appro-
priate authorities. 
Clauses 34 to 37 seek to apply to the Corporation certain provi-
sions of the Banking Regulation Act, the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, and the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, in so far as they are 
applicable to a co-operative bank. These powers will enable the 
Reserve Bank to issue instructions to the Corporation in: regard 
to its lending policy and other matters as are already available in 
respect of a co-operative bank. 
Clause 38 provides that the Corporation shall be deemed to be 
a co-operative society for the purposes of Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 39 exempts the Reserve Bank and the Corporation or any 
oftlcer of the Reserve Bank or Corporation from producing before 
a court of law the report of any inspection that may be carried out 
by the Reserve Bank in pursuance o"! the statute. 
Clauses 40 to 42 deal with the declaration of fidelity and secrecy, 
indemnity of director and protection to officers for acts done in good 
faith. \ 
Clause 43 provides that the Corporation cannot be taken to liqui-
dation except by an order of the Central Government. 

Cla1Ue 44 requires the Reserve Bank to submit a report to the 
Central Government on the working of a Corporation after five years. 
Clause 45 seeks to empower the Corporation to appoint officers, 
advisers and employees for the purpose of the working of the 
Corporation and also provides for delegation of powers to its 
employees. 
~Use 46 provides for the rules to be made by the Central 
GoVernment in order to carry out the purposes of the Act. 
ClaUse 47 deals with the matters which have to be covered by 
regulation to be made by the ·Corporation in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank. 
Clause 48 provides for an amendment to the Agricultural Re-. 
finance Corporation Act, 1963, to enable the Agricultural Refinance 
Corporation to provide necessary fWlds to the Corporations for 
their operation. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the State Agricultural Credit Corporations Bill, 1_ 
provides that the authorised capital of each Corporation shan be 
between Rs. 1 crore and Rs. 5 crores and that 30 per cent. of issued. 
share capital in the case of a Corporation established in a State and 
50 per cent. in the case of a Corporation established in a' Union 
territory, shaLl be contrlbuted by the Central Government. The 
first proviso of the said clause also provides that the Central Gov-
ernment, along with the Reserve Bank and the State Governments, 
may take up the unallCYtted shares up to 30 per cent. in case these 
shares are not contributed ful1y by other shareholders, namely, the 
State Bank and its subsidiaries. other commercial banks and the 
Food. Corporation. The size of the share capital fixed, from time 
to time, will depend on the requirements of each State or Union 
territory and on present indications the total contribution by the 
Central Government to the share capital of the Corporations may 
not exceed Rs. 7 crore!; in all. spread over in three or four financial 
years. Even if the Bill is enacted and brought into operation well 
before the end of the current financial year, it is not likely that the 
Corporations could be set up in more than one or two States and 
Union territories during the flnancial year. Hence the non-recurring 
expenditure bv the Central Government during the current financfal 
year is not likely to exceed. at the most, Rs. 1 crore. The balance 
of the estimated non-recurrinl!' exPE!nditure of Rs. 6 crores is likely 
to be incurred in the subseQuent two or three flnancial years. No 
recurring expenditure is envisaged. 
Clause 20 (b) of the Bill provides that the Corporations may 
borrow money from, among others. the Central Government. This 
is a permissive provision which authorises the Corporations to 
borrow monev from the Central Government on such tenns and 
conditions as' may be determined. The Corporations will depend 
for their wor1dn~ funds primarily on the Reserve Bank and public 
deposits and it is not possible to envisaj!'e at this stage whether it 
will ~ neeessarv for the Corporations to borrow funds from the 
Central Govemm'ent. If and when the Corporations find it necessary 
to reauest the Central Governmeont to lend funds to them and if 
the Central Government decides to advance fund!'; on terms and 
conditions as may be determined, there would be some expenditure 

29 
from the Consolidated Fund, but it is not possible to indicate, before 
the CorPorations have started functioning, What would be the order 
of such expenditure. In any case, amounts to be lent by the Cen-
tral GOftrnment would be required to be repaid to it by the Cor-
porations and over the years no net outgo from tilt" Consolidated 
Fund on this Recount is envisaged. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION , , 
Clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for earring out the purposes of the Act. The rules made under 
the Act may provide for the functions to be discharged by the exe-
cutive committee; procedure with regard to the transaction of 
business at a meeting of the Board or of any committee constituted 
by it; procedure to be followed by the State Government for issuing 
a certificate for the recovery of any money due to the corporation; 
the manner in which the general meeting of the corporation shall 
be convened and held; the form and manner in which accounts of 
the corporation shall be maintained and its profit and loss account 
shall be prepared and the form in which the statement of its assets 
and liabilities shall be furnished. These are matters which relate 
to detail and as such the delegation of the legislative power is of a 
normal ~haracter. 
2. Clause 47 of the Bill empowers the Board to make, after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, regulations with regaTd to the 
duties which the managing director shall perform; the fees and 
allowances which may be paid to directors for attending the meeting 
of the Board or any committee thereof; duties, conduct, salaries and 
allowances and conditions of service of officers and other employees 
of the corporation; establishment and maintenance of provident and 
other benefit funds for the employees of the corporation; the condi-
tions subject to which the amlount in the Stabilisation Fund shall 
be utilised; the manner in which the amount in the Reserve Fund 
may be utilised; the restrictions which may be imposed by the 
corporation on any loan or advance made by it. With a view to 
facilitating the wOTk of the corporation sub-clause (3) of clause 47 
empowers the Reserve Bank to make the first regulations at any 
time within three months from the commencement of the Act; but 
the regulations so made may be rescinded or modified by the Board 
\vhen it. i~ constituted. 
3. The delegation of the legislative power with regard to the 
matters for which regulations may be made by the Board or the 
Reserve Bank are matters of detail. The delegation of the legisla-
tive power is thus of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment in the States and t: nion territorie 
of Agricultural Crwit Corporations and for matters 
cOlUlccted therewith or incidental th('Teto. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister of Fi1UlJfCe.) 