Bill No. 47 of *0 
THE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS 
AND MEASURES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 16TH AUGUST, 1960) 

Bill No. 47 of 1960 
THE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Standards of WeifJhts and Measures Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: ~ 
1. (1) This' Act may be called the Standards of Weights and Short title 
Measures (Amendment) Act 1960. and com-, mCllccment. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
10 
15 
20 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2~ In section 1 o! the Standards of Weights and Measures Act. Amendment 
1956 (hereinafter referred to 11S the principal Act) ,- of eection 1· 
(i) in sub-section (2), the words "except the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir" shall be omitted; and 
(ii) to sub-section (.3), the following proviso shall be add-
ed, namely:-
"Provided that, in relation to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, the said period of ten years shall be computed 
from the date on which 'the Standards of Weights and 
Measures (Amendment) Act, 1960 comes into force. 
3. In section 17 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the fol- A dm 
lowing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- f);r:~0J1e~7 . 
.. (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made. before each House of Parlia-
ment while It is in session for a total period of thirty days which 

may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or 
the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 5 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so however that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.". 

STATEMENT· OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The question of the extension of the Standards of Weights and 
Measures Act, .1956, to the State of Jammu and Kashmir has been 
under consideration of the Government for some time past and it 
is felt that the adoption of the metric system in that State would 
facilitate trade and commerCE between that State and the rest of 
the country. At the time the Act was enacted, however, it could not 
be ext~·nded to the State of Jammu and Kashmir because entry 50 of 
the Union List to which the subject-matter of the Act was relatable 
was not applicable to tblt State. By the Constitution (Application 
to Jammu and Kashmir) Second Amendment Order, 1960, that ~ntry 
has been made applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and 
it is now proposed to extend the Act to that State. It is ulso proposed 
that the period for the cOOlplete adoption of the metric syste.n in 
that State shall be ten years from the date on which the proposed 
legislation comes into force. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. 
NEW DELHI; LAL BAHADUR. 
The 5th August, 1960. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Section 15 of the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1956 
requires the Central Government to supply at least one set of 
standards of mass and measure to each State Government. The 
estimated cost of such supply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
will be about Rs. 2,000. 
• 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRAOTS FROM 1'HE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND MEAStJRES ACT, 1956 
(No. 89 OF 1956) 
• • • • 
1 Short tft1e. 
• edmt aDd 
• • • • CCIIIIIDm" 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date, not being later than ten 
years from the passing of this Act, as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act or for different 
areas or for different classes of undertakings or for different classes 
of ~.. I 
• • • • 
17. 
• • • • 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall be laid for not less than 
thirty days before both Houses of Parliament as soon as possible 
after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid 
or the session immediately following . 
• • • • 
ment. 

~O.:::7 ~j(' ..... 
;,!" ........ :,eu . 
LOK SABRA 
A 
BIsLL 
to amend the Standards of Weights and. Measures Act, 1956. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of artide 117 of 
the Con~titutionof India, recommended to Lok Sabba. the 
consideration of the BUt 
M. 1'(. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Lat Bahadur Shaslri, 
Minzster of Commerce 
and Industry.) 