8U1 No. 17 of 1"1 
THE VOLUNTARY SURRENDER OF' 
SALARIES (EXEMPTION FROM 
TAXATION) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOR SABRA) 

DUI No. 47 of 1"1 
THE VOLUNTARY SURREDNER OF SALARIES 
(EXEMPTION FROM TAXATOIN) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN Los: SABHA) 
.A 
Bll.rL 
to provide for exempting from. tazes on income a portion CYf the 
sala.ry or allowances pal/a'bIe to a.ny person who has in the public 
interest volunteered to forego it. 
BE it enacted by F9rliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - I 
1. This Act may be called the Voluntary Surrender of Salaries Short tide. 
(Exemption from Taxation) Act, 1961. 
5 2. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Income-tax Exemption 
II of 1933. Act, 1922, or in any other law for the time being in force relating to fro~ taXes 
taxation on income, no income-tax or super-tax shall be payable by :- :en;~c: 
any person- I of .. laries ,urrendered 
(a) where his salary is paid out of the Consolidated Fund in favour of 
10 of IDdia or of the Consolidated Fund of a State, in respect of ~~­
that part of the salary due to him for any period after the 31st 
day of March, 1961 which. he has, by a declaration in writing, 
volunteered to forego in the public interest: 
(b) in any other case, in respect of that part of the salary 
IS which is due to him for any period after the 31st day of March, 
1961 which has been, in the public interest, surrendered in 
favour of, and paid to, the Central Government in accordance 
with the rules made in this behalf by that Govemment; 
QDd such part of the salary shall not be included in his total income 
2.0 for ~ purposes of any law relating to taxation on income. 

Provisions 
of section:z 
to apply to 
allowances. 
3. The provisions of section 2 shall apply in relation to any allow-
ances due to any such person as is referred to therein for any period 
after the 31st day of March, 1961 as they apply in relation to his 
salary. 
~':~~es. 4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 5 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
Repeal. 
(2) Every rule IDQde under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it 
is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may bo! com-
prised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immedi- 10 
ately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the rule or both Houses Qgree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in BUch modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modi- r 5 
fication or armulment shall be without prejudice to the validity (If 
anything previously done under that rule. 
S. (1) The Voluntary Surrender of Salaries (Exemption from 
Taxation) Act, 1950, is hereby repealed. 61 of 1950. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal any declaration made under 20 
the said Act shall be deemed to be a declaration made for the 
. purposes of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Voluntary Surrender of Salaries (Exemption from 
Taxation) Act, 1950 a person whose salary is either specified in the 
Second Schedule to the Constitution or is determined by any Cen-
tral, State or Provincial Act, is exempted from taxation on income 
in respect of such part of his salary and allowances \1S is foregone 
by him in the public interest by a declaration in writing. The 
object of the present Bill is to extend the scope of this exemption to 
all salaried employees, whether in Government or private employ-
mei1t in respect of rolaries and allowances due for any period after 
the 31st March, 1961. 
MORARJI R. DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 5th August. 1961. 
3 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill emp'owers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The rules would 
relate, inte1" alia, to matters such as the manner in which a plrt of 
the salary and allowances may be surrendered in favour of, and paid 
to, the Central Government in the case of persons referred to in 
clause 2 (b). These matters are of a routine nature. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal charac-
ter. 
4 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for exempting from taxes on income a portion of 
the salary or allowances payable to any person who has 
in the public interest volunteered to forego it. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 
and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India, recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction of 
the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shn Morarji Desai, 
MinISter of Finance.) 