· 
" .. 
\~(~ 
~IIY'J 
..... IIt ... 
TIm GOLD (CONTROL) BILL, 1963 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSIS 
CHAPTER I 
PRa.D.fIN'AllT 
1. Short title, extent. application and commeDCDG" 
2. De1lnitloDl. 
CHAPTER n 
CONmOLOWBUmxag~~ 
3. Prohibition of manufacture of articl. ot ,old In certa!D ..... 
4. Restrictions on the making, etc., of ornament. m4 G~ 
articles of gold. 
5. Restrictions on possession and sale of pld. 
e. Prohibition of loana on hypothecatioD of 10ld. 
CHAPTER m 
LICENSING or D:&ALI:RS .Al'O) ~ AD c.l1'Ji"iiU6 
TIOIf or GOLDSMlTD 
.,. Licensing of dealers. 
8. Licensing of reftners. 
9. Cancellation of licences 'by A4mfnfatrator. 
10. Cancellation of licence on application by dealer or reJbl •• 
11. Disposal of gold in the possession ot dwert or ~ III 
certain cases. 
12. Display of licences. 
13. Certified goldsmiths. 
14. Registration and certification of deelel1l DOt tallJ.nt ~ ... 
tion 7 or 13. 
15. Special provision regarding pubUc relJIloua m.t1tutloal. 
CHAPTER IV 
D!'.CLAu'!'Iol' a. CIO'LD 
18. Declaration as to poueAion at gold othel' tbul ~ .... t. 
17. Declaration as to pouesaion of omam.nta. 
(0 

(ti) 
CHAPTER V 
CHAPTER,VI 
19. ~ 88 to gold. 
20. Accounts. 
21. Power of Administrator to issue directions and orders. 
22. Persons permitted to b.y gold to observe conditions. 
23. Prohibition of use of buildings for carrying on willcenaed 
refinery. 
24. Transfer Gr. transmiasion of business. 
25. Secrecy and fideUty. 
26. Power to enter, search and seize, to obtaia information and to 
take samples. 
27. Power to hold inquiry and to call for information. 
28. CODfiscation of conveyances. 
'29. Coilft.scation of gold seized and imposition of penalty. 
30. Adjudication, appeal and revision. 
SI. Penalties. 
32. Oftences by companies . 
. n .. Lmiitation of prosecutioRl. 
S4. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
35. Administrator, ete., to be public servants and appUcation of 
certaf.n provisions of Central Excises and Salt Act. 
38. ~~wer to exempt., 
3'7. Effect of Act and rules, etc., mconsiiteftt with other eaaet. 
mente. 
38. Aet not to apply to Government. 

10K SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
tOo 
THE GOLD (CONTROL) BILL, 1963 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabhal 
1. Page 5, lines 2') and 21,-
for "re-finers"" read lire-finer" -
2. Page 7, line 12 .. , 
!2!: "." read " " , "- , 
3. Page 8, line 9,-
for "restrctions" ~ "restrictions" 
4. Page 9, line 14,-
after "hypothecation" ins ert 
5. Page 10, lines 39 and 40,~ 
" " , 
for "Adminis-tration" ~ "Adminis-trator" 
6. Page 11, line 35,-
ror~Government?~ponsored" read - r:Government-~ponsoredn -
7. Page 12, line 20,-
after "clause (iii)" insert 
8. Page 17, line 32,-
" " , 
after "Government" insert If)" 
9. Page 23, line 1,-
omit "in" -
10. Page 24, line 34,-
for ".11 read" " -' - , 
11. Page 24, line 36,-
for "." read " " - , - , 
12. Page 26, line 25,-
after II Act" insert 
13. Page 27, line 21,-
after "both" insert • 
" n , 
n.II . 
, 

,14. Pa~e 28, against line 37,-
.!Q! "186P" ~ "1880" 
15. Page 36, line 21,-
.f.Q!: "repealed" read "replaced" 
16. Page 38, line 15,-
for "OffIcers" read "Officers" - -
17. Page 38, line 3 from bottom,-
.f.Q!: "adjusment'll ~ "adjustment" 
18. Correct line numbers on pages 10, .23, 24, and 30. 
NEW DELHI, 
November 23 1963 
Agrahayana ~, 1885 (SakaJ 
! • 

(iii) 
CUthliB 
39. Goftmment may perform functions and exercise power. 
the Administrator. 
40. Licensing of dealers in areas without sales tax law. 
41. P!resumpUon as to orders. 
42. Power to make rule.. 
43. Repeal and savings. 

1 all". 
bill No. 47 of 1963 
THE GOLD (CONTROL) BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
to p1'ovide, in the economic and financial in.terests of the community, 
for the control of the production, supply, distribution, we and 
possession of, and business in, gold and ornaments 4nd other 
4rtiCles of gold and for m4tters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
, 1. (1) This Act may be called the Gold (Control) Act, 1963. Short title, 
(2) It extends to the whole of India and it applies also to citizens :!. 
of India outside India. t.len anel 
10 
com· (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern· menc:e-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. ment. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- DdDl-
(a) "Administrator" means the Administrator appomtecI tiODl. 
under section 18; 
(b) "company" means any company as defined in section a 
of the Companies Act, 1956; 
(c) IIcertified goldsmith" means a dealer who holds 8 valid 
certificate granted under section 13 recogniling him as a gold. 
smith; 

(d) "dealer" means any person who carries on, directiy or 
otherwise, the business of-
(1) making, manufacturing, preparing, buying, selling, 
supplying, distributing, melting, processing or converting 
ornaments, 
(2) buying, selling, supplying or distributing gold for 
the purpose of making, manufacturing or preparing orna-
ments, 
(3) melting, processing or converting gold for the pur-
pose of making, manuf~cturing or preparing ornaments, J8 
whether for cash or for deferred payment, or for commi88ion, 
remuneration Or other valuable consideration, and includes-
(4) an undivided Hindu family which carries on such 
business; 
(b) a local authority, company, society registered under .$ 
the Societies Registration Act, 1860, co-operative 80ciety re- 11 of 1880. 
gistered under any law with respect to co-operative societies, 
club, finn or other association which carries on such bu&!ness, 
or 
(i) buys ornaments, or gold for the purpose of mall· 20 
ing ornaments, from, or "-
(ii) makes or manufactures ornaments fOf, 
(iii) processes, melts or converts ornaments, or gold 
for the purpose of making ornaments, for 
(iv) sells, supplies or distributes ornamenta, or gold 2$ 
for the purpose of making ornaments, to, 
its members; and 
(c) a commission agent, broker, del credere agent, aue .. 
tioneer or other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, 
who carries on such business on behalf of any principal; 30 
but does not include the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of 
India, any subsidiary bank as defined in clause (k) of section 2 
of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, or any 88 ot. 1_ 
banking company as defined in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, in so far as such 35 10 of 1M. 
bank sells or transfers or exhibits for sale or transfer any gold. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this Act-
(a) every person who acts as an agent of a dealer residing 
outside India and carries on the business of such dealer in 
India or acts on behalf of such dealer as- 40 
(i) a mercantile agent as defined in the Sale of Goods 
Act, 1930i Qr J of 1930 • 

3 
(ii) an agent for handling gold or document. of titl. 
relating to goldj or 
(iii) an agent for the collection or payment of .ale 
price of gold or as a guarantor for such collection or pa,.-
ment; and 
(b) every branch in India of a firm or company having It. 
registered office outside India, 
shall be deemed to be a dealer; 
(e) "gold" means gold, including its alloy, whether virgin, 
10 melted, re-melted, wrought or unwrought in any shape or form, 
of a purity of not less than nine carats and includes any gold com 
(whether legal tender or not), any ornament and any other 
article of gold; 
(/) "ornament" means any article in a finished form, meant 
I, for personal adornment or for the adornment of any idol, deity 
or any other object of religious worship, made of, or manufac-
tured from, gold, whether or not set with stones or gems, real 
or artiftcial, or with pearls, real, cultured or imitation or with all 
or any of them and includes parts, pendants or broken pieces of 
ao omaments; 
(g) "prescdbed" means prescribed by rules made under thiI 
Act; 
(h) "primary gold" means gold in any unfinished form and 
includes all ingots, bars, blocks, slabs, billets, shots, pellets, rods 
.15 and wires; 
(i) "refiner" means the owner or occupier of a reftnery; 
(j) "refinery" means a place where gold is melted, process-
ed, converted or refined. 
CHAPTER II 
CONTROL OF Bt1SINESS IN GOLD 
3. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act,-
(a) a dealer shall not make, manufacture or prepare-
(i) any article of gold other than ornament, or 
(ii) any article containing gold of any purlty; 
(b) a refiner shall not make, manufacture or prepare-
(i) any article of gold other than primary gold, or 
(it) any article containing gold of any purity; and 
Prohibl. 
tlon of 
manufac-
ture of 
arti~les of 
.. 14m 
certa1D 

Bestric-
tiOOI on 
themak-
in& etc., 
at orna-
menband 
oth .. 
articles 
of ,old. 
.. 
(c) any other perSO!i shall not make, man1ilacture or pre.-
pare any article of gold or any article containin. gold of anr purity, 
unless such dealer, refiner or 0* person is authorised by the Ad. 
ministrator by ge:a.eral or special order to make, manufacture or pre- S 
pare such article. 
(2) A certified goldsmith may, and no other dealer shall, accept 
any ornament having gold of a purity exceeding fourteen carats for 
polishing or repair. 
(3) A dealer ma, accept any ornament having gold ot any purity 10 
for the purpose of making, manufactUring or preparing new orna-
ment or ornaments having gold of a purity not exceeding fourteen 
carats: 
Provided that a certi1led goldsmith may, in accordance with the 
provisions of section 13, accept any ornament having gold of a purity I, 
exceeding fourteen carats for the purpose of making, manufacturing 
or preparing new ornaments having gold of a purity exceeding 
fourteen carats. 
4. (1) Save as provided in seetion 13,-
(a) no dealer, whether licensed under this Act or not, Ihall- 20 
(i) make, manufacture or prepare, or 
(U) sell or otherwise transfer, agree to sell or otherwiH 
transfer, or expose or offer for sale or transfer, and 
(b) no person shall place any order with any dealer, whe-
ther licensed under this Act or not, for the making, manufacture 25 
or preparation of, 
any ornament having gold of a purity exceeding fourteen carats. 
(2) No person shall make or manufacture any article of gold Gf a 
purity exceeding fourteen carats: 
Provided that- 30 
(i) any refiner may, if authorised by the Administrator to 
do so by general or .pecial order, make, manufacture or have in 
his possession, custody or control any primary gold containing 
gold of a purity exceeding fourteen carats, and 
(ii) any refiner or dealer who u such refiner or dealer 35 
acquires or comes into the possession of any primary gold, or. 
ornament or other article of gold, of a purity exceeding fourteen 
carata under any provision of thia Act shall convert that gold, 

S 
ornament or article into gold of a purity not exceeding fourteen 
carats within such period as the Administrator may by general 
or special order grant: 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or 
5 sub-section (2), the Administrator may by general or special order 
permit any person to make, manufacture or prepare any ornament, or 
other article of gold, of a purity exceeding fourteen carats subject to 
such conditions and !restrictions as may be specified in the order. 
(4) Every person who makes, manufactures or sells any primary 
10 gold shall put a stamp on each piece of primary gold,-
(i) certifying the purity of gold contained in such primary 
gold and the date of making or manufacturing thereof; and 
(ii) containing such descriptive and other particulars which 
may enable the identification of the maker or manufacturer of 
15 such primary gold, as may be prescribed. 
(5) No stamp referred to in sub-section (4) shall be used in 
stamping any primary gold unless such stamp has been approved and 
registered by the Administrator. 
5. (1) Except in the case of any quantity of gold acquired after Restrie-
20 the date of making any return under this Act, no dealer, and no re- tions on 
finers, who is licensed under this Act, shall have in his possession or ~ion 
under his control any gold which has not been included in such :; 'Old~ 
return: ! 
Provided that any gold acquired after the date of making such 
2 S return shall be included in the next succeeding return. 
35 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,-
(a) a refiner may sell or deliver gold only to a dealer licen-
.sed under this Act in accordance with the conditions and res-
trictions, if any, contained in the dealer's lieence but shall not 
sell or deliver gold to any other person: 
Provided that a refiner may sell geld to any person on pro-
dUction by that person of a permit granted by the Adminis-
trator in this behalf or to such other person as the Administrator 
may, by general. or special order, authorise in this behalf; 
(b) a dealer 1icens~d under this Act may, in accordance 
with the conditions and restrictions, if any, contained in his 
licence, buy or otherwise acquire, or agree to buy or otherwise 

6 
acquire, gold, not being ornament, only from a dealer, or refiner, 
licensed under this Act but not from any other person: 
Provided that any such dealer may buy or otherwise acquire 
or accept gold, not being ornament, fram any person if such 
gold has been included in a declaration made by that person 5 
under Part XII A of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, or under 
section 16, or if in respect of such gold no such declaration is 
required and a permit has been obtained under sub-section (3); 
(c) a dealer licensed under this Act may, in accordance with 
the cenditions and restrictions, if any, contained in his licence- 10 
(i) sell or otherwise transfer, or agree to sell or other-
wise transfer, or ' 
(ii) expose or offer for sale or transfer, 
gold, not being ornament, only to a dealer, or refiner, licensed 
under this Act but not to any other person:' IS 
Provided that a dealer licensed under this Act m:ly lell 
gold, not being ornament, to any person on proouction by that 
penon of a permit granted by the Administrator in this behalf; 
(d) a person other than a dealer licensed under this Act 
shall not buy or agree to buy or otherwise acquire or agree to 20 
acquire gold, not being ornament, except in accordance with a 
permit granted by the Administrator or in accordance with 
such authorisation as the Administrator may, by general or 
special order, make in this behalf, nor shall he otherwise ac-
quire or agree to acquire such gold except by succession, in- 2S 
testate or testamentary: 
Provided that a refiner may buy or accept gold from a dealer 
licensed under this Act; 
(e) a person acquiring gold in accordance with any general 
or special authorisation made by the· Administrator shall not- 30 
(i) sell or otherwise transfer, or agree to sell or other-
wile transfer, or 
(ii) expose or oft'er for sale or transfer, 
such gold to any person other than a person authorised by the 
Administrator by general or special order in this behalf. 3S 
(3) Any gold (other than ornament) which is not required to 
be declared under this Act may be sold .or otherwise transferred or 
hypothecated, pledged, mortgaged or charged under and in accordance 
with a permit granted by the Administrator in this behalf. 

'! 
d. (1) No person shall make, advance or grant any loan to any Prohlbl .. 
other person on the hypothecation, pledge, mortgage or charge of tion of 
any gold other than ornament unless a permit has been obtained loam em 
under sub-section (3) of section 5 or unless such gold has been =~:; 
5 included, if so required, in a declaration or a further declaration lold. 
made under Part XII A of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, or under 
section 1&: 
(2) No person who is a dealer, whether licensed or not, shall-
(a) carry on business as a dealer in the same premises in 
10 which he or any other person carries on business as a money-
lender or banker involving the hypothecation, pledge, mortgage 
or char~ of any gold; 
(b) (i) sell or otherwise transfer to any person any gold on 
the hypothecation, pledge, mortgage or charge of which he has 
15 advanced any loan, whether before or after the 10th day of • January, 1963, or 
(ii) return such gold to the borrower, whether before or 
after the repayment of the loan, 
except under and in accordance with such conditions, limitations or 
20 restrictions, if any, as may be imposed by the Administrator in this 
behalf. 
(3) No pawnee who is not a dealer shall sell any gold pledged 
with him, on the failure of the pawnor to redeem such gold, except 
in accordance with such conditions as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER III 
LICENSING OF DEALERS AND REI'INERS ."..ND CERTIFICATION OF GOLDSlWTHS 
'I. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no dealer who :is Lie . 
registered under any law with respect to sales ~ shall carry on of =~I 
business as such dealer unless he holds a valid licence issued in this erB. 
30 behalf by the Administrator. 
(2) A licence issued under sub-section (1) may contain such 
conditions and restrictions as the Administrator may think fit to 
impose and different conditions and restrictions may be imposed for 
different classes of dealers. 
3S (3) Every dealer who is registered under any law with respect 
to sales tax shall, as B90n as possible after such registration and in 
any case before the expiry of thirty days thereafter, make to the 

8 
Administrator an application in such form and on payment of such 
fee as may be prescribed, for the issue of a licence under this section. 
(4) Any dealer who is not required to be registered under any 
law with respect to sales tax may, if he likes, also make to the Ad-
ministrator an application in accordance with the foregoing provi- S 
sions for the issue of a licence under this section "and any licence 
issued in pursuance of such application may contain such conditions 
and restrictions as the Administrator may think fit to impose and 
difterent conditions and restrctions may be imposed for different 
classes of applicants: 10 
(5) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall be 
deemed to prohibit any dealer who is required to apply for a licence 
under th~ section from carrying on his business as such dealer for 
the period within which he is required to apply for such licence and 
if He has applied for such licence, until he is granted a licence or is, IS 
by a notice in writing, informed by the Administrator that a licence 
cannot be granted to him. 
(6) On the receipt of an application for the issue of a licence 
under this section, the Administrator may, after making such in-
quiry, if any, as he may consider necessary, by order in writing 20 
either grant the licence or reject the application for the same: 
Provided that no application for the issue of a licence made by a 
dealer registered under any law with respect to sales tax whether 
before or after the commencement of this Act shall be rejected unless 
the Administrator is satisfied that any statements made in the appli- 25 
cation for the issue of the licence are incorrect or false in material 
particulars or that the applicant for the licence has contravened any 
of the provisiOns of this Act and unless the applicant for the licence 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
such rejection. 30 
(7) A licence granted under this section shall be valid for the 
period specified therein and may b'e renewed from time to time for 
such period and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed and 
the provisions of thi.s section relating to the first issue of a licence 
shall apply as faI as may be in relation to such renewal. 
LicenainJ 8. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall 
01. re8n.. carry on business as a refiner unless he holds a valid licence issued 
era. in thi.$ behalf by the Administrator. 
3S 

9 
(2) A licence issued under sub-section (1) may contain such 
conditions and restrictions as the Kdministrator may think fit to 
impose and different conditions and restrictions mIly be imposed for 
different classes of refiners. 
5 (3) Every person who intends to carry on business as a refiner 
may, if he had a refinery in existence immediately before the 10th 
day of January, 1963, make to the Administrator an application in 
such form and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed., for the 
issue of a licence under sub-section (1). 
10 (4) A person to whom a licence to carry on business as a refiner 
is issued. under sub-section (1) shall not carry on business as such 
refiner in the same premises in which he or any other person carries 
un business as a dealer or business as a money-lender or banker 
involving the hypothecation pledge, mortgage or charge of any gold. 
IS (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a 
refiner who has made an application under sub-section (3) for the 
issue of a licence to carryon business, may carryon business aa a 
refiner, pending the grant of a licence unless he is, by a notice in 
writing, informed by the Administrator that the application has been 
20 rejected. 
(6) No person shall establish any refinery unless he has obtained 
a valid licence from the Administrator on an application in accord-
ance with the foregoing prOVisions for the issue of a licence under 
this section: 
2, (7) On the receipt of an application for the issue of a liczence 
under this section, the Administrator may, after making such in-
quiry, if any, as he may cemsider necessary, by order in writing 
either grant the licence or reject the application for the same: 
Provided that no application for the issue of a licence made by a 
30 refiner shall be granted unless the Administrator is satisfied having 
regard to--- • 
(a) the number of refineries existing in the area in which 
the applicant intends to carryon business as a refiner, 
(b) the demand for primary gold in that area, 
35 (c) the facilities existing in that area for the assay of gold 
by any method other than the touch-stone method, 
(d) the turnover of the applicant during the year imme-
diately before the 10th January, 1963, or immediately bef9re 
the date of the application for the issue of the licence, which-
40 eve\- is later, 

t6 
(e) the suitability or otherwise of the applicant, and 
(f) the p~blic interest, 
that the licence applied for should be granted: 
Provided further that no application for the issue of a licence 
made by a refiner shall be rejected unless the applicant has been 5 
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such re-
jection. --
(8) A licence gmnted under this section ...hall be valid for the 
period specified therein and may be renewed from time to time far 
such period and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed and 10 
the provisions of this section relating to the first issue of a licence 
shall apply as far as may ,be in relation to such renewal. 
Cancella- 9. A licence granted under section 7 or section 8 shall be cancelled 
tion of by the Administmtor if he is satisfied that any statements made in 
licen~e~by the application for the issue of the licence or in relation to the IS 
AdDWl18- licence are incorrect or false in material particulars or that the 
:rator. holder of the licence has contravened any of the provisions of this 
Act: 
Provided that no licence shall be cancelled unless reasonable 
opportunity has been given to the holder thereof to show cause why '.0 
the licence shall not be cancelled. 
Cance1la- 10. A dealer who ceases to be registered under any law with re&-
tion of pect to sales tax: or who discontinues his business in gold or a refiner 
licence who discontinues his business as such may make an application to 
~ a~ca- the Administrator for cancellation of his licence as dealer or refiRer, 25 
~:~er or as the case may be, and thereupon the Administrator may cancel his 
reftner. licence. ' I \ I' Wi 
':, 
Disposal 11. A dealer who, being required by section 7 to make an appli-
of gold in cation f010 a licence, has failed to do so within the period speci1led 
t?e posses- therefor or whose application for the issue of a licence has been 30 
~:;'e;: rejected or whose licence has been cancelled or a refiner whose appli-
or reftn- cation for the issue of G licence under section 8 has been rejected 
era in or whose lice~e has been cancelled shall not, after the expiry of. that 
certain period or after such rej ection or cancellation, as the case may be, 
case.. carry on his business and shall, within thirty days from the date 35 
of such expiry, rejection or cancellation, sell or otherwise trensfer 
to any dealer or refiner licensed under this Act the entire quantity of 
g~d including ornaments, in his possession on the date of such expiry, 
rejection or cancellation and send intimation thereof to the .A.dminis-
~~ ~ 

II 
12. Every dealer and every refiner who is liceIlled under this J?iaplay of 
Act shall display his licence at a conspicuous place of the premises licences. 
in which the business of such dooler is carried on or the premises in 
which the refinery is located. 
S 13. (1) A dealer who is not required by sub .. section (3) of sec- Certjft~ 
tion 7 to make an application for the issue of a licence under that goldsmIths. 
section and has not obtained any licence in pursuance of an applica-
tion made by him under sub-section (4) of that section and who. 
does not employ hired labour in actually making, manufacturing or 
10 preparing any ornament and is not himself in the employment of 
another dealer may, if he was carrying on business as a dealer for 
more than a year immediately before the 10th day of January, 1963,-
(a) accept from any person, not being a refiner or a certified 
goldsmith or other dealer, any ornament or ornaments having 
IS gold of a purity exceeding fourteen carats for the purpose of 
making, manufacturing or preparing, and 
(b) make, manufacture or prepare, 
new ornement or ornaments from that ornament or those ornaments 
so however that the purity and the total quantity of gold contained 
20 in such new ornament or ornaments do not exceed the purity and the 
total quantity of gold contained in the ornament or ornaments accept-
ed. 
(2) No such dealer shall accept any such ornament or ornaments 
for the purpose of mRki.ng, manufacturing or preparing new oma-
2S ment or ornaments a!'l Aforesaid after such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notlflcation in the Official Gazette, specify, unless 
before that date he has obtained. on an applioation made in that 
behalf to the Administrator, a certificate recognising him as a gold-
smith in such form and on payment of such fee as may be pres-
30 cribed. .... : 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2), the 
Administrator, may. after making such inquiry as to the antecedents 
of the applicant and the provision, if any, which has been made for 
. the grant of assistance to the family of the applicant by Government 
3 S or any Government ?sponsored agency and after considering the 
desirabiHty or otherwise of incTP8sing the number of persons making, 
manufacturing or preparing ornaments in the area in whioh the 
applicant was carrying on -business, by order in writing either grant 
the certiflc"lte or reject the application for the same: 
40 Provided that no application for the grant of a certificate shall 
be rejected unless the applicant has been ~ven a reasonable oppor-
tun~ of showina- cause against such rejection. . 

Registra-
tion and 
certifiea-
tlori of 
dealers 
not fall-
ing under 
section '1 
or 13. 
12 
(4) A certificate granted under this section shall be valid for the 
period specified therein and may ,be renewed from time to time for 
such period and on payment of such fee as maybe prescribed and 
the provisions of this section relating to the first issue of a certifi-
cate shall apply as far as may be in relation to such renewal. S 
(5) A certificate granted under this section may be cancelled by 
the Administrator-
(i) if the certified goldsmith is, at any time after the grant 
of the certificate to him, registered under any law with respect 
to sales tax or 10 .. 
(ii) on an application made to the Administrator for sueh 
cancellation ),y the certified goldsmith who ceases to work as a 
goldsmith, or 
(iii) if the Administrator is satisfied that any statements 
made in the application for the issue of the certificate or in IS 
relation to the certificate are incorrect or false in material parti-
culars or that the holder of the certificate has contravened any 
of the provisions of this Act: 
Provided. that no certificate shall be cancelled under clause (i) or 
clause (iii) unless reasonable opportunity has been given to the holder 20 
thereof ,to show cause why the certificate shall not be cancelled. 
(6) Every certified goldsmith shall have in his possession the 
certificate granted to him while he carries on business as such gold-
smith and shall produce it for inspection on demand by any officer 
authorised by the Administrator in this behalf. 2S 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, a certified 
goldsmith may have in his possession, custody or control primary 
gold of a purity exceeding fourteen carats by melting or processing 
or converting any ornament which has been accepted by him under 
this section for making, manufacturing or preparing new ornament 30 
or ornaments: . 
PrC1Vided that a certified goldsmith shall not have at any time 
in. his posst!ssion, custody or control any quantity of such primary 
gold in excess of one hundred grammes obbained in the process of 
making, martufacturing or preparing new ornament or ornaments. 3S 
14. (1) No dealer who has not obtained a licence under section 7 
or a certificate under section 13 shall carry on business as a dealer 
unless he has been registered end possesses a certificate. 
(2) Every such dealer shall make an application for the grant of 
a certificate within such time, in such form and on paymen.t of such 40 
fee as may be prescribed. 

13 
(3) If the Administrator is satisfied that an app1icatdon for regta-
t~tion is in order, he shall, in accordance with such rules as may 
be prescribed, register the applicant and grant him a oertificate of 
registration in the prescribed form: 
S Provided that no application for the grant of a certiflcate of reils-
tration shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a rea-
somble opportunity of showing cause against such rejection. 
(4) A certificate granted under this section shall be valid for the 
period specified therein and may be renewed from time to time for 
10 such period and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, and 
the provisions of this section relating to the first issue of a c~te 
shall apply as far as may be in relation to such renewal. 
(5) The provisions of sections 9, 10, 11 and 12 shall, as far u 
may be, apply to a dealer registered under this section as they apply 
IS to a dealer licensed under section 7. 
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any 
dealer who has been registered. under this section from applying at 
any time for a licence under section 7 if he likes to do so and on hJa 
being licensed under section 7, the registration certificate issued to 
20 him under this section shall be cancelled. 
15. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter n and ~i~ 
the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, any public religious insUtu- =:~a 
tion such as a temple, mutt, church, mosque, gurudwara ar any other PUb~ I 
place of public religious worship, not being a dealer or refiner licensed religious 
as under thiS Act, may receive gold in any form as offering. iNlt1tu-
)0 
3S 
~. 
(2) Any such institution-
(a) may retain the gold in the form in which it is re ~e1ved 
as offering so long as it is used exclusively for the purposes of the 
institution; 
(b) shall not convert any gold in its possession into gold 
of a purity exceeding fourteen carats or make, manufacture or 
prepere ornament or any other article of gold of a purity exceed-
ing fourteen carats unless such institution has been authorised 
by the Administrator by general or special order subject to such 
conditions as may be laid down, to do so; 
(c) shall not sell or otherwise transfer gold in any form in 
its possession unless such gold has been converted into gold of a 
purity not exceeding fourteen carats and unless, In the case of 
gold other. than ornement, the sale or transfer 1s to a dealer or 
refiner licensed under this Act; , 
UODI. 

(d) lIhall maintain such accounts and suDmit such retUl'Dl 
u to the quantity, description and other particulars of gold 
possessed, received, sold or otherwise transferred by it, as may 
be prescribed. 
(3) The person in charge of the management of any such inatltu- S 
tion shall be responsible for anything done or omitted to be done 
under thia aection. 
CHAPTER IV 
DECLAllATION OF GOLD 
Deelara- 1 •. W) H any person who has made a declaration as to gold 10 
tlon u to ·other tli8n ornaments owned by him under Part XII A of the Defence 
pas_ion of India Rules, 1962, acquires by succession, intestate or testamentary, 
of ,old or in accordance with a permit granted by the Admjnistrator, or 
== parts with, after such declaration any quantity of gold, not being 
ornament, he shall, as often as he acquires or parts with any qU/mtity IS 
of gold, make within thirty days from the date of such acquisition 
or parting with, a further declaration to the Administrator in the 
prescribed form stating the quantity, description and other prescrib-
ed particulars of such gold acquired or parted with by him and 
giving the prescribed particulars of the person from whom such gold 2G 
wu acquired or in whose favour such gold was parted with, as the 
case may be. .' :: . I;.:', I;";'] "'1 ;. ..1.:0 L.i.£._6Q 
(2) If any person who did not own any gold, not being ornament, 
at any time during the period commencing on the 10th January, 
1963, and ending with the 9th February, 1963, acquires, aftet' the 2S 
expiry of that period by succession, intestate or testamentary, or in 
accordance with a permit granted by the Administrator any quantity 
of gold, not being ornament, he shall, within thirty days from the 
date of such acquisition, make a declaration to the Administrator in 
the prescribtd form stating the quantity, description and other pres- )0 
c:ribed particulars of such gold owned by him on the date of such 
declaration. 
(3) If any person who has made a declaration under sub-seclion 
(2) acquires ·by succession, intestate or testamentary, or in accord-
ance with a permit granted by the Administrator, or parts with, any 35 
quantity of gold, not being ornament, he shall, as often as he acquires 
Qf parts with any -quantity of gold, make within thirty days from 
the date of such acquisition or parting with a further declaration to 
the Administrator in the prescribed form stating the quantity, des-
cription and other prescribed particulars of such gold acquired or 40 
parted with by him and aivine the preteribed partfcqlan of the 

10 
I! 
person from whom wch gold was acquired or ill whOM favour IUCib 
,old wu parted with, as the case may be. 
(4) For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that a dec-
laration referred to in this section and section 17 ahall be made-
• (a) in the case of gold belonging to a minor or a lunatic, by 
the guardian or manager ot such minor or lunatic, u the case 
may be; . 
(b) in the case of gold belonging to an idol or a deity, by 
the manager ot such idol or deity, whether known u .hebait 
or manager or by any other name; 
(c) in the case of gold belonging to a person whose proper-
ties are under the management of a Court ot Wards, by the 
manager of such Court; 
(d) in the case of gold belonging to a person whose proper-
I, ties are under the management of any ac1minlstrator or receiver, 
by such administrator or receiver: 
20 
)0 
35 
(e) in the case of gold vested in an executor or an adminie-
trator of a will or other testamentary disposition, by such eXecu-
tor or administrator; 
(f) in the case of gold helonging to the members of • ftrm, 
by any partner of such firm; 
(g) in the case of gold belonging to an undivided H1Ddu 
family, ,by the head or kana of such !emily; 
(h) in the case of gold which is the subject matter ot any 
public or private trust, by a trustee of such trust; 
(i) in the case of gold belonging to a company incorporated 
outside India, by any person in charge of the management at 
such company in India; 
(;) in the case of gold ibelonging to a temple, mutt, church, 
mosque or any other religious institution by the person in charge 
of the management of such temple, mutt, church, mosque 01' 
other religious institution; 
(k) in the case of gold which is wakt property, by the 
mutawalli of such wakf; 
(I) in the case of gold bp.longing to any soclety, club or 
other association, by the secretary or manager of such society, 
club or other association. 
(5) No person who is required to make a declaration as to gold 
other than ornament owned' by him under the Defence of India Rulli, 
, 
, 

J)ec1ara-
tiona to 
poueI8ion 
of oma-
IMIlta. 
16 
1882. or this section or exempted from making such declaration under 
the said Rules or sub-section (6) of this section shall, after the com-
mencement of this Act, acquire any gold other than. ornament 
except-
(a) by succession, intestate or testamen.\&ry, or S 
(b) in accordance with a permit granted by the Adminil-
trator in this behalf. 
(6) No declaration or further declaration shall be required to 
be made under the foregoing provisions of this section in respect of-
(a) any gold, whether contained in one or more pieces, 10 
owned by a minor unless the weight of such gold exceeds twenty 
grammes; 
(b) any gold, whether contained in one or more pieees, 
owned by an individual other than a minor unless the weight of 
such gold exceeds fifty grammes; IS 
(c) any gold, whether contained in one or more pieces, refer-
red to in clauses (b) to (1) of sub-section (4), unless the weight 
of. such gold exceeds fifty grammes. 
(7) Any person in possession or control of any gold, not being 
ornament, shall be presumed:, until the contrary is proved, to be the 20 
oWDer thereof. 
17. (1) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it 
is necessary so to do for carrying out the purposes of this Act, that 
Government may at any time, by general or special order, require 
that any person or class of persons owning ornaments shall, within 2S 
such period as may be specified in the said order, make a declaration 
to the Administrator in the prescribed form as to the quantity, des-
cription and other prescribed particulars of the ornaments owned 
by such person or each person in that class: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to make any such dec-la- 30 
ration where the quantity or value of the ornaments owned by a 
perIOn does not exceed such limit as may be speeifled in the said 
order by the Central Government. 
Explan.ation.--For the purposes of this section, any person in pos-
session or control of any ornament shall be presumed, until the 35 
contra!'y is proved, to be the owner thereof. 
(2) If any pe1'IIOfl· who has made a declaration under sub-
section (1) acquires or parts with any ornAment after such declara-
tion, he shall, as often as he acquires or parts with Gny ornament, 
make within thirty days from the date of such acquisition or parting 40 

11 
with a further declaration to the Administrator in the prescribed 
formstaUng the quantity, description and other prescribed particu-
lars of such ornament acquired or parted with by him and giving 
the prescribed particulars of the person from whom such ornament 
S was acquired or in whose favour such ornament was parted with, 
as the case may be. i .' .. 
(3) If any person who, at any time during the period withba 
which the declaration referred to in sub-section (1) is to be made, 
does not own any ornament, or owns ornaments not exceeding In 
10 quantity or value such limit as may be specified by the Central 
Government under sub-section (1), acquires thereafter any orna-
ment or ornaments so as to exceed such limit, he shall, within thirty 
days from the date the limit is exceeded, make a declaration to the 
Administrator in the prescribed form stating the quantity. deserlp-
15 tion and other prescribed particulars of such ornament or ornament. 
owned by him on the date of such declamtion. 
(4) If any person who has made a declaration under sub-
section (3) acquires or pal'ts with any quantity of ornaments, he 
shall, as often. as he acquires or parts with any quantity of 0l'D8-
!O ments, make, within thirty days from the date of such acquisition 
or parting with, a further declaration to the Administrator as p~ 
vided in sub-section (2). 
CHAPTER V 
ADMINISTRATOR 
25 18. (1) The Central Government shall, by notlfteatlon In the A~~ 
Om.el., Gazette, appoint. an Admin,skator for earryilll' out the pur- ~~ns 
pO$eS of this Act. at Admin-
istrator. 
(2) The Administrator sooll discharge his functions subject; to 
the general control and directions of the Central Government. 
30 (3) The Administrator may by general or special order authorise 
lueh person (indudin2 any offteer or authority subordinate to a State 
Government as he think~ fit to exereise aU or any of the powers exer-
dsable by him under this Act and different persoDS may be autho-
rised to exercise different powers: 
35 Provided that no officer below the rank of Collector of CUstoms 
or Central Excise or Collector of a district shall be auth.orf.sed to 
hear appeals under sub-section (2) of section 30. 
(4) Subject to any general or special direction given or condition 
attached by the Administrator, any person authorised. by the Admin-
40 istrator to exercise any powers may exercise those powers in the 

JI.eturDI 
uto 
.old. 
Power of 
Adminis-
trator to 
illrue 
IS 
aame manner and with the same effect as if they had been conferred 
on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation. 
CHAP1'ER VI 
RJ:Tl.TRNS AND ACCOUNTS 
II. Dealers (including certified goldsmiths) and refiners, .ball ' 
furnish to the Administrator such returns as to the quantity, descrip-
tWn and other prescribed particulars of gold in their possession or 
under their control in such form and within such time as may be 
prescribed, and different returns may be prescribed for difterent 
classes of dealers or refiners. .• 10 
!G. (1) Dealers (including certified goldsmiths) and refiners shall 
keep such accounts and in such form and manner as may be prescrib-
ed of the gold held, bought or sold or otherwise received or disposed 
of by them, in respect of each transaction and different accounts may 
be prescribed for different classes of dealers or refiners. 15 
(2) Every such dealer, certified goldsmith and refiner shall, if so 
required by the Administrator,-
(a) produce before the Administrator any account, register 
or other document, and 
(b) furnish to the Administmtor· any information relating ao 
to the quantity of gold in his possession or under his control at • 
to. the purchase, sale or delivery of gold by him. 
(3) All accounts, registers and other documents, relating to any 
quantity of gold or to the pur-chase, sale or delivery thereof and any 
gold in the possession or under the control of the dealer, refiner or 2, 
certified goldsmith, wherever kept, shall be open to inspection by 
any person authorised by the Administrator in this behalf. 
CHAPTER VII 
MIsCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
21. (1) The Administrator may, if he thinks fit, issue directioIllJ )0 
or orders, not imonsistent with this Act, for carrying out the pur-
poses of this Act. 
directiol1l (2) The Administrator, so far as it appears to him to be neees-
I1'ldorcier •. sary or expedient for securing the equitable distribution and availa-
bility at fair prices 01 gold and ornaments, may by order published 35 
in the Oftlcial Gazette-
(a) regulate the prices at which any gold or orn·ament may 
be bought or sold by any dealer or refiner, and 

t9 
(b) regulate by licences, permits or otherwise,. the ~bti­
tion, transport, disposal, acquisition, possession, use or consump-
tion of gold by dealers or refiners or other persons. 
zz. Any person authorised by the Administrator by general or PerIODIt ed 
~ special order, or holding a permit issued by the Administrator, for ~t 
buying or otherwise acquiring gold shall observe such conditions, told to 
be subject to such restrictions and furnish such accounts or returna, observe 
or both, to the Administmtor as may be prescribed. ccmditiODl. 
~ .... 
23. No person _ Prohibl-. ~~ 
10 (a) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any premises or UN of 
the agent of such owner, lessor or landlord, shall let the same buildlnp 
or any part th~reof with the knowledge that the same or part :rcarry -
thereof is intended to be used as a refinery or wilfully allow Wl~ic:.e. 
any person to use such premises or any part thereof as a refinery reftnery. 
I, unless the refiner htas been licensed under this Actj or 
(b) being the tenant, lessee or occupier or any person in 
charge of any premises, shall use or allow any person to use 
such premises or any part thereof as a refinery unless the refiner 
has been licensed under this Act. 
30 24. Where the business of a dealer licensed or registered. under Tranafer 
this Act or a refinery is transferred by sale, gift, bequest or otherwise :. ~an. or 
or is transmitted by inheritance or is transferred ,by way of lease, bU:n:'. 
the transferee, heir or lessee shall not carry on such business or run 
the refinery either in his own name or in some other name unless 
3S the transieree, heir or lessee has, before the expiry of thirty day. 
after the date of such transfer or transmission, made to the Adminis-
trator an application for the issue of a licence or certificate of regis-
tration in accordance with the provisions of section 7 or section 8 or 
section 14: 
30 Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit 
the transferee, heir or lessee from carrying on business as a dealer 
or refiner for the period within which he is required to apply for 
such licence or registration and if he has ·applied. for such licence 
or registration, until he is gmnted the licence or certificate of regis-
is tration or is, by a notice in writing, informed by the Administrator 
that such licence or certificate cannot be granted. to him. 
25. (1) All particulars contained. in any return or declaration Secrecy 
made or accounts, registers or other docwnents produced in accord- and , 
ance with this Act shall, save as otherwise provided in sub-section ftdeUt;r. 
40 (4), be treated as confidential, and notwithstanding anything con-
I .. 1.111. tamed In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, no court ,hall be entitled 

Power to 
ater, 
.arehand 
1eIze, to 
obtain 
blforma-
lion and 
to tate 
tamples. 
............ "' ...... _. 
to require the Administrator or any person authorised by the Admin-
istrator under this Act or any officer or other employee of the Gov-
ernment to produce before it any such return, declaration, 6CCOunts, 
registers or other documents or any part thereof or to give evidence 
before it in respect thereof. 
(2) Any person authorised by the Administrator under this Act 
and any other person discharging any functions in the implementa .. 
tion of the provisions of this Act shall not divulge any infonnation 
relating to any .particulars contained in any return or declaration 
made to, or any accounts, registers or other documents produced 10 
before, or inspected by, the Administrator or any such person. 
(3) The Administrator or any gazetted officer authorised by him 
in this behalf may request any officer of Government to furnish any 
information relating to any particulars contained in any return or 
declaration made to, or any accounts, registers or other documents IS 
produced before or inspected by such officer of Goverrunent under 
the provisions of any law if, in the opinion of the Administrator or 
the gazetted officer aforesaid, such information is necessary for the 
implementation of the prOvisions of this Act; and when such request 
is made, the officer of Government shall comply with such request 2.0 
notwithstanding the provisions of any such law forbidding the fur-
niShing of such information. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to and in relation to the 
disclOsure of any of the particulars referred to in 'sub-section (1) or -, 
sub-section (2)- 25 
Ii (4) for the purposes of any prosecution for any offence, or 
(b) to any oftk:er or other employee of Government where 
it is necessary to make such disclosure to such officer or other 
employee for the purposes of this Act or of any other law. 
ZI. (1) Any person authorised by the Administrator in this 30 
behalf uay-
(a) enter and search the establishment of a dealer or any 
refinery; . 
(b) seize any gold in respect of whieh he suspects that any 
provision of this Act has been, or is being, or is about to be, S 
contravened, along with the package, covering or receptacle, if 
any, in :which such gold is found; 
(~ seize any boob of account, return or any other docu-
~t reI.tint to any lueh gold. 

21 
(2) Any person authorised by the Central Government in this 
behalf ~ay-
(a) enter and search any premises, not being a refinery or 
establishment referred to in sUb-section (1), vaults, lockers or 
5 any other place whether above or below ground; \ 
(b) seize any gold in respect of which he suspects that any 
provision of this Act hos been, or is being, or is about to be 
contravened, along with the package, covering or receptacle, if 
any, in which such gold 11 fOund; 
10 (c) seize any books of account, return or any other docu-
- mentrelating to any such gold. 
(3) Any officer authorised 'by the Administrator in this behalf 
may search any person if that officer has reason to believe that such 
person has secreted about his person-
IS (a) any gold in respect of which such officer suspects that 
any provision of this Act has 'been, or is being, or is about to be, 
contravened, 
(b) any document relating to such gold. 
(4) When any such officer as aforesaid is about to search ... the 
20 person referred to in sub-section (3), he shall, if such person 80 
requires, take such person to the nearest gazetted officer· authorised 
by the Administrator or to the nearest magistrate. 
(5) Any ·officer authorised by the Administrator in this behalf 
may, if he suspects that any person has contravened, or is contmven-
::&5 ing or is about to contravene any provision of this Act, detain such 
person and take him to a gazetted officer authorised by the Admin-
istrator or. to a magistrate for a search of his person. 
(6) A ~lzetted officer or magistrate before whom any person is 
brou~ht shall, if he sees no reasonable ground for search, forthwith 
30 dtscharge the person but otherwise shall direct that search be made. 
(7) No female shall be searched by anyone excepting a female. 
(8) Any officer authorised by the Administrator in this behalf 
may, jf he has reason to believe that any person has contravened, or 
is contravening or is about to contravene, any provision of this Act, 
3S arrest such person and shall as soon as possible inform him of the 
grounds for such arrest and shall take such arrested penon to the 
nearest magistrate within a period of twenty.four hours of such 
arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place 
of arrest to the court of the magistrate. and no such person shall be 

.,.: 
22 
detained in custody beyond ·the said period without the ~" 
of a rdagi"8tl lite. 
(9) Any officei' W'ho has artested any penOlf under tlUs section 
shall, for the purpose of releasing such person on bail or otherwise, 
have the same powers and be subject to the same proviSion:s as the 5 
offteer-tD-charge of a police station has and is subjected "to utit!er 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18"98. .. • of 1_ 
(10)" Any officer authorised by the AdnUtt-iStrator ill this bebalt 
may, if he has reason to believe that any aircraft, vehicle- 01' uima1 
or any vessel is being, or is about to be, used for earry1ng any gold 10 
in respect of which he suspects that any ptt;vtiton tJf tibia" Act ... 
been, or is being, or is about to be, eontravened, at 8'11y am .. stop 
any such vehicle, animal or vessel or, in the e~ of 1ft ali'oraft, 
e~l it to land, ind 
(4) rummage and search any part of the~, ~ or IS 
~~ ~ 
(b) examine and search any goods in the aitc!ftft, veh1ele, 
ve,cJAeI or on the animal; 
(c) seize any SUch gold u.s is' referTed" tB alMwe aad my 
books Of accoun't or other ddallneM relating to sueh pld; 20 
(d) break open the lock of any door or paclcage 1M ~ 
1hg the· powers conferred. by clauses (4), (b) and (c), if keys are 
withheld; 
(e) if it beeotnes n~e.ary to stop any such aircraft, vehicle 
or animal or vessel, he J!lIY U'Se all lawful means _ stoppin, it," 2S 
and where s1i~h means fatl, the' ain:raft, ftbtcle-, ve.ael M' Iftbal 
may be fired upon. 
(11) nte provisions of the Code of CrimiJtaI hOced.111'f, lW1t, • 01 1888. 
relating to fJearch· and seizure shan, so far as, they are ~ie.hl'f, 
apply ih relation to search and seizure made under this secUon. JO 
(1~) 'the Administrator shall haV'e powt!t-
(a) t'O tlke samples of gold from any dealer, reftnet or 
other J'etson in sueh manner ~ may ~ ~becI; 
(b) to send such sample for assay or analysis to such au-
thority as may be prescribed and to require such authority to 35 
Bend Ii :report to the Administrator as- 8' reI\llt of the usaf or 
analysis. 

2j 
iI. ,(1) ~y ~~ o~er authorised by the Administrator in Potier ~ 
iIL.~ R,@alf ma.Y boJ4 an inquiry for the purpose of ascertaining :::'an4 
whether any contravention of any of the provisions of this Act has w call 
been, is being. 01' ia about to be, COJ;nJDii~ ~~ .hall ~or ~e. pur- for infor-
poses of such inquiry have po.w:er to SUlJlVlon any ~ w1;lose matiOD. 
, attendanoe he OOllsicie:rs nJ'Ces&aI'f ,ei$lw' 10 give evide~ceor to pr0-
duce 'aDJ 40cumeDt or other thiD.g. 
(!) The Administrator may call for information from any person 
for the purpOl8of~g whet.h~r 9l" ,J;J.ot there hIlS been any 
10 contraveation of &Dy of the .provbiOJlS ,of this .Act . 
J 
.. . (l) TAe ,fqUo.w~ conve1ances shall be liable to se~ure and ~:!: ... 
ClQQU~'~QD:-~. 
ami .. 
(eJ) ~y ves~l which is or has been within the lndifIIl·waters, 
lUly .aircraf~ which is or has been in India or anyvebicle which 
it or .bas bee,n in any area in India, while constructed, adapted, 
altered or fitted in any manner for the purpose of concealing 
gold; 
(J» ~y cOJ;lveyance from whit;ll the whole or any part of 
goki » t~wn oYer"boarP., stav~d qr destroyed so as to prevent 
o seizure by any officer authorised by the Administrator; 
30 
(c) any conveyance which having been required to stop or 
land under sub-section (10) of section 26 fails to do &0, exeept for 
good and ·s1l8lcient cause; 
(4) aQ.y ~l;Ul.vey,ance from which any ,gold cleared for ex-
JlQriat-ion is .~oaded wiij\out the permission of the oftlcer au-
~or.Wd b.y the Adl;ninistr;ltor in ~is behalf; 
.(e) any conveyance carrying imported gold which has en-
~nP ~dia and is afterwvds found with the whole or sub-
stantial portion of such gold missing, unless the master of the 
vessel or ~t.is tble toaccQunt for the loss of, ,or :deficiency 
in. the~. . 
(2) ~y conveyance or animal used as a means of transport or 
1~ 'Ule ~arriageofany gold in respect of which.ny provision of this 
Act has been, or is. being or is about to be. co.t .. aven~, shall be • 
3S ilt.aWe to,MUure·and ,CQQfisoa"On, ,~ess Uleowner of tbe conyeyan-
ce or animal proves that it was so used without the knowl~ge or 
.~~ ,pj 1he .~wner ~~lf, ,his ~gent. if any, and the person in 
.~ Qf lhe conveyance ,or an:tmal and that each of them had taken 

CcmBsca .. 
tlon of 
IQ1dlJeiz-
-.. ed and 
24 
all such precautions against such use as are 'for the time being sp~i­
fied in the rules made in this behalf by the Central Government: 
Provided that where any such conveyance or animal is used for 
the carriage of goods or passengers for hire. the owner of the' con-
veyance or animal shall be given an option to pay in lieu of confts- S 
cation of the conveyance or animal, a fine not exceeding the value 
of the gold which was sought to be so conveyed ar carried. 
%09, (1) Any gold seized under section 26 together with the 
package, covering· qr receptacle. if any. in which such gold is found 
shall be liable to COnfiscation. 10 
imposition (2) Any person who in relation to any gold does or omits to do 
. ~~ty, any act which act or omission would render such gold liable to 
confiscation under sub-section (1), or abets the doing 
or omission of such an' act shall be liable, in addition to any 
liability for punishment under this Act, to a penalty not exceeding 15 
five times the value of the iold or one thousand rupees, whichever 
is more. 
30, (1) The confiscation and fine or penalty under section 28, 
section 29, proviso to' sub-section (3) of section 31 or sub-section 
(7) of this section or under any rule made under this Act may be 20 
adjudged-
(a) without limit, by an officer not below the rank of 
Collector of Customs or Central Excise; 
(b) where the value of conveyance or gold or both together 
with the package, covering or receptacle, if any, in which such 2S 
gold is found, liable to confiscation does not exceed ten thousand 
rupees, or where the fine or penalty proposed to be imposed doeS 
not exceed two thousand rupees, by an officer not below the 
• rank of Assistant Collector of Customs or Central Excise or by 
any other officer of the Centr~l Government or a State Govern- 30 
ment authorised by the Central Government in this behalf . 
. (2) An appeal shall lie to the Administrator-
(a) from every adjudication of confiscation or penalty 
under sUb-section (1) i 
(b) from any other decision or order passed by an officer 3S 
not above the rank of Collector of Customs or Central Excise; 
within a period of three months from the date of the communication 
of the order or decision:' 
Provided that where the decision or order appealed against re-
lates to any penalty levied under this Act. any person desirous of 40 

23 
appealing against such decision or order shall, pending the appeal, 
deposit the penalty levied: 
Provided further that where in any particular case, the Admi. 
nistrator is of opinion that the deposit of penalty levied will cause 
$ undue hardship to the appellant, he may in his discretion dispense' 
with such deposit, either unconditionally or subject to such condi-
tions as he may deem fit. 
(3) Every person adjudicating under this section and the Admi-
nistrator hearing any appeal under sub-section (2) shall have all 
S of 19:>8. 10 the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:-
S of 1898. 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnessesj 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any docu-
mentj 
IS (c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from 
any court or officej, 
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and 
\ 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses 
or documents. 
20 (4) Every person adjudicating under this section and the Ad-
ministrator hearing any appeal shall be deemed to be a civil court 
for the purposes of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898. 
(5) The Central Government may, of its own motion or on appli-
2$ cation made by any person aggrieved by an appellate order of the 
Administrator under sub-section (2) within six months from the 
date of communication of such order, call for and examine the re-
cord of any proceeding in which the Administrator has passed an 
order on appeal for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the ,legality. 
30 or propriety of any such order and may pass such order thereon as 
the Central Government thinks fit. 
(6) NotWithstanding' anything contained in any other law-
(a) any order passed by the Central Government in revision, 
(b) subject to such order of the Government, any order 
35 passed in appeal by the Administrator, and 
(c) subject to the final order of the Central Government 
in revision and the appellate order of the Administrator, any 
order of adjudication of confiscation or penalty, or any other 
decision or order referred to in' clause (b) of sub-section (2), 
40 shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court. 

. 
(7) Whenever confiscation of any gold or conveyance ot animal 
is authorised by this Act, the officer adjudging it may give to the 
owner thereof an option to pay in lieu of confiscation such. fttle as 
the said officer thinks fit. 
(8) For the removal of doubt it is hereby declar~ that the pay- , 
ment of fine in lieu of confiscation under sub-section (7) shall Dot 
prevent the infliction of any punishment to which the person affect-
ed is liable under the provisions of this Act. 
Penalti-. 31. (1) Whoever fails or omits to make any return as required 
by section 15 or 19 or any declaration including a further ~la{a- II) 
tion as required by section 16 or 17 without any reasonable cause, 
or makes any statement in such return or declaration which is false 
and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not be-
lieve to be true, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. IS 
(2) Whoever,-
(i) refines, processes, melts, converts, deals or makes, manu-
factures or prepares any article of gold in contravention of any 
provision of this Act, 
(ii) has in his possession or under his ,control ,~y qU8ll.t.i.ty 20 
of gold in contravention of any provision of this Act, 
(iii) sells or otherwise transfers or agrees to sell or trans-
fer, or exposes or offers for sale or transfer, or delivers or other-
wise parts with, any gold in contravention of any provision of 
this Act • 3S 
. (tv) buys, or otherwise acquires, or accepts aold in contra-
vention of any provision of this Act, 
(v) allows any person to use any premises or any part 
thereof as a refinery in contravention of any provis~ of'~ 
Act, 30 
(vi) makes, manufactures or prepares, or places any order 
for the making, or the manufacture or preparation of, sells or 
otherwise transfeno; or agrees to Bell or transfer, or exposes or 
offers for sale or transfer any ornament or anypdrnary ~ld 
in contTavention of section 3 or section 4 or any other provision 3' 
of this Act, 
(vii) possesses, delivers, sells or otherwise transfers any 
gold in contravention of the provisions of section 5 or section 8, 

" 
:l.1 
(viii) carries on business as a dealer, refiner, banker or 
money-lender in contravention of the provisions of section 6, 7, 
8 or 14, 
(u) carries on business as a certified goldsmith in contra-
S vention of the provisions of section 13, 
(x) falsely stamps any primary gold with the intention of 
causing it to be believed that such primary gold contains gold 
of such purity as is mentioned in such stamp or sells or other-
wise transfers, or agrees to sell or otherwise transfer or ex-
10 poses or offers for sale or transfer any such falsely stamped 
prima~ gold, ' 
(xi) makes 8l" counterfeits any stamp intending that the 
same shall be usad for the purpose of stamping any primary 
gold, knowing the same to be counterfeit, or uses any such 
IS counterfeit stamp, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than 
six months and not more than two years and also with fine. 
(3) Whoever contravenes any other provision of this Act for 
which no punishment is provided in the foregoing prOvisions of this 
20 section. shall be punishable with imprisonment for a tertn which 
may e;rtend to one month or with fine or with both. 
Provided that-.! 
(i) whoever fails or omits to keep or to produce any account 
or other document or to furnish any information when required 
3S to do so under any provision of this Act; 
(ii) whoever fails or omits to display any licence as required 
by section 12, 
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five hundred rupees. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
I of 1818. 30 Procedure, 1898, an offence under this section shall be tried sum-
marily by a magistrate: 
12. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by Of!enca 
a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed by corn-
_at in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the con- panlel. 
35 duct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that notlting contained in this sub..,ection shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment, if he provetl that the 

Limitation 
of prose-
cutions. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
,oodfaith. 
Admizm-
trator, 
etc., to be 
public 
servants 
and appli-
cation of 
certain 
provisions 
of Central 
Excises 
and Salt 
Acl,. 
I 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due dilig~nce to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained In sub-section (1), 
where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 5 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the 
part of, any director, mllnager, secretary or other officer of the com-
pany, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly. 10 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and "eludes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
finn. - 15 
33. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act 
shall be instituted against any person except by, or with the consent 
of, the Administrator or any person authorised by the Administra-
tor in this behalf. 
M. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie 20 
against the Central Government or the Administrator or any person, 
authorised by the Central Government or the Administrator, or per-
forming any functipns in the implementation of the provisions of this 
Act, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule or order 2S 
made thereunder. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Cen-
tral Government or the Administrator or any person, authorised by 
the Central Government Or the Administrator, or performing any 
functions in the implementation of the provisions of this Act, for 30 
any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thweunder. 
35. (1) The Administrator and ~my person authorised by him or 
the Central Government, and performing any functions in the imple- 35 
mentation of this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within 
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(2) The provisions of sections 11. 15 and 23 of the Central Ex-
cises and Salt Act, 1944, relating to-
(i) recovery of any sum payable to the Government, or 40 
(ii) rendering of assistance by any offieer of Police or Cus-
toms or Revenue, and 
~ of leeo. 
1 of 1844. 

29 
(iii) failure of any Central Excise Officer, on duty, 
respectively, shall, as far as may be, apply in regard to like matters 
under the provisions of this Act. .. 
38. Where on the recommendation of the Administrator or other- Power to 
S wise the Central Government is of the opinion that it is ,necessary exempt, 
or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by order and sub-
ject to such conditions, if any, as it may specify in the order-
(a) exempt any dealer or any refiner or any other person 
from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act; and 
10 (b) as often as may be, revoke any such order and again 
subject, by order any dealer or any refiner or any other person 
to the operation of such provisions. 
37. The provisions of this Act or any rules or orders made there- Hect of 
under shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent there- Act and 
IS with contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any ins- rules, ~tc., 
trument having ,effect by virtue of any enactment other than this =~: 
Act. other 
20 
38. Nothing in this Act shall apply to or in relation to-
(a) any gold belonging to, or in the possession or under the 
control of, the Government, 
(b) any refinery owned or occupied, or any business of a 
dealer carried on, by the Government. 
enact-
menta. 
Act not 
to apply 
to Gov-
ernment. 
31. The Central Government may perform all or any of the func- Sovem-
tions of the Administrator and may. by notification in the Oftlcial ment"7 
70S Gazette, exercise all or any of the powers conferred by this Act on perform 
the Administrator, if that Government is of the opinion that it is == 
necessary or expedient In the public interest so to do. else 
powers 
of the 
Adminis-
trator. 
40. If in any territory there is no law with respect to the sales tax Licensing 
in force, then, every dealer carrying on his business as such dealer of dealers 
30 in that territory, whose annual turnover is not less than ten thou- in a~as 
sand rupees, shall be required to be licensed in accordance with the without 
provisions of this Act as jf he were a dealer registered under law :~~ tax 
with respect to sales tax and accordin~ly all th~ provi~<U1~ Qf tl\i, 
Act shall apply to such regiatered dealer., 

Presump-
tloa .. to 
olden. 
Power to 
make 
rut .. 
• 
30 
Ct. Where an order purports to have been signed by any person 
aupt'91"ised by the Administrator in this behalf in exercise of any 
power conferred by or under any provision of this Act, a court shall 
presume, within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, thet Iofl87l. 
such order waS so made by that person. . S 
42. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for- • 
(a) the additional particulars to be stamped on each piece 10 
of primary gold; . 
(b) the conditions subject to which a pawnee may sell gold 
pledged with him; 
(c) the forms of applications for the grant or renewal of 
licences, permits and celtificates under this Act and the fees IS 
payable in respect of such applications; 
(d) the forms of such licences,permits end certificatesj 
(e) the procedure for registration ·of ·a dealer'under section 
14; 
(/) the accounts to be maintained and the returns to be 2Q 
submitted by public religious institutions under se~tion 15; 
(g) the forms ot declarations under sections 16 and· 17 and 
the particulars regarding gold Or persons from whom .or in 
whose favour it was acquired or parted with, as ~he case may be; 
. (h) the forms in which,and the period within which, ··re- 25 
turns as to gold shall be submitted by dealers and refiners UDder 
section 19~ 
(i) the forms in which accounts shall be kept ,by dealers 
and refiners under section 20 and the manner of keeping such 
accounts; 30 
(;) the conditions and restrictions subject to whi.ch.persons 
may be p~rmitted to buy gold and the .accounts and returns. to 
be furnished by such persons; 
(k) t.he preCautions to be taken againSt the use of any con-
veyance oi-animal as a means of transport or 'in .the cil'triage of 3, 
gold in contravention of· the provisions· of this Act; . . 

100f 1897. 
~I 
(I) the fees payable in respect of appeals and appllcatlona 
for revision under this Act; 
(m) the manner of publication of notices and orders under 
this Act; 
S (n) any other matter which has to 'be or may be prescribed. 
(3) In making rules under this section, the Central Government 
may provide that any person committing any breach of any rule 
shall, where no other penalty is provided by this Act, be liable to a 
penalty not exceeding two thousand rupees. 
10 (4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this 
section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session fora total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more suc~ 
cessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session ,in which it 
IS is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both, Ho~ agree i!l 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form, or be of ,no effect, as the case may be; so Jtow-
ever that any such modification pr llllIUtllment shall be without pre-
20 judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
43. (1) ,As from the commencement of this Act, the provisions of Repeal 
Part XIIA of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, shall stand repealtJd and _v-
and upon ~ch repeal, section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, in,l. 
shall apply as if the said Part were a Central Act. 
2S (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, but without prejudice to the 
lOot 189'1. application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, any.thlng 
~, done or any action taken (including any application made to, or any 
order made or licence issued by, the Gold Board, Administrator or 
Qther competent authority) under or in pursuance of th'e provisiqns 
30 of Part XIIA of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, shall, so far a&it Is 
not inconsistent with the provisions of thia Act, be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Gold Control Rules were promulgated on the 10th January, 
1963, as Part XIIA of the Defence of India Rules. These rules regu-
la~ thp. manufac~u:re of ornaments and other articles of gold, the 
activities of refiners and dealers, require owners of non-ornament 
gold to make declarations regarding gold possessed by them and place 
certain restrictions on the transfer of gold. In the economic and 
financial interests of the community, it is necessary that the provi-
sions relating to control of gold should be placed on a pennanent foot-
ing by an Act of Parliameu~. 
2. In order to achieve the objective of gold control, it is essential 
to strengthen the scheme in certain respects. While declarations 
were required from individuals possessing gold (other than orna-
ments) in excess of 50 grammes, there was no provision for calling 
for any declarations in respect of ornaments held by them. Accord-
ingly, provision has been made for conferring on Government the 
power to call for declarations, by general or special order, from any 
person or class of persons, in respect of holdings of ornaments in 
excess of limits that may be specified. 
3. At present, only dealers in gold, who are registered under any 
law with respect to sales tax, are required to be licensed. For the 
other dealers, licensing is optional. The goldsmiths who are working 
on their own are, however, required to obtain certificates to enable 
them to :remake ornaments of over 14 carat purity. It is considered 
necessary that all categories and types of dealers in gold, who are not 
licensed, should be registered so as to bring them within the scope 
of the Bill. 
4. Some difficulty has been experienced by public religious institu-
tions, which receive gold as offerings and sell them. To meet their 
special requirements, suitable provision has been made placing them 
on a separate footing as distinguished from dealers and private indi-
viduals. 
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail the changes which are 
proposed to be made in the Bill as compared with the provisions in 
Part XIIA of the Defence of India Rules. 
NEW DELHI; 
Dated the 16th Novembe1', 1963. 
32 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 

-
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 11' 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1/82/63-GC, dated the 20th November, 1963 
from Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] 
L .r~ 
The President having been informed of the s~bject matter of the 
Gold (Control) BUl, 1963, to provide, in the economic a'nd financial 
interests of the community, for the control of the production, supply, 
distribution, use and possession of, and business in, gold and orna-
ments and other articles of gold and for matters connected therewith, 
recommends under clause (3) of aI'ticle 117 of the Constitution the 
consideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha. 
33 
,I 

Note. on clauaes 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Clause 2.-The definitions generally follow the existing defini-
tions in Part XIIA of the Defence of India Rules. In the definition 
of "dealer", however, the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank 
of India, subsidiary banks as defined in the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1909, and banking companies as defined in 
the Banking Companies Act, 1949, have been excluded from its scope. 
CHAPI'ER II 
CONTROL OF BUSINESS IN GOLD 
Clauses 3 to 6.-These provisions are generally based on the 
corresponding provisions of the Defence of India Rules, namely, 
rules 126B, 126C, 126H and 126D respectively. In clause 6, pro-
vision has been made to clarify the position regarding a pawnee 
who sell~ gold on the failure of the pawnor to redeem it. 
CHAPTER III 
LICENSING OF DEALERS AND REFINERS AND CERTIFICATION OF 
GOLDSMITHS 
Clauses 7 to 10.-These relate to the licensing of dealers and 
refiners and the circumstances in which their licences may be 
cancelled or surrendered and are based on the provisions of rule 
126E of the Defence of India Rules. It has been provided that 
before an application for licence is rejected, the applicant should 
be given a reasonable opportunity for showing cause against the 
rejection. 
Clame ll.-Under sub-rule (10) of rule 126E, dealers as well 
as refiners, who for any reason discontinue their business, have to 
deposit the gold in their possession with the Administrator and 
thereupon the Central Government will purchase it at the interna-
tional price of fifty-three rupees and fifty-eight naye paise per ten 
grammes of gold of a fineness of O' 995 or more. It is now proposed 
to modify this provision so as to give to such dealers and refiners 
the facility of disposing of such gold to a·ny licensed dealer or 
refiner. 
34 

35 
Clause 12.-This corresponds to sub-rule (11) of rule 126E of 
thf:' Defence of India Rules. 
Clau.se 13.-This corresponds to rule 126HH (relating to certified 
goldsmiths) of the De~iice of India Rules. As in the case of licences 
for dealers, provision has been made for giving opportunity to the 
applicant to show cause against rejection of the application for a 
certificate. 
Clause 14.-This is a new provision intended to register dealers 
other than licensed dealers and certified goldsmiths so that all cate-
gories of dealers may come within the scope of gold control. 
Clause 15.-This is a new provision designed to accord a special 
position to public :religious institutions so that they may not be 
hampered by the restrictions which would otherwise epply to them 
in accordance with the definition of the term "dealer". 
CHAPTER IV 
DECLAftATION OF GOLD 
Clause 16.-This corresponds to rule 126 I (relating to deelua .. 
tions as to gold other than ornaments) of the Defence of India 
Rules. 
Clcluse 17.-This is a new provision intended to confer on Gov .. 
ernment the power to call for declarations in respect of ornaments 
owned by any person or class of persons in excess of such limits 
as may be specified by the issue of a general or special order. 
CHAPl'ER V 
ADMINISTRATOR 
ClcluBe 18.-This corresponds to rub~ 126J of the Defence of 
India Rules and provides for the appointment and functions of the 
Administrator. 
CHAPTER VI 
llETuRNs AND ACCOUNTS 
Clauses 19 and 20.-These correspond to rules 126F and 1260 of 
the Defence of India Rules. It is, however, proposed to lay down 
the details regarding the returns and accounts to be furnished bv 
different categories of dealers, by framing rules for the purpose .• 

CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
The provisions of this Chapter (clauses 21 to 41) follow the pro-
visions of rules 126K to 126Z of the Defence of India Rules subject 
to certain modifications. The more important of them are ex-
plained below. 
Clause 26.-This corresponds to rule 126L. Provision has, how-
ever, been made for the seizure of books of accounts, returns and 
other documents relating to any gold involved in the contravention 
of the law from the premises of persons other than dealers and 
refiners as well. ~' " ; 
Clauses 29 and 30.-These correspond to .sub-rule (16) of rule 
126L, and rule 126M. Provision has been made for appeals not only 
against adjudications of confiscation or penalty but also against other 
decisions and orders.' It has further been provided that persons 
filing appeals should deposit in advance the penalties adjudged 
unless specific relaxation in this behalf is granted by the appellate 
authority. 
Clause 31.-This corresponds to rule 126P. For minor infringe-
meAts, the existing provision for imposition of a sentence of impri-
sonment and lor fine has been repealed by a provision for penalty to 
be adjudged departmentally. 
Clause 43.-This provides for the repeal of Part XII-A (relating 
to gold control) of the Defence of India Rules and contains the 
necessary provision for saving action taken under the provisions of 
that Part. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to prohibit the manufacture of articles of gold in 
certain cases and to impose restrictions on the making of ornaments 
and other articles, possession and sale of gold, etc. It also provides 
for the licensing of refiners and licensing or certification of dealers 
and goldsmiths. Other provisions made in th~ Bill include the 
furnishing of declarations and returns, and the maintenance of 
accounts by various classes of persons, dealers, reftners, public reli-
gious institutions, etc. 
2. Enforcement of these measures will involve extra work and 
necessitate the employment of some additional staff. The Bill pro-
vides for the appointment of an Administrator and also contemplates 
authorisation of other officers to exercise some of the powers of the 
Administrator. 
3. The expenditure on account of additional staff together with 
incidental expenses on administration is estimated at about Rs. 29 
lakhs per annum. 
31 

REQUIREMENT OF PERSONNEL AND FINANCE 
Annual emoluments. 
Headquarters Rs. 
Administrator I 43,000 
Deputy Secretary I 18,000 
Under Secretary 1 14.500 
Ministerial Staff ZQ 74,000 
Class IV Staff' 8 10,000 
Regional Office 
Deputy Secretary I 18,000' 
Rcs!."arch Officers 2 20,000 
Ministerial Staff 22 99.500 
Class IV Staff 4 6,500 
State Gold Control Officers 
Gold Control Officer; 16 1,92.000 
Office Estadishme,lt 100 2,00,000 
Enforcement Staff in the 
Central Excise Collect01'ates. 
(mainly on Gold Control) 
Deputy Collectors 4 35,5 00 
Supdts. Class II IS 1.06,000 
Dy. Sup::lts. (Executive) 48 2.77,000 
Inspectors 209 7.83,000 
Sub-Inspectors 78 1,43,000 
Ministerial Staff 98 2,44,000 
InciJcntal expenses 6,00,000 
Total *2.8,84.000 
* As a result of the 1963 Budgetary changes, some staff is surplus 
in Central Excise Col1cctorates and is available for adjusmcnt against 
the Gold Control requirement. After such adjustment. the net additional 
cost of the new posts will be Rs. 21'19 lakhs only. 
38 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 42 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. The matters in respect 
of which rules may be made are specified in sub-clause (2) and they 
relate, among others, to the additional particulars to be stamped on 
pieces of primary gold, the conditions subject to which a pawnee 
may sell gold pledged with him, the forms of applications for grant 
or renewal of licences and certificates, the fees payable in respect 
of sllch applications, the forms of such licences and certificates, the 
forms of declarations to be made by persons holding gold (other 
than ornaments) or ornaments, and the forms of accounts and 
returns to be submitted by dealers, refiners and public religious insti-
tutions. These are matters of procedure or administrative detail. 
The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal character. 
., 39 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide, in the ·economic and financial interests of the 
community, for the control of the production, supply, 
distribution, use and possession of, and business in, 
gold and ornaments and other articles of gold and for 
matters connected therewith. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamac}uzri, 
Minister of Finance.) 