~o. 41 of 1254 
THE UNIVER~Er~T~~~m~; ~~-¥Mt~Bcill~ BILL, 1954 
A 
BILL 
to make provision for the co-ordination and determination of stand-
ards in Universities and for that purpose, to establish a University 
Grants Commission. ' [ 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows :-
CHAPTER 1 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called , 
the University Grants Commission Act, 1954. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. DeflnitioDS.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise re-
quires,- I 10 
(a) "Cdmmission" means the University Grants Commission 
established under section 4; 
(b) "executive authority", in relation to a University, means 
the chief executive authority of the University (by whatever 
bame called) in which the general administration of the Uni- IS 
versity is vested; 
(c) "Fund" means the University Grants Commission Fund 
constituted under section 16; 
(d) "member" means a member of the University Grants 
Commission and includes the,Chairman; 20 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 

~ 
(1) "University" means a University established or incot-
porated by or under a Central Act, a Provincial Act or a State 
Act, and includes any institution recognised as a constituent 
college of a University under any such Act. 
S 3. Application of Act to institutions for higher studies other than 
Universities.-The Central Government may, on the advice of the 
Commission, declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, that any 
institution for higher education, other than a University, shall be 
deemed to be a University for the purposes of this Act, and on such 
10 a declaration being made, all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
to such institution as if it were a University within the meaning 
of clause (f) of section 2. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE; COMMISSION 
15 4. Establishment of the Commission.-(l) With effect from such 
date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint, there shall be established a Commission by the 
name of the University Grants Commission. 
(2) The said Commission shall be a body corporate having per-
20 petual succession and a common seal, and shall by the said name 
sue and be sued. 
5. Composition of the Commission.-(l) The Commission shall 
consist of such number of members, not exceeding nine, as the 
Central Government may think fit to appoint. 
25 (2) The members shall be chosen as follows:,--
(a) not less than one-third of the number of members shall 
be chosen from among the Vice-Chancellors of Universities and 
heads of institutions deemed to be Universities under section 3; 
(b) not less than two members shall be chosen from among 
30 the officers of the C~ntral Government to represent that Gov-
ernment; and 
(c) the remaining number shall be chosen from among 
persons who are educationists of repute or who have obtained 
high academic distinctions or who have experience in adminis-
35 trative or financial matters. 
(3) The Central Government shall nominate a member' of the 
Commission to be the Chairman thereof. 
(4) Every appointment under this section shall take effect as soon 
as it is notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette. 
G. Terms and conditions of service of members.-(1) Ev~ry .mem-
<40 ber shall, unless his appointment is terminated earlier by the Cerl.tral 
Government, hold office for a period of six years: 
Provided that out of the members (other than the Chairman and 
the members representing the Central Government) appointed for 
45 the first time under this section, as nearly as possible, one-half of 
the members shall retire, as soon as may be, on the expiration of the 
third year in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed, 
and the vacancies so caused shall be filled by fresh app~intmen1;. 

3 
(2) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Central Government, but he shall continue in office 
until his resignation is accepted by the Central Government. 
(3) A casual vacancy created by the resignation of a member 
under sub-section (2) or for any other reason shall be filled by S 
fresh appointment. 
(4) The office of the Chairman shall be a whole-time and salaried 
one and subject thereto', the terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairman and other members shall be such as may be prescribed. 
7. Meetings of the Commission.-The Commission shall meet at 10 
such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be pro-
vided by regulations made under this Act. 
8. Vacancies amongst members or defect in constitution not to 
Invalidate acts or proceedings of the Commlsslon.-No act or proceed- t~ 
ings of the <l!ommission shall be deemed to be invalid by reason 
merely of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, 
the Commission. 
9. Temporary association of persons with the Commission for 
particular purposes.-(l) The Commission may associate with itself. .20 
in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by 
regulations made under this Act, any person whose assistance or 
advice it may desire in carrying out any of the provisions of this 
Act. . ,l''JIi'' 
(2) A person associated with it by the Commission under sub- 2S 
section (1) for any purpose shall have a right to take part in the _ 
discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to 
vote at a meeting of the Commission, and shall not be a member 
for any other purpose. 
10. Staff of the Commission.-Subject to such rules as may be 30 
made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Commission may, 
for the purpose of enabling it to efficiently perform its functions or 
exercise its powers under this Act, appoint a Secretary and such 
number of other employees as it may think fit and determine their 
functions and conditions of service. 35 
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Com-
mission.-All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authen-
ticated by the signature of the Chairman or any other member autho-
rised by the Commission in this behalf, and all other instruments 
issued by the Commission shall be authenticated by the signature 40 
of the Secretary or any other officer of the Commission authorised 
in like manner in this behalf. 
CHAPTER III t:. 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISS N 
12. Functions of the Commission.-It shall be t e general duty of 4$ 
the Commission to take all such steps as it may think fit for the 
co-ordination and determination of standards of teaching and exami-

5 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
4 
nation in Universities, and for the purpose of effectively discharging 
its functions under this Act, the Commission may-
(a) inquire into the financial needs of Universities; 
(b) alldcate and disburse, out of the Fund of the Commis-
sion, grants to Universities for any general or specified purpose: 
Provided that in making any such grant to a University, 
the Commission shall give due consideration to the development 
of the University concerned, its financial needs, the standard 
attained by it and the natioJUlI purpose which it may be called 
upon to serve; 
(c) recommend to any University the measures necessary 
for the reform and improvement of University education and 
advise the University upon the action to be taken for the pur-
pose of implementing such recommendation; 
(d) advise the Central Government or any State Govern-
ment on the allocation of any grants to Universities for any 
general or specified purpose out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India or the Consolidated Fund of the State, as the case may be; 
(e) act as an expert body to advise the Central Government 
on problems connected with the co-ordination of facilities and 
the maintenance of standards in Universities; 
(f) advise any authority, if such advice is asked for, on 
the establishment of a new University or on proposals connected 
with the expansion of the activities of any University; 
(g) advise the Central Government or a State Government 
in regard to the recognition of any degree, diploma or certificate 
conferred or granted by any University or other authority for 
the purpose of employ~ent under the Central Government or 
the State Government or for any other purpose; 
(h) advise the Central Government or any University on 
any question which may be referred to the Commission by the 
Central Government or the University, as the case may be; 
(i) require any University to furnish it with such infor-
mation as may be needed relating to the financial position of 
the University or the classes of studies in the .various branches 
of learning taught in that University, together with all the rules 
and regulations relating to the standards of tea~hing and exami-
nation in that University respecting each of such branches of 
learning; 
(j) perform such other functions as may be prescribed or 
as .may be deemed necessary by the Commission for advancing 
the cause of higher education in India or as may be incidental 
or conducive to the discharge of above functions. 
13. Inspection.-(l) For the purpose of effectively discharging its 
functions und~r this Act, the Commission may, in consultation with 
45 any person or authority responsible for the inspection of a University 
under any law for the time being applicable to the University, cause 
an inspection to be made. by such person or persons as it may direct, 
of the University, its laboratories and equipment or of any institu-
50 tion maintained by the University and also of the examinations, 

s 
teaching or other work conducted or done by the University and 
may cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any 
matter connected therewith. 
(2) The Commission shall, before' causing any inspection or in-
quiry to be made under sub-section (1), give notice to the Un;versity 5 
through the executive authority of the University of its intention 
of causing an inspection or inquiry to be made and the University 
shall be entitled to be represented at such inspection or inquiry. 
(3) The Commission shall communicate to the University its 
views in. regard to the resul~ of any such inspection or inquiry and 10 
may, after ascertaining the opinion of the University, recommend 
to the University the action to be taken as a result of such inspection 
or inquiry. 
(4) The executive authority of the University shall report to the 
Commission the action, if any, which is proposed to be taken for IS 
the purpose of implementing any such recommendation as is referred 
to in sub-section (3). 
14. Consequences of failure of Universities to comply with re-
commendations of the Commission.-If any University fails within 
a reasonable time to comply with any recommendation made by the 20 
Commission under section 12 or section 13, the Commission, after 
taking into consideration the cause, if any, shown by the University 
for its failure to comply vy~th such recommendation, may withhold 
from the University the grants proposed to be made out of the Fund 
of the Commission, and also advise the Central Gdvernment or the a, 
State Government to withhold its grants from that University or 
to take such other action in respect of that University as the Gov-
ernment may deem proper. 
15. Payment to the Commission.-Tbe Central Government may, 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in tbis behalf, 30 
pay to the Commission In each ftnanclal year such sums as may be 
considered necessary for the pertOl'DUUlCe of the tunettons of the 
CelDDlifJslon under this Act. 
16. Fund of the Commission.-(l) The Commission shall have 
its own Fund; and all sums which may, from time to time, be paid 35 
to it by the Central Government and all the receipts of the Com-
mission (including any sum which any State Government or any 
other authority or person may hand over tp the Commission) shall 
be carried to the Fund and all payments by the Commission shall 
be made therefrom. 1,0 
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund shall be deposited in such 
banks or invested in such manner as may, subject to the approval 
of the Central Government, be decided by the Commission. 
(3) Tbe Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for 
perform.illg its functions under this Act, and such sums shall be 45 
treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund of the Commission. 
17. Budget.-The Commission shall prepare, in such form and 
at such time each year as may be prescribed, a budget in respect 
of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts 
a"~ expenditure, and copies thereof shali be forwarded to the Centra~ 50 
('~rnment. 

I 6 ./ 
, __ ,/ 18. Reports.-The Commission shall prepare, twice every year in 
such form and at such times as may be prescribed, a six-monthly 
report giving a true and full account of its activities during the 
previous six months, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the 
5 Central Government. 
19. Account and audit.-(l) The Commission shall cause to be 
maintained such books of account and other books in relation to 
its account in such form and in such manner as may, in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed. 
10 (2) The Commission sha1l, as soon as may be after closing its 
annual accounts, prepare a statement of accounts in such form, and 
forward the same to the Comptroller and Auditor-General by such 
date, as the Central Government may, in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General, determine. 
IS (3) The accounts of the Commission shan be audited by the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General at such times and in such manner as he 
thinks fit. 
(4) The annual accounts dI the Commission together with the 
audit report thereon shall be forwarded to the Central Government 
20 and the Government shall cause the same to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament and shall also forward a copy of the audit 
report to the Commissian for taking suitable action on the matters 
arising out of the audit report. 
2S 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
20. Directions by the Central Government.-(l) In the discharge 
of its functions under this Act, the Commission shall be guided by 
such directions on questions of policy as may be given to it by the 
Central Government. 
30 (2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and 
the Commission as to whether a question is or is not a question of 
policy, the decision of the Central Government shall be final. 
21. Returns and information.-The Commission shall furnish to 
the Central Government such returns or other information with 
3S respect to its property or a~tivities as the Central Government may, 
from time to time, require. 
22. Right to confer degrees.-(l) The right of conferring or 
granting degrees shan be exercised only by a University as defined 
in section 2 or an institution deemed to be a University under section 
40 3 or an institution specially empowered by an Act of Parliament to 
confer or grant degrees. 
(2) Save as provided in sub-section (1), no person or authority 
shall confer, or grant, or hold himself out as entitled to confer or 
grant, any degree. 
45 23. Prohibition of the use of the word 'University' in certain 
cases.-No institution, whether a corporate body or not, other than 
a University as defined in section 2 shall be entitled to have the 
word 'University' associated with its name in L9}Y manner whatso- . 
ever. 
so 24. Penalties.-Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 22 
or section 23 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
... d~, 

7 
, one thousand rupees, and if the person contravening is an assoCiation 
or other body of individuals, every member of such association or 
other body who knowingly or wilfully authorises or permits the 
contravention shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees. , 
25. Commission need not be consulted in certain matters.-
Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to render it obligatory 
on the part of the Central Government to consult the Commission 
respecting grants-in-aid from the Consolidated !Fund of India to 
institutions whose annual budgets do not form an integral part of [0 
the budget of any University. 
26. Power to make rules.-(l) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the pur-
poses of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the I, 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the procedure for the retirement of members under 
section 6; 
(b) the terms and conditions of service of members of the 2( 
Commission; 
(c) the terms and conditions of service of employees ap-
pointed by the Commission; 
(d) the additional functions which may be performed by the 
Commission under clause (j) of section 12; 2, 
(e) the returns and information which are to be furnished 
by Universities in respect of their financial position or standards 
of teaching and examination maintained therein; 
(1) the inspection of Universities; 
(g) the form and manner in which the budget and reports )0 
are to be prepared by the Commission; 
(h) the manner in which the accounts of the Commission 
are to be mairitained; 
(i) the form and manner in which returns or other infor-
mation are to be furnished by the Commission to the Central 35 
Government; 
(j) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
27. Power to make regulations.-The Commission may, subject 
to the previous approval of the Central Government, make regula-
tions consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder,- 40 
(a) regulating the meetings of the Commission and the 
procedure for conducting business thereat; 
(b) regulating the manner in which and the purposes for 
which persons may be associated with the Commission under 
section 9; 45 
(c) specifying the terms and conditions of service of the 
employees appointed by the Commission; 
(d) defining the qualifications that should ordinarily be 
required of any person to be appointed to the teaching staff of 

8 
the University, haVing regard to the branch of educat10n hi 
which he is expected to giTe iristruction; 
(e) defining the minimum standards of instritctiori for the 
grant of any degree by any UrliverSity; 
(f) regulating the maintenance of standards and the cd-
ordination of work or facilities in Universities. 

9 
STATEMENT OF OaJECTS AND RBASONS 
The Constitution of India vests Parliament with exclusive autho-
rity in regard to "co-ordination and determination of standards in 
institutions for higher education or research and scientific and tech-
nical institutions". It is obvious that neither co-ordination nor deter-
mination of standards is possible unless the Central Government has 
SQme voice in the determination of standards of teaching and ex-
amination in Universities both old and new. It is also necessary 
to ensure that the avail~ble resources are utilised to the best pos-
sible effect. The problem has become more acute recently on ac-
count of the tendency to multjply Universities. The need for a 
properly-constituted Commission for determining and allocating 
to Universities funds made available by the Central Government has 
also become more urgent on this account. 
2. It is therefore proposed to establish a University Grants Com-
mission as a corporate body which will inquire into the financial 
needs of Universities and allocate and disburse srants to Universities 
for any general or specified purpose. The Commission will also have 
the power to recommend to any University the measures necessary 
for the reform and improvement of University education and to 
advise the University concerned upon the action to be taken for the 
purpose of implementing such recom.mendat~on. The Commission 
will act as an expert body to advise the Central Government on 
problems connected with the co-ordination of facjlities and main-
tonance of standards in Universities. The Commission, in consul-
tation with the University concerned, will also have the power to 
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made of any Univ~sity estab-
lished by law in India and to advise the University 01;1 aoy matter 
which has been the sU}:>ject of an inquiry or inspectior1. The Com-
mission shall also advise. whenever such advice is sought, on the 
establishment of new Universities. 
3. The Bill also seeks to relltrict the use of the word 'Univen;ity' 
or the power to confer degrees, etc., to institutions established as 
such by law in India or to institutions empower~ to do so by an 
Act of Parliament and provides a penalty for contravention of these 
provisions by an individual or a corporate body. 
4. While the provisions of the Bill eto not appJy to ~titutions of 
higher education which are not Universities, power is vested in the 
Central Government to declare any institution for higher education 
to be a University for the purposes of this Bill by issuing a notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th September, 1954. 
A. K. AZAD. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
. A Commission, known as the University Grants Commission, has 
been set up under a Re301ution of the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Education No. F.30-2/51-G.3, dated the 3rd November, 
1952 as amended by No. F.24-4/54-A.1, dated the 22nd January, 1954 
and is already functioning. The Bill contemplates the establishment 
of the University Grants Commission as a Statutory Body and con-
ferring on it larger powers. At this stage, it is not pdssible to frame 
an accurate estimate of the manpower needed to enable the Commis-
sion to exercise all the powers and discharge all its functions under 
the provisions of the Bill. The Bill also provides that grants to 
Universities, etc., shall be made by the University Grants Commission. 
The exact amC1ums which will be needed by the Commission for this 
purpose can be properly determined only after it has surveyed the 
problems of University education with which it "has been charged. 
2. For the year 1954-55, the follOWing amounts have been provided 
in the budget of the Ministry of Education under different 
demands:-
(a) University Grants Commission Establishment 
(b) Grants to Universities, etc. 
Rs. 
1,50,000 
1,79,62,000 
1,81,12,000 
3. Funds to be made available in respect of subsequent years will 
vary and will be determined frO'm time to time. 
4. It may be noted that the University Grants Commission has 
been given the power to accept funds from State Governments and 
donations and grants from private authorities and individuals. 
5. All sums placed at the disposal of the University Grants Com-
mission will constitute the "Fund" of the Commission. Un-utilised 
amounts in the "Fund" <1f the Commission at the end of the year, will 
not lapse, but shall be taken into account in making funds available 
to the Commission in respect of the subsequent year. 

II 
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED 
LEGISLATION 
Clause 26 of the Bill .empowers the Central Government to make 
rules by notification in the Official Gazette to carry out the purposes 
of the Act. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made 
are specified therein. 
The matters specified therein are of a routine character. They 
relate to the terms and conditions of service of members, the proce-
dure for retirement of members and the terms and conditions of 
service of employees appointed by the Commission. Provision has 
also been made to prescribe additional functions which may be 
performed by the Commission. It is not possible, at this stage, to give 
a list of such functions. Experience only can show what additional 
functions can be given to the Commission. Rules can also be made 
regarding matters of procedure. connected with the functions of the 
University Grants Commission. 
2. Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Commission to make, subject 
to the previous approval of the Central Government, regulations 
consistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules made there-
under. The matters in respect of which such regulations may be 
made are specified therein. 
These powers are also of a routine character. They relate to the 
procedure for conducting business at meetings, the terms and condi-
tions 0'£ service of employees and the purposes for which the Com-
mission may associate other persons with i~. The Commission has 
been charged with the duty of co-ordinating and determining stand-
ards of teaching and examination in Universities. It will be necessary 
for the Commission to frame regulations for such purposes. Such 
regulatiO'ns can be made only after the Commission has surveyed t~ 
problem of University education and has gained some experience in 
the matter. . 
3. The delegated legislation is of a character normal to such Acts. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to make provision for the co-ordination and determination ot" 
standards in Universities and for that purpose, to establish a 
University Grants Commission. 
The President ha", in pursuance of clause (3) of article II7 of 
the COllstitut:on of India, recommended to the Lplt Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
GIPD-LAD- 806 LS-28-9-S4-J.770 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Maulana Abul KaJam Azati, 
Minister for Education) 