To BE INTRODtlg:U IN LOK s.wtA 
_..,.." . . _ BiU N.,. 47 of 1"5 
T~'HINDU RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS'BILL, 1965 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRm.nmfARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2: Definitions and interpretation. 
3. Application of Act to Hindu public religious .encioWmants. 
CHAPTER II 
AUTHORITIES 
4. Enumeration of authorities. 
5. Appointment of Commissioner. 
6. Tenure of office and conditions of service ot Commissioner, etc., 
and casual vacancies. ~ 
7. General powers and functions of Commissioner. 
S. Central Religious Endowments Council. 
9. Functions of the Council. 
10. Religious Endowments Tribunal. 
11. Functions of the Tribunal. 
12. Appointment of assessors. 
L3. Procedure of Tribunal. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION OF HINDU PUBLIC RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS 
14. Register of Hindu public religious endowments. 
15. Application for registration of religious endowments. 
L6. Inquiries for registration. 
17. En try in register. 
18. Amendment of register. 
766 (B) LS-l. 
.-

~ u 
~LAusi:S 
L9. Special provisions with respect to religious endowments regis-
tered under any other law. 
JO. Furnishini copies of extracts from register . 
.21. CiVil courts not to e~tertain suit on behalf of an unregistered 
religious endowment. 
CHAPTER IV 
ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF HINDU PUBLIC RELIGIOUS 
ENDOWMENTS 
22. Appointment and succession to office of trustee. 
23. Hindu Succession Act, 1956 not to apply to succession to oJftce 
of trustee. 
24. Disqualifications for trusteeship. 
25. Removal of trustee. 
26. Disputes relating to office of trustee to be decided by Tribunal. 
27. Power of C<;>mmissioner to suspend trustee pending order of the 
Tribunal 
28. Trustee to deliver possession of property. 
29. Administration and management of Hindu public religious 
endowment to vest in trustee. 
30. Preparation and maintenance of register of Hindu public reli-
gious endowments. 
31. Power of Commissioner in cases of mismanagement. 
32. Budget of religious endowments. 
33. Obligatory ex:penditure of Hindu publi~ religious endowments. 
34. Discretionary expenditure of Hindu public religious endow-
ments. . 
35. Power of Com,missioner to make alterations or modifications in 
budget. 
36. Utilization of accumulated surplus funds of Hindu public reli-
gious endowments for the discretionary purposes. 
37. Power of Commissioner to settle schemes for proper adminis-
tration of Hindu public religious endowments. 
38. Application of property cy pres. 
39. Investment of endowment money. 

Iii 
CLAUSES 
40. Alienation of Immovable property. 
41. ATchana or pu;a by unqualified priests not to be allowed in 
Hindu public religious endowments. 
42. Unqualified hereditary priests to be required to appoint quali-
fied deputies to perform aTcOOna and pu;a. 
43. State Governments to set up schools for training of priests. 
44. Contributions by Hindu public religious endowments towards 
expenses of schools or institutions. 
45. Priests not to have any proprietary right to any offerings and 
jewels, etc. 
46. Code of conduct for priests. 
47. Scale of fees to be paid by worshippers and visitors. 
48. Salaries and other conditions of service of aTchakas and pu;a-
Tis. 
49. Licensing of pandas. 
50. Other provisions relating to pa.ndas. 
5l. Common Good Fund.' 
52. Accounts of padakanikas. 
53. Maintenance of accounts. 
54. Audit of accounts. 
55. Inspection and returns. 
56. Observance of appropriate forms and ceremonies by Commis-
sioner and others in certain cases. 
57. Determination of question as to whether a temple is a Hindu 
public religious en~owment or not or Of question as to custom, 
usage, etc. 
58. Contributions. 
59. Trustee to carry out directions of Commissioner and to furnish 
returns, statistics and accounts. 
CHAPI'ER V 
ApPEAL AND REFERENCE 
60. Appeals to Tribunal. 
61. Finality of orders and decisions. 
82. Reference of cases to Tribunal by Commissioner. 

· IV 
-- CHAPTER VI 
CLAUSES 
63. Procedure and powers at inquiries. 
64. Offences and penalties. 
65. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred. 
66. Notice of certain suits to be given to the Commissioner. ' 
67. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
68. Execution of orders of the Commissioner. 
69. Commissioner, etc., to be public servants. 
70. Application of Act to endowments governed by special enact-
ments. 
71. Power to make rules. 
72. Power to remove difftculties. 
73. Cesser of application of corresponding laws and savings. 

- .. ·c 
Bill No. 17 of 1"5 
THE HINDU RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
to provid~ for the better supervision and mOTe effective' administra.-
tion of Hindu public religious endowments cmd for matters con-
nected therewith. 
BB it eDaaed by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Hindu Religious Endow- Short title, 
ments Ad, 1965. extent and 
com-
(Z) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu mence-
and Kashmir. ment. 

De1lni-
tionsand 
interpre-
tation. 
2 
(3) This section shall come into force at once, sections 8 to 13 
shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and the rest of this 
Act shall come into force in a State on such date as the State Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and 5 
different dates may be appointed by the State Government for 
different provisions thereof. 
Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "commencement of this Act", in relation to any provi-
sion of this Act, means the date of the coming into force of that 10 
provision; 
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Hindu 
Religious Endowments appointed WlIIler sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 5 and includes a Deputy Commissioner and an Assistant 
Commissioner appointed under sub-section (2) of that section IS 
while exercising the powers and discharging the functions of 
the Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of that sub-
section; 
(c) "Council" means the Central Religious Endowments 
Council constituted under section 8; 20 
(d) "manager" in relation to a religious endowment means 
a person who either alone or in association with any other per-
son administers, manages Or otherwise deals with the endow-'. ment; 
(e) "math" means a Hindu religiOUS institution with pro- 2S 
perties attached thereto and presided over by a person, the suc-
cession to whose office is regulated by rules of succession laid 
down by the founder or by practices, usages or customs of the 
math relating to such succession and-
(i) whose principal duty is to engage himself in the 10 
. --} teaching and propagation of Hindu religion ~ and philosophy 
and the teachings and philosophy of the denomination, sect 
or sampradaya to which the math belongs and in imparting 
religious instruction and training and rendering spiritual 
service to a body of disciples; or 35 
(ii) who exercises or claims to exercise headship over 
a body of disciples, 
and includes any place or places of religious worship, instruc-
tion or training which are appurtenant thereto; 

3 
<f') i'person interested" means,-
(i) in the case of a math, the founder of the math 01' 
any descendant of such founder or a disciple of the math 
or a person belonging to the denomination, sect or 
S sampradaya to which the math belongs; 
(ii) in the case of a temple, the founder of the temple 
or any descendant of such founder or any person who is 
entitled to attend or is in the habit of attending the perfor-
mance o.f worship or service in the temple or who is entitled 
10 to partake or is in the habit of. partaking in the benefit of 
the distribution of gifts and offerings thereat; 
(iii) in the case of a specific endowment, a person who is 
entitled to attend, or is in the habit of attending, the per-
formance of the specific service or charity for which the 
IS specific endowment has been created or who is entitled to 
partake, or is in the habit of partaking, in the betlefit of 
such service or charity; 
20 
2S 
and includes the trustee of a math or temple; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(h) "priest" includes a shebait· by whatever name~alled 
(where such shebait performs or conducts any archana, puja or 
ritual), an archaka, a pujari and a panda; 
(i) "public temple" means any place by whatever designa-
tion known (whether or not the image of any deity or images 
of deities is or are installed and consecrated therein), which is 
used, whether-
(i) by virtue of any dedication to or for the benefit of 
the Hindu community or any section thereof, or 
(ii) by virtue of any practice, usage, custom or_ Qther-
wise, 
J:.; ..... , 
by the members of the said community or section as a place of 
public religious worship, prayer or other religious service; 
ExpZanation.-A temple which is located and maintained in 
3' a private dwelling house shall be deemed to be a public temple 
if-
(a) the members of the Hindu community or any sec-
tion thereof have, by virtue of any practice, usage, custom 

AppUc:a~ 
tion of Act 
to Hindu 
public 
religious 
endow-
menta. 
.. 
01' otherwise, unrestricted access thereto for the pui'pose of 
religious worship, prayer Or other religious serviee, and 
(b) gifts and offerings are received by the trustees or 
priests of the temple from such members at the time of or 
in connection with such worship, prayer or other religious S 
service or on the occasion of any UtB4V« or festival or the 
like; 
(j) "religious endowment" or "endowment" means a math 
or a public temple and all property belonging to or given or 
, endowed for the support of such math or temple, or given or 10 
endowed for the performance of any service or charity of a 
public nature connected therewith and includes the premises 
thereof but does not 'include any gifts of property or any offer-
ings made as personal gifts to a trustee, priest, service-holder or 
other employee of such math or temple; IS 
• 
(k) "specific endowment" means any property or money 
endowed for the performance of any specific service or charity 
in a math or temple; 
(0 "Tribunal" means the Religious Endowments Tribunal 
constituted under section 10; 20 
(m) "trustee" means any person whether known as 
mathadhipati, mohant, dharmakarta or sheba.it or by any otheL' 
name, in whom either alone or in association with any other 
person, the administration and management of a religious endow-
ment or specific endowment are vested and includes a manager. 2S 
(2) Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this 
Act-
(a) any reference to the word "Hindu" shall be construed 
as including a reference to the word "Buddhist"; and 
('b) any reference io a·"religious endowmen~ "endowment", 30 
"math" or "temple" shall be construed as including a reference 
to a Buddhist reli~ous endowment, endowment, 'math or 
, , 
temple. 
3. This Act applies to all' Hindu public religious 
that is to say, to all maths and all public temples. 
endowments, 
35 

, 
CHAPTER U 
AtmlORl'l'DS 
" For I~etter supervision and more effective administration of Enumen.. 
Hindu public religious endowments, there shall be the following tion of 
5 authorities charged with such powers and functions as are respec- ~~tho-
tively conferred on them by or under this Act, namely: _ eI 
(a) the Commissioner; 
(b) the Central Religious Endowments Councll; 
(c) the Religious Endowments Tribunal; 
10 (d) such other authority or authorities as the State Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint to 
aid and advise the Commissioner in the exercise of his powers 
and the discharge of his functions. 
5. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the OfBdal Appoint. 
IS Gazette, appoint a person to be the Commissioner of Hindu ment of 
Religious Endowments for exercising the powers and discharging stCOIDIDiI-• oner. the functions conferred on him by or under this Act. 
(2) The State Government may, by like notification, appoint as 
many Deputy Commissioners and Assiatant Commissioners as it 
20 thinks fit, and every such Deputy Commissioner or Assistant Com-
missioner shall, subject to the general superintendence and control 
of the Commissioner, exercise such of the powers and discharge 
such of the functions of the Commissioner and within such local 
limits as the CommfsstOJ1m' may, by ,eneral or apec:lal order, 
J~ speeJt:9'. . "':'!" - - '---''T9''P' 
35 
(3) A person shall not b. qualtfted for appointment as Com.mta-
CltODer unle81 h..... . " 
(a) has for at least ten yean held a judictal otftce in the 
territory of India; or 
(b) has for It least ten years been an advoeate of a High 
Court or of two or more High Courts in succession. 
(4) A person shall not be quali1ied for appointment as a Deputy 
Commissioner or an Assistant CommiMioner unlesa he-
(a) has for at least seven years held a judiclal omc:e in the 
territory of India; ar 
.,. (15) ,LS-..& ~ 

Tenure 
of Q,t!ice 
arid con-
ditions of 
service of 
Commis-
aioner, 
etc., and 
cuual 
vacanciel. 
General 
powers 
and 
functions 
of Com-
milliioner. 
Central 
Religious 
Endow:' 
ments 
Council. 
6 
(b) has for at least seven years been an advocate of a High 
Court or of two or more High Courts in succession. 
6. (1) The tenure of office of the Commissioner, a Deputy Com-
missioner and an Assistant Commissioner, their salaries and allow-
ances and other conditions of service shall be such as may be S 
prescribed. 
(2) Any vacancy in the office of the Commissioner, a Deputy 
Commissioner or an Assistant Commissioner occurring by reason of 
death, resignation, removal or otherwise shall be filled in accordance 
with the rules made under this Act. 10 
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Commissioner 
may do all such acts and things as are in his opinion reasonable or 
neces,sary to ensure that all Hindu public religiOUS endowments 
within the local limits of his jurisdiction are properly administered 
and managed and the income thereof is duly appropriat~ and IS 
applied to the objects for which such endowments were founded or 
for which they exist, so far as such objects can be ascertained. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the Commissioner shall also exercise all the powers and 
discharge aU the functions specificelly conferred on him by or under 20 ' 
this Act or by or under any other law for the time being in force. 
8. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gezette, constitute for the purposes of this Act a Council to 
be known as the Central ReligiOUS Endowments Council. 
(2) The Council shall consist of- 2S 
(a) such number of members not exceeding, fifteen as the 
Central Government play think fit, to be nominated by that 
Government from among persons who are in its opinion capable 
: ,-of Tepreseni"ing:":,,,:-·· .' ". " , ' " , . ' . .....,. " . 
•.... 
',~ 
(i) the Central Government; 30 
. - .' (ii) the Union territory administrations; . . . ...... 
(iii) ,the sadhus and sanyasis; ... ~ -.:." 
(iv) the. Hindu public religious endowments; and-
(~l ~uch ~ther in~erests_ whicp in the op~~ion of the 
C~ntral: qov~~ment ought to be r,epresented on, 't~~_Co~ncU; 35 
. (b) .one, representative of e~ch State 90vernment to be 
DOJDinated by that Government. 

, -::.' .... .;...~~;.;..~."".... -..:.:;.,~~~ y.. 1 :;00,-.. A'O' .;._. - . ." -, '0 
~ .: ....... ,~... --
(3) The Chmmali oWhe. Council ahall be ~PPOinted by the 
Central Government from among the members nominated under 
clause (4) of sub-section (2): 
(4) The Chairman and other members of the Council Shall te-
, , ceive such remuneration, if any, and shall be governed by such con~ 
ditions of service, as the Central Government may determine: 
(5) All expenses incurred in connection with the Council shail 
be defrayed out of the contributions referred to in section 58 in ac-
~rdance with such directions as may be issued by the, Central Gov-
10 ernm.ent in this behalf. 
15 
(6) Any vacancy o~~r~ing in the Council shall be filled aS'lOon 
as may be by nomination as provided in sub-section (2). 
(7) The Council shall have power-
(4) to regulate its procedure and conduct of business; and 
(b) to constitute committees and sub-committees, if any, of 
its members and to delegate to each of them such of its func-
tiona as it thinks fit. 
(8) The Council shall have power to act notwithstanding any 
vacancy therein. 
20 9., The Council shall cUacharge such functions, as m~ be confer- Functioftl 
red on it by or under this Act. of the 
Council. 
10. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification. in the Reli,ioul 
Official Gazette, constitute a tribunal to be known as the Religious Endow-
Endowments Tribunal. Tm~nbts 1 
tl una. 
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of such number of members as 
25 the Central Government may think fit, to be appointed by that Gov-
35 
ernment after consultation with the Council. 
(3) A person shall not 'be qualified for appointment as a member 
of the Tribunal unless he is a Hindu and-
(4) has been, or is, or is qualified to be, a judge of a High 
Court; or 
(b) having held office for at least ten years under the Gov-
ernment, has, in the opiilion of the Central Government, ad.e-
quate knowledge of, and experience in, matters of administra-
tion and finance; or . 
(c) has, in the opinion of th~ Central Goveriunent, sp~ial 
knowledge of Hindu scriptures, philosophy, :reliiion and reU-

, 
Functiona 
of the 
Tribunal. 
Appoint-
mantof 
..... ors. 
lioua practiCl!S and experience ot the working and administra-
tion of·1tindu public religious endowments. 
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a member of the 
Tribunal having the qualification specified in clause (4) of 1Ub-aee-
tion (3) to be the Chairman of the Tribunal. , 
(5) The Chairman and other members of the Tribunal shall re-
ceive such r~uneration and shall be governed by such cOnditions 
of service as the Central Government may determine: 
Provided that the remuneration of the Chairman or any other 
member shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appoint- 10 
ment. 
(6) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribu-
nal such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions 
under this Act. I 
(7) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall IS 
be defrayed out of the contributions referred to in section 58 in 
accordance with such directions as may ibe issued by the Central 
Government in this behalf. 
lL The Tribunal shall discharge such adjudicating and other 
functions as may be conferred on it by or under this Act. 20 
12. (1) 'HIe Tribunal may in ns diecretion diacharge any of itl -. 
functions under this Act with the aid of such number of assellors 
as it may think ~t and for this purpose shall, after consultation with 
the Council, prepare and maintain a list of assessors. 
(2) Every assessor shan be a person fit rand suitable to give ad- 25 
vice to the Tribunal on matters which come up before the Tribunal 
for consideration. : 
Procedure 13. (1) The functions of the Tribunal may be discharged by 
of Benches constituted by the Chairman of the Tribunal from amoDl 
Tribunal. the members thereof. 30 
(2) Eve#1 such Bench shall consist of three members possessing , 
respectively the qualifications specified in clause (4), clause (b), 
and clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 10. 
(3) If during the course of any proceedings any member ot the 
Tribunal is for any reason unable to discharge his functions or 35 
relinquishes his membership of the Tribunal, the Central Govern-
ment may appoint another member in his 'place in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act and upon his joining the Tribunal the 

as of 1980. 
• of 18D8. 
1'1"OCeedinp shall be continued as if he had been on the 'tribunal 
%rom me commencement of the proceedings. 
(4) In the case of difterence of opinion among the members of 
a hencil, the opmion of the majority shall prevail and orders of 
$ 'the Bench shall be expressed in terms of the views of the majority. 
(5) Decisions and orders of a Bench of the Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be the deci3ions and orders of the Tribunal itself. 
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Tribunal ahall 
have power to regulate its own procedure and the proceaure of 
10 Benches thereof in all matters arlSmg out of the discharge of its 
functlons, including the places at which the Benches shall hold their 
sittings and while discharging any adjudicating functiOns, shall 
follow the prinClples of natural justice. 
(7) The Tribunal shall, for 'the purpose of discharging its tunc~ 
IS tions, have all the powers which are vest~d in the Commissioner 
by sub-section (2) of section 63; end any proceeding before the 
Tribunal shall ibe deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
mearung of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and for 
the purpose of section 196 of that Code and the Tribunal shall be 
:zo deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and 
Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 . 
CHAPTER nl 
Rl:m.sTRATION OF HINDu PUBLIC BELIGIOUS ENDOWMBN'rS 
• 
14. The Commissioner shall lIlGintain a register' of all Hindu Relister 
as public religious endowments in the State in such form. and contain- of Hindu 
ing such particulars as may be prescribed. ' public 
relilioUi 
endow. ' 
mentl. 
15. (1) The trustee of every Hindu public religious endowment A lica-
shall make an application to the Commissioner for the registration tior: for 
of the endowment. reliJtra-
: . lion of 
o (2) Such application shall be made in such form and manner re1iJioUi 
3 and accompanied by such fee, not exceeding fifty rupees, as may endow. 
be prescribed and shall, as far as may be, contain the following mentl. 
particulars, namely:-
(a) the name 'or designation by which the religious endow-
ment is or shall be known; 
(b) the name and address of the trustee an~ the manager; 
(c) the mode of succession to the otBce of trustee; 

• 
10 
(d) the movable and immovable properties pe~ng to 
the endowment and a description thereof Bumcient for their 
identification; 
(e) the approximate value of the movable and the immov-
able properties of the endowment; S 
. (f) in the case of a religious endowment existing ~t 'the 
commencement of this Act, a statement of the gross income 
annually received. and of the expeIlSe3 annually incurred In 
connection with the religious endowment, during the period of 
three years immediately preceding such co'mmencement; 10 
(g) in the case of a religious endowment created after auc:h 
commencement, an estilnate of the gross income. which i.likely 
to be received, and of the expenses which are likely to 'be incur-
red, annually, in connection with the religious endowment, dur-
ing the period of three years immediately following the date I, 
of the creation of the endowment; 
(h)' such other particulars as may be prescrilbed. 
(3) Every application shall be accompanied by a coPy of the 
. endowment deed or if no such deed bas been executed or a copy. 
thereof cannot be obtained, the application shall contain full parti- 20 
.;: culars as far as they; are known to the applicant, of the origin, 
nature and object of the endowment. 
(4) Every application soo11 be signed and verified by the appli-
• 
cant in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 5 of 1908. 
, .. 
~
:' uiries 
..... r relis-ationo 
, 
for the signing and verification of pleadings. I 2S 
(5) The Commissioner may require the applicant to supply such 
further particulars or such information relating to the endowment 
a3 the Commissioner may deem necessary. 
(6) Every appliCl8tion for registration shall be made- I 
(4) in the case of a religious endow~ent exis~ing at the 30 
commencement of this Act, within six months l\ext following 
such commencement, and 
. . 
(b) in the case of a religious endowment created after 
such commencement, within six months next following the 
date of the creation of the endowment. 3~ 
UI. (1) On the receipt of an application under section 15, the 
Commissioner shall in the prescribed manner make luch inquiries 
as he thinks fit in Jrespect of the application and the correctness of 

11. 
the P!orticulars th~rein mentioned and may, in additi~, ~,In 
. 1pqui.,Qr in respect of' all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(4) whether there is an endowment and whether such, 
endowment is a Hindu public religioUs endowment; 
(b) whether any J)roperty is the property of such religiou!I 
endowment; . ,. . 
(c) whether the whole or any substantial portion of the 
endowed property is situated within the local limits of hiJ 
judisdiction; 
10 (d) the origin, nature and object of such endowment; 
(e) the gross average annual income and expenditure of 
e;uch endowment; 
(1) any other m·atter which may be prescribed. 
(2) If on an application made to him by a person interested in a 
IS religious endowment or otherwise, the Commissioner has real:lon 
to believe that there is a religious endowment which should be 
r~gistered under this Act, he may make such inquiries as he think:; 
fit in respect of the· matters specified in sub-6ection (2) of aection 15 
and sub-section (1) of this section; but no inquiry shall 'be mad~ . 
20 without giving the trustee a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
(3) On the completion of an inquiry under this section, tho 
Commi'SSioner shall record his findings with the reasons therefor ill 
respect of the IllIltters inquired intc and make an order in relation 
to the religious endowment. 
25 17. Wht!re an order ·for registration of a religious endowment Entry in 
is made under section 16, the Commissioner shall cause the entrfe~ register. 
i~ respect thereof to be made in the register (maintained by hlm 
.. ~!lc!,er ,s,~~.ion ,l~)., i~ a,ccorciance with the f\n~gs'.~~C9.rded under 
, , sub-section - (3) of section '16 . .' ~ _. ~: '...-::, ~ ., ':: , .. : ~ ,. ~ :,.' ,.: ,: '~. 
30'· ", 11. : ~1~ -:~ere:' ~Y'ch,~nge ,occm:s in '~y ~f :t~' ~~ntrie9 ~~~ 111 Ame~ ... :,·, 
the reg:tster maintamed under section 14, the trustee' shall, ·within me~t of ., 
nmety 'days froin the date of such change, send by· past .. a -report t~ re,~~ .. 
: ,~ the Commissioner in the 'prescribed fonn giving notice of the 
~se. ' 
35, ,<?) On ,~he r~ei~t' of a report under sUlb,:"sectio~ (1) or ,other-
wise, . the Commissioner m~y hold an inquiry for ascertaining whe-
ther any change has occurred in any of the entries recorded in the 
J'estster in relation to the religious endowment. 

Special 
provisions 
with res-
pectto 
religious 
endow-
ments 
register-
ed under 
any other 
law. 
12 
(3) If the Commissioner, after holding such inquiry, is s.tiIfled 
that a change has occurred in any of the entries made-in the relfl-
ter, he may make an order to that effect and shall cause the rele-
vant entry in the register to be amended accordingly. 
19. (1) Where any 'Hindu public religiOUS endowment has been $ 
registered in a State before the commencement of this Act under 
any other law with respect to religiOUS endowments in force in that 
State, the religious endowment shall, as from such commencement, 
be deemed to have been registered under this Act. 
(2) The Commissioner shall issue a notice hr-.pest to the trustee 10 
of such endowment for the purpose of making the entries relating 
thereto in the register maintained under section 14. 
(3) The trustee of such religious endowment shall, as far u may 
be, supply to the Commissioner the particulars referred to in Iec-
tion 15 within three months from the date of the receipt of the 1$ 
notice referred to in sub-section (2) . 
(4) The Commissioner may, after such inquiries as he thinks 
fit, record his findings with reasons therefor in respect of the 
matters specified in sub-section (2) of section 15 and sUMection (1, 
of section 16 and make an order in relation to the endowment and 20 
the prOvisions of sections 16 and 17 shall, as far aJf may be, apply 
to such order. 
Furnish- Zo. (1) The Commissioner may, on application made to him In 
ing copies this behalf, furnish to the applicant copies of any extracts from 
of extracts the register maint~ed under section 14 on payment of such fee 25 
fro~ ter not exceeding one rupee for every one hundred words or fractional 
regls . part thereof required to be copied, as may be prescribed and sub-
CivU 
:. courts 
! not to 
'i. entertain 
,: suit on 
:~: . 
+ behalf 
~. ot an 
~f unregia-
, ..... ~~ ... tered .t. 
'. reUaiOUl 
i·; endow-
:'~ment. 
ject to such conditions, if any, as may be determined by the Con\-
missioner. 
(2) Such' copies may be certified in the manner provided in 50 
uc:tiOIl 76 of the Indian Evidence Aet, 1872. - , 1 at 11'11. 
ZL (1) No civil court sball entertain a suit for the enforee1l\ct 
of a right on behalf of a Hindu public religious endowment unless 
such endowment has been, or is deemed to be, registered UDder 
this Act. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall also apply to a ela1m 
of set-oft or other proceeding to enforce a right on behalf of a 
Hindu public religiOUS endowment which has not been, or is not 
deemed to be, reptered under tbis Act. 

13 
CHAPTER IV 
ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF HINDU PUBl.IC 
RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS 
D. (1) The appointment and succession to the office of a trustee Appoill'-
5 of a Hindu public religious endowment shall be regulated by the met IiDd 
rules, practices, usages or customs of the religious endowment with IUcceiIioD 
respect to such appointment or succession. to dee of 
truItae. 
(2) Neither the head of a Hindu pufblic religious endowment nor . 
any other trustee thereof shall h4y" the power to alter, amend, 
10 modify or rescind any such rules, practices, usages or customs ex-· 
cept with the permission in writing of the Tribunal. 
23. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the pro- ~u 
so of 1956. visions of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, shall Dot apply to and In ~~~ 
relation to the succession to the ofBce of a trustee of a Hindu public DOt to ' 
15 religious endowment apply to 
auecftllcm 
toofBceof 
truJtee. 
24. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed, or succeed- Dilquali-
ing, to the office of a trustee of a Hindu public religious endowment- ftcat1ans 
(a) if he is of unsound mind 'and stands so declared by a.!:.t.._ 
competent 'court; Ihip. 
~ (b) if he suffers from any such physical disease or detect 
as renders him unfit or incapable to pe:rform the duties of his 
office; 
(c) where a trustee is, by ruies, practices, usages or cUS-
toms of the endowment, prohibited from marrying, if he has 
2S married; 
30 . U.011860. 
(d) if he lives an immoral, vicious or scandalous ute; 
(e) if he has been convictcl of any offence involving moral 
turpitude; 
(f) notwith~tanding. anything" contained in the Caste Dis-
abilities Removnl Act, 1850, i,t he doe; not belong to the deno-
mination; sect or sampradaya to which the religious endow-
ment belongs. 
25. A trustee may be removed from his oftice on the ground that Removal 
he is, or has become, subject to any of the disqualifications men- ot tnut ... 
3~ tioned in section 24 or on the ground- . 
(a) that he has neglected or failed to d;lIICharge the func-
tions of his oftlce; or 
TIl (B) LB-I. 

"'tei "';'11 to __ of 
trqa&H 
COM 
decided by 
TrlbUDal. 
1. 
(b) that the affairi of the It!1igioUB endowment have not 
been properly managed or have been mismanaged; or 
(c) that he is lUilty of misappropriation of any endowment 
property. 
Je. (1) In any of the following cases, that is to say,- 5 
(a) when there is any dispute as to the disqualtftCltiOn of 
a perlOn for being appointed or succeeding to the omee ot a 
trustee on any of the grounds speci1led in section 24 or n to 
the removal of a trustee under section 35; or 
(I» when the person entitled to succeed to the 'ollce bf fO 
trustee Is a minor and has no auardian fit and wtlltn,to ad .. 
IUbh or When there 11 • dispute al to the person who is erltltled 
tb 'lct as guardian; or 
(c) when the trustee entitled to nominate his succe8lor in 
omee is unable or unfit to do so by reason of his removal froiD 15 
omee or otherwise; or 
(d) when there is no person eligible.· to become a trustee; 
or 
(e) when there is a dispute as to the right of any perlOn 
to act 81, or to succeed to the omee of, a trustee. 20 
al! -ea.eIhaH be referred to the Tribunal for deetMon. 
(2) Every case under sub-section (1) shall be stated in tbe form 
of 8ft application which shall be presented to the Tribunal or such 
aIlcer thereof as it may appoint in this behalf. 
(3) Every such application- a, 
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the eirc:wnatancel 
and materials upon which the person making the application 
relies in support of his allegation, 
(b) shall be signed and verified in the manner laid down 
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, lor the Bienature and veri- lo IJ at rtOa. 
ftcation of a plaint in a suit. 
(4) The Tribunal may, after issuing notice in the prelCl'ibed 
manner to every person who appears to it to be interHteci in the 
endowment and holding sucb inquiry as it thinka fit, make IUCh 
order in the case (Including an order appolntm, a fit penon to be 35 
the trustee of the endowment or to discharp the functiolll of a tl'\lltee 
or to be the guardian of a mlaor trustee) AI It dMmI At; 

1:; .;>'Vr;·· , 
Provided that in appointing a person to the oftlce of a truatee 
or tp dischar,e the functions of a trustee or to be the guardian of 
~aminor trustee, the Tribunal shall select a person of the denomi-
nation, sect or B4mpra.da.Y4 to which the endowment belongs. 
S %7. (1) Pending the order of the Trtbunal under 5ub-aection (4) Powerof 
10 
IS 
of section 26, the Commissioner may- Comm1a-
. .lonerto (4) suspend from office on any of the grounds speci1led suspenc1 
in section 24 or section 25, the trustee of a religio~ endow- trustee 
lUent if in the opinion of the Commission .. such' ~OD is pendiD, 
immediately necessary in the interests of the endowment·, and order . oltha 
(b) appoint a fit .person to discharge the functions of the Tribunal. 
trustee during the period of such suspension. 
(2) The Com.mjssion~r shall, as soon 88 possible, report to the 
Tri'bunal any action taken by him under sub-section (1). 
28. Where a trustee has been removed from his oSee by an Tl'\I.Itee 
order of the Tribunal under section 26 or suspended from his oftice to 4e1lver 
by an order of the Commissioner under section 2:1, the Tribttnal or, pou..toD 
as the case may be, the Commissioner shall direct the trustee 10 of ~- I 
removed or suspended to deliver possession of the endowment pro- pe y. 
20 perty to the person who has succeeded to the oftice of the trustee by 
virtue of the order of the Tribunal or who has been appointed~y 
the Tribunal or the Commissioner to discharge the functions of the 
trus tee. . ~ .tilt 
29. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the administration aDd Adm ln' s -
3S management of every Hindu public religious endowment shall be ~tion 
vested in the trustee thereof and the trustee shall be responsible mana,a-
lor the proper and efficient discharge of his functions in relation ment of 
to the affairs, religious and secular, of the religiOUS endowment. Hindu 
public 
reUlioua 
endow-
mentto 
vestln 
tzwtee. 
.30. (1) The trustee of every Hinciu public religious ~e.~t Prepare-
30 shall prepare and maint~n a register in such form as the CQIIl- tion and 
missioner may direct, showing- mainteDf -
anC80 
(4) the origin and history of the Hindu public re~g1ous repter 
endowment and the names of past and present trustees and of Hindu 
particulars as to the rules, practices, usages or customs regard- pubUc 
ing the succession to the office of trusteej reUdot!oul 
3' en w-
(b) the particulars relating to the administration. and mentl. 
D,Wlagement of the endowment and the scale of expendUure 
incurred in connection therewith; 

, 1. 
{c) the names of all oflices to which any salary, emolu-
ment or perquisite is attached and the nature, time and' con-
ditions of service in each case; 
(d) the jewels, gold, silver, preCious stones, vessel3 and , 
utensils and other movables belonging to the endowment with 
their weights and ~timated values; 
(,) the particulars of all immovable properties belongina 
to the endowment and of all title deeds and other documents 
relating thereto; 
u) the particulars of the idols and other images of the 10 
endowment, whe<ther intended for worship or for being carried 
in processions or for any other purpose; . 
(g) the particulars of ancient or historical records relatina 
to the· endowment with their contents in brief; and 
(h) such other particulars as may be required by the Com- 'S 
missioner. 
(2) The register shall be verified and signed by the trustee of 
the religiOUS endowment concerned or by his authorised agent and 
. sUbmitted by him to the Commissioner within three mentha from 
the commencement of this Act or, as the case may be, from the 
date of the creation of the religious endowment or within such 
. further period as may be allowed by the Co~ioner. 20 
(3) The Commissioner may, after receiving the register, direct 
the trustee to make such additions, alterations or omissions in the 
register as the Commissioner may deem fit. 
25 
(4) 'rhe trustee shall carry out the orders of the Commissioner 
and then submit three copies of the register as corrected to the 
Commissioner for approval . 
. (5) . One copy of the register as approved by the Commjssioner 
shall be furnished to the trustee. 
·(6) The trustee or his authorised agent shall scrutinise the en- 30 
tries in the register every year and submit to the Commissioner for 
his approval'a signed and verified statement showing the additiona, 
alterations or omissions required in the register and' tlie provisions' 
of sub-section (3), sub-section (4) and sub-section (5) shali. apply 
. in relation to such statement as they apply in relation to the S 
re~ter. 3 

l' 
3L . '(l)"Where em' receipt 01 iny report of the auditor &a Power 01 
respect of any Hindu public religious endowment or on an Commia-
app~cation . made in this behalI I:?y two or more persons interested sioner il! 
iIi the endowment. or otha-wise, the Commissioner has reason to cases of 
:. believe that the affatrs of the enciow·ment are 'being mismanaged mismana-
or that the trustee is neglecting or failing to discharge his functions gemenl 
in . relation to the endowment in a proper and e1Bcient m8llDer. the 
Commissioner may, after issuing notice in the prescribed manner 
to the trustee and to such other persons as may appear to .the Com-
10 missioner to be interested in the endowment, hold an inquiry into 
IS 
the matter in such manner as may be prescribed. . 
(2) If, after'holding ~ inquiry und~ su~section (l), tile Com-DUSsioner: ~ satisfied~.· .' '. .. . .. .. . 
. . 
(4)· that the affairs of the religious endowment are being 
mismanaged or that the trustee is neglecting or falling to dis-
charge the. functions of his office, or 
(b) that the trustee is guilty of misappropriation of any 
endowment property, 
. the Commissioner may, without prejudice to any other action 
20 that may be taken against the trustee under any of the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, make an order giving directions to the 
~rustee for the proper and efficient admjnjstration and management 
of the endowment or for the discharge of the functions of his office, 
or directing the trustee to pay to the endowment such amount not 
2S exceeding the amount of loss caused to the endowment as the Com-
missioner thinks fit. 
........ . .. ~. 
32. The trustee o! every Hindu public religious endowment shall Budget of 
prepare before the close of every financial year in such form and religious 
within such time as may be prescribed, a budget of the estimated endow-
30 income and expenditure of such endowment for the next financial mentl. 
year and shall forthwith send a copy thereof to the Commissioner: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a rell-
. gious E'lldowmen.f having an annual income of less than one thou-
. sand rupees. , t 
3S 33. The trustee of a Hindu public religious endowment shall, Obligatory 
while preparing the budget in accordance with section 32, make expendi-
provision for the following objects, namely: - ~~~ 
(4) the. due maintEnance of the objects of .the institution public 
and the pr0t.'er perfonnance of the services therein in .confor- ~:~~;~ 
mity with the rules, practices, usages or custODl$ of the endow- mentl. 
ment; 

Dia:re· 
Uonary 
expenc:U.. 
tu.re ot 
Hindu 
public: 
reUaioUB 
endow-
ment •. 
•• 
(b) the paYment of th.. ularj... uad allow... dUf to 
the trustee, priest. and other servants of the en40~e"t; 
(c) the adequate training of priests, .a4h..u, 14nllasi8, 
adhyapok43, VedapaT4114nika and reciters of holy texts; 
(d) the repayment of loa118 binding on the' endowment,S 
the repair, renovation or sterulion of the buildings of the 
endowment, and the contributions required t& be made in pur-
suance of the provisions of section 44 and ~tion 58; 
(e) the maintenance of. working balance. 
M. The trustee of a Hindu public religioua ~t DJY,IO 
after making adequate provision for the objects specifted In sec· 
tioft 33, make provision in the buaget of the enaowment for all or 
any of the !following objects, namely:-
(4) the arrangements providing amenities to l. ,adhUl , 
sanyariB, disciples, worshippers, d8Y'EKees, pilgrims and other IS 
visitors, that is to say, clean accommodation, good water sup-
ply, Ughting, sanitation and au.pply of wholesome food wbaa:e 
the custom of N aivedllam or Bhag obtaiDa; 
. (b) the grant of aid to any other religious endowment in 
needy circumstances, of the same denomination, aeet er 20 
IClmpnulayCl; 
(c) the provision and ,maintenance of llower ,arde.os ItOd 
gorhala.s; 
(d) the propagation of the tenets of the religiOUS endow-
ment and the fundamentals of Hindu dharma common to all ZS 
denominations, sects or IClmpradallU; 
(e) the publication of 4g4m41 and the history of eYeJ'Y 
endowment; 
-~ (I> .the provision of libraries with nUgious and .pbUoaophi-
cal 'works and publication of religious Hter.ature and maldDg 30 
the same available to the members of the public .either free of 
cost or at a cheap price; 
(g) the provision ~or religiOUS discou·rs.es; 
(h) the grant of scholarships and stipends to Hindu students 
studying in educational institutions where such stwients under- 3S 
take, In addition to their normal studies, the ·study of ,Hindu reU-
gion and philosophy and offer themselves to be examined as re-
prcls their progress 111 sueb studies; 

11 
--,~ " 
(t) the promottOD of temple arehlteeture, sculpture and be , 
arD; 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of institutions where 
secular u well u rel1iloua eclucation is imparted; 
(1c) the .tabliahmeot and maintenance of colleges or iDati-
tuUoaa tor the·study of Hindu, religion, philosophy, Ved4. or the 
Shastras or contributions thereto; 
(1) the establishment and maintenance of orphana,es for 
Hindu ehildren; 
10 (m) the establishment and maintenance of-asylums for per-
sons su1!ering from leprosy or any other serious disease; 
(m)tbe eatabltshment and main~ance of poor homes for 
destitute, helpless and physically disabled persons; and 
_., - --,. 
(0) the .tabltshment and maintenance at hospitals anel dia-
lS pensarhta for the beDeftt of soc:Uwa, llUlflaiI, discipl_, wor-
shippers, devotees, pilgrims and other' visitor.. 
35. (1) The Commissioner may, after giviDg notice to the trustee Powwet 
in the prescrlbed manner and after considering his l'epn!Sentatftm, if ~~ 
. any, make such alterations or modfftcatioM In the budget as the Com- ..... 
~o missioner thinks ftt. .; alteration. 
or modi-
(2) Nothing contained in BUlb-section (1) shall be deemed to fteatloDi 
authorise the Commissioner to restrict or prohibit the observance In bud,et. 
of any religious plI&ctice or the performance of any act in pursuance 
of any religious belief or to alter or modify any budget in a manner 
a$ or to an extent iDcouistent with the provisions of this Act or with 
the wishes of the founder ot the endowment so tar as such wishes can 
be ascertained. 
38. (1) With the previous sanction of the 'Commissioner and sub- utilizatlon 
~ to 8uclil conditions end restrictions as may be prescribed, the of acewn-
30 trustee -of a Hindu ,public relupDus endowment may approprtate any mula1ted 
, ~~ 
portion 'of the accwnulated surplua of such endowment for any of funds of 
the P1IlrpOH8-specified in section 34. Hindu 
(2) Before giving aanction under su1Hection (1), the Com- ~::UI 
missioner shall publish the particulars relating to the proposal of the endow-
35 trustee in such m"anner as 'may be prescribed, invite objections and menta tor 
suggestions with respect thereto and consider all the objections and the dilcre-
. . tionary SQggestlou receivecl. pul'pOMl" 
(t) The 'lanetion mtWaid IIml11 'be 'publlBhed in "1Ueh maDm!r '.1 
may 'be 'prwserw. ' 

Power of 
Commll-
sionerto _ttl. 
lebem .. 
lor proper 
adm1nJ.a. 
tratlon 
otHindu 
public 
reUlioUi 
endow-
ments. 
Applica-
tion at 
1WOPertY 
~ Pres. 
10 
31. (1) Where on an application made in this behalf by two or 
more persons interested in a Hindu public religious endowment or 
otherwise, the Commissioner is of the opinion that in the interest of 
the proper administration and management of the endowment, a S 
scheme should be settled for it, the Commissioner may, after issuing 
notice in the prescribed manner to the trustee of the endowment and 
to such other persons as may appear to the Commissioner to be Inter-
ested therein, hold an inquiry, into the matter in the prescribed 
manner and if, after such inquiry, the Commissioner is satisfied that it 10 
is necessary or desirable so to do, he may, by order, settle ~ scheme 
for the proper administration of the religious endowment. 
(2) The Commissioner may also, in like manner and subject to 
1ike conditions, modify any scheme settled under this section or under 
any other law or substitute another scheme in its stead. 
(3) No scheme settled, modified or substituted under this section; 5 
shall be contrary to the wishes of the founder of the religious endow-
ment so far as such wishes caD be ascertained or to the religion to 
which such endowment belongs. 
38. (1) Where from any application made to him by two or more 
persons interested in a Hindu public religious endowment or a sped- 20 
fic endowment or otherwise, it appears to the Commissioner that,-
(a) the original objects, in whole or in part, of the endow-
ment or specific endowment-
(i) have been fulfilled as far as may be; or 
(ii) either cannot be carried out at all or cannot be 25 
carried out accordin~ to the directions and wishes of the 
founder or according to the spirit of the endowment or sped;'·; 
ftc endowment; or 
........ ~-. (b) the original objects provide a use for part unly of the 
property or income of the endowment or speciftc endowment; ot" 30 
;.; . .' (c) the property and income of the endowment or speciftc-
endowment and any other property applicable to objects similar' 
to the original objects of the endowment or tbe specific endow-
ment can be more effectively used in conjunction. and to that end 
can suitably be made appli~ble to common objects regard beim~ !U 
bad to the directions and wisbes of the founder or the spirit nf 
the endowment or the specific endowment; or 
(d) the original objects were laid down by reference to an 
area, nr a class of persons. which has for any reason ceased to 'be 
IUttable, reprd. being had to the direetiona and Wishes of tJul 40 
founder or the spfrlt of the endowment ot' the. ~fte endowme:nt . 

J1 
or to be practical fn admf nfater1nl the endowment or the sp .... 
fIc endowment; or 
(e) the original objects, in whole or in part, have, since 
they were laid down,-
S (i) been adequately provided for by other means; or 
(ii) ceased as being useless or harmful to public order, 
morality or health, to be in law reUgious or charitable ob-
jects; or . 
(iii) ceased in any other way to provide a suitable and 
10 effective method of using the property and income of the 
endowment or specific enc1Gwment, regard being had to the 
directions and wishes of the founder and the spirit of the 
endowment or the specific endowment, 
the Commissioner may, after issuing notice in the prescribed manner 
1'$ to the trustees of the endowment and to such other persons as may 
appear to him to be interested therein, hold an inquiry into the 
matter and if after such inquiry the Commissioner is satisfied that it 
is necessary so to do, he may, by order. direct that the property and 
income of the endowment or the sDecific endowment or so much 
20 thereof as he deems fit shall be applied. subject to such conditioDR, If 
any, as may be specified in the order, to anv other objects which shall 
be similar, or as nearly as practicable, similar to the orhrlnal obiectB 
or if in the opirrion of the Commlssiotrer it is not possible to deter-
mine which other objects are similar or as nearlv 9S p,.actir.able. Rimi-
2, lar; to the original objects, to anyone or more of the objects specifted 
in sec1:loIi' 34. 
(2) In making an. order under this section in relation to an en-
dowment or specific endowment, the Commissioner sh~l1 have, as far 
as may be, due reg~rd to the directions and wishes of the foundpr or 
30 the spirit of the endowment or specific endowment and also to the 
wishes of the trustees and persons interested in the endowment or 
specific endowment and no order shall be made directing the appli-
cation of the property or income of the endowment or specific endow-
ment to any purpose other than a purpose which is recognised by 
3S Hindu religion or by the denomination, sect or sampradaya thereof 
to which the endowment or specific endowment belongs, as a reli-
gious, pious or charitable purpose. 
31. (1) Where the whole or any portion of the property of a Invest:-
Hindu public religiOUS endowment or of a specific endowment con- ment of 
40 sists of money which cannot be applied immediately or at an early end~w­
date to the objects to which such money can be applied under this :7. 
Act or where there is a surplus in the funds of a Hindu public reU- . 
gious endowment or of a specific endowment after m~eting all law-
ful expenditure in connection therewith, the trustee shall, except 
766 (B)LS-4 

Alienation 
if immov-
able 
, property. 
, 
u otherwise prcu1ded in this Act, invest, subject to the directioDl, 
if any, contained in the deed of endowment, such money or surplus 
·in the following securities and no others, namely:-
(4) seCurities of the Central Government or a State GOvern-
ment; ! S 
(b) stocks, shares or debentures of companies, the interest 
or dividend on which has been· guaranteed by ~he Central Gov-
ernment or any State Government; 
(c) debentures or other securities for money issued by or on 
behalf of any local authority or corporation in exercise of the 10 
powers conferred by any Central Act or any ProVincial or State Act: - "I .;"1 : .. " .. :.;-: - '-:' .~-. 
Provided that the Commissioner may, by general or special order, 
permit the trustee to invest the money or the surplus in any other 
manner consistent with'the endowment deed and the objects to which IS 
such money or surplus may be applied under this Act. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect any investment made 
before the commencement of this Act. 
40. (1) No transfer by a trustee llf any property belonging to a 
Hindu public religious endowment by way of sale, mortgage, ex- 20 
change or gift or by way of lease, the term or in the case of a re-
newable lease, the aggregate term of which exceeds three years, . 
shall be valid unless it is made with the previous sanction of the 
Commissioner: . 
Provided that no such sanction shall be given unless the Com- 25 
missioner is of the opinion that the transfer is necessary in . the in-
terests of the endowment. 
(2) Where any 'transfer of property is made in contravention of 
sub-section (1), the provisions of section 10 of the Limibatiol'l Act, 
1.963, shall apply notwithstanding that such transfer fs a transfer 30 38 of Uta. 
for valuable: consideration. . ,~ 
\ 
Archana 41. (1) No trustee of a Hindu public religiou3end~wment shRIl, 
::~~~Y after the expiry of two years from the ,commeneement .f thi:! Aet, 
led priests allow any: pers~ to omciate as a prie~ unless sueh persOft po...-ses-
!lot to be ges, subject to such suitable modiftcations in view of local eonditions 
allowed, as may be· authorised by the CommU!sioner, the fbllowlnl lJuaIfft- 35 
.. Hindu 'cations namely: -" . _bIle ' , 
~01U 
.,..-.,...-t. (4) a worldnr knowled,e of Sanskrit; 

.' (b) • good knowledge of the mantrcu, lIgatlna and other 
relevant ShaatraB, rituals and mode of worship sa required by 
----- the tenets of denomination, sect or Bampradaya concerned there-
of; 
5 (c) a knowledge of the SthaZapurana and traditions of the 
endowment to which he is, or may be, attached; 
(d) proficiency in the regional language or languages 10 as 
to enable him to explain with facility the meaning and signift-
cance' of the mantraa, archanas and pu;aa to worshipp~s, d~ 
10 votees, pilgrims or other visitors; and 
(e) a good moral character and basic learning 10 as to 
inspire reverence in the worshippers, devotees, pUgrims and 
other visitors. 
(2) A trustee who contravenes the provisions of this section 
15 slall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees. 
42. (1) If any hereditary priest does not possess the quali1lcatioDS UnquaU-
specified in section 41, he shall appoint a deputy who possessea fled here-
those qualifications far performing arcoona and pu;a and such de- dita1'7 
20 puty shall perform 4rchana. and pu.;a until the hereditary priest or ~~ 
his descendant acquires the qualifications &0 specified. ~uired-
(2) In the matter of appointment of a deputy under this section to a:o:t 
prefe,rence should be given to a qualified person who has a heredi- :::uti:' tct 
tary right to perform archana or pu.;a. perform 
archana 
and puja. 
25 43. (1) In order to provide facilities to priests to acquire the qua- State 
lifications specified in section 41, the State Government shall set up Govern-
in one or more important Hindu religious centres within the State, mentl \0 
schools or institutions for giving training to priests in the Shutraa set up 
and agamas, archana. and pujapaddhati and other ritUftls in accord- lChooll ~ 
ance with the prescribed syllabus. traininf ri ~_ 30 0 pel ... 
35 
(2) The syllabus referred to in sub-section (1) shall make provi-
sion 'for both elementary and advanc~d training. 
'(3) The syllabus for elementary training may provide for-
(a) a working knowledge of Sanskrit; 
(I)' a knowledge of the ShastrtU 'lII1d agtimu, mcI"trCII.~ 
rituals and mode of worship of the respective denomination., 
Beets or .ampradayCII to which the priests beloDi; 
, . . '~ 

~, ... II 
C~Dtribu­
t10Da by 
Hindu 
public 
relilioUi 
endow-
ments 
towardJ 
upenIe8 
ofachools 
orlDltltu-
tlou. 
(e) a knowledge of the Sthalapur4t'14 and the traditions of 
the institution to which they 8Il'e or may be attached; 
(d) a good working knowledge of the regional language or 
languages so as to enable them to explain with facility the 
meaning and significance of the m4ft.tras, 4rCMft.4S and pu.;as S 
to worshippers, devotees, pilgrims and other visitors. 
(4) The syllabus for advanced training shall, in addition to the 
matters specified J.n sub-section (3), provide for the study of select-
ed Shtutraa and the Darshaft.CJ8 or Philosophies of Hinduism in 
general with particular emphasis on the tenets of the denommations, 10 
sects or sampradayaa to which the priests belong. 
(5) The school or institution shall, after the completion of the 
training, elementary and advanced, hold examinations and gnmt 
certificates to the successful candidates both in respect of elemen-
tary training and advanced training. IS 
(6) The school or institution shall also provide for courses of 
training for the priests who are already serving in Hindu public 
religious 'endowments and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (5) 
shall apply to the priests who join such COur3es of training. 
(7) The school or institution may also provide for refresher 20 ~ 
courses for the priests holding certificates granted by it. 
(8) The school or i.n3titution may also make provision for part-
time training for such Hindu students studying in secular schools 
or institutions as may volunteer for such training during their lIJpare 
time. : 25 
(9) The school or institution may initiate and maintain a system 
of award of stipends to students who are undergoing training therein, 
preference being g!ven as far as possible to the students from the 
fAmilies of hereditary priests. 
44. Every Hindu public religious endowment .. shall contribute ~ 
such percentage of its surplus funds not exceeding five per cent. 30 
thereof as may be specified in each case cr class of cases by the Com-
missioner with the approval ~f the State Government for the pur-
pose of meeting the expenses of the school or institution referred 
to in section 43 and the expenses, if any, incurred in connection 35 
with the payment of salaries and alloW'.lnces to the priests aDd such 
expenses shall be met from the contributions so received: 

t, -_r, 
Provided that no contributions made by any Hindu public reli-
gious endowment belonging to any denomination, sect or Bampr~ 
daya, shall be utilized for meeting the expenses of any school or 
institution of, or. the expenses incurred in connection with the pay .. 
S ment of salaries and allowances to pdests attached to and serving 
in, Hindu public religious endowments belonging to a different de--
nomination, sect or sGm.pradaya. 
45. Notwithstanding anything in any rules, practices, usages or PrielU 
customs of a Hindu public religious endowment, no priest attached not to 
10 to or serving in such endowment shall, on and after the commence- have any 
ment of this Act, have any proprietSl'y right to" any part of the propria .. • 
ofterings made before the deity installed therein, nor shall he enjoy ::r:n right 
any right of custody of the jewels and other valuable articles be.. offer~,s 
longing to the ep.dowment: and jewels 
IS Provided that a priest shall have a proprietary right to any gift etc. 
which is specifically made to him and not for the benefit of the en .. 
dowment, by any worshipper, devotee, pilgrim or other visitor. 
46. The Commissioner shall, after consultation with the Council, Code of 
prepare a code of conduct for the priests and di.fferent codes may conduct 
be prepared in relation to different classes or categories of priests. for prieltts 
.20 47. (1) The State Government, after consultation with the Coun- Scale ~ '\ 
cll, shill, by rules made in this behalf, specify a regulated scale of fees to be 
fees which may be paid to a priest by worshippers, devotees, pi!- paid by 
grims or other visitors at a temple for services connected with worship-
abhishek, archa:n4, puja, u.tsava and the like. ,p~rs, 
visitors. 
S (2) The trustee of every Hindu public religiQUS endowment shall 
2 publish the scale of fees so specified, in such manner' as mey be 
prescribed and also exhibit such scale of fees in one or more cousp!-
cuous parts of the endowment. 
(3) The trustee shall supply to every priest, printed receipt 
books (duly certified by the ~rustee) in such form. 'fi may be pres-
30 cribed and the priest shall grant receipts from such receipt books 
to the worshippers, devotees, pilgrims or other visitors for the 
amounts paid by them. 
(4) The Commissioner may, after giVoing reasonable opportunity 
of being heard to a priest who obtains payment of fees at a rate 
35 higher than the specified rates or who omits to grant receipts for 
the amounts paid to him, prohibit him either absolutely or for a 
limited period from officiating as a priest in any Hindu public reli-
gious endowment in the .state. 

,-
~lariel 
and other 
conditions 
of service 
of 
Clt"Chakaa 
and . 
pu;aria. 
f 
:16' 
48. (1) Every 4TChaJca or pu;ari attached to or serving in a Huldu 
public religious endowment' shall receive such salary ang. dearness 
and. ather allowances as may be prescribed so, however, that the 
salary paid to an aTch4'kCl or pujari shall i.n no case ,be less than 
rupees sixty per month and the dearness and other allowances paid 
to an aTch4ka or a pu;ari shall not be less than those admissible to 
persons serving in connection with the aftairs of the State in the 
corresponding grades. 
(2) WQere the income of a Hindu public religious endowment i. 
not sufficient' to meet the expenditure to be incurrm. on account of 10 
the salaries and allowances referred to in sub-eection (1), such sala-
ries and allowances or any portion thereof may be paid out of the 
contributions referred to in section 44. 
(3) Other conditions of service of ClTChakcJB and pu;aN attach- . 
ed to and serving in a Hindu public religiOUS endowment shall be 
specified by rules made .by the State Government in this behalf liS 
and such rules may provide for the following among other matters, 
namely:-
(a) the pension and provident funds for aTchaktu and 
~~; , ~ 
(b) the punishment by way of fine, suspen~ion or removal 
rfrom office for misconduct or negligence of duty, disobedience 
to the directions of the trustee or other authorities concemeGl 
with the administration and management of the endowment; 
(c) the appeal against any such punishment and the autho .. 
rity to whom such appeal shall be preferred; 2~ 
(d) any other matter which is by the State Government 
considered necessary for regulating the conditions of service 
of aTchakas and puja.ri&. 
(4) The trustee of every. Hindu public re!ig\ous endowment 
shall make endeavour to provide free residence tci every aTchaka. )0 
or pujari attached to and serving in the endowment. 
49. (1) After the expiry of two years from the commencement 
x;cen= of this Act, no trustee of a Hindu pUlblic religious endowment shall 
o po • allow any person to act, and no person shall act, as a panda unless 
such person- 3S 
(a) possesses the qualifications specified under section 41 
to perform any religious or other service. for worshippers, de-
votees, pilarims or other visitors; and 

, " 
(b) has obtained, from the Commissioner a mence granted 
in accordance with the provisions of this section and the rul~a 
made under this Act. 
(2) Every person desiring to obtain, a licence referred to in 
:.s sub-section (1)' shall make an application in writing to the Com-
missioner in such form and .manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) On th~ receipt' 01 such application, the Commissioner, after 
such inquiry, if any, as he considers necessary, shall, by order in 
writing, either grant or refuse to grant the licence. 
10 (4) Where the Commissioner refuses to grant a licence he shall 
~rd a brief statement of the reasons for such refusal and furnish 
·a copy thereof to the applicant. 
(5) The fees on payment of which, the period for which, the 
conditions subject to which and the form in which a licence may 
IS be granted shall, be such as'may be prescribed. 
(6) The Commissioner may, after giving the holder of a licence 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel the 
licence on the tfollowing, or anyone of the following grounds, 
. namely:- ' ! ' ', .... ~~ 
20 (a) that there has been a breach of any of the conditions 
subject to which the licence has been granted; 
(b) that the holder of the licence has acted as a panda in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act. 
(7) Whenever a licence is suspended or cancelled, the licensing 
25 authority shall' record a brief statement of the reasons for such sus-
pension or cancellation and furnish a copy thereof to the person 
whose licence has been suspended or cancelled. 
(8) A licence granted under this section shall, unless cancelled 
earlier, continue in force for such period from the date on which it 
30 is granted, as may be prescribed. 
(9) Every licence shall, uRless the CommissiollH for reasons 
to be recorded in writing otherwise decides in any ease, be renew-
able for the same period for which' the licence was Originally 
" ~anted .and shall be 'so renewable hoin time I to time and the fore-
~ 'S goin~' proVisions of this section shall apply to the renewal 04. a Uc-
enee as they apply ~o the grant thereof. . 
so. (1) The trustee of every, Hindu public, religious endowment Other pro-
shall ~.int~~ a ~gister in which the name ~d other prescribed visio?S 
PartiCulars 'of every liCensed panda shall be entered." " relatmg to '- pandal. 

Common 
Gooe! 
rune!., 
(J) Every licensed panda shall on demand show his Hcence to 
. every worshipper, devotee, pilgrim or other visitor at a Hindu 
public religious endowment. 
(3) The State Government shall', after consultation with the 
Council and the Commissioner, lay down the scale of maximum S 
and -mInimum charges for the various services rendered by the 
pandas at the various Hindu public religious endowments within 
the State and different scales of char:ges may be specift.ed for difter-
ent Hindu public religious endowments or lor different classes 
th 10 - ereof. 
(4) The scale of charges specified under sub-section (3) for 
every Hindu public religiOUS endowment shall' be prominently dis-
played in one or more than one conspicuous place in that endow-
ment. 
(5) Any panda who takes more than the maximum charges IS 
from a worshipper, devotee, pilgrim or other visitor at the endow-
ment or harasses in any way such worshipper, devotee, pilgrim or 
other visitor, -may be suspended or dismissed by the trustee from 
the service and the licence granted to such panda may also be can-
celled :ao 
~ 6) The trustees of Hindu public religiOUS endowments in im-
portant Hindu religious centres shan encourage the pandas to 
organise themselves to act as qualified ~des to worshippers, 
devotees, pilgrims or other visitors who visit those endowments 
and shall make suitable arrangements for providing a short course :&, 
of training to the pandas for this purpose. 
(7) A trustee who contravenes the provisions of this section 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred 
ru·pees. 
51. (1) It shall be lawful for the Commissioner to create a 30 
fMid to be called the Hindu Public Religious Endowmenta Com-
mon Good Fund, hereinafter referred to as the Fund, out of the 
contributions voluntarily made by the Hindu public religious en-
dowments within the State from their surplus funds or by any 
person, for the renovation and preservation of such endowments, 3' 
and the 'buildings and paintings requiring such renovation and pre-
servation and for the promotion and propagation of the tenets com-
mon to all or any c~s of sucn endowments. 
(2) The Fund shall be administered by the Conunfssioner in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 40 

~9 
52. (1) The trustee and the priest of every Hindu public rell- Account. 
gious endowment shall keep accounts of p1'an4mis or padakaniklJ8, of pada-
that is to say, any gift of prop'erty or money made to such trustee 7caniJca.a. 
or priest in his capacity as the head of the endowment or such 
5 priest, in such form as may be prescribed. 
ExpZanation.-Any gift of property or money made to a trustee 
or 'priest which is not sp~cally designated as a personal gift to 
such trustee or priest shall .be deemed to have been made to him in 
his capacity as the head, or, as the case may be, the priest of the 
10 endowment. 
(2) The trustee or the priest shall be entitled to spend the 
p1'anamis or the padakanikas referred to in sub-section (1) in ac-
cordance with the rules, practices, usages or customs of the endow-
ment concerned. 
IS (3) Any pranami or padakanika which is not spent by the 
trustee or the priest during the tenure of his offi.ce in accordance 
with such rules, practices, usages or customs shall, after the ter-
mination of such tenure, form part of the property of the endow-
ment. 
20 53. (1) The· trustee of every Hindu public religious endowment MaiDten-
shall keep accounts in such form and containing such particulars anee of 
as may be prescribed. 11 accounts. 
(2) The accounts kept under sub-section (1) shall be balanced 
in each financial year on the 31st day of March or such other date 
2S as may be fixed by the Commissioner in the case of any particular 
endowment having regard to the circumstances thereof. 
(3) For the purpose of ensuring the proper keeping of accounts 
of any Hindu public religious endowment, the trustee-
(a) shall, where the annual income of the endowment is 
30 ten thousand rupees or more, appoint, after consultation with 
the Commissioner, a suitable person to be a full-time accountant 
of the endowment; and 
) 
(b) may, in any other case, appoint, after such consulta-
tion, a suitable person to be a full-time or part-time accountant. 
54. (1) The accounts of every Hindu public religious endowment Audit of 
3S (including the accounts of pranamis and padakanikas referred to in accounts. 
section 52) having an annual income of not less than five thousand 
rupees shall be audited annually by an auditor to be appointed by 
the Commissioner after consultation with the trustee, from among . , 
40 such chartered accountants, within the meaning of the Chartered 
766 (B) LS-5. 

.... \' 
Inspection 
and 
returns. 
I\ccountants Act, 1949, as ha~e been. approved in this behaU by the 
State Government; and the accounts of every Hindu public religious 
endow~ent having, all annual income of less than five thousand 
rupees, ~ut not less than one thousand rupees, shall be audited an-
nually by such person as may b~ appointed by the Commissioner .$ 
after consultation with the trustee. 
-(2) The auditor shall have access to the accounts, books, vouchers, 
documents, papers and other records relating to such endowment in 
the possession or control of the trustee and may, by written notice, 
require the attendance before him of any person responsible for the 10· 
preparation of the ~ccounts to enable the auditor to obtain such in-
formation as he may consider necessary for the proper conduct of the 
audit. I ,~ .• ,~_i~lr 
• .... '_0.. t.::.&...:.. 
(3) Within a month of the completion of the audit, the auditor 
shall prepare a report on the accounts audited and submit the same IS 
to the Commissioner and deliver a copy thereof to the trustee con-
cerned. 
(4) The auditor shall in his report specify all cases of irregular, 
improper or illegal expenditure or failure or omission to recover 
monies or other property belonging to the endowment or of loss 20 
or waste of money or other property thereof and state whether such 
expenditure, failure, omission, loss or waste was caused in conse-
quence of any breach of trust or misapplication of trust property or 
any other misconduct on the part of the trustee or any other person. 
(5) The cost of the audit of accounts shall be borne by the State 2S 
Government from out of the contributions referred to in section 58,' 
55. (1) The Commissioner, or any officer authorised by him by a 
general or special order, may-
(a) enter into or upon and inspect any endowment property 
with such assistance as he may consider necessary; 30 
(b) call for or inspect any books, papers, recards, corres-
pondence, plans, accounts or ti~e-deeds relating to the- endow-
ment in the possession or control of the trustee. 
(2) If the Commissioner or any officer· authorised -by him is re-
sisted or obstructed in the exercise of his powers conferred on him 3S 
by sub-section (1), the magistrate having jurisdiction shall, on a 
written request from the Commissioner or such authorised officer, 
direct any police officer not below the rank of sub-inspector, to render 
such help as may be necessary to enable. the Commissioner or such 
authorised officer to discharge the functions in exercise of such 40 
power, 
38 ot 1940. 

--31 
(3) The Commissioner or any officer authorised by him uDtter 
sub-section (1). or the police officer referred to in sub-section (2) 
. - -shall, before entering into or upon any endowment property give 
reasonable notice to the trustee and shall have due regard to the 
S rules, ,practices, usages or customs of the endow_nent. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise any 
person to enter int9 or upon any part of the endowment property 
which is a place of worship or is the gar'bha-griha (sanctum .ancto-
rum) or is regarded as specially sacred unless such person professes 
10 the religion to which the endowment belongs. 
56. The Co~i~sioner and every other person exercising powers Obs~r-
of superintendence and control under this Act shall not interfere vance of . 
with, and shall, as far as may be, observe, the forms and ceremonies ar:: oPri- , 
appropriate to the religious endowment in respect of which powers :nd:= 
IS are exercised and in the case of a religious endowment which is a monies by 
math, act in conformity with the rules, practices, usages or customs Co~-
of the math in his dealings with the head of the math. aioner and, 
others in 
certain 
cases. 
20 
57. If any question or dispute arises- Determi-
( ) th I H· d ' bl' Ii' nationot· a as to whe er a temp e is a In u pu lC re glous en- question ',: 
dowment or not; .or as to ' 
(b) as to whether any matter is a matter of religion or any Wtehethe1r 
.. t' I 1" t· tamp e practice IS an essen la re IglOUS prac Ice or no ; or is a Hindu 
(c) as to any matter of basic importance in relation to the public 
administration and manaBement of any Hindu public religious religioUi 
d h· h" th .. f th C .. . es endow-en owment, W lC In e opInion 0 e ommlSSloner requlr m t ' en or adjudication or decision by the Tribunal; or not or of 
, (d) as to any rule, practice, usage or custom of any Hindu qUMt!on 
public religious endowment; as toto 
CUI m, 
such question or dispute snaIl be decided by the Tribunal: usage, etc. 
30 Provided that when urgent action is caIIed for, the Commissioner 
may decide such qu~tion or dispute and may in his discretion con-
. suit before deciding the question o.r dispute either the Council or 
where consultation with the Council is not practicable with reason-
able despatch, such persons as he thinks fit, belonging to the denomi-
3S nation, sect or samp1'adaya. to which the religious endowmen~ belongs 
and possessing in his opinion adequate qUSllifications makmg such 
persons fit for such consultation. 
58. (1) For purposes of defraying the expenses in connection with C:0ntribu-
the administration of this Act the trustee of every Hindu public re- tIona. 
40 ligious endOWJll~Qtr reptered' or deemed to be registered under this 

32 
Act, shall pay annually to the State Government in such manner and 
_________ wi~~_~ch time as may be prescribed, such contributions by way of 
fees nof exceeding three per cent of its gross annqal income as the 
State Government may determine. 
Trustee 
toeaIT)'" 
out direc-
.- tions of 
Commis_ 
sionerand 
tofumish 
returns, 
statistics 
and 
accounts. 
Appeals to 
Tribunal. 
Finality 
of orders 
and 
decisions. 
Reference 
f of cases to 
Tribunal 
by Com-
missioner. 
(2) U any amount payable as contributions under sub-section (1) 5 
is not paid within the time prescribed, it shall be recoverable as an 
arrear of land revenue. 
59. (1) The trustee of every Hindu public religious eJldowment 
shall carry out all directions which may be issued to him by the 
Commissioner under any of the provisions of this Act. 10 
.(2) The trustee of every such endowment shall, within such'-
time or such extended time as may be fixed by the Commissioner, 
furnish to the Commissioner such returns statistics accounts or I , 
other information as the Commissioner may require. 
CHAPTER V IS 
ApPEAL AND REFERENCE -_ .. _- .-... _.- ._--- " . _ ..• 
~.~" . . 
60. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act and unless the 
context otherwise requires, an appeal· shall lie tQ the Tribunal from 
every order of the Commissioner made under this Act within a -
period of sixty days from the date of the making of such order. 20 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the Tribunal shall 
be deemed to be a court within the meaning· of section 5 of· the Limi-
tation Act, 1963. 
(2) Th'e provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with res-
pect to appeals from original decrees shall, as far as may be, apply 2.5 
to and in relatibn to appeals to the Tribunal from the orders of the 
Commissioner under this section as if such orders were decrees passed 
by a court exercising original jurisdiction and the Tribunal were a 
court authorised to hear appeals from the decisions of such courts .;.,; 
under that Code. 30 
'81. The decision of the Tribunal on appeal under this Act and 
subject only to such decision, the order of the Commissioner from 
which an appeal lies to the Tribunal under this Act shall be final and 
conclusive. 
.62. (n If at. any time it appears to the Commissioner that a 35 
question of fact or of law relating to any matter dealt with in this 
Act has arisen or is likely to arise, which is of such a nature and of 
such public importance that it is necessary Qr prop~ ~g gbtain 1;be 
38oflH3. 
a of 1808. 

.,.- , 
33 
decision of the Tribunal thereon, the Commissioner may either \oJf his 
own motion or on the application of any person interested in a 
---------·-Hindu public religious endowment draw up a statement on the ques-
tion and refer such statement with his own opinion on the question 
S for the decision of the Tribunal. . 
(2) The Tribunal after hearing the Commissioner and the person 
on whose application the reference was made and any other person 
interested in any Hindu public religious endowment who may desire 
to be heard, shall decide the question, so referred setting out the 
10 grounds on which such decision is fOUlllded and a copy of the decision 
-~-'--;'-of the Tribunal shall be transmitted to the Commissioner who shall 
act, if necessary, according to such decision. 
CHAPTER VI 
MIscELLANEOUS 
15 83. (1) Every in9uiry made under this Act shall be held, as near- Procedure 
ly as may be, in accordance with the procedure applicable under the and 
5 of 1908. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to the trial of suits: POi w~rsl at nqwr eI. 
Provided that rules may be made under this Act with respect 
to the procedure for an inquiry under this Act in so far as the pro-
ao visions of the Code. of Civil Procedure, 1908, are not applicable to 
such procedure. 
(2) The Commissioner shall, for the purpose of making an in-
quiry under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
5 of 1908. court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in 
25 respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) The summoning and enforcing of the attendance of any 
witness and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 
30 (c) the reception of evidence on aftldavits; 
(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court 
or office; 
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses; . 
35 (f) .. ny other matter which may be prescribed. 

O1fences 
and 
penalties. 
Jurisdic-
tion of 
civil 
courts 
barred. 
Notice of 
certain 
suits to be 
given to 
tbeCom-
missioner. 
34 
64. (1) If any' person-
(0) fails to apply for the registration of a Hindu public 
religious endowment within the time specified in sub-section (6) 
of section 15; or 
(b) resis~ or obstructs the Commissioner or any officer in 5 
the exercise of his power under clause (0) or clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 55; or 
(c) furnishes or causes to be furnished to the Commissioner 
any return, statistics, account or other information which is false 
and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not be- 10 
lieve to be true, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees. 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
this Act except upon a complaint in writing made either by the Com- IS 
missioner or by a Deputy Commissioner or an Assistant Commis-
sioner specially authorised by the Commissioner by writing in thi~ " 
behalf. :," 
(3) No court inferior "to that of a presidency 'magistrate or.'a 
magistrate of the first class shall try an offence punishable under 20 
this Act. ' .. ' 
65. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other la~ for tbe, " 
time being in force, no civil court shall entertain any suitor proc~-""" 
ing in so far as it relates to any question or matter'which the 'Com-
missioner ~r the Tribunal is i!mpoweted by this Act to' de~ wi~ and loS 
aecide: 
68. (1)" In every suii or proceeding (except in II sujt' instituted 
by a trustee for the recovery of the arrears of rents and proceedings, 
in execution of the decree passed in such suit) in respect of any Hindu 
public religious endowment or property pertaining thereto or' in 30 
respect of any specific endowment, whether instituted by a trustee.Ar 
by any other person, the court shall send to the Commissione:: by 
post a notice of the institution thereof. 
(2) The Commissioner may apply to the court in which any such 
suit or proceeding is pending, to be added as a party to the suit or 3S 
proceeding and shall thereupon be added as a party thereto. 
(3) If the notice referred to in sub-section (1) -is not sent to 
the Commissioner, the decree or order" passed or made in the suit 
or proceeding whether by the court of the first instance or 'by an 
appellate couri ,hall not be binding on the, COmmissioner, and shall,4O 

'II 
45 of 1880. 
if the Commissioner makes an application to the appropriate court 
in this behalf, be set aside and the suit or the proceeding shall be tried 
-by the court of the first instance after adding the Commissioner as 
a party thereto. . 
S Explanation.-In this sub-section "appropriate court" means,-
(a) in the case of an original decree or order, the court of 
the first instance; 
. (b) where the ~riginal decree or order has merged in the 
appellate decree or order, the appellate court. 
10 67. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against Protection 
the Central Government or any State Government or the Com- ot acttctn 
missioner or the Tribunal or any member of the Council or any officer tak~n in 
or authority under this Act for anything which is in good faith done ::th. 
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order 
IS made thereunder. 
68. Any order made under this Act which is capable of execution Execution 
as a degree or order of a civil court shall, on an application made in ot ordera 
this behalf by the Commissioner ar any person j,n w-hose favour such of the . 
order is made, be enforced by a civil court within the local limits 01 ciomnus-
h .. di' th d . f' a oner. 20 w ose JuriS ctlon e en owment property or any portion thereo 18 
situate in the same manner as if such order _were a decree passed 
by such court. 
69. The Commissioner and every Deputy and Assistant Com- Commit-
missioner shall be deemed to be pUblic servants within the meaning aioner, 
25 of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. etc., to be 
public 
aervlUlts. 
70. Unless the State Government otherwise directs by notifica- Applica-
tion in the Official Gazette, nothing in this Act shall apply to any tion of 
Hindu public religious endowment or any class of such endowments, = to 
to which any special enactment applies. menO:-
governed 
by special 
enact-
ments. 
30 71. (1) The State Government may, .by notification in the Official Power to 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. make 
3S 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing provision, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the manner of nomination of members of the Council; 
rules. 

38 
(b) the form and manner of making application for the re-
gistration of a Hindu public religious endowment and the parti-
culars it ma~ contain and the manner of inquiry for the purpos~ __ 
or registration of a religious endowment; 
(c) the manner of issue of notice-
(i) under sub-section (4) of section 26; 
(ii) for the settlement of a scheme; 
(iii) to interested persons before IDling 
in the office of trustee; 
S 
any vacancy 
(it» in any other case where notice is required to be 10 
Issued; 
(d) the manner of inquiry-
(i) into any case under section 26; 
(ii) for the the settlement of a scheme; 
(iii) where an endowment is mismanaged; 
(i'V) into any other matter under this Act; 
(e) the service of notices and orders under this Act; 
<I) the procedure to be followed by the Commissioner in 
holding an inquiry under this Act; 
IS 
(g) the form of the-register of Hindu public religious 20 
endowments maintained under section 14 and the particulars 
it may contain and the form of report notifying any change 
in the entry in the register; 
(h) the levy and collection of fees in respect of any ap-
plication under this Act for the registration of a Hindu public 25 
religious endowment and supply of copies of, or extracts from, 
the register maintained under section 14; 
(i) the form in which and the time within which the bud-
get in respect of a Hindu public religious endowment may be 
prepared and the manner of giving notice to the trustee before 30 
making any alteration Q¥. modification in the budget; 
(j) the form and manner in which accounts of Hindu 
public religious endowments may be maintainEd and the parti-
culars which such accounts may contain; 
(k) the time at which and the manner in which the ac- 3S 
counts may be audited; 
(l) the form and manner in which any report, return, 
statistics or other information may be furnished to the Com-
missioner by any trustee under this Act; 

... 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
(m) the manner in which and the time -within Which cOn: 
tributions are to be paid by the trustee of. a Hindu public reli-
gious endowment; 
(n) the conditions of service of priests and the code of 
conauct to be followed by them; 
(0) the syllabus for the training of priests; 
(P) the training, and the selection for such training, of 
sadhus and B4nyasis, the manner of, and syllabus for, such train-
ing; 
(q) the scales of fees and charges which the worshippers, 
devoteE'S, pilgrims or other visitors at a Hindu public religious 
endowment shall pay to the priests for services rendered by 
them to such worshippers, devotees, pilgrims or other visitors 
and the manner of publication of the specified scales of fees 
and charges; 
(r) the form oI printed receipts which are to be granted by 
the priests for payments made to them by worshippers, devo-
tees, pilgr~ or other visitors and the form. in which accounts 
of pranamis or pada!canikas are to be kept; 
(8) the conditions and .,restrictions .subject to which the 
accumulated surplus of a Hindu public religious endowment 
may be appropriated ·by a trustee, the manner of publication 
of the proposal for the utilisation of such surplus and the man-
ner of publication of the sanction of the Commissioner; 
(t) the manner of administration of the Hindu Public 
Religious Endowments Common Good Fund; 
(u) any other matter which is to be or may ,be prescribe. 
or provided for by rules or with r~·pect to which it is neces-
sary in the opinion of the State Government to' make rules. 
30 72. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of Power to 
this Act, the Central Government may, .by orde~ as occasion re- re~ 
quires, do anything which appears to it to be necessary for the difticultiel 
purpose of removing the difficulty. 
73. (1) On the commencement of any provisions of this Act in Cesser of 
35 any State, any law applicable immediately before such commence- appllca-
ment to Hindu public rE·ligious endowments in that State and cor- tion of 
responding to those prOvisions shall cease to apply to such endow- ;:~~ 
menta. law. and 
laviDp. 
788 (I) :r..s .. . I 
~ ... I .• 

3fs 
(2) ~otwithstanding· the cesser of application 6f aily such law, 
anything done or any action taken (including any appointment 
made, any direction given, any - register maintained, . any . scheme 
framed, any rule or older made or any restriction or limitation 
imposed) under such law in relation to Hindu public religious S 
endowments shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsi-
stent with the provisions of this Acl,be deemed to have been done 
or taken under the provisions of this Act as if such provisions were 
in force when such thing was done or such action was taken and 
shall continue in force accordingly until superseded by anything 10 
done or any action taken und~r this Ac:t. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The HiBdu Religious Endowments Commission was appointed on 
1st March, 1960, under section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act. 
1952, for the purpose of making an inquiry into certain matters con-
nected with Hindu public reUgious endowments. The Commission 
submitted its report, containing inter alia 114 recommendations to 
the Government of India on 31st May. 1962. Some of the recom-
mendations relate to general policy and some are of an administra-
tive nature and there are also 'N~f!w recommendations relating ·.to 
particular temples and maths. The Commission has emphasized the 
imperative necessity for undertaking suitable legislation, particu-
larly in States having no legislation governing Hindu religious en-
dowments, namely, Assam, Punjab, West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh. 
The Report was laid on the Table of each House of Parliament on 
10th August, 1962. 
2. As the subject of religious endowments faUs in the concurrent 
field of legislatipn (entry 28, List m of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution), the Report was circulated to the State Governments 
and to the Administrators of Union territories for their views. After 
I!onsidering the comments received t'fom the State Governments and 
the Administrations of Union territories and the comments sent by 
various institutions and individuals with reference to the Report of 
the Commission, Government have decided. to give effect practically 
to all the principal recommendations of the Commission In so far as 
they are capable of implementation by legislation. The Bill is in-
tended to give etfect to this decision and will extend to the whole of 
India except Jammu and Kashmir and apply to all Hindu public 
religious endowments (that is, to all maths and public temples) in-
cluding Buddhist religiOUS endowments. 
3. The notes on clauses explain the salient features of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th July, 1965. 
_ ....... ~Iit"":· 
A. K. SEN. 
39 

Notes on clauses 
C'Z4use I.-The Bill when enacted will extend to the whole of 
India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir because entry 28 of 
the Concurrent List,-"Cbarities and charitable institutions, chari-
table and religious endowments and religious institutions"-has not 
ueen extended to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
Power to' bring the Act into force has been given to the State 
Governments except B;ftSpect of clauses 8 to 13 which provide for 
the ·Central Council and Central Tribunal. Power in respect of these 
latter clauses has been given to the Central Government. 
Clause 2.-Special attention is drawn to the definitions of "math", 
"person interested", "priest", "public temple", "religious endow-
ment" and "trustee". 
Clauses 3 and 70.-Clause 3 provides that th~ Act will apply to 
all Hindu public religious endowments, that is to say, to all maths 
(vide recommendation No. (6) on page 174 of the Report) and all 
public temples [tnde the second paragraph of recommendation No. 
(4)-on page 1731. Hindu~ublic religious endowments'will include 
BUddhist religious endowments also. Jain religious institutions have, 
however, been excluded from the purview of the Bill. The reasons 
for such exclusion are several and have been noted in the Report 
of the Hindu Religious Endowments Commission itself. In the first 
place, Jain religious institutions are managed by elected bodies and 
are, ·by and large, very well run; "cases of mismanagement are very 
few. If and when such cases arise, the acharyas, and sadhus and 
sangh deal with them and set matters right. Public opinion and 
public pressure are such that the defaulter ordinarily makes good 
the loss unless his condition is such as to make it impossible for him 
to do so," (vide para. 14 of Chapter IX of the Report). In the second 
plac~, Jains do not have 1My mohant in charge of religious institu-
tions in order to do anything corresponding to the shebaits of Hindu 
temples' and as a matter of fact their acharyas do not own any 
property or accept any offerings (vide para. 6, ibid.). In the third 
place, hereditary tru·steeship is not prevalent among the Jains. 
Trustees keep the accounts relating to the endowment and submit 
them to the Sangh every year (vide para. 14, ibid.>. In the next 
place, the standard of cleanliness maintained in Jain temnles is very 
40 

41 
high. The Jain community takes a great deal of enlightened In-
terest in the maintenance of their shrines and in the maintenance of 
- a proper and serene religious atmosphere surrounding them. The 
stupendous activity in the direction of repair, expansion and reno-
vation work connected with these temples some of which are of 
great architectural beauty.... is such thai it is worthy of healthY 
emulation by Hindu temples and organizations (vide para. 35, ibid.). 
All these salutary features noted by the Commission in connection 
with the management of Jain temples may suffer adversely, because 
of possi.ble interference by the various statutory authorities proposed 
to be set up in the Bill. Accordingly Jain religious institutions have 
--been excluded from the purview.. of the Bill .. 
Under clause 70 unless the State Government otherwise directs, • the provisions of the Act will not apply to any Hindu public religious 
endowment if in respect thereof there is any special enactment in 
force such as the Badrinath and Kedarnath Temples, the Puri 
Temple, the Tirupati Temple, the Bodh Gaya Temple, etc. 
Clause 4.-Tbe various authorities for the effective administra-
tion of Hindu public religious endowments have been mentioned in 
this clause. The principal authorities will be the Commissioner, the 
Central Religious Endowments Council and the ReUgious Endow-
ments Tribunal . 
Clauses 5 to 7.-These clauses deal with appointment, condttions 
of service, powers and functions of the Commissioner and his de-
puties and assistants [vide paragraph 17 on pages 124-125 and recom-
mendations Nos. (58) and (59) on page 183 of the Report]. 
CZauses 8 and 9.-Clause 8 provides for the constitution by the 
Central Government of a Central Religious Endowments Council 
representing various interests (including sadhus and sanyasis) and 
the State Governments [vide the last portion of the first paragraph 
on page 126 and recommendation No. (62) on page 183 of the Report]. 
Under clause 9, the Council shall perform such functions as may 
b~onferred on it by the Act and the rules made thereund,!r. It 
has been provided throughout the Bill that the Commissioner and, 
the State Government shall in respect of several important matters 
consult the Council before taking action. 
Clauses 10 and 13.-Clause 10 provides for the constitution of a 
Religious Endowments Tribunal on an all-India 'basis and clause 13 
provides for the col'.stitution and procedure of the Tribunal [t.i(ie 
paragraphs 20 and ~1 on pages 127-28 and recommendations NOB. 
o (64) to (69) on pages 184-85 of the Report]. The Chairman of the 
Tribunal shall be a person who has been, or is, or is qualified to be, 

-, - 42 
appointed as a High Court Judge. The other members shan be 
persons who have either held senior administrative offices under the 
_Government. and have adequate administrative and financial exper-
ience for not less than ten years under the Government, or who are 
specially conversant with Hindu scriptures and religion and reli-
gious practices and with the working of Hindu religious endow-
ments. 
Clauses 11, 26, 57, 60, 61, 62, etc.-These clauses deal with the 
various important functions of the Tribunal [vide paragraph 20 on 
page 127 and recommendations Nos. (64) and (70) on pages 184-85 
of the,R~I1]. The Tribunal will have original as well as appellate 
jurisdiction. An appeal will lie to the Tribunal from the decistons 
of the Commissioner and the Tribunal will have exclusive original 
jurisdiction in regard to certain matters, e.g., (i) succession and 
appointment to hereditary offices, such as hereditary trustees, heads 
of maths, etc., (ii) determination of what are matters of religion or 
essential religious practices and what are ancillary and unessential 
accretion'S, and (iii) such other matters of basic importance in 
relation to the administration and management of temples, maths , 
etc., which in the opinion of the Commissioner, require adjudication 
or decision by the Tribunal. 
Clause 12.-This clause deals with appointment of assessors to 
aid the Tribunal in the discharge of its functions [vide recommenda-
tionNo. (66) on page 184 of the Report]. 
Clauses 14 to 21.-These clauses deal with registration of all 
Hindu public religious endowments with the Commissioner. 
Clauses 22, 24 a.nd 25.-These clauses deal with appointment and 
succession to the office of trustee, disqualifications for trusteeship. 
removal of trustees, etc. [vide paragraph 24 at page 101 and recom-
mendations Nos. (38) to (41) at pages 180-81 and recommendation 
No. (57) at page 183 of the Report]. Appointment and succession 
to oftice..Af trustee will be regulated by rules" practices, usages o~ 
customs of the religious endowment concerned with respect to such 
appointment or succession. 
Clause 23.-This clause provides that the Hindu Succession Act. 
1956, shall not apply to succession to the ,office of trustee [mde 
paragraph 25 on page 101 and recommendation No. (42) on page 181 
of the Report]. 
Clause 27.-This clause empowers the Commissioner to suspP.nd a 
trustee in cases of urgency and to report the action taken to the 

43 
fribunal [vide recommendation No. (63) on pages 183-84 Qf the 
Report]. 
Cla.uses 28 and 29.-These clauses do not call for any comment 
[vide recommendations Nos. (27) and (29) on pages 177-78 of the 
Report]. The administration and management of every Hindu public 
religious endowment will vest in the trustee thereot 
Clause 30.-This clause provides for the preparation and main-
tenance by the trustee of a register in the prescribed form in relation 
to the religious endowment. 
Clause 31.-This clause relates to the power of the COmmissioner 
in cases of IIJ-isinanagement and is consequent upon the general 
powers of supervision and control to be exercised by the Commis-
sioner over Hindu public religious endowments. 
Clauses 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36.-These clauses relate to the prepara-
tion of budgets by trustees of public religiOUS endowments and the 
provisions to be made therein for carrying out obligatory objects 
and discretionary objects [vide recommendations Nos. (28), (30), 
(31), (34) and (35) at pages 178-80 and recommendation No. (71A) 
at page 185 of the Report]. 
Clause 37.-This clause empowers the ~ommissioner to fram~' a 
scheme for proper administration of any Hindu public religious 
endowment and ~ollows from the general powers of the Commis-
sioner as recommended by the Commission. 
Clause 3B.-This clause provides for the applica:tion of the pro-
perty cy pres [vide recommendations Nos. (36) and (37) on page 
180 of the Report] on the lines of sections 13 and 14 of the U.K. 
Charities Act, 1960. 
C14use 39.-This relates to investment of endowment money in 
what may be called gilt-edged securities and follows out. of the re-
commendations r~lating to the proper and"::l!fBcient management of 
endowment properties. 
Clause 4O.-This clause provides for the alienation (by way of 
sale, mortgage, exchange or gift, or by way of lease for over three 
years) of immovable property belonging to an endowment only with 
the previOUS sanction of the Commissioner and follows more or less 
recommendation No. (52) and recommendation No. (56) made on 
pag~s 182-83 of the Report. 
Clauses 41, 42, .., and 44.-These clauses prohibit arcJum4 and 
pu;a. in maths and public temples by unquaWied priesta after the 

I.· 
'44 
e!xpfry Qf two y~rs from the commencement of the Act, provide fot 
_._~he .. qualifications to be possessed by priests, the setting up of schools 
for the training of priests and the syUabus for elementary and ad--
vallced training in such schools and the contributions to be made 
by the various Hindu public religious endowments towards the ex-
. penses of the schools and other institutions [vide recOtnmendatiolls 
Nos. (8), (9), (10) on pages 114-175 and Nos. (31) and (32) on page 
178 of the Report]. 
Clauses 45 and 52.-These clauses provide that trustees and priests 
should have no proprietary rights over any gifts or offerings, 
pranamis or padakanikas made ~shippers, devotees, etc., unl~ss 
they have been specifically designated as personal to the' trustee or 
priest [vide recommendations Nos. (4), (7) and (11) on pages 173, 
174 and 175 and recommendation No. (26) on page 177 of the Report]. 
Clause 46.-Tbis clause provides for the preparation of codes of 
conduct for the ~ests by the Commissioner after consultation with 
the Council [vid~ recommendation No. (14) on page 176 and the 
latter part of recommendation No. (22) on page 177 of the Report]. 
Clause 47 and clause 50 (3) to (5) .-These proviSions seek to 
regulate all fees paid by worshippers, devotees and other visitors 
[vide recommendations Nos. (15) aIW (23) on pages 176 and 177 of 
the Report]. 
CkLuse 48.-This clause deals with the emolUII1ents and ether 
conditions of service of archakas and pujaris [vide recommendations 
Nos. (12) and (13) on pages 175-76 of the Report]. 
Clauses 49 and 50.-These clauses deal with special provisions re-
lating to pandas~ their liceming and the prescription of the sCRle of 
maximum and minimum charges for the services rendered by them, 
etc. [yide recommendations Nos. (20), (21), (22) and (25) on page 
177 of the Report]. 
Clause 51':-This clause provid~or the creation of a Common 
Good Fund [vide recommendation No. (33) on pages 178-79 of the 
Report] out of contributions voluntarily made by Hindu public re-
ligious endowments from their surplus funds or by any person, for 
the renovation and preservation of such endowments, etc. 
Clauses 53, 54 and 55.-These clauses are based on recommenda-
tions No. (28) on page 178 and (71A) on page 185 of the Report alld 
relate to maintenance of accounts by t~ees and their audit, and 
.power of the Commissioner to inspect any endowment property and 
to call for returns, etc., from trustees. 

4' 
~-'---s::'~, ~.-~s cl.a~ is ~ in view of the provision'S of 
the Constitution contairied in article 28. 
Cl4U6e 57.-Tbia clause to which reference has already been made 
in connection wttl\ the functions of the Tribunal is based upon recom-
mendations No. (61) on page 183 and (64) ('b) and (c) on page 184 
of the Report.. ' 
Clauae 58.-This clause deals with the contributions to be made 
by the varjQ~ Hindu p11plic religious eDdo~ts for the pprpose 
of defraying the expenses in connection with the administration of 
the ~ct. ' 
9~UB~ ~-This clause ~ ~ciUary to th~ general powers of the 
Commissioner. , . 
C~usel ~O, ~1 ~nd 62.-'fh~ cla~ ~e~ ~~ ~ppea1s to the 
Tri~unal and r!!f~nc~ to it ~y ~e Co~one~. . 
Clauses 63 to 70.-Tbese clauses provide for miscellaneous matters 
which are incidental ~r ~cillary to ~e foregoing provisions. 
Clause 7l ..... This clause gives pow.er to the State Government to 
make ruies to carry out the purposes of the Act. . 
Clause 73.-This clause provides that on the commencement of 
the Act in any State, any law applicable to any Hindu public reli-
gious endowment shall cease to apply to such endowment; actiQD8 
taken or things done before such commencement under the old law 
are, however, saved. 
'188 (B) LS-'1. 

MEMORANDU,M REGARDING DELEGATED LEGiSLATION 
Clause 71 of the Bill empowers the State Government to make 
rules to carry O\lt the purposes of the Act. The matters in respect 
of which such rules may be made have been specified therein. They 
relate inter alia to the form and manner of making application3 for 
registration of Hindu public religious endowments, the levy and 
collection offel! in respect of such registration, the form of the 
register, the manner of making .certain inquiries, the servicta of 
notices and orders, the form of the budget of a Hin.du public' reli-
gious endowment, the form and manner in which the accounts of 
such endowment may be maintained and the audit of sucb accounts, 
the form and manner in which- reports, returns, etc., have to be fur .. 
nished, the conditions of service of priests and their training, the 
scales of fees and charges payable to the priests for services renctered 
by them to worsl;1ippers, pilgrimS, etc., the conditions and restrictions 
subject to which the accumulated surplus of the religious endow-
ment may be utilized .by ~ trustee and the administration of the 
Hindu Public Religio~ Endowments Common Good Fund. All 
these matters are matters of detail or of administrative character. 
2. efhe delegation of legiSlative power is thus of a normal charac-
ter. 
46 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the better supervision and more effective 
administration of Hindu public religious endowments and 
for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister of LarD and 
Social Security.) 