WK 
SABRA 
~ 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE 
ADDITIONAL 
])IOLUYlBNTS 
(COMPULSORY 
DEPOSIT) 
AMENDMENT 
BILL, 
1977 
(To 
be/As 
introduced 
in 
Lok 
Sabha) 
1. 
Page 
2, 
line 
8,-
tor 
"concrne 
d" 
~ 
"concerned" 
2. 
Page 
3, 
line 
15,-
:for 
"occrued" 
~ 
"accrued" 
NEW 
DELHI-
, 
June 
6 ,"-1977 
Jyaistha 
:6, 
1899 
(Saka) 

S70f 1974. 
As INTRODUCED IN THE LoK SABHA ON 
.1 i 
Bill No. 47 .. f Itn 
nIE ADDITIONAL EMOLUMENTS -(COMPULSORY 
DEPOSIT) AMENDMENT BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) 
Act, 1974. 
BE it enacted by Parljament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Additional Emoluments (Com- Short 
pulsory Deposit) Amendment Act, 1977. title and 
commence-
ment. 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of May, 
1977. 
2. In clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Additional 
Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), for the words "three years", the words "two years and 
10 ten months" shall be substituted. 
3. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(0) in ~ub-section (1), for the words, brackets and figure "pro-
visions of sub-section (2)", the words "other provisions of this sec-
tion" shall be substituted; 
Amend-
mentof 
IleCtion 6. 
Amend-
ment of 
.ectlon 9. 

Repeal 
and 
savin,. 
2 
(b) to sUh-section (3), the following provisos shall be added, 
namely:-
"Provided that repayment of the second annual instalment 
due on the 6th day of July, 1977, to the employees who subscribe 
to any provident fund shall not be made in cash but the amount .' 
payable towards the said instalment together with intc.-est pay-
able under this sub-section shall be' credited to the provident 
fund acconnt of the concrned empl~yee: 
Provided further that the emp!oyer shall not be required to 
make any contribution under the Employees' Provjdent Funds 10 
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, or under any other law I Q (If 1952. 
for the time being in force, in relation to the amounts so credited 
to the provident fund account of the concerned employee."; 
(c) in the fjrst proviso to sub-section (4), aiter the words 
"Employees' Provident Funds", the words "and Miscellaneous Pro- 15 
visions" shan be inserted. 
4. (1) The Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Amend-
ment Ordinance, 1977 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 20 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by 
this Act. 
7 of 1977. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974, read 
with the Additional Emoluments (CoJllQu:sory Deposit) Amendment Act, 
1976, provided for the compUlsory deposit of one-half of the additional 
dearness allowance for a period of three years from 6th July, 1974. 
2. With a view to ensuring that one-half, of the additional dearness 
allowance is not impounded any longer. the Additional Emoluments 
(Compulsory Deposit) Amendment Ordinance, 1977, was promulgated by 
the Vice-President acting as President on the 9th May, 1977. The Ordi-
nance provides for the discontinuance of the compulsory deposit of one· 
half {Jf the additional dearness allowance with effect from the 6th May, 
19'77. As any large addition to the stream of £{lending in the prescnt 
delicate state of economy may accentuate inflationary pressures, the Ordi. 
nance furthE'r provides that repayment of the second instalment. of "he 
impounded additional dearness allowance together with accrued 
interest, due on 6th July, 1977, shall be made by crediting 
the amount due to the provident fund account of the employee 
if he has any such account. The Ordinance also makes it clear 
that in respect of such credit to the provident fund account, there will be 
no matching contribution from the employer under the Employees' Provi-
dent Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952. Where, howevt!r, an 
employee does not subscribe to any I;)rovident fund, the repayment of the 
said instalment will be made in cash. 
3. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW DI:LBI; H. M. PATEL. 
The 24th MAY, 1977. . . 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Cla1.lle 2 of the Blll provides that compulsory deposit of one-hRlf of 
the additional dearness allowance under the Act will now be only for a 
period of two years and ten months from the appointed day. instead of 
three years. This reduction in the period of compulsory deposit will cor-
respondingly reduce the quantum of total compulsory deposits, by approxi-
mately Rs. 84 crores. Since deposits under the Act carry a rate of interest 
which is 21 per cent. over and above the maximum bank deposit rate, the 
total interest liability 0" Government will consequently be reduced by 
Rs. 31 crores, approximately. 
2. Sub-clause (b) of clause 3 of the Bill provides that repayments, 
along with accrued interest, due on 6th July, 1977, of the second annual 
instalment of the additional dearness allowance deposits, will be cr~dited 
to the provident fund account of the employee, if he lias any such account_ 
It is estimated that the total repayments due as above wlll be &r.lproxi-
mately Rs. 326 crores (Rs. 220 crores toward. principal and Rs. 106-crores 
towards accrued interest). A major portion of this amount will be credi-
ted to the provident fund accounts of the employees, though some amounts 
will also be paid lneash to employees who do not subscribe to sny pro-
vident fund. 
3. The Biij" if eaacted, will not involve any other recurring or non-
recurring expenditure. 

"" .I 
ANNEXTmE 
EXTRACTS FROM THI!: ADDlTlDNAL EMOLUMENTs (COMPULSORY DIPoSIT) 
Ar:r, 1974 
(37 OF 197«) 
• • • • • • • 
t. (1) For the pu~ses of this Act, the deductions specified in sub-
section (2) shall be made,-
• 
• 
• • • • • • 
(b) in the case of additional dearness allowance, for a period of 
three years from the appointed day. 
• • • • • • 
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) , every amount 
credited to the Deposit Accounts shall be repayable with interest due 
thereon,-
• • • • • • • 
(3) The" aggregate amount credited" to the Additional Dearness Allow-
ance Deposit Account by or in relation to an employee for the period 
ending on the 30th day of June, 1976, shall, subject to the provisions of 
sub-section (5), be r~aid, in cash, to the employee in five equal annual 
instalments commencing from the expiry of a period of two years from 
the appointed day, together with interest due on the whole or, as the 
case may be, part of the amount of compulsory deposit which remains 
unpaid. 
(4) The aggregate amount credited to the Additional Dearness 
Allowance Deposit Account by or in relation to an employee for the period 
commencing on the 1st day of July, 1976, and ending on the 5th day of 
July, 1977, together with interest due on the whole, or, as the case may be, 
,art of the amount compulsory deposit which remains unpaid, shall, sub-
ject to the provisions of sub-section (5), be repaid to the employee in five 
equal annual instalments commencing on the 6th day of July, 1978, and 
each such instalment shall be credited to the pr~ldent fund account of 
the employee: 
Provided that the employer shall not be required to make any contri-
butiorL under the Employees' Provident Funds Act, 1952, or under any 
other law for the time being in force, in relation to the amounts so credi-
ted to the provident fund account of the employee: 
'" • • • • • '" 
Duty of 
employer 
Or other 
person 
to make 
deduc-
tiona of 
additional 
wacea 
and 
additional 
dearaeas 
allowance 
from 
'emolu-
ments. 
Repay-
ment of 
deposits. 

LOK SABRA 
. . ~. 
, . ~ \. 
A 
BILL 
Further to amend the Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 
1974 
(Shri H. M. Patel, Minuter of Finance and Revenue and Banking) 