.!!!!.. N.,:.!' ... ' ... 7_of ..... l.t8Za 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL. 1982 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial lNpute. Act, 1947. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of Ipdia as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) 
Act, 1982. . 
Short 
uu. 
aM 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date 811 the Central Govarmnent 
may, by notification in the omcial Gazette, appoint. 
oom-
mence-
met. 
10 
11011976. 
.of 19f8. 
11 at 19f8. 
M of 1&68. 
MoflMl. 80 
Z. In section 2 of the Industrial Dill'pdes .Act, lSM7 (hereiDafter !:,e:!i 
referred to as the principal Act) ,- HCtIoIa Z. 
(a) in clause (/1), in sub-clause (i), for the portion begbmiDg 
with the words "the Industrial FinaDce Corporation of India" and 
ending with the words and figures "the Regional Rural Banks Act, 
1976", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
'a Dock Labour Board established under section SA of the 
Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948, or the 
Industrial Finance Corporation of India establi.hed UDder section 
3 of the Inciuatrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948, or the Em-
ployees' State Inaurance Corporation established under section 
3 of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, or the Board ot 
Trustees constituted under aection 3A of the Coal Mines Provident 
l"'tmd and Misee1laneou8 ProviIlcad Aet, IN, or the Central 
Board of TruIteee ud the State .uU of "l'n1IteeI CODIUtute4 

.... -. "'.r ~ ,.. " , 2 
under section 5A and section 5B, respectively, of the Employees' 
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, or the 19 ot 1952. 
"Indian Airlines" and "Air India" Corporations established under 
section 3 of the Air Corporations Act, 1953, or the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India established under section 3 of the Life In- 5 
surance Corporation Act, 1956, or the Oil and Natural Gas 
Commission established under section 3 of the Oil and Natural 
27 of 19G5. 
31 ot 1958. 
Gas Commission Act, 1959, or the Deposit, Insurance and Credit 43 of 1959. 
Guarantee Corporation established under section 3 of the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act. 1961, or the 10·.47 ot 1961. 
Central WarehouSing CorpOration establishled under section! 3 
of the Warehousin~ Corporations Act, 1962, or the Agricultural 
Refinance and Development Corporation established under 
58 of 1962. 
section 3 of thp. Agricultural Refinance 'and Development Cor- lOot 1963. 
poration Act. 1963, or the Unit Trust of India established under 15 
section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act. 1963, or the Food Corpo- 52 of 1983. 
ration of India established under section 3, or a Board ~ Manage-
ment established for two or more contiguous States under 
section 16. of the Food Coroorations Act, 1964, Or the International _ 37 of 1964-
Airports Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the 20 
Intemational Airports AuthOrity of India Act, 1971, or a Regional Q of 1971. 
Rural ,Bank established under section 3 of the Regional R1ll'81 
Banks Act, 1976, or the Export C~t and Guarantee Corpora- 21 of 19'78. 
tion IJmited or the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of Sl5 
India Limited'; 
(b) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, 
e1 . • .,.,.,... nam y:- , 
'(ee) "closure" means the pennanent closing down of a 
place of employment or part thereof;'; 
(c) for clause (j). the following clause shall be substituted, So 
namely: - . ~..., , 
'(j) "industryt' means any systematic activity carried on by 
co-operation between an employer and hiR workmen (whether 
such workmen are employed by such employer directly or by or 
through any agency, includin~ a contractor) for the production, 35 
supply or distriQution of goods or services with a view to satisfy 
human wants Or wishes (not being wants or wishes which are 
merely spiritual or religious in nature), whether or not,-
(i) any capital has been invested for the purpose of 
carrying on such activity; or 40 
(ii) such activity is carried on with a motive to make 
any gain or profit, 
and includes-
(a) any activity of the Dock Labour Board estabUshed 
under section 5A of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Em- 45 
ployment) Act, 1948; 90t IH1. .. 
(b) any activity,being. a profession practised by any 
Indtvidual or body of" tndlvi8uals; 

5 
10 
15 
20 
. (c) any activity ,relating to tl..e promotion of sal. or 
business or both carried on. by an establishment, 
but does not include-
(1) any agricultural operation except wherf' such agri-
cultural operation is carried on in an integraLi!d manner 
with any other activity (being any such activity as is refer-
red to in the foregoing provisions of this clause) and such 
other activity is the predominant onej or 
(2) hospitals Or dispensaries; or 
(3) educational, scientific, research Ol' training institu-
tions; or 
(4) institutions owned or managed by organisations 
wholly or substantially eng~ged in any charitable, lOCial or 
philanthropic service; or 
(5) khadi or village industries; or 
(6) any activity of the Government relatable to the 
sovereign functions of the Government including all the 
activities carried on by the departments of the Central 
Government dealing with defence research, atomic energy 
and space; 
(7) any activity which is carried on by a co-operative 
society, being a co-operative society in which not less than 
ten pensons are employedj'; 
(d) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, 
25 namely:-
So 
35 
45 
'(ka) "industrial establishment or undertaking" means an 
establishment or undertaking in which any industry is carried 
, , 
on: 
Provided that where several activities are carried on i'n an 
establishment or undertaking and only one or some of such 
activities is or are an industry or industries, then,-
(a) if any unit of such establishment or . undertaking 
. carrying on any activity, being an industry, is severable 
from the other unit or units of such establishment or 
undertaking, such unit shall be deemed to be a separate 
industrial establishment or undertakingj 
(b) if the predOminant activity or each of the predomi-
nant activities carried on in such establishment or under· 
taking or any unit thereof is an industry and the other 
. activity or each of the otheractivitiee carried on in such 
establishment or undertaking or unit thereof is not severable 
from, alld is, for the purpose of carrying on, or aiding the 
carrying on of, such predOminant activity or activities, the 
entire eetablishment or undertaking or, as the case may be, 
unit thereof shall be deemed to be an industrial establt.h· 
ment or undertakingj', 

(e) clause (kka) shall be reletteredu clauee (Jekb) and before 
the c1auJe as 80 relettered, the fellowing elause.mill be inserted, 
namely:-
• (kka) "khadi" bu. the meaning assigned to it in clause (d) 
of section 2 of the Khadi BDd Villap Industries Commission Act, 5 
1958;'; 81 0111H. 
(f) in clause (kkk),· fer the words "or for any other reason", 
the words "or natural calamity or for any other conneeted reason" 
shall be substituted; 
(g) in clause (1), for the words "closing of a place of employ- 10 
ment", the words "temporary closing of a place of employment" shall 
be substituted; . 
(h) after clause (q), the followin&.. clause shall be inserted, 
DlUDely:-
, (qq) "trade union" meaDS a trade union registered under J 5 
the Trade Unions Act, 1926;'; 16 of 1926. 
(i) after clause (r), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
oamely:-
'(Ta) "unfair labour practice" means any of the practices 
speci1l.ed in the Fifth Schedule; !20 
(rb) "village industries" has the meaning assigned to it in 
clause (h) of section 2 of the Khadi and Village Industries Com-
mission Act, 1956;'; 
(j) in clause (rr) I after sub-clause (iii), \he following sub-
clause shall be inserted, namely:- !25 
.. (iv) my eommJpion payable on the promotion ot sales or 
business or both;"; 
(c) for clawe (.).. the following clause shall be substituted, 
aamely:-
'(,) "workman" means any person (including an apprentice) 30 
employed in any industry to do any manual, 1)n skWed, akiUed, 
techDical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or 
reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, 
and for the purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation 
to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been 35 
dJsmissed, di1Icharged or retrenched in conneetion with, or as a 
consequence of, that dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or 
retreDclunent has led to that dispute, but does not include any 
such person-
81 of 1_ 
(f) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950, or the 40 45011810. 
Army Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 195'1; or 48 of 1_. 
8201185'. 
(ii) who is employed in the police lerVice or as an oftlcer 
or other employee of a prison; or 
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or ad-
ministrative capacity; or 45 
(i\) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, 
draws wages exceedin~ one $ho1uanc:l1ix hundred rupe_ per 
mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the dutl .. 

5 
10 
attached to the office Or by reason of the powers vested Ia 
him, functioD8 mainly of a managerial nature.'. 
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), clause (c) shall Amend-
ment of 
be omitted section 7. 
~. In section 7 A of the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (1), after the words "the Third Schedule", the 
words "and for performing such other functions as may be assigned to 
them under this Act" shall be inserted; 
(b) in !'Iub-~ection (3) ,-
(i) in clause (00), the word "or" at the end shall be omitted; 
(ii) clause (b) shall be omitted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
7A. 
5. In section 7B of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the portion 
beginning with the word "unless" and ending' with the words "not less 
than two years", the words "unless he is, or has been, a Judge of a High 
15 Court" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 'lB. 
Amend-
mentof 
aection9A. 
20 
30 
35 
G. In the proviso to section 9A of the princ:pal Act, clause (4) shall 
be omitted. 
7. After section 9B of the principal Act, the followin& Chapter shall Insertion 
be inserted, namely:- '. of new 
"CHAPTER OB 
REFERENCE OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUAL DISPt7TlI:S TO GIUEVANCB SB'1"1'LD4ENT 
. AtmIOR1'1'II'B 
9C. (1) The employer in relation to every industrial establish-
ment in which one hundred or more workmen are employed or have 
been employed on any day in the preceding twelve months, shall 
set up, in accordance with the rules made in that behalf under this 
Act, a Grievance Settlement Authority 'for the settlement of indus-
trial disputes connected with an individual workman employed in 
the establishment. 
(2) Where an industrial dispute connected with an individual 
workman arises in an establishment referred to in sub~tion (1), 
• workman or any trade union of workmen of which such workman 
is a member, refer, in such manner as may be prelCribed such dispute 
to the Grievanoe Settlement Authority set up by the employer under 
that sub-section for settlement, 
(3) The Grievance Settlement Authority referred to in sub-
section (1) shall follow such procedure and complete its proceedings 
within such period as may be prescribed. 
(4) No reference shall be made under Chapter OI with respect 
to any dispute ref~rred to 1n this section unless sucn dispute has 
been referred to the Grievance Settlement Authority concerned and 
the decision of the Grievance Settlement Authority is not acceptable 
to any of the parties to the dispute.", 
Chapter 
IIB. 
Setting 
up of 'Grie.-
vance 
Settle-
ment 
Authori. 
ties and 
reference 
of certain 
lndivi· 
dual dis-
putes to 
luc:b 
Authori-
ties. 

Amend-
mentO! 
section 
10. 
Amend-
mentol 
aecUon 
11. 0 
e 
8. In section 10 of the principal Ad,-
(4) in sub-section (1), after the second proviso, the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided also that where the dispute in relation to which 
the Central Cklvernment is the appropriate Government, it shall 5 
be competent for that Government to refer the dispute to a 
Labour Court or an Industrial Tribunal, 'as the case may be, 
constituted by the State Government: "; 
(b) after Bub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely: - 10 
.. (2A) An order referring an industrial dispute to a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal under this section shall 
specify the period within which such Labour Court, Tribunal or 
National Tribunal shall submit its award on such dispute too the 
appropriate Government: 15 
o Provided that where such industrial dispute is connected 
with an individual workman, no such period shall exceed three 
months: 
Provided further that where 'the parties to an industrial 
dispute apply in the prescribed manner, whether jointly or !<to 
separately, to the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for 
extension Of such period or for any other reason, and the presid-
ing officer of such Labour Court, Tribunal or National TrlbUDIJ. 
considen it necessary or expedient to extend such period, he may 
for reasons to ,be recorded in writing, extend such period by such ~5 
further period as he may think fit: 
Provided also that in computing. any period specified in this 
sub-section, the period, if any, for which the proceeding,; before 
the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal had been stayed 
by any injunction or order of a Civil <...:ourt shall be excluded;, go 
Provided also that no proceedings before a Labour Court, 
Tribunal Or National Tribunal shall lapse merely on the ground 
that any period specified under this sub-section had expired 
without such proceedings being completed"; 
.<c) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be insert- 35 
ed, namely:-
"(8) No proceedings pending before a Labour Court, Tribu-
nal or National Tribunal in relation to an industrial dispute shall 
lapse merely by reason of the death of any of the parties to the 
dispute being a workman, and such Labour Court, TribUDal. or ... 0 
National Tribunal shall complete such proceedings and submit its 
award to the appropriate Government.". 
9. In section 11 of the principal Act,-
o (a) in sub-section (4),-
(i) for the words "may call for", the words "may enforce the 
attendance of any person for the purpose of examination of such 45 
person or call for" shall be subat\tutedf . 

5 ot 1898. 
20t 1974. 
5 
(ii) for the words "in respect of compelling the production of 
documents", the words "in respect of enforcing the attendance 
of any person and examining him or of compelling the production 
of documents" shall be substituted; . 
(b) in sub-section (8), for the words and figures "sections 480, 
482 and 484 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and 
figures "sections 345, 346 and 348 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973" shall be substituted. 
10. In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words "as soon as it is 
10 practicable on the conclusion thereof", the words, brackets, figures and 
letter "within the period specified in the order referring such industrial 
dispute or the further period extended under the second proviso to sub-
section (2A) of section 10" shall be substituted. 
11. After section 17A of the principal Act, the follOwing section shall 
15 be inserted, namely:-
20 
go 
35 
"17B. Where 'in ''Sny case, a Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal ~y its award directs reinstatement of any workman and the 
employer prefers any proceedings against such award in a High Court 
or the 'Supreme Court, the employer shall be liable to pay such work-
man, during the period of pendency of such proceedings in the 'High 
Court or the Suprem~ Court, full wages last drawn by him, inclusive 
of any maiJ?tenance allowance admissible to him under any rule if 
the workman had not been employed in any establishment dunng such 
period and an affidavit by such workman had been flIed to that effect 
in such Court: 
Provided th'at wheN' it is proved to the satisfaction of the Hillh 
Court Or the Supreme Court that such worlanan had been employed 
and had been receivinll adequate remuneration during anv such pP.rlod 
or part thereof. the Court shall order that no wages shall be paV'able 
under this section for such period or part, as the case may be.". 
:12. In section 25K of the principal Act, in ~uh-section (1). 'for the 
words "three hundred". the words "one hundred" shall be substituted. 
13. In section 25M of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words Clor,to natural calamity", 
the words ". and in the case of a mine, such lay-of! is due also to fire, 
flood,' excess of inflammable gas or explosion" shan be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
., (2A) Where the workmen (other than badli workmen or 
casual worlanen) of an industrial establishment being a mine have 
40 been laid-ofl' under sub-section (1) for reasons of flre, flood or 
excess of inflammable gas or explosion, the employer in relation 
to such establishment shall, within a period of thirty days from 
the date of commencement of such lay-01f, apply to the 'authority 
45. speeifted under sub-section (1) fOr permission to continue the 
lay-off."; 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
lIS. 
IIlIer. 
tlonof 
newHCtion 
17B. 
Payment 
ottuU 
wag. 
to work-
maD 
pendin, 
pro· 
ceedinp 
in higher 
cO\Jl"llzt. 
Amend.. 
Mento! 
section 
25K. 
Amend-
Mento! 
s!dion 
25M. 

Substitu· 
tiOllof 
new 
section 
for sec· 
tion 25·0. 
Procedure 
for 
cl08ina 
dOWDb 
under-
taking. 
8 
(c) in sub-eections (3), (4) and (S), after the wordl, bracket. 
and flgure "under sub-section (2) ", the words, brackets, figure and 
letter Clor sub-section (2A)" shall be inserted. 
14. For section 25-0 of the principal Act, the following 8eCtion shall 
be substituted, namely:-
5 
"2f)..Q. (1) An employer who intends to close down an under-
taking of an industrial establishment to which this Chapter applies 
shall, in the prescribed manner, apply, for prior permission at least 
ninety days befor~ the date on whiCh the intended closure is to 
become effective, to the appropriate Government, stating clearly the 10 
reasons for the intended closure of the undertaking and a copy of 
such application shall also be served simultaneously on therepresen· 
tatives of the worktnen in the prescribed manner: 
Provided that nothin~ in this sub·section shall al'ply to an under· 
takinlit set up for the construction of buildings, bridges, roads, canals. 15 
dams ot' for other construction work. 
(2) Where an application for permission has been made under 
sub-section (1). the RPpropriate Government. after making such 
encmirv as it thinks fit and after mvin!! a reasonable opportunitv of 
heine: heard to the f'mplovpr. the workmen and the person!l interested ao 
in such closure tnAv. havinl:!' re~ard to the ~enuinene9s and adequacy 
of the reR!'IOnc:: stRted bv the p.mnlover. the interests of the ll!eneral 
nublic Rnd :111 other relevant 'factors, bv order and for reasons to 
be recorded in wrl tin I! , IZT'RTl.t or refuse to rrant such permission and 
Ii conv of such order shall be communicated to the em~oyer and 25 
the workmen. 
(3) Where RTl. Rnn1if'stion hl't"l been made under sub-sectlon (1) 
and the Bnpron"iatp. Government dOe<: not communicate the order 
S!l'8ntinl7. O~ refllsino;!' to Il'l"ant ~rmission to the emnlover within a 
period of sixtv davs from the date on which such anplication is made, go 
the permission anplle(l foT' shall be deemed to have been granted on 
the expiration of the said period of sixty days. 
(4) An order of the apnropriate Government grantin~ or refusing 
to JlI'8nt permis.'1ion shan, subieet to the provisions of sub-eection (5). 
be final and bindin~ on all the parties and shall remain In force for 35 
one year from the date of such order. 
(S) The appropriate Government may. either on its -own motion 
or on the application made by the employer or any workman. review 
its order rranting or refusinll to grant permission under sub-seetion 
(2) or refer the matter to a Tribunal for adjudication: 40 
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribunal 
under this sub-section, it shall pass an award within a period of thirty 
days from the date of such reference. 
(6) Where no application ~ ~isston under sub-eeetion' (1)' 11 
made Within the period speclfted therein, Or where the penniSiion for .5 

18af 19U. 
. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
elosure has been refused, the closure of I the undertaking shall . be 
deemed to be illegal from the date o~ closure and the workmen shall 
be entitled to '811 the benefits under any law for the time being' in 
force as if the undertaking had not been closed down. 
(r) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing pro-
visions of this section, the app·ropriate Government may, if it is satis-
fied that owing to such exceptional circumstances as I accident iri the 
undertaking or de'8th of the employer or the like it is necessary so to 
do, by order, direct that the provisions of sub-~ection (1) shall not 
apply in relation to such undertaking for such period as may be 
specified in the order. 
(8) Where an undertaking is permitted to be closed down under 
sub-section (2) or where permission for closure is deemed '.0 be 
granted under sub-section (3), every workman who is employed in 
that undertaking immediately before the date of application for I per-
mission under this section, sh'811 be entitled to receive compensation 
which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for every 
completed year of continuous' service or any part· thereof in excess 
Of. six months.". 
15. In section 25R of the principal Act,-
(a.) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets, figures and letters 
"a direction given under sub-section (2) of section 25-0 or section 
25P", the words, brackets, figures and letters "an order refusing to 
grant permission to close down 'an undertaking under sub-section (2) 
of section 25-0 or a direction given under section 230P" shall be. 
substituted; 
(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
16. After Chapter VB of the principal Act, the following Chapter 
shall be inserted, namely:-
go "CHAPI'ER VC 
35 
40 
UNFAIR LABOUR PRACTICES 
25T. No employer or workman or a trade union, whether re-
gistered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926, or not, shall commit any 
unfair labour practice. 
25U. Any person who commits any unflair labour practice shall be 
punishable wjth imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months or with fine which may extend Ito one thousand rupees or 
with both.". 
17. In section 33 of the prinCipal Act, in sub-section (5) ,-
(a.) for the words "as expeditiously as possible", the words "wit1:&in 
a period of three months from the date of receipt of, such application" 
sh'all be substituted; 
(b) the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that where any such authority considers it necee-
45 sary or expedient so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded m 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
25R. 
Inaertion 
olnew 
Chapter 
Vc. 
Prohibl-
tionof 
unfair 
labour 
practice. 
Penalty 
for com-
roitttna 
unfair 
labour 
practices. 
Amend-
mento! 
section 
33, 

Amend-
mentof 
section 
IIA: 
InsertloD 
of new 
.ec1.toD. 
88 B. 
Power to 
ezempt. 
10 
writing, extend such period by such further period as it may 
think fit: 
Provided further that no proceedings before any such authority 
shall lapse merely on the ground that any period specified in this 
sub-section had expired without such proceedings being com- 5 
pletea.". 
18. In section 33A of the principal Act,-
(a) for the wo..rds "before a Labour Court, Tribunal or NatioxiaI 
Tribunal", the words "before a conciliation officer, Board, an arbitra-
tor, a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal" shall he substi- 10 
tuted; 
(b) for the portion beginn:iJlg with the words "in the prescribed 
manner to such Labour Court" and ending with the words "apply 
accordingly", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"in the prescribed manner,-
(a) to such conciliation officer or Board, and the concilia-
tion officer or Board shall take such complaint into acoount in 
mediating in, and promoting the settlement of, such industrial 
disp'ute; and 
(b) to such arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or 20 
National Tribunal and on receipt of such· complaint. the 
arbitrator, LaboUr Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as 
the case may be, shall adjudicate upon' the complaint as 
if it were a dispute referred to C1r pending before it, jn accord-
ance with the provisions of this Act and shall submit his or 25 
it.s award to the appropriate Government and the provisions 
of this Act shall apply accordingly.". 
It. In section 33C of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),-:-
(Go) after the words "the appropriate 'Government", the 'WOI"d8 
"within a period not exceeding three months" shall be inserted; 30 
(b) the following proviso shall be 'added at the end, namely: - . 
"Provided that where the presiding ofticer of a Labour Court 
considers it necessary or expedient so to do, he may, for l'eBSOlUl 
to be recorded in writing, extend such per~od by such further 
period as he may think fit.". S5 
20. In sub-section (2) of section 34 of 'the principal Act, for the words 
"8 Presidency Magil$'ate or a Magistrate of the first class", the words 
"8 Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial ' Magistrate of thefll'lt' class" 
shall be substituted. 
, 21.' After section 36A of the principal Act, the following sectloR. shBll 40 
,be inserted, namely:-
1'368. Where the appropriate Government is satiafted iu relation 
to any industrial establishment or undertaking or any class of in-
dustrial establishment~ or undertakings under the control of that 
Government that adequate pr6vitiorls exist for the investigation and 45 

11 
settlement of industrial disputes in respect of workmen employed In 
such establishment or' undertakng Or class of establishments or 
undertakings, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, 
conditionally or unconditionally such establishment or undertaking 
5 or class of establish!Jlents or undertakings from all or any of the pro-
10 
visions of this Act.". • 
2Z. In sub-section (2) of section 38 of the principal Act, after clause 
'(aaa) , the 'following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ab) the constitutio'n of Grievance Settlement Authorities 
,referred to iIl section 9C, the mllnner in 'which industrial disputes may 
be referred to such authorities for settlement, the procedure to be 
followed by such authorities in the proceedings in relation to d.sputes 
referred to them and the period within which such proceedings shall 
be completed;". 
15 IS. After the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, the following 
Schedule shall be inserted, namely:-
'THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (Ta)] 
UNFAIR LABOUR PRACTICES 
liO I.-On the paTt 0'1 emplo'yer.<: and trade union<: of employers 
1. To interfere with, restrain from, or coerce, workmen in the 
exercise of their right to organise. form, join or assist a trade union 
or to engage in concerted activities fur the purposes of collective 
bargaining or other mutual aid or protection, that is to say-
25 (a) threatening workmen with discharge or dismjssal, if they 
join a trade union; 
(b) threafening.a lock-out or closure, if a trade union is 
organised; 
(c) granting wage increase to wor-kmen at crucial periods of 
30 trade union organisation, with a view to undermining the efforts 
of the trade union at organisation. 
2. To dominate, interfere with or contribute support, financial 
or otherwise, to any trade union, that is to say:-
(a) an employer taking an active interest in organising a 
35 trade union of his workmen; and 
40 
(b) an employer showing partiality or granting favour to one 
of several trade unions attempting to or:g.anise his workmen or to 
its members, where such a trade union is not a recognised trade 
union. 
3. To establish employer sponsored trade wUons of WDl'kmen. 
4. To encourage or discourage membership in any trade union by 
. discriminating against any workman, that is to say:-
(a) discharging or punishing a workman, because he urged 
p~~r workmen to join or organise a trade union; 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
88. 
IIlI.,. 
Uon of 
new 
Fifth 
Sche-
dule •. 

(b) discharging or dismissing a workman for taking part in 
any strike (not being 'a strike which is deemed to be an illegal 
strike under tAis ACt); 
(e) changing seniority rating of workmen because of trade 5 
union activities; 
(d) refusing to promote workmen to higher posts on account 
of their trade union activities; 
(e) giving unmerited promotions to certain workmen with 
a view to creating discord amongst other worlOnen, or to under-
mine the strength of their trade union; 10 
(f) discharging office-bearers or active members of the trade 
union on account of their trade union activities. 
5. To discharge or dismiss workmen-
(a) by way of victimisation; 
(b) not in good faith, but in the colourable exercise of the 15 
employer's rights; 
(e) by falsely implicating a workman in a criminal case on 
false evidence or on concocted evidence; 
(d) for patently false reasons; 
(e) on untrue or trumped up allegations of absence without to 
leave; 
(f) in utter disregard of the principles of natural justice in 
the conduct of domestic enquiry' or with undue haste; 
(g) for misconduct of a mipor or technical character, without 
having any regard to the nature pf the particular misconduct or 25 
the past record Or service of the workman, thereby leading to a 
disproportion'ate punishment. 
6. To abolish the work of a regular nature being done by work-
men, 'and to give such iwork to contractors as a measure of breaking 
• strike. 30 
7. To transfer a workman mala fide from one place to another, 
under the guise of following management policy. 
8. To insist upon individual workmen, who are on a legal strike 
to sign a good conduct bond, as a pre-condition to allowing them to 
resume work 35 
9. To show favouritism or partiality to one set of workers re-
gardless of merit. 
10. To employ workmen as "badlis", ~suals or temporaries and 
to continue them as such fur years, with the object of depriving them 
of tb., .,tatus and privileges of }>erI¥l'l'elti worlanen. <to 

5 
10 
15 
20 
11. To discharge Or discriminate against any workman for filing 
charges or testifying against an employer in any enquiry or proceed-
ing relating to any industrial dispute. 
12. To recruit workmen during a strike which is not an illegal 
strike. " 
13. Failure to implement award, settlement or agreement. 
14. To indulge in acts of force Or violence. 
• 15. To refuse to bargain collectively, in good faith with the 
recognised trade unions. 
16. Proposing or continuing a lock-out deemed. to be illegal under 
this Act.' 
II.-On the part of workmen and trade uniOns Of workmen 
1. To advise or actively support or instigate any strike deemed. 
to be illegal under this Act. 
2. To coerce workmen In the exercise of their right to seJf-organi-
sation or to join a trade union or refrain from joining any trade union. 
that is to sa1-
(a) for a trade union or its members to picketing in such 
a manner that non-striking workmen are physically debarred 
from entering the work places; 
(b) to indulge in acts of force or violence or to hold out 
threats of intimidation in connection with a strike against non-
striking workmen or against managerial staff. 
3. For 'a'recognised union to refuse to bargain collectively in good. 
25 faith with the employer. 
30 
4. To indulge in coercive activities against certification of a 
bargaining representative. 
5. To stage, encourage or instigate such fol'tllS of cOercive actions 
as wilful "go slow", squatting on the work premises after working 
hours or "gh.erao" of any of the members of the managertal Or other 
staff. 
6. To stage demonstrations at the residences of the employers or 
tile managerial staff members. 
7. To incite or indulge in wilful dama,e to employer's property 
35 connected with the industry. 
8. To indulge in acts of force or violence or to hold out threats of 
intimidation against any workman with a view to prevent him from 
attending work.'. 
%4. In section 6 of the Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of 
,0 ~e~vice) Act, IV76, sub-section (Z) shall be omitted. 
Amend-
mentol 
Ad 11 of 
19'78. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, provides the machinery and pro. 
cedure for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes. The 
provisions of the, Act had been 'amended from time to time in the light 
of experience gained in its actual working,. case laws and industrial 
,relations policy of the Governme'nt. The National Commission on 
Labour (1969) which made an in-depth study of the industrial relations 
and procedures had identified a number of aI"e'as in which the Act need-
ed to be amended to promote industrial harmony. The recommendations 
of the National Commission on Labour were discussed at various forums. 
2. The objectives of the Bill are mainly to ensure speedier resolution 
of industrial d:.isputes by removing procedural delays and to make certa~n 
other amendments in the light of some of the recommendations of the 
National Commission on Labour. The Bill seeks to make the following 
amendments in the Act, namely:~, 
(i) Difficulties have ar:isen in the interpretation of the definition. 
of the expression "appropriate Government" as contained in the Act 
in respect of certain industrial establishments. It is proposed to 
remove these difficulties by making the Central Government the 
appropriate Government in respect of those establishments. 
(ii) The Supreme Court in its decision in the Bangalore Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board Vs. Rajappa and others (AIR 1978 SC 
548) had, while interpreting the definition of "industry" as contained 
in the Act, observed that Government might restructure this defini-
tion by suitable legislative measure!':. It is accordingly proposed to 
redefine the term "industry". While doing so, it is proposed"to exclude 
from the scope of this exprer;sion, certain institutions like hospitals 
.and dispensaries, educational, SCientific, research or training institutes, 
institutions !,!ngaged in charitable, social and philanthropic serviCes, 
etc., in view of the need to maintain in s,uch institutions an atmOlll-
phere difterent from that in industrial and commercial undertakings 
and to meet the spedal needs of such 'organisatio'ns. It is also 
proposed to exclude sovereign functions of Government including 
activities relating to atomic energy, space and defence research from 
the purview of the term "industry". However,keeping in view the 
special characteristics of thr~!':e activities and the fact that their 
worlanen also need protection, j t is' proposed to have a separate law 
for the settlement of individual grievances as well as collective 
disputes in respect 'of the workmen of these instit~tions. All these 
have been taken into account and the term "indust.ry" has been made 
more specific while making the coverage wider. The scope of the 
)term "workman" has ah;o been enlarged to cov~r the supervisory 
~taff whose wages do not exceed Rs. 1,600 per month.; 
(iii) A model grievances redressal procedure had b~ncom­
J2\ended for adoption. But this voluntary arrangement has not 
proved' effective. It is, therefore, proposed to make it obligatory for 
every industrial establish:nent employing 100 or'more workmen to 
let up a time-bound grievance redressa.prpcedure. . , 
14 

e." 
l~'I 
.. 
10 
(iv) There has been dissatisf'action with delays involved in the 
adjudication of industrial dispute<;. It is proposed to fix a time limit 
for the adjudication of individual and collective disputes, as also 
for the disposal of claims, applications and other references by the 
Labour Court,' the Industrial Tribunal or the National Industrial 
Tribunal with a view to securing speedier 'justice to workmen:' It has 
'also been provided that no' case will lapse merely on account of the 
flct that the time limits specified had expir~d . . 
(v) There have been conflicting ,decisions about .the right of 
leg~l heirs of a workman in the event of the .deatp. of the latter 
pending proceedings before the authorities under the Act. Provision 
is being made to make it clear that pending disputes will not abate 
in the event o'f the death of the workman. 
(vi) It is observed that when Labour Coutts pass awards of 
reinstatement, these 'are often contested by an employer in the 
. Supreme Court and High Courts, The delay in the implementation of 
the award causes hardship to the workmen concerned.' It is, therefore, 
proposed to prOVide for payment of wages last drawn by the workmen' 
concerned, under certain conditions, from the date of the award till 
the case is finally decided in the Supreme Court or the HIgh Courts. 
(vii) It is proposed to provide that workmen in mines could be 
laid-oft' for reasons of fire, flood, excess of inflammable gas or explo-
sion without previous permission. 
(viii) Taking into conSideration the observations of the Supreme 
Court in the Excel Wear case (AIR 1979 SC 25), it is proposed. to 
recast the provisions relating to closure of industrial establishments 
as contained in the Act to provide for the following, namely:-
(a) The employer will have to apply to Government to obta!ln 
permission f~r closure ninety days before the intended date of 
closure and a copy of such application will have to be served 
by him on the representatives of the workmen also; 
(b) On receipt of such application, Government, after giving 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the applicant and the 
representatives of the workmen, and after taking into considera-
tion the guidelines laid down in the provision, may grant or 
refuse to grant the permission asked for. Permission shall be 
deemed to have been granted if no order of the Government 
granting or refusing to grant permission is communicated Within 
the specified period; 
(c) The order of the Government granting or refusing to 
grant permission is ~ing made final subject to a review by ~ 
Government or a reference to the Industrial Tribunal; 
(d) Where an undertaking is permitted to be closed down, 
thl:! workmen shall be entitled to closure compensation equiva-
lent to fifteen days' average pay. for every completed year of 
continuous service or part thereof in excess of six months. 
(ix) The special provisions relating tolay-off, retrencJunat 
and closure as contained in Chapter VB of the Act apply at present 
to establishments employing 300 workmen or above. With a view 

UI 
to extending this statutory protection to workmen of smaller eltab· 
"" lilhments also, it is proPosed to reduce the existing employment 
limit trom 300 to 100. . 
(x) There is at present no Central law specifying unfair labour 
practices on the part of employers, workmen and the trade unions 
of employers and workmen and for imposing any penalty for resort.-
ing to such undesirable practices. Certain State laws as well as volun-
tary Codel of Discipline laid down by the Indian Labour Conference 
specify certain practices as unfair labour practices. The National 
Commission on Labour which examined this aspect in detail suggest-
ed a list of such unfair practices. It is proposed to make suitable 
provision . in the Act to specify certain practices as unfair labour 
practices on, the part of employers, workmen and trade unions and 
to provide for penalties for those indulging in such practices. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects and to provide for 
certain other consequential and clarificatory changes in the Act. 
NEW DBLHI; BHAGWAT JHA AZAD. 
The 27th March, 1982. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
. Clause 7 of the Bill, which seeks to insert a n~ Chapter IIB in the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, provides for the reference of certain indi-
vidual disputes to Grievance Settlement Authorities. The newsectioD 
9C included in this Chapter provides for the setting up of a Grievance 
Settlement Authority by the employer of an establishment emplJyiJ1g 
one hundred or more workmen for the adjudication of individual disputes 
arising in such establishment. Such authority slrall be set up in accordance 
with the rules to be made under the Act. The manner in which 
individual disputes may be referred to such authorities, the procedure 
to be followed by such authorities in proceedings in relation to disputes 
referred to them and the period within which such proceedings may be 
completed will be provided for by rules made under the Act. 
2. Clause 14 of the Bill proposes to substitute a nejW section 
for the existing section 25-0 in the Act. Sub-section (1) of new section 
25-0 requires the employer, who intends to close down the undertaking 
of an industrial establishment, to apply for prior permisSion to the 
appropriate Government and a copy of such application shall also be 
served simUltaneously on the representatives of the workmen in the 
manner prescribed by rules. 
3., Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 36-B in the Act 
which empowers the appropriate Government to exempt, by nottftcation 
in the Oftlclal Gazette, any industrial establilhment Of undertaJdnl or 
class of industrial establishments· or undertakings from all or any of the' 
provisions of the Act, if it is satisfied that adequate provisions exfst 
for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in respect of 
workmen employed in such establishment or undertaking or class of 
establishments or undertakings. 
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made Of notifications 
may be issued under the above provisions are matters of detail or pr0-
cedure. The delegation of legislative power is thus nonnal in ebaraeta'. 
17 

ANNEXUIUt 
!XTRACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 194't 
(14 OF 1947) 
• • • • • 
I"" 
!. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the su~iect or 
"eontcxt,-
"\ 
(a) "appropriate Government" means-
(i) in telation to any industrial dispute coneern.1ng any 
industry carried on by or under the authority of the Central 
Government, or by -a railway company or concernlng any' such 
controlled industry "as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Centr81. Government or in relation to an industrial dispute con-
cerning the I Industrial Finance Corporation of India established 
under section 3 of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948, 15 of 1~8. 
or the Employees' State Insurance Corporation established under 
section 3 of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, or the 34 of llK1. 
"Indian Airlines" and "Air-India" Corporations established under 
MCtion 3 of the Air Corporations Act, 1953, or the Life Insurance 27 of 1953. 
Corporation of India established under section 3 of the Life 
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, or the Agricultural Refinance 31 of 1~. 
Corporation established under section 3 of the Agricultural Re-
finance Corporation Act, 1963, or the Deposit Insurance Corpo- 10 of 1983. 
ration established under section 3 of the Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration Act, 1961, or the Unit Trust of India established under 47 of 1981. 
section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, or the Food Cor- 52 of 1983. 
poration of India estab1ished under section ,3, or a Board of 
Mamagement established for two or more contiguous States under 
section 16, of the Food Corporations Act, 1964, Or the Banking 37 of 1984. 
Service Commission established under section 3 of the Banking 
Service Colnmission Act, 1975, Or a Regional Rural Bank 42 of 1975," " 
estBbl1shedundet section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 
1976, or a banking or an insurance company, a mine, an Oilfield, 21 of.J.978. 
a Cantonment Board, or a major port, the Central Government, 
and 
• • • • 
(j) "industry" means any business, trade, undertaking, manu-
facture or caUing of employers and includes any calling, service, 
employment, handicraft, Or industrial occupation or avocation of 
workmen; 
• • • • • 
(kkk) "lay~ff" (with its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressio~) means the failure, refusal or inability of an employer 
on account of shortage of coal, power or raw materials or the accu-
mulation of stocks or t~e" break-down of machinery or for any other 
reason to give employment to a workman whose name is -borne on 
the muster rolls of his indulitrial establishment and who has not been 
retrenched. 
_ Explcmation.-Every workman whose name is I'bome on the 
muster rolls of the industrial establishment and who presents himself 

19 
tor work at the establishment at the time appointed for the purpose 
during normal working hours on any day and is not given employ. 
ment by the employer within two hours of hi.$ so presenting himself 
shall be deemed to have been laid-off for that day Within the meaning 
of this clause: ' 
Provided that if the workman, instead of being given emp.loy-1.1ent 
at t~e commencement of any shift for any day is asked to p1 sent 
himself for the purpose during the second half of the shift for t~ day 
and is given employment, then, he shall be deemed to havel oeen 
laid-o.ff only for one-half of that day; , 
Provided further that if he is not given any such employment 
even after so presenting himself, he shall not be deemed to have been " 
laid-o~ for the second half of the sljift for the day and shall be 
entitled to full basic wages and deamessaUowance. for that part of 
the day; ~J 
, , 
(l) "lock-out" means the closing of a place of employment, or 
the suspension of work, or the refusal by an employer to contiDl.e 
to employ any number of persons employed by him; , , 
'" '" '" '" .' (rr) "wages" means all remuneration capable of being expressed 
in terms of money, which would, if the terms of employment, express 
or implied, were fuIfUled, be payable to a workInan in respect of his 
employment or of work done in such employment, and includes.:.-
... • • ... • 
(s) "workman" means any person (tnclu.dii1g an' apprentice), 
employed in any industry to do any skilled or unskilled m.a~ual,' 
supervisory, technical Or clerical work for hire or reward, whether 
the terms of employment be express or implied, and for the 
purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation to an" 
industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, ; 
discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as '8 consequence of, 
that dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to 
that dispute, but does not include any such person-
(i) who is subject to the Army Act, 1950, or the Air Force 
. '"Act, 15150, or the Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934; or 
(ii) who is employed in the police service, or as an oftlc~ or 
other employee of a prison; or . 
.a of 1150. 
~oflNt • 
afofl'" 
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administra-
tive capaeity; or . , 
(iv) who, being employ~ in a supervisory capacity, draws 
waees exceeding five hundred rupees per mensem or exerciMI, 
either by the nature of the duties attached to the otBce or Dy 
reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly ot a mana-
gerial nature. 
2A. Where any employer discharge~, dismisses, retrenches, or otherwise 
terminates the services of an individual workman, any dispute or di1ference 
between that worlanan and his employer connected with, or arising out of, 
8UCh discharge, di.mislil, rretreDchment or termination shall be deemed 
to be an industrial, dispute notwithstanding that no other worlbum nor 
8y union of workmen is a party to the dispute. 
• • ... • • 
DiImiual, 
etc.,ot. 
individual 
worlaun 
to be 
deemed 
to be 1ft 
industrial 
dispute. 

Labour 
Courte. 
Tribunal8. 
National 
Tribunals. 
·r 1 
!20 
1. (1) • • • • • 
(3) A Person shall not be qualified for appointment as the preSiding 
officer of a Labour Court, unless- ' 
• • • • • 
(e) he:baa heid ~e ofti~' ~i ih~ ~ait or any other inem~,ot 
the ~ur ,,~a~ Trib~ copstituted under the Industrial Df». ; 
putes (Appella~ !TribuDal) Act, 1950, or of any Tribunal, for a period 
of not less than two years; or 
• • • • • 
1~ .pt~e; ~proP.iate. ,GOv~ent 'ma'Y'~ by . notitleation in}he 
?1BCl~ ,p~~ ,c.o~tu~ one or 'more In~usttia1 Tribunals for the ad-
Judication of bidustrial disputeS relating to any matter, whether speC.Ifted 
in the Second Schedule Or the Third Schedule. 
• ! : ~ • • • • 
(3) A person shall not be iqualified for appointment as the preaid-
in« oftl.cer of a Tribunal unless-
(4) he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or 
(~,~: h118, 'for apetiQd ~f not l~Ss than three years, been a 
District Judge, or an Addition81 District Judge; or 
(b) he has held the office of the chairman or any other member 
of . the ,~l:JoJ:u'Appe~te Tribunal. constituted under the Industrial 
Dispu~~ (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, or of any Tribunal, for a 
period of not less than two years. 
• • • • • 
m. (1) • • • • • 
(3), A person shall not be qualified. for appointment as the presiding 
oftker 'of a National Tribunal unless-,.. 
(a) he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or 
tb) he,has held the office of the chairman or any other member 
of the LabOur" Appellate Tr,ibunal constituted under the. Indu,strial 
48 of lHO. 
Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, for a period of not lesS than ~8 of 1950. 
two years. 
• • • • 
I" , 
Noticeot tA. No employer, who proposes to effect any change in·the conditions 
cbanle. of servige" ~pp.1N;~l;>le to ,any wor~ in respect of any matter specified 
in the FoUrth ~hedule, shall effect such change,-
, , 
. ..•.... ,. 
(a) witllout, giving to the workmen likely· to be afl'ected. by 
such ,~qange ~not~ in the prescribed manner of the nature of the 
change proposed to be effected; or 
(b) wit~ twenty-one days of giving such notice: 
, ~ . Pro"idded that no notice shall be required for effecting any such 
; dWtge-
(a) where the change is effected in pursuance of any settlement, 
award or decision of the Appellate Tribunal. constituted· under: the 
Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950; or +8 ot 1950. 
• • • • • 

, & of 1908. 
21 
10. J1) Where the appropriate Government is of opinion that any 
industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, it may, at any time, by order 
in writing,-
(a) refer the dispute to a Board for promoting a settlement there-
of; or 
(b) refer any matter appearing to be connected with or relevant 
to the dispute to a Court for inquiry; Or 
(c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected 
with,' of relevant to, the dispute, if it relates to any ~tter specified in 
the Second Schedule, to a LaboUr Court for adjudication; or 
(d) .refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected 
with, or relevant to, the dispute, whether it relates to any matter 
specified in the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule. to a Tribunal 
for adjudication: 
Provided that where the dispute relates to any matter specified in the 
Third Schedule and is not likely to aft'ect more than one hundred workmen, 
the appropriate GOvernment may, if it so thinks fit, make the reference 
to a Labour Court under clause (c): 
Provided further that where the dispute relates to a public utility 
service and a notice under section 22 has been given, the appropnate 
Government shall,unless it considers that the notice has been frivolously 
or vexatiously giv:en or that it would be inexpedient so to do, make a 
reference under this sub-section notwithstanding that any other proceed-
ings under this Act in respect ot the dispute may have commenced . 
• 
11. (1) ... 
• ... 
... 
.. 
... 
... • • 
(4) A conciliation officer may call for and inspect any document which 
he has ground for considering to be relevant to the industrial dispute 
or to be necessary for the purpose of verifying the implementation of 
any award, or carrying out any other duty imposed On him under this 
Act, and for the, aforesaid purposes, the conciliation officer shall have the 
same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, in respect of compelling the production of documents . 
... ... ... ... • 
15. Where an industrial dispute has been referred to a Labour Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal for adjuci1cation, it shall hold its proceedings 
expeditioUsly and shall, as soon as it is practicable on the conclusion 
thereof, submit its award to the appropriate Government. 
... ... ... • • 
25K.(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to an industrial 
establ!ishment (not being an establishment of a seasonal character or in 
which Work is performed only intermittently) in which not less than 
three hundred workmen were employed on an average per working day 
for the preceding twelve months . 
• ... • • ... 
25M. (1) No workman (other than a badli workman or a casual work-
man) whose name is borne on the muster rolls of an industrial establish-
ment to which this Chapter appUes shall be laid-off by his employer except 
with the previous permission of such authority as may be specified by 
Reference 
otdis-
putes to 
Boards, 
Courte or 
Tribunals. 
Procedure 
and 
power.ot 
conei11a-
tion 
omeara, 
BoarclI, 
Couda 
and 
Trlbunala. 
Dut1elot 
t.Ibour 
~ 
Tribunals 
and 
NatioDal 
Tribunals. 
Applica-
tion ot 
Chapter 
VB. 
Prohibi-
tion ot 
1ay-o~ 

Ninety 
days' 
notIce to 
be given 
~f inten-
tioI\ to 
close 
down any 
under-
taking. 
,I •• _0 
....... .,. 
the appropriate Government by notillcatjon in the Official Gazette, unleu 
such lay-01l' is due to shortage of power or to natural calamity. • 
'" '" • • • 
(3) In the case of every application for permission under sub~section 
(1) or sub-section (2), the authority to whom the application has been 
made may, after making such inquiry as he. ~ fit, grant or refuse, tor 
reasons to be recorded in writing, the permi,ssion applied for. 
(4) Where an application for 'permission has been made under sub-
section (1) or su1>section (2) and the authority to whom the application 
is made does not communicate the permission or the retusal to grant the 
permission to the employer within a period of two mOl\ths from the date 
on which the application is made, the permission applied for shall be 
deemed to have been granted on the expiration of the said period of two 
months. 
(5) Where no application for pennission under sub-section (1) is made, 
or where no application for permission under sub-section (2) has been 
made within the period specified therein, Or where the permission for the 
lay-off or the continuance of the lay-off has been refused, such lay-oft shall 
be deemed to be illegal from the date on which the workmen have been 
laid-off and the workmen shall be entitled to all the benefits under any 
law for the time being in force as if they had not been laid-off . 
'" • • • 
25-0. (1) An employer who intends to close down an undertaking o~ 
an industrial establishment to which this Chapter applies shall serve, for 
previous approval at least ninety days. before the date on which .the 
mtended closure is to become effective, a notice, in the prescribed manner, 
on the appropriate Government stating clearly the reasons fOr the intended 
closure of the undertaking:' 
Provided that nothing in this section shall. apply to an undertaking set 
up for the construction of buildings, bridges, roads, canals, dams or tor 
other construction work. • 
(2) On receipt of a notice under sub-section (1) the appropriate Gov-
. ernment may, if it is satisfied that the reasons ,for the intended cloeur.e of 
the undertaking are not adequate andsufllcien.t or such closure is ,pre-
judicial to the public interest, by order, direct the employer not to close 
down such undertaking. 
(3) Where a notice has 'been served on the appropriate Government 
by an employer under sub-section (1) ofsectmn 25FFA and the period 
ot notice has not expired at the commencement of the Industrial Diapuu. 
(Amendment) Act, 1976, such employer shall not close down the under-U of 197 .... 
taking but shall, wi thin a period of fifteen days from such oomDlencement, 
apply to the appropriate Government for perm.ission to close down the 
undertaking. j ~t 
(4) Where an application for permission has been made under sub-
, 'section (3) and the appropriate Government does not' communicate the 
pennission or the refusal to grant the permission to the employer wit1:lin 

IlS 
a Period of two months from the date on 'vhich the applicatioh is made, 
the permission applied for shall· be deemed to have been granted on the 
expiration of the said period of two months. . 
(5) Where no application for permission under sub-section (1) is made, 
or where no application for permission under sub-section (3) is made 
within the period specified therein or where the permission for closure has 
been· refused, the closure of the undertaking shall be deemed to be illegal 
from the date of closure and the workman shall be entitled to all the 
benefits under any law for the time being in force as if no notice had been 
given to him, 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in Ilub-section (1) and sub-
section (3), the appropriate Government may, if it is satisfied that owing· 
to such exceptional circumstances as accident in the undertakin~ Or death 
of the employer or the like it is necessary so to do, by order, direct that. 
the proviSions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) shall not apply !in 
relation. to such undertaking for such period as may be specified in the 
order. 
(7) Where an undertaking is approved or permitted to be closed down 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4), every workman in the said 
undertaking who has been in continuous service for nQt less than one year 
in that undertaking immediately before the date of application for per~ 
mission under this section shall be entitled to notice and oompensjltion as 
speoifted in section 25N as if the said workman had been retrenched under 
that !iection. . 
• • • • • 
25&. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Any employer, who contravenes a direction given under sub-
section (2) of section 25-0 or section 25P, shall be punishable with im-
prilOnment for a tenn which may extend to one year, or with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and where the con-
traveption is ~ continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to 
two thousand rupees for every day during which the contravention 
continues after the conviction. 
(3) Any. employer Who contravenes the provisions of sub-section 
(3) of section 25-0 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
• • • • • 
33. (1) • • • • • 
. (5) Where an .employer makes an application to a conciliation officer, 
Board, an arbitrator, a Labour Court, Tribunal or National'Tribunal under 
the proviso to sub-sectiOll (2) for approval of the action taken by him, 
the authority concerned shall~ without delay, hear such application and 
pass, as expeditiously as possible, such order in relation thereto as it 
deems fit. 
Penalty 
for 
closure. 
Conditions 
of service, 
. etc., to 
remain 
unchang-
ed under 
. certain 
circum-
stances 
during 
pendency 
of PrO-
,....,'n ... 

Special 
provialOl1 
for ad-
judication 
as to 
whether 
conditions 
ofaerv1ce, 
etc., 
cbanpd 
du.rlng 
pendency 
of pro~ 
ceedinp. 
Recovery 
of money 
due from 
an emplo-
yer ...... , ~ 
Cocni~ 
ZaDCeof 
offences. 
Power 
to make 
:ruliel... 
ApPlica-
tion • 
of certain 
Acts to 
pIes pro-
motion 
em.-
ployees. 
!24 
33A. Where an employer contravenes the provisions of section sa 
during the pendency of proceedings before a Labour Court; Tribunal or 
National Tribunal, any emp1oyee. aggrieved by such contravention, may 
make a complaint in writing, in the prescribed manner to· such Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal and on receipt of such complaint that 
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall adjudicate upon the 
complaint as if it were :a dispute referred to or pending before it, in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and shall submit its award to 
the appropriate Government and the provisions of this Act shall apply 
accordingly. 
... ... ... ... ... 
aac. (1) ... ... ... ... ... 
(2) Where any workman is entitled to receive from the ~mployer any 
money or any benefit which is capable of being computed in· tenns of 
money and if any question arises as to the alUOuntof money due or as 
to the amount at which such benefit sh~u1d be computed, then the question 
may, subject to any rules that may· be made under this Act, b, decided by 
such Labour Court as may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate 
Government. 
... • • • • 
34. (1) • • • • ... 
(2) No Court inferior to .that of '8. Presidency Magistrate ora Magis-
trate of the flrstct.ass shall try any offence punishable under this Act .. 
• • • • 
38. (1) • • ... ... ... 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the folloWing 
matters, namely:-
... • • ... ... 
(aaa) the appointment of assessors in proceedings under this 
Actj 
... ... • • 
ExTRACT FROM THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLoYEES (CONDITIONS OF 
SDMCI:) ACT, 1976 
(11 OF 1976) 
... • ... ... • 
6. (1) • ... • • •• 
(2) The provisions of the Industrial Disputes.Act, 1947, as in force for 
the time" -being, shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees 
11S they apply to, or ill relation to, workmen within the meaning OIl that Act 
and for the purposes of any proceeding under that. Aet lin relation to an 
industrial dispute, a sales promotion employee shall. be deemed to, ~clude 
a sales promotion employee who has been dismissed., diKhargad or ~ 
trenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute or whose 
dismissal, discharge or retrenclunent had led to that dispute. 
• • • ~ • • , ( 
14 of 19-47. 

LOIt SABRA 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
(Shri Bhagwat Jha Azad, 
Min.~er of State of the 
Ministry of Labour.) 