     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 47 of 2021
THE UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE FOR GRADUA TES
LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE BILL, 2021
By
SHRI SUBRAT PATHAK, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of unemployment allowance to graduates living
below poverty line and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1)This Act may be called the Unemployment Allowance for Graduates Living
Below Poverty Line Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “graduate” means any citizen who holds a bachelor’s degree or equivalent
qualification from any university or institution and includes citizens who hold
qualifications higher than that of a Bachelor’s degree or its equivalent; and
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Every unemployed graduate who falls in the below poverty line
category  as may be determined by the Central Government shall be entitled to
receive a monthly unemployment allowance at such rate, as may be prescribed,
till the time he is gainfully employed.
(2) The Central Government shall, while fixing the rate of unemployment
allowance, take into account the age, educational qualification, technical skills,
physical disabilities and such other factors, as it may deem necessary:
Provided that different rates of unemployment allowance may be prescribed
for graduates on the basis of subjects in which they hold degrees and the
State or part of the State of their residence.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State
Governments for the purpose of payment of unemployment allowance to
unemployed graduates in the States.
5. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any
instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.
6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while  it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if,  before the expiry of the session immediately following  the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses  agree in making any modification in the
rule  or both the Houses  agree that the  rule should not be made,  the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such  modification or annulment  shall be without  prejudice
to the validity  of anything  previously  done under that rule.
5
2
10
15
20
25
30
Definitions.
Unemployment
allowance to
graduates
living below
poverty line.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
laws in force.
Power to
make rules.
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The problem of unemployment amongst graduates in the country is alarming. In
this regard various studies have shown that nearly forty-seven per cent. graduates in
the country are unemployed either due to lack of adequate skills or unavailability of
job.
It has been witnessed that technical graduates are not able to find suitable decent
jobs due to saturation in their chosen field. They choose to shift to other field where
there is no application of their skill and talents. The unhealthy trend of shifting of
sectors amongst youth living below poverty line for want of job and gaining quick
money is the major concern, which needs to be properly addressed.  The country is
missing out the potential of using the minds and skills of youth for the service of the
nation.  The present Bill provides for unemployment allowance to graduates living
below poverty line till they get to employed in their desired field instead of joining
different sectors and fields for quick money. Such a measure will help in realizing the
idea of  ‘Make in India’ and skill development amongst youth in real sense.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;                              SUBRAT PATHAK
February 12, 2021
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every unemployed graduate living below poverty
line shall be entitled to receive monthly unemployment allowance at such rate as the
Central Government may fix after taking into consideration certain factors.  Clause 4
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State
Government for payment of unemployment allowance to the unemployed graduates
in the States.  The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India.  It is estimated that a sum of about rupees five hundred
crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes  of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide  for payment of unemployment allowance to graduates living below
poverty line and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri  Subrat Pathak, M.P.)