Bill No. 47-F of 2012
 
THE NORTH-EASTERN AREAS (REORGANISATION)
AND OTHER RELATED LAWS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK  SABHA  ON  11TH MAY, 2012
RAJY A SABHA ON 16TH MAY, 2012)

1
THE NORTH-EASTERN AREAS (REORGANISATION) AND OTHER
RELA TED LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 and Other
Related Laws.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other
Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 47-F of  2012

2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE NORTH-EASTERN AREAS
(REORGANISATION) ACT, 1971
2. In section 2 of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in clause ( d), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘Provided that on and from the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the provisions of
this clause shall have effect as if for the brackets and words “(Assam, Nagaland,
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura)”, the brackets and words “(Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland)” had been substituted.’.
3. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that on and from the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the common High
Court shall be the High Court for the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram
and Nagaland and shall cease to have its jurisdiction, powers and authority for the
States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.”.
4. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“28A. ( 1) On and from the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, there shall be a
High Court—
(a) for the State of Meghalaya to be called the High Court of Meghalaya;
(b) for the State of Manipur to be called the High Court of Manipur;
(c) for the State of Tripura to be called the High Court of Tripura.
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur
and the High Court of Tripura shall respectively be at such place as the President
may, by notified order, appoint.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Judges and
division courts of the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the
High Court of Tripura may sit at such other place or places in the States of Meghalaya,
Manipur and Tripura respectively, other than their principal seat as the Chief Justice
of the respective High Court may, with the approval of the Governor of the State
concerned, appoint.
28B. (1) Such of the Judges of the common High Court holding office immediately
before the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other
Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 as may be determined by the President after
ascertaining their option shall, on such commencement, cease to be the Judges of the
common High Court and become a Judge of the High Court of Meghalaya or the High
Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura, as the case may be.
(2) Every person who by virtue of sub-section (1) become a Judge of the High
Court of Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura shall,
except in the case where any such person is appointed to be the Chief Justice of any
of those High Courts, rank in the respective High Court according to the priority of
their respective appointments as Judges of the common High Court.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section
28.
Insertion of
new sections
28A to 28K.
Establishment
of separate
High Courts
for the States
of
Meghalaya,
Manipur and
Tripura.
81 of 1971.
Judges of
High Courts
of
Meghalaya,
Manipur and
Tripura.

3
28C. The High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High
Court of Tripura shall have, in respect of any part of the territories included in the
State of Meghalaya, the State of Manipur and the State of Tripura respectively, all
such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under the law in force immediately before
the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, are exercisable in respect of that part of the said territories
by the common High Court.
28D. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the North-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 with
respect to the custody of the seal of the common High Court shall, with the necessary
modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of
Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura, as the case
may be.
28E. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the North-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 with
respect to practice and procedure in the common High Court shall, with necessary
modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of
Manipur and the High Court of Tripura, and accordingly, the High Court of Meghalaya,
the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura shall, respectively, have all
such powers to make rules and orders with respect to practice and procedure as are
immediately before the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation)
and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 exercisable by the common High
Court:
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately before the
commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2012 with respect to the practice and procedure in the common
High Court shall, until varied or revoked by rules or orders made by the High Court of
Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura, as the case
may be, apply with the necessary modifications in relation to the practice and
procedure in the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High
Court of Tripura respectively, as if such rules or orders were made by the respective
High Court.
28F. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 with respect
to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the common High
Court shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs
and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Meghalaya, the
High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura.
28G. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the North-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 relating
to the powers of the Chief Justice, Single Judges and division courts of the common
High Court and with respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers
shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of
Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura.
28H. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the North-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 relating
to appeals to the Supreme Court from the common High Court and the Judges and
division courts thereof shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to
the High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.
Jurisdiction
of High
Courts of
Meghalaya,
Manipur and
Tripura.
Custody of
seal of High
courts of
Meghalaya,
Manipur and
Tripura.
Practice and
procedure in
the High
Courts of
Meghalaya,
Manipur and
Tripura.
Forms of
writs and
other
processes.
Powers of
Judges.
Procedure as
to appeals to
Supreme
Court.

4
28-I. (1) Except as hereinafter provided, the common High Court shall, as from
the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, have no jurisdiction in respect of the States of
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.
(2) Such proceedings pending in the common High Court immediately before
the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation)  and Other Related
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 as are certified, whether before or after that day, by the
Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of
action and other circumstances to be proceedings which ought to be heard and
decided by the High Court of Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the High
Court of Tripura, as the case may be, shall, as soon as may be after such certification,
be transferred to the High Court of Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the
High Court of Tripura, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2) or in section
28A, but save as hereinafter provided, the common High Court shall have, and the
High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura
shall not have, jurisdication to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for
leave to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any
such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed by the common High
Court before the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and
Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012:
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the
common High Court, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought
to be transferred to the High Court of Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the
High Court of Tripura, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such
proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.
(4) Any order made by the common High Court—
(a) before the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation)
and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, in any proceedings transferred
to the High Court of Meghalaya, or the High Court of Manipur or the High
Court of Tripura by virtue of sub-section (2); or
(b) in any proceeding with respect to which the common High Court
retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3),
shall, for all purposes, have effect, not only as an order of the common High Court but
also as an order made by the High Court of Meghalaya, or the High Court of Manipur
or the High Court of Tripura, as the case may be.
28J. For the purposes of section 28H,—
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a Court until that Court
has disposed of  all issues between the parties, including any issue with respect
to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings and shall include appeals,
applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review,
petitions for revision and petitions for writs; and
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed  as including references
to a Judge or division Court thereof, and references to an order made by a Court
or a Judge shall be construed as including references to a sentence, judgment
or decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.
28K. Nothing in sections 28A to 28J (both inclusive) shall affect the application
to the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of
Tripura of any provisions of the Constitution, and the provisions of these sections
shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made on or after the
Transfer of
proceedings
from
common
High Court
to the High
Courts of
Meghalaya,
Manipur and
Tripura.
Interpretation.
Saving.

5
commencement  of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2012 with respect to the respective High Court by any Legislature
or other authority having power to make such provisions.".
5. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Nagaland or Tripura”, the words “Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram or
Nagaland” shall be substituted.
6. In section 32 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided that on and from the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the provisions of
this section shall cease to have effect.”.
7. In section 33 of the principal Act, for the words “Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland
and Tripura”, the words “Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland” shall be substituted.
8. After section 87 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“87A. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, as
amended by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2012, the Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act,  as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of
a period of two years from the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.".
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961 AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS
RELATING TO THE BAR COUNCIL AND ADVOCATES
9.  On and from the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and
Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, in section 3 of the Advocates Act, 1961,—
(A) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words “and Uttaranchal”, the words “Uttarakhand,
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura” shall be substituted;
(ii) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) for the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Mizoram and
Nagaland to be known as the Bar Council of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Mizoram and Nagaland;”;
(B) in sub-section ( 2), for the words "in the case of the State Bar Council of
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura, the Advocate-General of each
of the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura", the words "in
the case of the State Bar Council of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland,
the Advocate-General of each of the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram
and Nagaland" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
31.
Amendment
of section
32.
Amendment
of section
33.
Insertion of
new section
87A.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment
of section 3.25 of 1961.

6
10. (1) Any person who immediately before the commencement of the North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation)   and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 is an advocate on
the roll of the Bar Council of the States of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and
Tripura may give his option in writing, within one year from the commencement of the
North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 to
the Bar Council of such State, to transfer his name on the roll of the Bar Council of any one
State among the States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura and notwithstanding anything
contained in the Advocates Act, 1961 and the rules made thereunder, upon such option so
given his name shall be deemed to have been transferred on the  roll of the Bar Council of
such State with effect from the date of the option so given for the purposes of the said Act
and the rules made thereunder.
(2) The persons other than the advocates who are entitled immediately before the
commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2012, to practise in the common High Court or any subordinate Court
thereof shall, on and after the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation)
and  Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, be recognised as such persons entitled
also to practise in the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High
Court of Tripura or any subordinate Court thereof, as the case may be.
(3) The right of audience in the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur
and the High Court of Tripura shall be regulated in accordance with the like principles as
immediately before the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and
Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 are in force with respect to the right of audience
in the common High Court.
11. Any person who, immediately before the commencement of the North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, is an advocate
entitled  to practise or any other person entitled to practise in the common High Court and
was authorised to appear in any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High
Court of Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura under
section 28-I of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 shall have the right to
appear in the High Court of Meghalaya, or the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of
Tripura, as the case may be, in relation to those proceedings.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENT OF THE STATE OF MIZORAM  ACT, 1986
12. After section 26 of the State of Mizoram Act, 1986, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“26A. On and from the date of commencement of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the provisions of
sections 15 to 26 (both inclusive) shall not apply to the States of Meghalaya, Manipur
and Tripura.”.
CHAPTER V
AMENDMENT OF THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH ACT, 1986
13. After section 28 of the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act,1986, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
Special
provision
relating to
Bar Councils
and
advocates.
Right to
appear or to
act in
proceedings
transferred to
High Courts of
Meghalaya,
Manipur and
Tripura.
25 of 1961.
81 of 1971.
Amendment
of Act 34 of
1986.
Non-applica-
bility of this
Part to the
States of
Meghalaya,
Manipur and
Tripura.
Amendment
of Act 69 of
1986.

7
“29A. On and from the date of commencement of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the provisions of
sections 18 to 29 (both inclusive) shall not apply to the States of Meghalaya, Manipur
and Tripura.”.
————
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
Dated the Chairman.
————
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.
Non-applica-
bility of this
Part to the
States of
Meghalaya,
Manipur and
Tripura.

————
A
BILL
further to amend the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 and
Other Related Laws.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
GMGIPMRND—1243RS(S3)—17-05-2012.