THE DAMODAR V ALLEY CORPORATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2007
A
BILL
further to amend the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Damodar Valley Corporation  (Amendment) Act,
2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 4 of the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948, for sub-section ( 1),
the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(1) The Corporation shall consist of—
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 4.
14 of 1948.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 47 of 2007
5

2
(a) a Chairman;
(b) a member (technical), and a member (finance);
(c) one representative from the Central Government;
(d) two representatives one each from the State Governments of Jharkhand
and West Bengal;
(e) three independent experts one each from the field of irrigation, water
supply and generation or transmission of electricity.
(1A) The Chairman and members under clauses (a), (b) and (d) of sub-section
(1) shall be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the State
Governments concerned while the members under clauses (c) and (e) shall be appointed
by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette.
(1B) The Chairman and members under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1)
shall be whole-time while the members under clauses (c) to (e) shall be part-time.".
5
10

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Damodar V alley Corporation was constituted under the Damodar Valley Corporation
Act, 1948 with the authority for flood control, irrigation, power generation and integrated
development of the Damodar River Valley. The corporation consists of a full-time Chairman
and two other part-time members appointed by the Central Government after consultation
with the State Governments of   Jharkhand and West Bengal. A number of changes have
taken place in the activities of the Corporation in tune with the industrial development in the
valley area and the increased demand for power by industries especially coal, steel and other
consumers. The Administrative Staff College of India has recommended restructuring of the
Corporation to make it more broad-based and professional so that it may discharge its
responsibilities more effectively and efficiently. Therefore, amendments to the Act are
proposed so that besides the Chairman there are two full-time members with functional
responsibilities for finance and technical matters. The remaining members, who are part-time
shall include one representative each from the Central Government, and the State Governments
of Jharkhand and West Bengal, and three independent experts, one each from the field of
irrigation, water supply and generation or transmission of electricity.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE.
The 4th April, 2007.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation would involve expenditure from the
fund of the Damodar Valley Corporation for the post of member (finance), member
(technical) and three independent experts, one each from the field of irrigation, water
supply and generation or transmission of electricity. It has been estimated that approximate
expenditure is Rs. 65 lakhs (Rupees sixty-five lakhs only) per annum for full-time members
and Rs. 8 lakhs (Rupees eight lakhs only) per annum for part-time members to be funded
from the Damodar V alley Corporation. No expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India shall be incurred.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE DAMODAR VALLEY CORPORATION ACT, 1948.
(14 OF 1948)
* * * * *
4. (1) The Corporation shall consist of a Chairman and two other members appointed
by the Central Government after consultation with the Provincial Governments.
* * * * *
Constitution
of the
Corporation.
5

MGIPMRND—1636LS(S3)—24-04-2007.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948.
—————
(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Minister of Power)