THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI KASHIRAM RANA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution  (Amendment)  Act, 2008.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution—
(i) in the Union List,—
(a ) in entry 2  for the words  "any other armed forces of the Union", the
words "any other armed forces of the Union including armed forces responsible
for the maintenance of internal security" shall be substituted; and
(b) in entry 2A for the words "in any State", the words "in any State for
controlling terrorist activities or" shall be substituted.
(ii) in the State List, in entry 1 for the words "any other armed force of the
Union", the words "any other armed forces of the Union including armed forces
responsible for the maintenance of internal security" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  47 of  2008
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The recent terrorist activities resulting in bomb blasts in the cities of Bangaluru and
Ahmedabad are grim reminders that terrorism is to be fought as a battle to protect the internal
security of the country, to maintain peace and communal harmony and for the overall
development of the country. Because of terrorism the country is pushed backward on all
fronts. Therefore, there is need to tackle the menace of terrorism on war footing.
At present, terrorism is affecting almost all parts of the country and the State
Governments have limited resources at their command to tackle the problem. The Central
Government simply citing the reason that law and order is the problem of   the State Governments
moves away from its basic responsibility to protect the internal security in the country. Time
has now come when problem of internal security has assumed gigantic proportions and
transferring the responsibility for internal security to the Centre has become particularly
urgent because of the weakening of the law and order machinery in several States owing to
various factors. The Central Government should set up a central force on the lines of other
paramilitary forces to tackle the problem of internal security.
Therefore, it is proposed to amend  the Constitution with a view to transfer the internal
security aspect of the country to the Central Government and authorizing it to raise a central
paramilitary force particularly to tackle the problem of internal security.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KASHIRAM RANA.
July 29,  2008.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*******
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
(Article  246)
List I—Union List
*******
2.  Naval, military and air forces; any other armed forces of the Union.
2A.  Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force subject to the
control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereof  in any  State in aid of  the civil power;
powers,  jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the members of such forces while on such
deployment.
*******
List II—State List
1. Public order (but no including the use of any naval, military or air force or any other
armed forces of the Union or of any other force subject to the control of the Union or of any
contingent or unit thereof in aid of the civil power.
*******
3

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kashiram Rana, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2743LS(S-5)—08.09.2008.