ASt(NTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

22 AUG 2005

Bill No. 47 of 2003

THE ABOLITION OF CHILD LABOUR BILL, 2003
| By
SHRI IQBAL AHMED SARADGI, M.P.
A
BILL
to abolish the child labour in the country and for matters connected therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Abolition of Child Labour Act, 2003. Short title,
ह | ee extent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India. : | commencement.
5 (3) It shall come into force at once. | |
2. In this act unless the context otherwise requires — | Definitions.

(a) " appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government:

(0) "child" means a boy or girl below the age of eighteen years; and



Abolition of
‘child labour.

Punishment
for violation
of the Act.

Punishment to
parents for
coercion.

Closure of an
organisation/
establishment
engaging

child labour.

Establishment
of children's
home and
rehabilitation.

Provision of
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for the time

being in force.

Power to
make rules.

2

(c) "employer" means a person who engages a child in a job or in an employment
and who has ultimate control over the affairs of an establishment including shop,
house, agriculture or any other work.

3. Child labour in any form in any establishment in the country is hereby abolished. _

4. Any person, who engages a child in any employment shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term of one year and a fine of rupees one lakh.

5. Any parent or a lawful guardian of a child who is found to have coerced his child
into employment shall be punished with imprisonment for a term of two years.

6. After this Act comes into force, any organisation or an establishment which is
found to have engaged a child in a job or in an employment shall be closed.

7. (1) Any child found engaged in a job or in any employment or found collecting
rags and waste shall immediately be taken into custody by the police.

(2) Every child so picked up shall be sent to a children's home, to be
established in every district by the appropriate Government, where the child shall
be provided with facilities like education and maintenance till the age of eighteen
years. |

8. The provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt
with in this Act.

9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. '

15

20

Se नाक



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India has the largest number of child labour in the world. The official figure is
| 3 million. But the actual number may be much higher. Indian children are the source
of cheap labour because they can be paid less or can be abused without provoking
retaliation. These children work in industries such as cracker making, diamond pol-
ishing, glass, brass-ware, carpet weaving, bangle making, lock making and mica cut-
ting to name a few. The overwhelming majority of working children are in unorga-
nized, agricultural and allied sector. And a large number of children work as domestic
servants. Poverty is cited as a major cause of child labour, but it is not the only
determinant. Inadequate schools or even the expense of schooling leaves some chil-
dren with little else to do but work. The attitude of parents also contribute to child
labour. Compulsory elementary education may help in regard to this attitude. The
gigantic problem of child labour cannot be eliminated in one stroke. Many countries
have stopped buying products of industries where children are employed. However,
this may be one step in the right direction. Only multidimensional strategies including
compulsory elementary education, eradication of poverty, eradicating parental
illiteracy, making child labour as illegal will help in achieving this objective. Stringent
legal provisions, severe punishment for violation of laws, rehabilitation of children
already engaged in jobs have to go alongwith abolition of child labour in the country.
Therefore, it is hightime that a stringent law for abolition of child labour is brought
forward. ‘

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
July 2, 2003.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 7(2) provides for establishment of a children's home in every district for
rehabilitation of children engaged in a job or in an establishment. The Central
Government would have to incur expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for
establishment of children's homes in respect of Union territories. The State Governments
will incur expenditure from their respective consolidated funds for children's homes
to be established in their respective States. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring ©
expenditure of about rupees Fifty Crore per annum. A non-recurring of about rupees
One Crore is also likely to be involved. |



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION |

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative powers is of normal character

नल
"Sc
~
. AZ
Be.
3 >
Be
be ~
4
x. ¢
&
5
है जे
yy
~§
- .
~
‘
“/



A
BILL

to abolish the child labour in the country and
for matters connected therewith.

~

(Shri [gbal Ahmed Saradgi, MP. ) | a

MGIPMRND—1605LS—16-07-2003.