AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 47 of 2022
THE  CONVERSION THERAPY (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI APARUPA PODDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit conversion therapy and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Conversion Therapy (Prohibition)
Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “conversion therapy”, means any practice, sustained effort or treatment
aiming to change a person’s sexual orientation from homosexual or bisexual
to heterosexual or his gender identity or gender expression from transgender
to cis-gender using psychological, physical, spiritual or other interventions;
(b) “gender expression” means manifestation of gender identity of a person,
that is to say, the manner in which a person expresses his gender identity
through song, appearance, dress and behaviour;
(c) “gender identity” refers to internal and individual experience of gender of a
person, which may or may not correspond with the sex assigned at birth,
including the personal sense of the body (which may involve, if freely chosen,
modification of bodily appearance and, or functions by medical, surgical or
other means) and other expressions of gender including name, dress, speech
and mannerisms;
(d) “professional” means a person who has an official qualification and a warrant
to practice as a care worker, counsellor, educator, family therapist, medical
practitioner, pathologist, psychologist, psychotherapist, psychiatrist, social
worker or youth worker;
(e) “sexual orientation” refers to each person’s capacity for profound emotional,
affectional and sexual attraction to, and intimate and sexual relations with,
persons of a different gender or the same gender or more than one gender;
(f) “mental illness” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Mental Healthcare
Act, 2017;
(g) “person with disability” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016;
(h)  “vulnerable person” means any person:
(i) under the age of eighteen years; or
(ii) with disability or mental illness; or
(iii) considered by the court to be particularly at risk when taking into
account the person’s age, maturity, health, disability, social or other
conditions including any situation of dependence, as well as physical
or psychological consequence of the offence on that person.
3. The conversion therapy is hereby prohibited.
4. Any person who advertises, directly or indirectly, about conversion therapy
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six
months but which may extend upto two years and with fine which may extend upto
two lakh rupees:
Provided that if a professional is found guilty of committing the offence of
advertising conversion therapy, his license to practice that profession shall also be
revoked.
5. A person forcing another person to undergo conversion therapy shall be
deemed to have committed the offence of voluntarily causing hurt under section 321
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and shall be punished accordingly.
6. A professional or a person pretending to be a professional, administering
conversion therapy shall be deemed to have committed the offence of voluntarily
causing grievous hurt under section 322 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and
shall be punished accordingly.
Definitions.
15
5
10
2
Prohibition of
Conversion
Therapy.
Punishment for
advertising
Conversion
Therapy.
Punishment for
forcing
Conversion
Therapy.
20
25
40
45
30
35
Punishment for
professional or
person pretend-
ing to be a
professional.
49 of 2016.
10 of 2017.

Metropolitan
Magistrate to
try offences.
Offences to be
cognizable for
certain purposes
and to be
non-bailable
and non-
compoundable.
3
7. Any person or a professional found instigating a vulnerable person to undergo
conversion therapy shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than two years, but which may extend upto five years and with fine which may
extend upto ten lakh rupees.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973,—
(a) no Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate
of the first class shall try any offence under this Act;
(b) no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act
except upon—
(i) its own knowledge or a police report of the facts which constitute such
offence, or
(ii) a complaint by the person aggrieved by the offence or a parent or other
relative of such person, or by any recognised welfare institution or
organisation;
(c) it shall be lawful for a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class to pass any sentence authorised by this Act on any person
convicted of an offence under this Act.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “recognised welfare
institution or organisation” means a social welfare institution or organisation
recognised in this behalf by the Central or State Government.
(2) Nothing in Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating
to limitation for taking cognizance of certain offences shall apply to any offence
punishable under this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,
a statement made by the person aggrieved by the offence under this Act shall not
subject such person to a prosecution under this Act.
9. (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply to offences under this
Act as if they were cognizable offences—
(a) for the purposes of investigation of such offences; and
(b) for the purposes of matters other than—
(i) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code; and
(ii) the arrest of a person without a warrant or without an order of a
Magistrate.
(2) Every offence under this Act shall be non-bailable and non-compoundable.
 10. Where any person is prosecuted for administering or abetting conversion
therapy, the burden of proving that he had not committed an offence under those
sections shall be on him.
  11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
  (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for the better co-ordination of policy and action with respect
to the administration of this Act.
  (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
Punishment for
causing vulnerable
person to undergo
conversion
therapy.
Burden of
Proof.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

4
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. All human rights
are universal, interdependent, indivisible and interrelated. Sexual orientation and
gender identity are integral to every person’s dignity and humanity and must not be
the basis for discrimination or abuse.
The aforementioned principles are also attributed to sovereign States such as
India under the Yogyakarta Principles. The Supreme Court of India in the landmark
case of Navtej Singh Johar vs. Union of India, while recognizing the ‘transformative
nature’ of the Indian Constitution, introduced the Doctrine of Progressive Realisation
of Rights, in order to advocate the realization of new rights congruent with changing
times. However, this an attempt is mere tokenism if the promise of constitutional
safeguards to sexual minorities fails to address lacunae in the existing legal framework,
thereby allowing these minorities to remain vulnerable.
Conversion therapy violates the aforementioned rights to its core. However, the
rights granted under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution only protect individuals
against the actions of the State, that is, vertical application of fundamental rights and
precludes liability of private entities. Whereas, the rights guaranteed under article 21
as fundamental rights in India can grant protection against private entities but such
horizontal application has not been observed in the context of sexual orientation.
Hence, the fundamental rights in the context of sexual orientation and gender identity
provided under article 19(1)(a) and article 21 of the Constitution, can only be enforced
against government facilities and not against private entities.
The objective of this Bill is to ensure that an individual is not persecuted  and
subjected to colonial narrative or victorian norms purporting heteronormative
cis-gender narrative as justification for causing uncertified and unscientific medical
harm.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;
 February 16, 2022      APARUPA PODDAR
5

  MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit conversion therapy and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Aparupa Poddar, M.P .)