1
Bill No. 47 of  2018
AS  INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE  SOLAR  ENERGY  PROMOTION  BILL,  2018
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of solar energy by establishing an Authority to protect the
environment and control the global warming being caused due to burning of fossil
fuels for energy production resulting in noxious emissions therefrom and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Solar Energy Promotion  Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(b) "Authority" means the National Solar Energy Authority of India established
under section 3;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "Solar energy" means the energy obtained from natural sources of sunlight.
Definitions.
5
10

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be known as the National Solar Energy Authority of India
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The headquarters of  the Authority shall be at New Delhi and it shall have offices
at such other places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an expert scientist having adequate knowledge
and professional experience in the field of solar energy, to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(b) one Deputy Chairperson with such qualifications as may be prescribed, to
be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the respective Presiding Officers of the House
concerned;
(d) five members to represent the Union Ministries of Environment and Forests,
Science and Technology, New and Renewable Energy, Planning and Finance, to be
nominated by the Central Government;
(e) four members to represent the non-Governmental Organisations working
for the protection of environment and promotion of solar energy in the country, to be
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(f) four members to be nominated by the Governments of the States to be rotated
amongst the States in alphabetical order.
(4) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(5) The term of office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of members other than  ex-officio members of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(7) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Authority as is required for its efficient functioning.
(8) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(9) The Authority shall meet at least two times in a year.
4. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such special steps in close co-ordination
with concerned Ministries, Departments and Public Sector Enterprise of the Central and
State Governments for the rapid and accelerated promotion and development of solar energy
throughout the country as it may deem necessary and expedient to do so for the promotion
of solar energy.
(2) Without prejudice to be generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall,
(a) formulate solar energy policy, its goals and execution plan;
(b) develop indicative standards of solar energy;
Establishment
of National
Solar Energy
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority.
5
10
15
30
35
40
20
25
45

3
(c) support and encourage research and development through Government and
private sector participation involving all major Research Laboratories;
(d) work for greening of industry and create public awareness of climate change
and other environmental issues;
(e) facilitate infrastructure development of solar energy in rural areas;
(f) suggest ways for conversion of fossil fuel based on industrial heating to solar
thermal heating through new solar concentrator technology or its hybrids;
(g) suggest educational and other policy initiatives for solar energy;
(h) create interactive web based resource maps of different solar technologies to
facilitate speedy project development and market expansion;
(i) facilitate quick technology transfer and adoption of solar energy; and
(j) such other activities as may be assigned from time to time.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the  time being in force,
the appropriate Government shall in consultation with the Authority make it compulsory for
every establishment including Government establishments to,—
(a) use the photovoltaic energy in all public buildings;
(b) ensure every company, firm in any business having open area of more than
200 square yards on ground or roof install photovoltaic or solar cells to fulfil its fifty
per cent of electricity and fuel demand shall impose heavy fine of  rupees one lakh per
month;
(c) make provision for time-bound solar water heating in all buildings with defined
floor area;
(d) make it mandatory for electricity utilities for compulsory purchase of electricity
from solar energy sources;
(e) reserve adequate land for setting up of solar energy projects;
(f) encourage monetarily by providing loan at one per cent interest for purchase,
installation and use of solar cells; and
(g) take such other steps as the appropriate Government may deem necessary.
(2) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, identify the exploitable
sources of solar energy in their respective territorial jurisdictions and send project reports
thereon to the Authority which shall depute a team of experts to verify and assess the
possibility of exploiting solar energy sources.
(3) The Authority shall on the basis of the report submitted by the team of experts work
out the estimated expenditure on the projects submitted to it under sub-section ( 2) and
recommend the Central Government to implement the projects in a time-bound manner.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, provide to the Authority in each financial year such sums as may be considered
necessary and adequate for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this Act.
7. The Authority shall prepare once in every calendar year in such form and at such
time as may be prescribed an Annual Report giving a true and full account of its activities
during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the President of India who
shall cause the same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Government
and
commercial
establishments
to use solar
energy.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Authority to
prepare Annual
Reports.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
20
45
15
25
30
35
40

4
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before both the Houses of Parliament.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The world Meteorological Organisation has reported that a series of record breaking
weather events have caused havoc in the world during the year 2007. Temperature records
were broken in western and central Russia in May and in South Eastern Europe in June and
July. In many European countries' April was the warmest ever recorded month. China and
some parts of India were hit by the worst snowfall followed by avalanches. According to
research, even though temperatures are showing precarious rise, global warming is forecast
to set in with a vengeance only after 2009 with at least half of the five following years
expected to be hotter than 1998, the warmest year on record. The global warming is being
caused by human activities such as the burning of fossil fuels which release greenhouse
gases. The accelerating rate of carbon dioxide emissions is largely due to rising energy
consumption, notably coal and petroleum products resulting from an increasing population
and higher per capita GDP. The mitigation of global warming is possible only through a
transition to a low carbon economy, which means large-scale development of solar energy is
the biggest imperative of our times for environmental protection.
Our country has vast potential of solar energy. According to conservative estimate,
Mega Watt wind power potential is 4500 Mega Watt and with the growth in unit size of
turbines, greater land availability and expanded wind resource exploration, this potential
should go up significantly up to one lakh Mega Watt. At the same time an urgent assessment
of the potential of power generation from solar energy in our country is essential. This is
more so because of the recent growth of Concentrating Solar Power (CSP). The desert area of
our country have the solar radiation required for CSP production. A 60 KM X 60 kilometer
area can produce one lakh Mega Watt of power. We have a desert area of 208110 square
kilometer in Rajasthan and Gujarat. Even if we use only 15000 square kilometer of desert we
can produce three lakh Mega Watt of power. The solar energy power production potential in
our country can easily be scaled up to six lakh Mega Watt in the future through multifarious
sources and new energy technologies. We are also capable of producing bio-fuels. It is felt
that an authority to tap these potentials should be established at the national level.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG  APPA  BARNE
January 22, 2018.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of National Solar Energy Authority. It
also provides for the composition of the Authority and the salary and allowances for its
Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson, members, officers and staff. Clause 4 provides for
infrastructure development of solar energy in rural areas. Clause 6 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore will be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the promotion of solar energy by establishing an Authority to protect the
environment and control the global warming being caused due to burning of fossil
fuels for energy production resulting in noxious emissions therefrom and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4057LS(S3)—13-02-2018.