1
THE SAFAI KARAMCHARIS INSURANCE SCHEME BILL, 2011
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for comprehensive and compulsory insurance of Safai Karamcharis against
any mishap connected with their work, to give them economic protection, to safeguard
their interests and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Safai Karamcharis Insurance Scheme Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be;
(b) "mishap" means any physical injury, disability, handicap or any disease
caused to a Safai Karamchari while performing his duties and which, for such karamchari,
Bill No. 47 of  2011
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
constitutes or results in a substantial handicap, whether temporarily or permanently,
to his normal daily activities and to his employment;
 (c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "Safai Karamchari" means any person engaged in or employed for manually
carrying human excreta or any sanitation work and includes persons engaged in cleaning
of animal hides; and
(e) "Scheme" means the Safai Karamcharis Insurance Scheme framed under
section 3.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments,
frame a Scheme to be known as the Safai Karamcharis Insurance Scheme, for comprehensive
and compulsory insurance of Safai Karamcharis against any mishap.
(2) The Scheme shall, among other things, provide for—
(a) the principles and conditions governing the insurance of Safai Karamcharis
under the scheme;
(b) the interim insurance amount to be paid to Safai Karamchari in the occurrence
of a mishap;
(c) part of insurance amount to be paid immediately to the Safai Karamcharis
affected by mishaps caused to them due to hazards involved in their job;
(d) nominal rate of premium to be paid by the Safai Karamcharis;
(e) the extent of insurance cover;
(f) the manner of making claims by Safai Karamcharis; and
(g) any other matter which the Central Government may deem necessary.
4. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Government,
administer the Scheme.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments and
by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a fund to be known as the Safai Karamcharis
Insurance Fund which shall consist of—
(a) premium amount received from Safai Karamcharis for insurance under the
scheme;
(b) grants made by the Central Government and the State Governments in such
ratio, as may be agreed between them;
(c) any monies received as contribution or donations from the people and
organisations in India or abroad; and
(d) any income received from investment of money out of the Fund.
(2) The initial capital of the Safai Karamcharis Insurance Fund shall be rupees five
hundred crore of which rupees four hundred crore shall be contributed by the Central
Government and rupees one hundred crore shall be contributed by the State Governments
in the proportion of number of Safai Karamcharis working in the respective States.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Advisory Committee in every district, falling within its jurisdiction, to assess
the claims made by the Safai Karamcharis due to any mishap.
Safai
Karamcharis
Insurance
Scheme.
Administra-
tion of the
Scheme by the
Central
Government.
Establishment
of Safai
Karamcharis
Insurance
Fund.
Constitution
of Advisory
Committees.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) Every Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, to be appointed by the
appropriate Government, and such other members and staff, as may be prescribed.
(3) The terms and conditions as to the qualifications, salary and allowances, etc. of the
Chairperson, members and staff of the Advisory Committees shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(4) While assessing the claims referred to in sub-section (1), every Advisory Committee
shall inform the representatives of the Safai Karamcharis of the area, where such mishap has
occurred, about the procedure followed by it in assessing such claims.
7. It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to pay insurance amount
or such part of insurance amount as may be recommended by the Advisory Committee,
referred to in section 6, to a Safai Karamchari for any mishap caused to him during the course
of performance of his duties, out of the Safai Karamcharis Insurance Fund.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Payment of
Insurance
amount by the
appropriate
Government.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Several outmoded and ancient traditions and beliefs are prevalent in our country. The
people, instead of doing their own work, depend on Safai Karamcharis for getting the cleaning
work done. These Safai Karamcharis have not been provided with minimum wages and social
and economic security till today.
The Safai Karamcharis always live in the danger of inhaling poisonous gases while
clearing blocked sewer lines and carrying poisonous waste matter. They earn their livelihood
from cleaning work, but they rarely get their meagre wages in time. As a result they are forced
to beg for food.
Life Insurance Corporation and other insurance companies insure only those
Safai Karamcharis who are working in Government, Semi-Government organizations and can
afford higher premium. But majority of Safai Karamcharis are working in villages in unorganised
sectors on daily wages/part time basis and have no regular income.
In the circumstances, there is an urgent need to frame a comprehensive and compulsory
insurance scheme for Safai Karamcharis, who are living in deplorable condition, selling their
labour at very cheap rates and responsible for cleanliness and, thus, prevention of epidemics.
Such an insurance scheme will go a long way in affording them social and economic protection.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN MEGHWAL
August 2, 2011.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall, in consultation with the
State Governments, frame a scheme to be known as the Safai Karamcharis Insurance Scheme.
Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall administer the scheme. Clause 5 provides
for establishment of Safai Karamcharis Insurance Fund by the Central Government to which
the Central Government shall contribute rupees four hundred crore to form initial capital of
the fund and shall also make grants to the fund. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of
Advisory Committees in every district by the appropriate Government. As far as constitution
of these Committees in the State is concerned, the expenditure shall be met out of the
Consolidated Fund of respective States. However, in the case of constitution of Advisory
Committees in the Union territories, the expenditure shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees four hundred
crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees four hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—841LS—(S3)—08-08-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for comprehensive and compulsory insurance of Safai Karamcharis against any
mishap connected with their work to give them economic protection, to safeguard their
interests and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P .)