THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI BASUDEB ACHARIA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"21B. (1) All citizens shall have the right to social security.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the provision of this article shall
not be suspended.
Short title.
Bill No. 47 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to Social
security.
5

2
(3) Parliament may by law prescribe within a period of one year from the enactment of
the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009, the manner in which social security shall be secured
to the citizens.
Explanation:— In this article, in clause (1), "social security" means—
(i) provision of employment or unemployment allowance to an unemployed person
from the age of thirty years till he gets gainful employment or attains the age of sixty
years, whichever is earlier;
(ii) old age pension and necessary assistance for a decent livelihood to such
persons who have attained the age of sixty years and have no other source of income;
(iii) disability allowance and other assistance to all disabled persons who have
no other source of income; and
(iv) compulsory health insurance for all old aged and disabled persons.
3. Article 41 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
Omission of
article 41.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even more than sixty years after independence, the State has not secured to its citizens
the rights envisaged under article 41 of the Constitution. There have been cases of death due
to starvation, malnutrition, inadequate health care facilities, etc. in many parts of country. A
large section of population is lacking basic facilities and lives below subsistence level. Social
insecurities such as loss of employment, disability, old age and ill-health, etc. are to be
addressed properly. Social security needs to be viewed as a basic/fundamental right rather
than as a charity oriented intervention.
The term social security should consist of all types of measures, preventive, promotional
and protective as the case may be. The term encompasses social insurance, social assistance,
social protection, social safety net, etc.
It should be the duty of the State to provide social security to all citizens of the
country. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA
June 18, 2009.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks   to insert a new article 21B in the Constitution, which makes
the State responsible for providing social security to all the citizens. Thus, it would become
the duty of the State to provide social security according to the needs of diverse sections of
population.
The total overall financial burden due to implementation of obligations under the
proposed provision would be shared between Central and State Governments in the ratio of
seventy five and twenty five per cent, respectively.
At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the total financial implication in case this Bill
is enacted and implemented. However, if the Bill is enacted and implemented approximate
recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of India per
annum is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
21A. The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age
of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State, by law, determine.
* * * * * *
41. The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make
effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in
cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved
want.
* * * * * *
5
Right to
education.
Right to work,
to education
and to public
assistance
incertain
cases.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2635LS(S5)—08-07-2009.