BDl No. " of 1954. 
'THE SEA CUSTOMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1954 
.q fI" r.1'I'PnflDUC:"·' .. ., . (I/'. ':~) ./'.~ ~ .. --- _ .... A ... - _>1. U ..... 
BILL 
further to amend the Sea Customs Act, 1878 
BE it enacted .by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
lndia as follows:-
1. Short tltle.-This Act may be called the Sea Customs (Am-
Endment) Act, 1954. 
2. Amelfdment of section 25, Act VIII of 1878.-ln the proviso to $ 
section 25 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (hereinafter referred. to as 
the principal Act), for the words "without payment of duty", the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"without payment of duty if no drawback in respect of the 
goods has been allowed under section 43B, and on payment of 10 
duty equal to the amount of the drawback if drawback has 
been allowed under that section." 
3. Insertion of new sections 29A and 298 in Act vm of 1878.-
After section 29 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:- 1$ 
"29A. Assessment of duty prior to examination of goods.-
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, goods charge-
able to duty may, prior to the examination thereof, be permitted 
by the Customs-collector to be assessed for the purposes of this 
Act on the basis of the statement contained in the bill of entry 20 
or shipping bill, as the case may be, but if it is found subse-
quently on an examination of the goods or otherwise, that any 
such statement is not true in respect of any matter relevant to the 
assessment, the goods may, without prejudice to any other action 
wliich may be taken under this Act, be reassessed to duty. 25 
• 

10 
1$ 
3$ 
so 
2 
29B. Provisional assessment of duty.-(1) Notwithstand-
ing anything contained in this Act, but without prej,udice to the-
provisions contained in section 29,-
(a) where the owner of any goods makes and subs-
cribes a declaration before the Customs-collector to the 
effect that he is unable for want of full infDrmation to state 
precisely the real value of such goods in a bill of entry or a 
shipping bill, as the case may be; or 
(b) where the owner of any goods has furnished full 
infonnation in regard to the teal value of the goods but the 
Customs-collector requires further proof in respect thereof; 
or ' 
(c) where the Customs-collector deems it expedient to 
subject any goods liable to duty, to any chemical or other-
test, 
the Customs-collector may direct that the duty leviable _ on such 
goods may, pending the production of such information or proof 
or pending the completion of any such test, be assessed pro-
visionally in accordance with, and subject to the provisions of, 
this section and any rules made thereunder. 
(2) When the owner of any goods in resp~ct of which the 
duty has been assessed provisionally under sub-section (1) has 
paid such duty, the officer of Customs may make an order allowing 
the goods to be cleared for home cO,nsumption or shipped or 
water borne to be shipped for exportation, as the case may be,. 
and such order shall be sufficient authority for the removal of 
the goods by the owner. 
(3) When the duty leviable on such goods is assessed finally 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the duty pro-
visionally assessed under sub-section (1) shall -be adjusted 
against the duty finally assessed, and if the duty provisionally 
assessed falls short of, or is in excess of, the duty finally assessed, 
the owner of the goods shall pay the deficiency or be entitled to 
a refund, as the case may be. 
(4) The Chief Customs-authority may, subject to the con-
dition of previous publication, make rules for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of this section and, in particular, such 
rules may provide for-
(a) the circumstances in which, and the restrictions and 
conditions subject to which, duty may be provisionally asses-
sed on any goods and the manner in which such duty may 
be &0 assessed; 
(b) the furnishing of any security for the payment of the 
deficiency, if any, between the duty finally assessed, and t.he 
duty provisionally assessed; and -
(c) the final assessment of duty, where the owner of the 
goods fails to furnish full information within a specified 
period regarding the real value of the goods. 
(5) All rules made under this section shall be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament, as soon as may be, after they are 
made." 

3 
4. Amendment of sectiOn 37, Act vm of 1878.-ln section 37 of 
the principal Act, for the Explanation, the following Explanation 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"ExpZanation.-A bill of entry shall, for the purposes of this 
section, be deemed to be delivered- 5 
(a) when it is first presented to the proper officer 
of Customs; or 
(b) where it is delivered in anticipation of the arrival 
of the importing vessel, on the date on which an order is 
given under section 57 for the entry of the vessel inwards." 10 
5. Amendment of section 39, Ad vm of 1878.-ln section 39 of 
the principal Act, the following Explanation shall be inserted at the 
end, namely:-
"ExpZanation.~The period of three months shall be com-
~~~ ~ 
(a) where duty is re-assessed under section 29A, from 
the date of re-assessment; and 
(b) where duty is provisionally assessed under section 
29B, from the date of final adjustment of duty." 
6. Amendment of section 40, Act vm of 1878.-To section 40 of 20 
the principal Act, the following Explanation shall be added, 
namely:-
"Explanation.-Where duty is provisionally assessed under 
section 29B, the period of three months shall be computed from 
the date of final adjustment of duty." 25 
7. Insertion of new section 54A in Act VlU of 1878.-After section 
54 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"54A. Delivery of manifest before arrival of vessel.-Not-
withstanding anything contained in this Act, the Customs-collec- 30 
tor may, subject to any general or special order issued by the 
Chief Customs-authority, allow a manifest to be delivered in 
anticipation of the arrival of a vessel." 
8. Amedment of section 86, Act VIU of 1878.-In section 86 of 
the principal Act, for the first paragraph, the following paragraph 35 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"The owner of any goods shall, after the delivery of the mani-
fest by the master of the vessel in which they are imported, make 
entry of the goods for home consumption or warehousing by 
delivering to tne Customs-collector a bill of entry thereof with 40 
such number of copies, in such form and containing such parti-
culars, in addition to the particulars specified in section 29. as 
may, from time to time, be prescribed by the Chief Customs-
officer." 
9. Amendment of section 140, Act VIII of 1878.-ln section 140 45 
of the principal Act, for the proviso in the second paragraph. the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that no such refund shall be allowed unless a 
claim therefor is made within three months of the date on which 
the said vessel left the port." . So 

4 
10. Amendment of section 161, Act VID of 1818.-In the Schedule 
to section 167 of the principal Act,-
(a) after item 76, the following items shall be inserted, 
namely:-
, "76A. If any person resists or refuses to I70A 
allow a radiologist to screen or take 
Such penon shall on conviction 
befroc a Magistrate be liable to 
imprisonment for any term 
not exceeding six months. or 
to fine, or to both. 
X-ray pictures of his body in accordance 
with an order mllde by a Magistrate. 
10 76B. If any person resists or refuses to allow 170A 
suitable action being taken on the advice 
Such person shall on conviction 
_ before a Magistrate be liable to 
imprisonment for any term 
not exceeding six months, or 
to fine, or to both." 
and under the supervision of a registered 
medical practitioner for bringing out any 
dutiable, or prohibited goods secreted 
15 inside his body. 
35 
(b) in item SO, in the entry in the first column, for the words 
and figures "without the approval of the Customs-collector un-
der section 202", the words and figures "without being in 
possession of a valid licence required under section 202" shall be 
substituted; 
(c) after item 80, the following item shall be inserted, 
namely:-
" 81. If any person knowingly, and with 
intent to defraud the Government of 
any duty payable thereon, or to evade 
any prohibition or restriction for the 
time beini! in force under or by 
virtue of this Act with respect thereto, 
acquires possession of, or is in any 
way concerned in carrying, removing, de-
positing, harbouring, keeping or conceal-
111g or in any manner dealing with any 
go~ds which have been unlawfully remov-
ed frum a warehouse or which are charge-
able with a duty which has not been 
paid or with respect to the importation or 
exportation of which any prohibition or 
restriction is for the time being in force 
as aforesaid; or 
General Such person shall on conviction 
before a Magistrate be liable 
to imprisonment for any term 
not exceeding two years. or to 
fine, or to both." 
40 If any person is in relation to any goods ia 
any way knowingly concerned in any 
fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion 
of any duty chargeable thereon or of Bny 
such prohibition or restriction as afore-
4' said or of any provision of thb Act appli-
cable to those goods. 
11. Insertion of new section 170A in Act VIU of 1878.-After 
section 170 of the principal Act, the following section shall be in-
serted, naq1ely:-
"170A. Power to screen OT X-ray bodies of ,eTsons fOT de-
tecting secreted goods.~(l) Where any officer 0 Customs duly 
employed in the prevention of smuggling has reason to believe 

5 
that any person on board of any vessel in any port in India or 
any person who has landed from any vessel has any dutiable, 
or prohibited goods secreted inside his body, such officer of Cus-
toms may detain such person until he can bring hfm before the 
nearest Magistrate. S 
(2) A Magistrate before whom any person .is brought under 
sub-section (1) shall, if he sees no reasonable ground for believ-
ing that such person has any such goods secreted inside his body, 
forthwith discharge such person. 
(3) Where any such Magistrate has reasonable ground for 10 
believing that such person has any such goods secreted inside his 
body and the MagistTate is satisfied that for the purpose of dis-
covering such goods it is necessary to have the body of such per-
son screened or X-rayed, he may make an order to that effect. 
(4) Where a Magistrate has made any order under sub-sec- IS" 
tion (3) in relation to any person, any officer of Customs duly 
employed in the prevention of smuggling shall, as soon as prac-
ticable, take such person before a radiologist possessing qualifi-
cations recognized by the Central Government for the purpose 
of this section, and such person shall allow the radiologist 20 
to screen or X-ray his body. 
(5) A radiologist before whom any person is brought under 
sub-section (4) shall after screening or X-raying the body of such 
person forward his report, together with any X-ray pictures 
takten by him, to the Magistrate without any unnecessary delay. 25 
(0) Where on receipt of a report from a radiologist under 
sub-section (5) or otherwise, the Magistrate is satisfied that any 
person has any dutiable or prohibited goods secreted inside his 
body, he may direct that suitable action for bringing out such 
goods be taken on the advice and under the supervision of a re- 30 
gistened medical practitioner and such person shall be bound to 
comply with such direction: 
Provided that in the case of a female no such action shall 
be taken except on the advice and under the supervision of a 
female registered medical practitioner. 35 
(7) Where any person is brought before a Magistrate under 
this section, such Magistrate may for the purpose of enforcing 
the provisions of this section order such person to be kept jn 
such custody and for such time as he may direct. 
(8) Any expenditure iDcuned for the purpose of enforcing 40 
the provisions of this section (Including any fees payable to a 
radiologist or a registered medical practitioner) shall be defray-
ed out of moneys provided. by Parliament. 
(9) Nothing in this section shall apply to any person refer-
red to in sub-section (1), who admits that dutiable or prohibited 45 
goods are secreted inside his body, and who voluntClrily submits 
himself for suitable action being taken for bringing out such 
goods. 

6 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this s~ction, the expression 
"registered medical practitioner" means any person who holds a 
qualification granted by an authority specified in the Schedule 
to the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 (VII of 1916), or notified 
under section 3 of that Act, or by an authority specified in any of 
the Schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1933 (XXVII 
of 1933)." 
12. Insertion of new section 171A in Act VIII of 1878.-After 
section 171 of the principal Act, the following section shall be insert-
10 ed, namely:-
"171A. Power of officers of Customs to summon persons to give 
evidence and produce documents.-( 1) Arty duly empowered offi-
cer of Customs or other person duly employed in the prevention 
of smuggling shall have power to summon any person whose 
15 attendance he considers necessary either to give evidence or to 
produce a document or any other thing in any inquiry which 
such officer or person is making in connection with the smuggl-
ing of any goods. 
20 
30 
4.5 
(2) A summons to produce documents or other things may 
be for the production of certain specified documents or things 
or for the production of all documents or things of a certain des-
cription in the possession or under the control of the person sum-
moned. 
(3) All persons so summoned shall be bound to attend either 
in person or by an authorized agent, as such officer or other per-
son may direct; and all persons so summoned shall be bound to 
state the truth upon any subject respecting which they are exa-
mined or make statements and to produce such documents and 
other things as may be required: 
Provided that the exemption under section 132 d the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908) shall be applicable to any 
requisition for attendance under this section. 
(4) Every such inquiry as aforesaid shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and sec-
tion 228 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860). : 
13. Amendment of section 172, Act VDI of 1878.-ln section 172 
of the principal Act,-
(a) after the words "prohibited goods", the words "or any 
documents relating to such goods" shall be inserted, and 
(b) after the words "to search for such goods", the words "or 
documents" shall he inserted. 
14. Insertion of new section 178A in Act VIII of 1878.-After sec-
tion 178 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"118A. Burden of proof.-Where any goods are seized under 
this Act on the ground that they are smuggled goods, the burden 
of proving that the goods are not smuggled goods shall be on the 
persons from whose possession the goods are seized." 

7 
15. Insertion of new section 187 A in Act vln of 1878.-After sec-
tion 187 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"187A. Cognizance of offences.-No court shall take 
cognizance of any offence relating to smuggling of goods , 
punishable under item 81 of the Schedule to section 167. ex-
cept upon complaint in writing, made by the Chief Customs-offi-
cer or any other officer of Customs not lower in rank than an 
Assistant Collector of Customs authorized in this behalf by the 
Chief Customs-officer." 10 
16. Insertion of new section 190A in Act VIII of 1878.-After sec-
tion 190 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"190A. Powers of revision of Chief Customs-authority and 
CJtief Customs-offi.cer.-(1) The Chief Customs-authority may I, 
-of its own motion or otherwise call for and examine the record 
of any proceeding in which an officer of Customs has passed any 
decision or order under this Act for the purpose of satisfying 
itself as to the legality or propriety of any such decision or order 
and may pass such order thereon as it thinks fit: 20 
Provided that no order prejudicial to any person shall be 
passed under this section unless such person has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of making a representation against 
the proposed order. 
(2) The powers conferred upon the Chief Customs-authority 2, 
under sub-section (1) may also, in the like manner and subject to 
the like conditions, be exercised by the Chief Customs-officer 
in respect of any decision or order passed under this Act by any 
·officer of Customs subordinate to him." 
17. Substitution of new section for section 202 In Act vm of 30 
"1878.-For section 202 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"202. Custom-houSe agents to be Hcensed.-(l) With effect 
from such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette specify, no person shall act as an agent for 3' 
the transaction of any business relating to the entrance or c1ear-
. ance of any vessel or the import or export of goods or baggage 
-in any custom-house unless such person holds a licence granted 
in this behalf in accordanc~ with ~he. rules made under suf:-
section (2). 40 
(2) The Chief Customs-authority may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section and in 
particular, such rules may provide for-
(a) the authority by which a licence may be granted 
under this section and the period of validity of any such 4S 
licence; 
(b) the form of the licence and the fees payable there-
for; 
(c) the qualification of persons who may apply for a 
licence; so 

s 
8 
(d) the restrictions and conditions (including the fur-
nishing of a security by the licensee for his faithful beha-
viour as regards the custom-house regulations and officers} 
subject to which a licence may be granted; 
(~) the circumstances in which a licence may be sus-
pended or revoked; and 
<f> the appeals, if any, against an order of suspension or-
revocation of a licence, and the period within which such 
appeals shall be filed." 

9 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS 1\ND REASONS 
The obje~t of the Bill is-
(i) to place on a statutory basis certain existing practices rea. 
lating to procedure which have been followed for a very long time 
and which have been found to be convenient both to the trade 
and to the Government; 
(ii) to take certain additional powers which have been found 
to be necessary for the effective control of smuggling; 
(iii) to make provision for the regulation of licensing of" 
custom-house agents; and 
(iv) to provide for review in certain circumstances by Cus-
toms-authorities of decisions of their subordinates. 
The notes on clauses explain further the various provisions of the" 
Bill. 
A. C. GUHA. 
NEW DELHI; 
ThJe 27th September, 1954. 

10 
Notes on Clauses. 
Clause 2.-Section 43B of the Act makes provision for the grant 
of drawback of duty on the export of goods manufactured in India 
out of imported materials. This clause seeks to ensure that goods so 
exported do not get the further advantage of free entry under ~e('­
tion 25 on subsequent reimportation into India. 
Clause 3.-This clause inserts two new sections in the principal 
Act. The proposed section 29A places on a statutory basis the long-
standing practice whereby in order to expedite clearance of import-
ed goods the duty thereon is assessed and realised prior to their ex-
amination and not after examination as contemplated by section :n 
of the Act. 
Similarly the new section 29B places on a statutory basis the ex-
tsting practice of assessing goods to duty provisionally when full in-
formation as regards their value is not immediately available so that 
the clearance of the goods is not held up. It also authorizes the 
Chief Customs-authority to make rules regulating the procedure in 
.detail. 
Clause 4.-The amendment made by this clause is consequentjal 
on the amendment made by cIa use 8. 
Clause 5.-The amendment made by this clause is consequential 
.on the insertion of new sections 29A and 29B by clause 3. 
Clause 6.-The amendment made by this clause is consequential on 
the insertion of the new section 29B. 
Clause 7.-This clause seeks to place on- a statutory basis the ex-
isting practice of allowing a manifest to be submitted in advance of 
the ship's arrival, and thereby making it possible for bills of entry 
to be delivered in advance of the arrival of the goods and thus ex-
pediting clearance of goods. 
Clause B.-Section 86 of the principal Act provides that the bill of 
entry may be submitted only after .the landing of the goods. But 
bills of entry are accepted as a matter of convenience prior to the 
arrival of the ship. The amendment places the practice on a statu-
tory basis_ 
Clause 9.-This clause fixes a time limit of three months on the 
analogy of section 40, for claiming a refund of export duty on goods 
which are not subsequently shipped. In the absence of such a pro-
vision the whole of the export duty becomes non-refundable for 
failure to submit within time a short shipment notice required gen-
erally for statistical purposes. 
Clause 10.-Sub-clause (a).-This sub-clause makes a consequential 
amendment providing for the punishment of persons failing to com-
ply with the orders of a magistrate under the new section 170A in-
fierted by clause 11 of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (b).-This sub-clause makes a similar consequential 
amendment in respect of section 202 of the principal Act as proposed 
to be substituted by clause 17 of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (c).-This sub-clause seeks to make smuggling of all 
kinds a criminal' offeru:e. 

II 
Clause 11.-This clause provides a remedy against a person who 
secrets smuggled goods inside his body. The clause empowers officer 
of Customs to produce such a person before a magistrate who may 
direct his body to be screened or X-rayed by a qualified radiologist. 
The clause further provides that if the X-ray picture reveals any 
secreted goods, suitable action may, in accordance with the order of 
the magistrate, be taken under the advice and supervision of a regis-
tered medical practitioner for bringing out such goods. 
Clause 12.-This clause empowers certain officers of Customs to 
summon persons to give evidence and to produce documents, where 
necessary, in any enquiry which such officers may make in conntc-
tion with the smuggling of goods. 
Clause 13.-This clause enlarges the scope of section 172 so as to 
include within its ambit documents relating to smuggled goods. 
Clause H.-At present when action is taken against persons who 
are in possession of smuggled goods, it is not always easy for customs-
authorities to prove that the goods are smuggled goods. This clause 
places the burden of proof in such cases on persons, from whose 
possession suspected smuggled goods are seized. Such a provision is 
necessary in order to safeguard the revenues of the State. 
Clause 15.-This clause provides a safeguard against indiscrimi-
nate prosecutions for the new offence created under section 167(81) 
by requiring that no court shall take cognizance of any such 
-offence except on a complaint in writing made by certain specially 
-empowered and responsible officers. 
Clause 16.-This clause empowers the Chief Customs-authority 
and the Chief Customs-officers to review cases on their own initiative 
in order to rectify errors of judgment prejudicial to revenue commit-
ted by subordinate officers. 
Clause 17.-This clause provides for the regulation of licensing 
of customs-house agents and authorizes the Chief Customs-authority 
to make necessary rules in this behalf. 

12 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide for persons who secret 
smuggled goods inside their bodies being screened or X-rayed, and 
suitable action being taken for bringing out such goods. Sub-section 
(8) of the proposed section 170A provides that any expenditure in-
curred for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of that section 
. (including fees payable to a radiologist or a registered medical prac-
titioner) shall be defrayed by the Central Government. The expendi-
ture which will be incurred as a result of the Bill passing into law 
is not expected to be considerable. In all probability it will be less 
than Rs. llakh per annum. 

13 
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED 
LEGISLATION 
Clause 3 of the Bill introduces a new section 29B in the Act, 
. seeking to place on a statutory basis the existing practice of assessing 
goods to duty provisionally when full information as regards their 
value is not immediately available, so that clearance of the goods 
'may not be held up. Sub-section (1) of the proposed section states 
that such provisional assessment shall be subject to the provisions 
of that section and any rules made thereunder. Sub-section (4) in-
dicates the general scope of the rules that the Chief Customs-autho-
rity (that is, the Central Board of Revenue) may make for carrying-
-out the provisions of the section. 
2. Some of the more important matters in respect of which rules 
-.will be made are-
(a) the circumstances in which a provisional assessment may 
be made; 
(b) the approximate basis on which a deposit of duty should 
be taken; 
(c) the type of guarantee and security that the importer or 
exporter should furnish in cases where provisional assessment 
is made; 
(d) the precautions to be taken for safeguarding Govern-
ment revenue in such cases: 
(e) the time limit for finalising provisional assessments and 
submission of documents; 
(f) the action to be taken when the importers fail to take 
steps to hav,e the assessment finalised, etc. 
Instructions at present in force in the various custom-houses re-
garding provisional assessment will be consolidated and a uniform 
set of rules will be framed. 
3. Clause 17 of the Bill seeks-to substitute for the existing section 
202 of the Act, dealing with custom-house agents a more elaborate 
section regulating licensing of such agents. The proposed secthm 
empowers the Chief Customs-authority (that is, the Central Board 
of Revenue) to make rules governing the conditions under which an 
agency licence may be issued, suspended or revoked. 
4. There are at present no rules regulating the licensing of clear-
ing agents. The general practice at custom-houses is to make an 
inquiry whether the applicant for a clearing agency (i) is likely 
to attract a minimum business, (ii) is financially sound, enjoying the 
credit of any reliable bank, (iii) is reliable enough to discharg.e his 
responsibilities to the department as well as to his clients. The 
rule-making power under the proposed section 202 of the Act (clause 
17) would relate to the above matters as well as to certain other 
matters, such as, the authority by which a licence may be granted, the 
'period of validity of such a licence, the nature of a bond that the 
. agent may be required to furnish, the type of security to be furnish-
·ed, the circumstances in which a licence may be suspended or re-
"?lokedand appeals against an order suspending or revoking a licence. 

14 
5. It would thus appear that provisions relating to procedural 
matters regarding provisional assessments and licensing of custom-
house agents would be detailed and lengthy and it would be unduly 
burdening the Act if they were to be included in the Act. It may 
be added that section 9(c) of the Act already empowers the Chief 
Customs-authority to make rules consistent with the Act for gene-
rally carrying out the provisions of the Act. The rule-making power 
proposed in clauses 3 and 17 is, therefore, normal and is not of an! 
exceptional character. 

IS 
ANNEXURE 
• EXTRACTS FROM THE SEA CUSTOMS ACT, 1878 (VIII OF 1878) 
'" '" '" '" '" • 
25. Be-imported articles of country-produce.-
• * • • • '" 
Provided that, if such importation takes place within three years 
after the exportation of such goods, and it is proved to the satisfac-
tion of the Customs-collector that the property in such goods has 
continued in the person by whom, or on whose account, they were 
exported, the goods may be admitted without payment of duty. 
'" • * • * • 
37. Alterations of import.duty or tarift valuation.-
• • • • • • 
Explanation.-A bill of entry shall, for the purposes of this sec-
tion, be deemed to be delivered when it is first presented to the 
proper officer of Customs. 
* • * * • • 
39. Payment of duties sbort-Ievied or erroneously refunded.-
When customs-duties or charges have been short-levied through in-
advertence. error, collusion or misconstruction on the part of the 
officers of Customs, or through mis-statement as to real value, quan-
tity or description on the part of the owner, 
or when any such duty or charge, after having been levied, has 
been, owing to any such cause, erroneously refunded, 
the person chargeable with the duty or charge so short-levied, or 
to whom such refund has erroneously been made, shall pay the defi-
ciency or repay the amount paid to him in excess, (In notice of demand 
being issued to him within three months from the date of the first 
assessment or making of the refund; 
and the Customs-collector may refuse to pass any goods belonging 
to such person until ~he said defiCiency or excess be paid or repaid. 
40. No refund of charges erroneously levied or paid, unless 
clain)ed within three months.-No customs-duties or charges which 
have been paid, and of which repayment, wholly or in p-art, is claim-
ed in consequence of the same having been paid through inadver-
tence, error or misconstruction, shall be returned, un!ess such claim 
is mad.e within three months from the date of such payment. 
'" '" • • '" '" 
86. Entry for home consumption or warehousing.-The owner of 
any goods imported shall, on the landing thereof from the import-
ing ship, make entry of such goods for home consumption or ware-
housing by delivering to the Customs-collector a bill of entry there-
of in duplicate, in such form and containing such particulars, in addi-
tion to the particulars specified in section 29, as may, from time to. 
time, be prescribed by the Chief Customs-officer . 
• * * * • * 

16 
140. Notice of non-shipment or re-landiDl and return of duty 
-·thereon.-
• • • • • • • ... 
Upon an application being made to the Customs-collector, any 
duty levied upon goods not shipped, or upon goods shipped and after-
-wards re-Ianded, shall be refunded to the person on whose behalf 
such duty was paid: Provided that no such refund shall be allowed 
unless information has been given as above required. 
CHAPTER XVI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
167. Punishments for oflences.-
... ... ... 
Offences 
80. If any person, without the approval of 
:he Customs-c~)lIector under section 202, 
u;cts as an agent for the transaction of 
business as therein me:ltioned. 
... ... 
... 
Section 
of this 
... ... 
Act to Penalties 
which 
offence has 
reference 
202 Such p~rson shill b: liable to a 
penalty not exc:eding five 
hundred rupees. 
------------- --
... ... ... 
172. Power to issue search-warrants.-Any Magistrate may, on 
application by a Customs-collector, stating his belief that dutiable 
or r-rohibited goods are secreted in "ny place within the local limits 
of the j 11ti'>1iction of such Magistrate, issue a warrclnt to search for 
su:h gouds -
Such warrant shall be executed in the same way, and shall-have 
the same effect, as a search-warrant issued under the law relating to 
Criminal Procedure . 
... ... ... ... ... ... 
202. Custom-house aeents.-No person authorized to act as an 
agent for the transaction of any business relating to the entrance or 
clearance of a~y vessel or the import or export of goods or baggage 
,shall so act in any custom-house unless such authorization is approved 
by the Customs-collector. 
Such officer may require any person so authorized to give a bond 
with sufficient security in any sum not exceeding five thousand 
rupees for his faithful behaviour as regards the custom-house regu-
lations and officers. 

17 
Such deer may, in ease of misbehaviour Qf the perBOn so autbo-
rized, suspend. or withdraw such ap~ but .. appeal against 
every eucl1 suapenaion or wtthdrawal shall lie to fhe Chief CugtoJns-
alUthority, whoee decision thereon shall be bat. 
Every appeal under thil section uall ~ maae within oae m.at. 
of tI,e suspens\oft or w1thdrawal. 
r , • ; • • 

. ........ . f.':. 
LOK ... ~t~~Hl\ 
"', "j , 
.. ' 
• " \,. . . ~ . ". • . ··BILL,.~· ... · 
[further to amend the Sea Customs Act, 1878 . 
-.. .,. 
j 
The President bas, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to the Lok Sabh1 
the consideration of the Bill. 
N. KAUL,. 
Secretary 
(Shn .4.run Chatulr( Gulla, 
Deputy:'MinisUJr for FinImc, ) 