.-", .. " ...... .., .. ,\ .r i 
I!IIJ '''J!t'~; 
THE INDIAN TRADE UNIONS (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, Ig60 
(As INTRODUCBD IN Lox SABRA 
ON 18TH AUGUST, 1960 ) 

Bill He ..• 1 fJf" 
THF INDIAN TRADE UNIONS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL." 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Trade UniON Act, 19a6. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Indian Trade Unions (Amenc!ment) SIMm tiIII. 
Act, 19GO. . 
5 Z. In the long title of and the preamble to, the Indian Trade ~t 
Unions Act, 1926 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the of JODI utle 
words "in the Provinces of India" shall be omittM. ::k. p~-
10 
IS 
20 
• 
3. For clause (1) of section 2 of the principal Act, .the following T:~!IIIIIt 
clause shall be substituted, namely:- 0 eectiGD. s. 
'(f) "Registrar" means-
(i) a Registrar of Trade Unions appointed by the 
appropriate Government under section 3, and includes any 
Additional or Deputy Registrar of Trade Unions; and 
(ii) in relation to any Trade Union, the Registrar 
appointed for the Stnte in which the head or registered office 
as the case may be, of the Trade Union is situated;'. 
4. Section 3 of the principal Act shan be re-numbered as sub- ADleQdmea\ 
Retion (1) of section 3 and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, ofl8Ctioa). 
the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) The .ppropri •• Government may appoiat u maB,. 
Additional and Deputy Becisttars of Tratle Uaioas .. it tJaiDb 
fit for tile purpoee of es:erciaiDg and d.iacbaqiq-, wad.. the 
superintend.nee and direction of the ItetJistrar, ~b pow ... and 
faBctiellS af the Recistrar u:i.der tbia Act .. itm." . ..,. ,.tier, 

I'peclfy and debe the local limits within which any such Addl. 
tional or Deputy Registrar shall exercise and discharge the 
powers and functions so specified. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of any order under sub-
section (2), where an Additional or Deputy Registrar exercises 5 
and discharges the powers and fUnctions of a Registrar in an 
area within which the registered office of a Trade Union is 
situated, the Additional or Deputy Registrar shall be deemed to 
be the Registrar in relation to the Trade Union for the purposes 
of this Aet,". 10 
~t 5. Section 4 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
.. flection 4· section (1) of section 4 and after s\.\b-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
~ 
flf section 6. 
"(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
an application made under sub-section (1) shall not be deemed IS 
to have become invalid merely by reason of the fact that any 
person· who signed such application has at any time before the 
registration of the Trade Union under this Act, ceased to be ... 
member of such Union.". 
S. After elause (e) of section 6 of the principal Act, the follow- ~o 
ing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ee) the payment of a subscription by members of the 
Trade Union which shall be not less than twenty-five naye paise 
per month per member;". 
Amaadnten 7. For clause (e) of section 14 of the principal Act, the following 25 
Of.-tieD I~. clause shall be substituted, namely:- ' 
"(c) The Companies Act, 1956,". 
AmIIldme:nt 8. In clauses (a), (c) and (d) of sub-section (2) of section 16 of 
fir -=tiOD 16. the principal Act, the words and figures "the Government of India 
Act, or the Government of India Act, 1935, or" shall be omitted. 30 
Amendmeat 9. After sub-section (3) of section 28 of the principal Act, the 
ofllCtioali. following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) For the purpose of examining the documents referred 
to in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), the Registrar, or any officer 
authorised by him, by general or special order, may at all 35 
reasonable times inspect the certificate of registration, accounl 
books, registers, and other documents, relating to a Trade Union, 
at its registered office or may require their production at such 
place as he may specify in this behalf, but no such place shall ~ 
be at a distance of more than ten miles from the registered 4"" 
dee of a Trade Union. It. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECtS ANn ftEASONS 
The object of this Bill is to amend the Indian Trade Unions Act, 
1926 (16 of 1926), so tiS to give dleet to the following recommenda-
tions of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Sessions of the Tripartite 
Indian Labour Conference held in May, 1958 and July, 1959, 
respectively:-
(1) that Additional and Deputy Registrars of Trade Unions 
should be appointed wherever necessary, so as to obviate delaYIi 
in the disposal of applications for the registration of Trade 
Unions; 
(2) that. if the signatories to an application for the registra-
tion of a Trade Union were entitled to apply for its registmtion 
at the time of application, its registration should not be refused 
on the ground that any of the signatories has ceased to be a 
member of such Union; 
(3) that a Trade Union should prescribe in its rules a mini-
mum membership fee of twenty-five naye paise per month; and 
(4) that the Registrar of Trade Unions should have power to 
inspect the account books, membership registers, etc., of Tradt: 
Unions for the purpose of examining the returns made by them 
under section 28 of the Act. 
Opportunity has also been taken in this connection to make a few 
formal amendments in the long title and preamble and sections 14 
and 16 of the Act (see clauses 2, 7 and 8 of the Bill). 
NEW DELHI; 
The 30th Ju.ly. 1960. 
G. L. NANDA. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause .. of the Bill enables the appropriate ,Government ., 
appoint Additional and Deputy Registrars of Trade Uniona u and 
when necessary. The appropriate Government i& the Central Goy· 
ernment in respect of Trade Unions, the objects of which are Dot 
confined to one State, and also in respect of Trade Unions, ibe 
objects of which are confined to Union territories. There is no 
intention at present to appoint any Additional or Deputy Registrars 
in respect of any of the two kinds of Trade Unions mentioned above. 
In ease any such appointment is made in future, it is estimated that 
it will entail an expenditure of ebout Rs. 7,500 per annum from th@ 
COIlIOlidated Fund of India. 

• r 1913. 
ANNEXUR! 
lbftACTII noM THZ INDIAN TIlADE UNIONI ACT, 1926 (No. 16 OF 19~6) 
• • • • • • 
All Act to provide for the registration of T~c UDie» and 
in certain respects to define the law relating to registered 
Trade Unions in the Provinces of India . 
• • • • • • 
WHERBA.S it ia expedient to provide for the registration of Trade 
Ulllona and in certain respects to define the law relatin, to registert!d 
Trade Unions in the Provinces of India; it il hereby enacted as 
-!']1QWI:-
• • • • • • 
J. 
• • • • • • 
(f) "'Registrat" means·~ Registrar of Trade Unions· appointed 
by the appropriate Government under section 3, and ··the 
Registrar", in relation to any Trade Union, means the Registrar 
appointed for the State in which the head or registered office, as 
the case may be, of the Trade Union is .ituated; 
• • • • • • 
u. 
• • • • • • 
CerlaiD Am 
Dot to applJ 
to reais.red 
Trade 
(t) The Indian Companies Act, 1913, shall not apply to any UDiODl • 
registered Trade Union, and the registration of any luch Trade 
Union under any Nch Ad shall be void. 
• • • • • • 
1 •. 
• • • • • • 
(2) The objects referred to in sub-aection (1) are:-
(a) the payment of any expenses incurred, either directly 
.1' indtrtctt11, by a oandidate or prospective candidate for electicn 
• 
ecmltftutiOll 
of. llparatl 
fuDcl for 
political 
Purpolllll· 

• 
u a member of any legislative body constituted under the 
Government of ndia Act, or the Government of India Act, 1935, 26 Geo. 5. 
or the Constitution or of any local authority, before, during, or c. 2. 
after the election in connection with his candidature or election; 
-or 
(b). the holding of any meeting or the distribution of any 
literature or documents in support of any such candidate or 
prospective candidate; or 
(c) the maintenance of any person who is a member of any 
legislative body constituted under the Government of IndIa Act, 26 000. 5, 
or the Government of India Act, 1935, or the Constitution or of C.2. . 
any local authority; or 
(d) the registration of electors or the selection of a candi-
date for any legislative body constituted under the Government 
of India Act, or the Gov~rnment of India Act, 1935, or the 26 Ceo. 5. 
Constitution or for any local authority; or C.2. 
(e) the holding of political meetings of any kind, or the 
distribution of political literature or political documents of any 
kind. 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABIIA 
A 
BILL 
funher re ftlDend the Indian Trade Unions Act, 1,26. 
The President has in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secreta.ry . 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nam14, 
, f i1Hseer of LAbour and Employment.) 