As inrRopucep In Lox SABHA ON

11 MAR 1991

Bil} No. 48 of 1991
THE CONSTITUTION (SEVENTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991
F ; :
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amend- Short
ment) Act, 1991. title.

2. In article 356 of the Constitution, in clause (4), in the third proviso, Aamend-
for the words “four years”, the words “five years” shall be substituted. ment of
article
356.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Under clause (4) of article 356 of the Constitution, no Proclamation
issued under that article and approved by both the Houses of Parlia-
ment shall remain in force for more than three years. However, under
clause (5) of the said article, a resolution approving the continuance in
force of a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of that article beyond
a period of one year cannot be passed by either House of Parliament
unless the two conditions relating to a Proclamation of Emergency being
in operation in the whole or any part of the State and the certificate by
the Election Commission that the continuation of the Proclamation issued
under clause (1) is necessary on account of difficulties in holding
general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State as specified
in that clause are met. The three year period in the case of Proclama-
tion issued on 11th May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab was
extended to three years and six months by the Constitution (Sixty-
fourth Amendment) Act, 1990 and clause (5) of article 356 was also
suitably amended by that Act in the expectation that it would be
possible to hold elections 10 the Legislative Assembly of that State. In
October. 1990 it was felt that it was not conducive to hold free and fair
elections to the Punjab State Legislative Assembly. Therefore, clause
(4) of article 356 was again amended by the Constitution (Sixty-
seventh) Amendment Act, 1990 to enable extension of President's Pro-
clamation issued on 11th May, 1987 for a total period of four years.

2. Despite pressure frum the security forces, the terrorist violence
has been continuing in Punjab. Therefore, the prevailing circumstances
still do not hold out prospects for fair, free and peaceful elections to
the Legislative Assembly of Punjab. Clause (4) of article 356 of the
Constitution is, therefore, proposed to be amended so as to facilitate the
extension of the said Proclamation up to a total period of five years in
relation to the State of Punjab.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
New Detur;
The 7th March, 1991.
SUBODH KANT.


ANNEXURE i

Extract FROM THE CONSTITUTION O¢ INDIA

356. (1) . . . . .

(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to
operate on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of
issue of the Proclamation:

Provided that if and so often as 3 resolution approving the continuance
in force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament,
the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a further
period of six months from the date on which under this clause it would
otherwise have ceased to operate, but no such Proclamation shall in
any case remain in force for more than three years:

Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People
takes place during any such period of six months and a resolution
approving :the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed.
by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to the con-
tinuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the House
of the People during the said period; the Proclamation shall cease to
operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the
House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the
continuance in force of the Proclamation has been also passed by the
House of the People:

Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation issued under clause
(1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab,
the reference in the first proviso to this clause to “three years” shall be
construed as a reference to “four years”.

* * . * *

Provisions
in case

of failure
of consti-
tutional

machinery
in States.


LOK SABHA

a

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Subodh Kant Sahay, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home
Affairs.)