LUK SABHI\ 
THE JtJTE M"NUF/,CTURES DEVELLJPMENT CvUNCIL BILL. 1 ~83 
:)0 be/-as introduced in Lok § abha 7 
1. Page (i) t in the heading under CHAPTER 11,-
!£!. "JUTE II ~ II THE JUTE" 
2. Page 2, line 2,-
m "JUTE" re ad "JHE JUTE" 
3. Page 4, line 10,-
~ "t::m1JluYlfient j S" ~ "~1I1ployrnent inn 
4. PQ~e 8, in the marginal head in I,; to clause .1.5,-
omit "tiun." -
5. P~ge 8, in the marginal heading to clause 10.-
for .. in sp ec-" -
6. Page 10 I lines 35 and 
fur "suh-st:?ctiun 
-
~ "sub- sect ion 
NEW DELHI; 
~ril I,. I Z83 
ait riJ 2'7, 1 SO:; (5 aka) 
~ "inspect iun." 
3u,-
\d) of sec or. ion 3." 
(2) of section 7 fll 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
. . 
BID No. 48 of 1983 
THE .rtrrE MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT COUNCn. BILL, 1983 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELu.uNARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
JUTE MANUFACTURES DEVELO~ COUNCIL 
3. Establishment and constitution of the Council. 
4. Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Chair-
man and other members. 
5. Committees of the Council. 
6. Officers of the CauncU and other stafl'. 
7. Functions of the Council. 
8. Dissolution of the Council. 
CHAPTER III 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
9. Grants and loans by the Central Government. 
10. Jute Fund. 
11. Borrowing powers of the Council. 
12. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPrERIV 
CONTROL BY CJ:.NTRAL GoVERNMENT 
13. Directions by Central Government. 
14. Returns and reports of activities of the Council. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
15. Power to call for reports and returns. 
16. Power of inspection. 
17. Penalties. 

(ii) 
CLAusrs 
18. Offences by companies. 
19. Cognizance of offences. 
20. Sanction for prosecutions. 
21. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
22. Members, officers and employees of the Council to be publle 
servants. 
23. Suspension of operation of Act. 
24. Application of other laws not barred. 
25. Power to make rules. 

BJlI No, 48 01 1983 
THE JUTE MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL BILL, 1M3 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a COILn.cll for the developmA!nt 0/ 
production Of jute manufactures by increasing the ef]i.ciency and 'pr0-
ductivity in the jute industry, the financing of activities for such 
development a.nd foo- mattefls connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Jute Manufactures Development 
Council Act, 1983. 
'(2) It extends to the whole of India, 
Short 
title, 
extent 
aJld 
com-
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government mence-
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. ment. 
10 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Council; 
(b) "Council" means the Jute Manufactures Development Council 
established 'Qnder section 3; 
(c) "Jute manufacture" shall have the same meaning as assign-
15 ed to it in the Jute Manufactures Cess Act, 1983; 
(d) "member" means a member of the Council and include. the 
Chairman; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under thie 
Act; , 
20 (1) "year" means the year commencing on the 1st day of July 
and endIng on the 30th day of June next following. 
Deftni· 
tiolll. 

Estab-
lishment 
and con-
stitution 
of the 
Council. 
2 
CHAPTER II 
JUTE MANUfo"ACTURES DEVELOI'M.EN1 COUNCIL 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall 
be established for the purposes of this Ad, a Council 'to be called the 5 
Jute ManufactUres Development Council. 
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to con-
tract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. J 0 
(3) The head office of the Council shall be at Calcutta in the State of 
West Bengal, and the Council may, with the ploevious approval of 'the 
Central Government, establish offices or agencies at other places in or 
outside India. 
(4) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) such number of members not exceeding eight as the Central 
Government may think fit to be appointed by it from among the 
ministlries of the Central Government deaUng wifh-
(i) agriculture; 
(ii) commerce (Textiles); 
liii) finance; 
(iv) ·industry'; 
(v) ch'i1 supplies; 
(vi) . co-operation; 
(e) six members ·to be appointed by tbe Central Government by 
rotation in the alphabetical order to represent respectively the Govern-
ments of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Meghalaya, 
Orissa, Tripura and West Bengal in which jute is cultivated on a large 
scale: 30 
Provided that such appointment shall be made on the recommen-
dation of the Government of the State concerned; 
(d) foUl' members to be appointed by the Central Government to 
represent the producers of jute manufactures; 
(e) 'two membelrs to be appointed by the Central Government to 35 
represent the exporters of jute manufactures; 
(f) three members to be appointed by the Central Government 
to represent the growers of jute; 
(g) three members 'to be appointed by the Central Government 
to represent the interests of workmen employed in factories produe- 40 
ing jute maRufactures; 
(h) five members to be appointed by the Central Government 
from amongst persons who, in the opinion 01 the Cen.tral Gov~ent, 
are experts in jute technological research, jute marketing or agrl-
e1lltural economics. 45 

3 
(5) The Council shall elect, from amongst its members, a Vice-
Chairman who shall exercise such of the powers and perform such of the 
functions of the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated 
to him by the Chairman. 
5(6) The term of office and other conditions of service of the members 
and the manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be fol-
lowt>d in the discharge of their functions by, the members shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 
(7) Any officer of the Central Government, not being a member of 
10 the Council, when deputed by that Government in this behalf, shall have 
the right to attend the meetings of the Council and take part in the pro-
ceedings thereof, but shall not have the right to vote. 
(8) The Council may associate with itself, in such manner, subject to 
such conditions and for such purposes as may be )I1'e8cribed., any persons 
15 whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the 
provisions of this Ad and a person so associated shall be entitled to receive 
such allowanl!es or fees as may be fixed by the Cenfral Government and 
shall have the right to take part in the proceedings of the Council relevant 
to the purpose for which he has been associated, but shall not have the 
20 right to vote. 
'(9) No act or proceeding of the Council or any committee appointed 
by it under section 5 shall be invalidated merely by reason of-
'(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
Council or such committee; or 
25 '(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a mem-
ber of the Council or such committee; or 
(r.) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council or such 
committee not affecting the merits of the case. 
(10) The Council shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
30 such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at Its 
meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be prescribed. 
4. (1) The Chairman shall he entitled to !luch salary and allowances and 
!lhall be subjec't to such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, 
Jlrovldent fund and other matters as may from time to time be fixed by 
35 the Central Government. 
(2) The other members of the Council shall receive such allowanees 
as may be fixed by the Central Government. 
5. (1) The Council may appoint such committees as may be necessary 
for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its funetions 
40 under this Act. 
(2) The Council shall have 'the power to co-opt as members of any 
committee appointed under sub-sedion (1) such number of perillons who 
are not members of the Council 8S it may' think fit and the Jlersons so co-
opted shall "ave the r~ht to attend meetinp of the committee and take 
45 part in its pr~eedin~ but shall not have the right to vote, 
(3) The persons co-opted as members of II committee under sub-section 
(2) shall be entitled to receive such allowances or fees for attending the 
meetings of the committee 8S may, be fhCf~d by the Central Government. 
Salary 
and allow· 
ancel 
and other 
conditions 
of ser-
vice of 
Chairman 
and other 
member •. 
Com_ 
mittees 
ot the 
Council. 

Oftlcers 
or the 
Council 
and other 
staff. 
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Ad, every perIOD employed 
by tile lute Manufactures Development Council established under lub· 
section (1) of section. of 'the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951, bnmedlately before the date of establishment of the CoucD 65 of 191s! 
under section 3 of this Act, shall, on and from such date, become an 5 
employee of the Council with such designation as the Counell may deter-
mine and shall hold his omce or service therein by the same tenure, at 
the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions as he 
would have held on such date if the Council had not been established and 
shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is the Counell is 10 
terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions 
are duly altered by "he Council: 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of 
service of any such person shall not be altered to his disadvantage with-
out the previous approval of the Central Government. 
(2) Every employee holding any office under the Central Govern-
ment immediately before the date of establishment of the Council solely 
or mainly for or in connection with such matters as are 
relevant to the functions of the Council under this Act, shall, on and 
from such date, be treated as on deputation with the Council but shall 20 
hold his office in the Council by the same tenure and upon the same 
terms and conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident 
fund, retirement or other terminal benefits as he would have held such 
office, it the Council had not been established and shall continue to do so 
until the Central Government, either on its own motion or at the request 25 
of the Council, recalls such employee to 'its service or until the Council, 
with the concurrence of the Central Government, duly absorbs such 
employee in its regular service. whichever is earlier: 
Provided that durin~ the period of deputation of any such employee 
with the Council, the Council shall pay to the Central Government, in :1° 
respect of every such employee, such contribution towards his leave 
salary, pension and gratuity as the Central Government may, by order. 
determine: I 
Provided further that any such employee. who has, in respect of the 
proposal of the Council to absorb him in its regular service, intimated 35 
within such time as may be 5pecified in this behalf by the Council his 
intention of not becoming a re~lar employee of the Council. shall not 
be absorbed by the Council in its regula~ service. 
(3) If any dispute or doubt arises as to which of the employees serving 
under the Central Government are to be treated as on deputation with 40 
the Council under this section. such dispute or doubt shall be decided by 
the Central Government in consultation with the Council and the de-
cision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
(4) For the purposes of enabling it efRciently to discharge its functions 
under this Act, the Coundl shall, subject to 'the other provisions of thiB 45 
section ad to such rules as may be made In this behalt by the Central 
GoverDlllent, appoint (wbether on .eputation or otherwise), such Dumber 
of nftleers and other employees as it may eonslder neoe&lal'1: 

Provided that the appointment of such cfltegory of o.ft\cers as may be 
specified in such rules, shall be subject to the approval of the Central 
Government. 
(5) Subject to the other provisions of this secUon, every o8leer or 
5 utber employee appointed by the Couaeil shall be subject to soeh COIldI· 
tiollS 01 service anel shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be 
prescribed. 
7. (1) It shall be the duty of the COWlcil to promote, by such measures 
as it thinks fit, the development of production of jute manufactures by 
10 increasing the efficiency and productivity in the -jute industry. 
20 
35 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the measures referred to therein may provide for-
(a.) evolving an integrated approach to jute cultivation in the 
matter of formulation of schemes, extension work, implementation 
and evaluation of schemes aimed at ~ncreasing the yield of jute and 
improving the quality thereof; 
(b) promoting arrangements for better marketing and sale of 
jute; 
(c) recommending targets for production for jute industry, co-
ordinating production programmes and reviewing progress from time 
to time; 
(d) suggesting norms of efficiency for jute industry with a view 
to eliminating waste, obtaining optimum production, improving 
quality and reducing costs; 
(e) promoting standardisation of jute manufactures; 
<f) maintenance and improvement of existiDrg markets and 
development of Dew markets outside India for jute manufac:tlU'eI 
and devising marketing strategy in consonance with the demand for 
such manufactures outside India; 
(g) sponsoring, assisting, co-ordina'ting or encouraling scientific, 
technolDgica, and economic research into the. matters relatine to 
materials, equipment, methods of production, product development, 
including discovery and development of Dew materials, equlpmeat 
and methods and of improvements in those already in use in the jute 
induStry; 
(h) ensuring stabilisation of prices of jute manufactures in and 
outside India; 
(i) promoting or undertaking the collection and formulation of 
statistics regarding jute industry; 
(j) propagating information useful to the growers, dealers and 
exporters of jute and producers or manufacturers of jute goods; 
(k) such other matters as ·may be prescribed. 
(3).The Council shall perform its functions under this section in 
accordance with and subject to such rules as may be made by the Central 
.5 Government and such rules may in particular make provflloDS for 
ensurlni that the Council functions in clOie lfaiaon with Union agencies, 
Functions 
of the 
Council. 

Dissolu-
tion of 
the Coun-
cil. 
Grants 
and loans 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Jute Fund 
6 
institutions and authorities concerned _with the jute manufactures 
(including cultivation of jute) and avoids duplication of effort. 
8_ (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and for reasons to be specified therein, direct that the Council 
shall be dissolved from such date and for such period as may be specified 5 
in the notification: 
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Gov-
ernment shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Cauncil to make 
representations against the proposed_dissolution and shall consider the 
representations, if any, of the Council. 10 
(2) When the Council is dissolved under the provisions of sub-section 
(1),-
(a) all the members, notwithstanding that their term of office has 
not expired, shall, from the date of 'dissolution, vacate their offices as 
such members; J 5 
(b) all the powers and duties of the Council shall, durin" the 
period of dissolution, be exercised aDd performed by such persoD or 
persons as the Central Governmeat may appoint in this behalf and 
their remuDeratioD shall be such as may be prescribed; 
(c) all funds and other properties vested in the Council shall. 20 
during the period of dissolution, vest in the Central Government; and 
(d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Council 
shall be reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
CHAPTERUI 
F'IHANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
•. The Central Government may, after due rBPpropriation made by 
ParlilUlleDt by law in this behalf, pay to the Council by way of grants or 
loans IUch sums of money as the Central Government may think ftt for 
being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
10. (1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Jute Fund and 30 
there shall be credited thereto-
(4) any fees that may be levied aDd collected under this Aet or the, 
rules made thereunder; 
(b) any sums of money paid or any grants or loaDS graated by the 
Central Govenunent for the purpOses of this Act; 35 
(c) aDY 1'I'&0ts or loans that may be made by aoy perIOD for the 
purposes of this Act. 

., 
(2) The Fund shall be applled-
(a) for meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section 
7; 
(b) for meeting the salaries, allowances and other remuneration 
5 of the officers and other employees of the Council; 
(c) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the 
Council; I • It} l 
(d) for repayment of any loans. 
11. Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf by the Cen-
10 tral Government the ·Council shall have the power to borrow on the security 
of the Jute Fund or any other asset for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act 
12. (1) The Council shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the profit 
15 and loss account, and the balance sheet, in such form and in 'Suc~ manner 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by thr: Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by 
20 him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall 
be payable by the Council to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of 
the Council shall have thie same rights and privileges and authority in 
25 connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General ha'S in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, 
shall have the right to aemand the production of books, accounts, connec-
ted vouchers and other documents and papers and to im;pect any of the 
offices of the Council. 
30 (4) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller and 
35 
Auditor-General of India Or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually 
to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER IV 'a 
CONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
13. The Council shall carry out 'Such directions as may be issued to it 
from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient ad~inls­
tration of this Act. 
40 14. (1) The Council shall furnish to the Central Government 'at such 
time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed, such returns 
and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing 
programme for the development of jute manufactures, as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, require. 
Borrow· 
ing 
powers 
of the 
Council. 
Accounts 
and audit. 
Directions 
by 
Ct'!-nttlll 
Govern_ 
ment. 
Returns 
and re-
ports ot 
activi-
ties of 
the Coun. 
cU. 

tion. 
Power to 
call fOr 
reports 
and ~e­
turns. 
Power of 
lnspec-
Penalties. 
Offences 
by com_ 
panies. 
8 
(2) The Council shall furnish a programme of its activities for each 
year to the Central Government for its information and directions, if 
any. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Council 
'Shall, aft soon IlS possible, after thle end of each year, submit to the Central 5 
Government a report in such form, and before such date, as may be 
prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and 
programmes during the previous year. 
(4) A copy of the report received under sub-section (3) shall be laid, 
as soon as may be, after it is' received, before each House of ParUament. 10 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
15. The Council may require a producer of a jute manufacture to 
furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical or other information . 
in such fonn and within such period as may,be specified by the Council. 15 
16. Any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government 
or by the Council or any officer of the Council authorised by the Chairman 
in writing may enter at all reasonable times any place or premises where 
jute manufactures are stored, kept or exposed for sale and may require 
the production for inspection of any book, register, record or other paper 20 
kept therein nnd ask for any information relating to the production, 
storage Or keeping for saie of jute manufacture'S. 
17. Whoever fails to comply witn any order or direction given under 
this Act, within such time as may be specified in the said order or direc-, 
tion, or contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention 25 
of any of the prOVisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder, Rhall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or w:th both. 
18. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was 30 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company fOr the conduct of the 
bUsiness of the c;ompany. as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 35 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or thr;Jt he had 
exercised all due diU gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , where 
an offence under this Act has been commltted by a company and it is 40 
proved that the offence has been commiUed with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attributable tl'l any neglect on the part· of, any director, 
manager, 'Secretary or other officer of the company. such director, manager, 
:;ecretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 

9 
oftence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
5 or other association of individuals; and 
(b) • director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm.. 
19. No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate Or a Cogni-
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable zanca of 
10 under this Act. oft'ences. 
20. Notwithstanding anything contained:in the Code of Criminal 
,.2 ot 19'14. Procedure, 1973, no court shall take cognizance of any offence punish-
able under this Act except with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government. 
15 21. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government, or the Council or any committee appointed by it, 
;, or any member of the Council or such committee,' or any officer or other 
C. employee of the Central Government or of the Council Or any other 
person authorised by the Central Government or the Council or the 
20 Chairman for anything which is in good faith done. or intended to be 
done under this Act or the rules made thereunder. 
22. All the members and all offi.cers and other employees of the 
Council when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions 
l' of thls Act or the rules made thereunder shal~ be deemed to be pubUc 
js ot 1860 25 servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
23. (1) If the Centlral Govenunent is satisfied that dircumstances 
have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions 
imposed by this Act should cease to be imposed and if it considers it 
necessary' or expedient so to do in the public interest, the Central Gov-
30 emment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to 
a specified extent and for such period as may be specified in the notification, 
the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act, in all or any 
of the territories to which this Act extends. 
(2). Where the operation of any provision of this Act has, under 
35 sub-section (1), been suspended or relaxed, such suspension or relaxa-
tion may, at any time while this Act remains in force, be removed by 
the Central Government by notification in the Oftici'al Gazette. 
(3) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as .soon 
as may be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament, wlule it 
40 is in 'SeSsion, for a total period of thirty days which may ;be comprised 
in one session or in two or more sUCCeSSive sessions, and 1f, before the 
apiry of the session immediately following the 'SessiOn or the succesSive 
Sanction 
for pro_ 
secutions. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
iuken in 
good 
faith. 
Members, 
officers 
and em-
ployees ot 
the Coun-
cil to be 
public 
servants. 
Suspen-
sion ot 
operation 
of Act. 

Appli_ 
cation of 
other 
laws not 
barred. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
10 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in maldng any modification In the 
notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be 
is'Sued, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the 'case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to th~ validity of 5 
anything previously done under that notification. 
14. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in 
derogation of, the provi'sions of any other law for the time being in 
force. 
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlciall0 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairman Of the 15 
Council under sub-section (5) of section 3; 
(b) the term of office and other conditions of service of members, 
the manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge of their functions by, members, under sub-
section (6) of section 3. gO 
(c) the manner in which, the conditions subject to which and 
the purposes for which persons may be associated by the Council 
under sub-section (8) of section 3; 
(d) the times and places at which the Council shall meet the rules 
of procedure to be observed in regard to the transaction of business at a5 
its meetings and the number of members which shall form a 
quorum at a meeting under 'Sub-section (10) of section 3; 
(e) the conditions and limitations subject to which the Council 
may appoint officers and other employees under sub-section (4) of 
section 6; 30 
(f) the conditions of service and the remuneration of officers and 
other employees appointed by the Council under sub-section (5) 
of section 6; 
(g) the matters in respect of which the Council may \lIldertake 
measures in the discharge of its functtolll under clause (k) of sub- 35 
section (d) of section 3. 
(h) the remuneration payable to the person or persons referred to 
in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(i) the conditions subject to which the Council shall borrow on 
the security of the Jute Fund or any other asset under section 11; 40 
(j) the form and manner in which the accounts of the Council 
shall be maintained under sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(k) the time at which and the form and manner in which the 
Council shall·furnish returns, statements and other particulars under 
sub-section (1) of section 14; 45 
(1) the form in which and the date before which the Council shall 
furnish to the Central Government the report of its activities, polley 
and programmes under sub-section '(3) of section 14; 

11 
(rn) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or 
provided for by rules under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
5 session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session Or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
10 shall thereafter have effect only .in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such mod1ftcation or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anythin, 
previously done under tlrat rule. 

STATEMENT OF 013J'ECTS AND REASONS 
The jute industry occupies a sigpjficant posiiion in India"s national 
economy. There are about 69 jute mills in the country with around 45,000 
looms accounting for about 30 per cent. of the world's export of jute 
goods. The total capital employe~ in the industry is of the order of Rs. 300 
crores generating employment to about 2.5 1akhs of persons. Besides, 
the cultivation of jute provides a liv~ng to nearly 40 lakh farm families 
and the marketing of jute and jute goods and other ancillary activities give 
siRable employment to others. 
2. For quite some time, the jute industry had been facing financial 
crisis caused by the shrinkage in the export market and acute competition 
from foreign countries and from synthetic substitutes. The export perfor-
mance had been declining. With decreased demand, the productivity 
and effiCiency of the industry has also remained at a low ebb. Any 
scheme for revitalizalion and rejuvenation of the industry would call for 
vigorous efforts towards markeot promotion, cost reduction, dynamiC: 
approach to research for improvement in techniques, processes of produc-
ti.OD and stabilisation of prices. The existing Jute Manufactures Develop-
ment Council set-up under the Industries (Development and Regula-
tion) Act, 1951, is iIl-equipped to perform most of these functions as it 
does not have adequate funds, nor is it constitutionally broad-based 
wi.th well-defined powers and functions to enable it to take a dynamic 
view of the promotional and developmental needs of the jute industry. 
In order, therefore, to provide the much needed integrated institutional 
set-up, the question of setting up a separate statutory Jute Council has 
been under the consideration of the Government for some time past. A 
number of representations have also been receivea for the setting up of 
such a Council. 
3. It is, therefore, proposed to provide for the establisbment of a new 
Council to be known by the same name as the existing Council set-up 
under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, in view of 
the fact that the existing Council has received international recognition 
over the years. The new Council is proposed to be constituted, among 
others, with the representatives of producers and exporters of jute manu-
factures, growers of jute, workmen employed in factories producing jute 
manufactures, experts in jute technological research, marketing or 
economics, representatives of the Ministries of the Central Government 
dealing with Agriculture, Commerce (Textiles), Finance, Industry, Civil 
Supplies and Co-operation, and representatives of the State Governments 
where jute is cultivated on a large scale. It is proposed to vest the Council 
with adequate powers to deal with various aspects of the jute industry. 
The existing Council set-up under the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951, will be dissolved as soon as the Council is esta-
blished under the proposed legislation and provision has 'been made in 
the Bill for the transfer of the officers and staff emp~oyed by the existing 
Council. 

13 
4. The finances of the Council will consist of sums provided by the 
Central Government from out of the proceeds of the cess on jute manu-
factures collected under the provisions of the Jute Manufactures cesS 
Bill, 1983, grants or loans made by the Central Government or by any 
person and sums realised by the Council in the discharge of its functions. 
The Council shall also have the power to borrow on the security of the Jute 
Fund set-up under the proposed legislation or any of its assets. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the abov~ objects. 
NEW DELHI,· VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
Tlte 28th Marcr... 1983. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER .ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1511 1 82-Jute (1), dated the 3rd March, 1983 from 
Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, Minister of Commerce and of the Depart-
ment of Supply to the Secretary. Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the propo-
sed Jute Manufactures Development Council Bill, 1983, recommends to 
Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bi~l under article 117(3) of the Consti-
tution. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clauses (1), (3) and (4) of clause 3 of the Bill provide for the esta-
blishment and constitution of the Jute Manufactures Development Council. 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 provides that the Chairman of the Council shall 
be entitled to such salary and allowances and be subject to such conditions 
of service in respect of leave, pension and provident fund and other 
matters that may be fixed by the Central Government, while the allowances 
payable to the other members will have to be fixed by the Central Govern-
ment under sub-clause (2). Provision has also been made in clause 3 (8) 
and in clause 5 (3) of the Bill for fixing the allowances or fees for the per-
sons associated with the Council. or co-opted to committees of the Council 
respectively. Sub-clause (1) of clause 6 of the Bill provides for the transfer 
of all persons employed by the Jute Manufactures Development 
Council established under sub-sE.'\.tion (1) of section 6 of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 immediately before the date of 
establishment of the Council under clause 3 of the Bui to the said Council. 
Sub-clause (4) of the said claUSe empowers the Council to appoint such 
number of officers and other employees as it may consider necessary for 
the purpose of enabling it efficiently to discharge its functions. Sub-
clause (5) of this clause provides that every officer or other employee 
appointed by the Council shall be subject to such conditions of service 
and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be prescribed by rules 
made under the provisions of the Bill. 
2. Clause 7 provides for the functions of the Council and these include, 
inter alia, the maintenance and improvement of existing markets and 
development of new markets outside India for jute manufactures and 
sponsoring, assisting, co-ordinating or encouraging scientific, technological 
and economic research into matters relating to materials, equipment, etc. 
3. Provision has also been made in clause 8 (2) (b) for prescribing by 
rules for remuneration to be paid to the person or persons who may be ap-
pointed by the Central Government under this proviSion to exercise and 
perform. the powers and duties of the Council when the Council is dissolved. 
4. The aforementioned provisions of the Bill involve expenditure 
towards-
(a) payment of salary, allowances, etc., of the Chairman and 
members of the Council, persons associated with the Council or co-
opted to the, committees of the Council, persons appointed to exercise 
the powel'S and duties of the Council when the Council is dissolved 
and oftlcers and employees of the Council; and 
(b) meeting the other administrative expenses of the Council and' 
any other expenses authorised by or under the Bill. 
5. Clause 10 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Fund to be 
known as the Jute Fund and the Fund is to be applied for meeting the 
aforementioned expenditure. The Fund will consist, inte?' alia. of the 

sums paid by the Central Government and grants or loans made by the 
Central Government, any person or institution and sums realised by the 
Council in the discharge of its functions. 
6. It is not possible at the present stage to indicate precisely the ex-
penditure that may be involVed in relation to the above matters. A non-
recurring expenditure of about Rs. 1.00 lakh is however estimated to be 
incurred initially on the establishment of the Council. Recurring expendi-
ture will be incurred primarily in carrying out the functions of the Council 
in regard to research, product development and market promotion. In the 
first year of the C..ouncil, a recurring expenditure of Rs. 1.00 crore is likely 
to be incurred on this account. This amount may increase subsequently as 
cess collections go on increasing and the Council expands its activities, As 
already mentioned, the Council will have to meet the expenditure from its 
own fund and any payments made to the Council by the Central Govern-
mp.nt will have to be made only after due appropriation made by Parlia-
ment by ~aw in that behalf. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
ClaWic 23 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to 
suspend or relax by notification the operation of any provisions dt the legis-
lation in any area to a specified extent aI¥i for a specified period. This 
power is necessary to meet varying local circumstances and contingencies 
which cannot be visualised. It is made clear that the power can be exercis-
ed only when it is necessary or expedient in the public interest. As in the 
casE' of rules, provision is made for laying of such notifications before each 
House of Parliament and for their modification or annulment by Parlia-
ment. In the circumstances, the delegation of legislative power is of a nor-
ma 1 character. 
2. Clause 25 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to 
make rules to carry out the purposes of the legislation. The matters in 
respect of which rules may be made inter alia relate to the powers and 
functions of the Vice-Chairman of the Council, the term of office and other 
conditions of service of the members, the manner of filling vacancies 
among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their func-
tions by. members, the manner in which, the conditions subject to which 
anrl the purposes for which any person may be associated by the 
Council, the times and places of meetings of the Council, the 
procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Council, the conditions 
and limitations subject to which the Council may appoint officers and 
other employees, the conditions of service and the remuneration of officers 
and other employees appointed by the Council, the matters in respect of 
which the Council may undertake measures in the discharge of its 
functions, the form and manner in which the accounts of the Council shall 
be maintained, the form and manner in which and the time at which 
the Council shall furnish returns and reports to the Central Government 
and other matters of procedural or administrative nature. The delegation 
of legislative power under the clause is, therefore, of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a Council for the development of pr~ 
duction of jute manufactures by increasing the efficiency and productivity 
in the jute industry, the financing of activities for such development and 
for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Viahwanath Pratap Singh, 
Minister of Commerce c:md 01 the 
Department of Sttpp/1J.) 