2 of 1934. 
·1 
• 
As INTRODUCED iN Lolt BABKA Olt 
Bill No. 48 of 1"* 
THE_BANKING LAWS (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) 
BILL, 19<>3 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking 
Comj.1anies Act, 1949 and the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959. 
BE it enacted by Parliame1lt in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking Laws (Miscellaneous Shorttltle 
S Provisions) Act, 1963. and com-mence-
10 
IS 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the CeD.tral Gov- ment. 
ernment may, Iby notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions.of thi.· 
Act. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDIP5T OJ' THB RISDVIl BANK OJ' INDIA Ac:r, 1934 
Z. In sectkm 34 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (herein- Amend-
after in this Chapte!" referred to as the principal Act), sub-section mentof 
(2) shall be omitted. ' eeeuon It. 
3. Section 36 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 0miIai0D 
ofMCtlon 
'1. 
1427 (B) 1&-1. 

Amend-
mentof 
lection 38. 
Insertion 
of new 
Chapter 
after 
Chap-
terIIIA. 
iBl'!ilBl. II.,... .. ==mr=mw::mrrn&a 
I 
4. In section 38 of the principal Act, the words and figures ''to 
re-issue any rupee coin delivered under section 36 nor" and the 
words "or by delivery to the Central Government under that sec-
tion" shall be 9mitted. 
·5. After Chapter IliA of the principal Act, th~ following Chap- 5 
ter and sections shall be inserted, namely:- .' 
"CHAPTER IIIB 
~.. PaovIBIORS ULATm'O TO NON-B.ANKI:N"O INSTrnJ'TIONS RECEIVING DEPOSITS 
Chapter 
nIB not to 
apply in 
certain 
calel. 
DeftDi-
tiOlll. 
AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
45H. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the 10 
State Bank or a banking company as defined in section 5 of the 
B,,,Jr;iqg CC8llpanies Act, 1949 or a banking institution notified lOot lINt. 
under section 51 of that Act 
Provided that for the pu~PQSeS of this Chapter, the Madras 
Industrial Investment Corporation Limited shall not be deemed IS 
to be a banking company. 
451. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise re-
quins,-
(a) "company" means a company as defined in section 
3 of the Companies Act, 1956 and ipc~~d~ a .fore,igll,com- 20 
pany wi~n· the meaning of section 591 of that A,ct; 1 of 1958. 
(b) "corporation" means a corporation incorporated by 
an Act of any legislature; 
(c) ·"financial institution" means any non-banking in-
stitution- . . 25 
(i) which.carrie.; on as its business or part of its 
busine$StqeJinancing, whether by way of making loans 
01' .ad.v~.or otherwise, of trade, industry, commerce 
or agriculture; or 
(ii) which carries ori as its business or part of its 30 
business the acquisition of shares, stock, bonds, deben-
1ur~s 9r.~Q~p~e"t#..pr,·~t'- ~by/a Govern-
ment or local authority or' any other assets; or 
(iii) which carries on as its prinoipal b\1siness 
hire-purchase transactions or the financing of ~h 35 
transactions; 
(d) "firm" hal the same meaning 8S in the Indian Part-
nership Act, 1932; 8 of l8JJ. 

LOK SABRA 
CORRIGRNDA 
to 
THE BANKING LAWS (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 1963 
(To belis introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 5, line 2,-
for "veryfying" ~ "verifying" 
2. Page 6, against line 23, in the marginal heading,-
for "Congnisance" read tfCognisance tl 
3. P.~ge 7, against line 7,~ the marginal heading, ... 
tor "of ll ~ nor" 
4. Page 8, line 39,-
.tel: It; II read "," 
5. Page 10, line 10,-
.Qm.U lIand" before "includes" 
6. Page 10, line 12,-
for ~'"" ~ tI. II \ ,. L ... 
-,- It) ...... ~ -
7. Page 10, in the marginal heading to clau.e 18,-
for t1par~ II ~ead "Part" 
8. Pag e 12, -line 24,-
omit " 
II , 
..... "'Q,i 
Page ~~, line 15,- • 
',.-
.QlIl.U n." aft er . "30 (1) tl 
10. Page 30, 1nSfit the following marginal heading to 
sec on 4!5T,-
IIEnforcement of orders and decisions of 
High Court." 
o 
11. Correct line numbers 'on pages 2, 3, 6, 11 and 13. 
NEW DELHI, 
NOYember 25, 1963 
Agrahayana 4, 1885(Saka) 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
a 
(e) "non-banldnginstitution" means a eOmpmy, cor-
. poration, or firm. 
45J. The Bank may, if it ccmsiders·'necestitry in the~public Bank to 
interest so to do, by general or- speCialorder;- regulate or 
~-...... -- pr.hibit 
(4) regulate or prohibit the issue by: any non-banking issue of 
institution of any prospectus or advertisement soliciting pr?spectua 
deposits of money from the public' and orilHver-, tisHneft\ . 
(b) specify the conditions subject to 'which -any such sOlicttm~ 
prospectus or advertisement, if not prohibited, may be =1!i Of 
issued. . 
45K. (1) The Bank may at any·tim.e·dftecttJ!atl~ry non- Power·bf 
belting institution ·snall furnish to th'~ [BanK, in sikh form, at Bf.'Itk·to 
such intervals and within such titne, sUch -statemMfts,1nfonna- collect 
tion or partietllars relating to fir conn'ecfed -With ... tl.sits re- :~[;n 
ceived by the non-banking institution, as may be speCified by from non-
the Bank by general or special' ·order. banking 
institutions 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of-the-pewer vested 
in the Bank under sub-section (1), the statements, ·inf-ormation 
or particulars to be furnished under sub-section' (n may relate 
to all or any of the following matters,' namely, the<""'8Dlount of 
the deposits, the purposes and periods fOf' which, and thE!' rates 
of interest and other terms and conditions on which. they: .. are 
received. 
(3) The Bank may, if it considers necessary' in the public 
interest so to do, give directions to non~banking institutions 
either generally or to any non-banking institution or group of 
non-banking institutions in parti~ular, in r~pect of any mat-
ters relating to or connected with the receipt of deposits, in-
cluding the rates of intereHt payable on such deposits, and the 
periods for which deposits may be received. 
(4) If any non-btmking institution' 'flltls'·to-corHplY' witlt lany 
diret!tton given by the" 'Bank under sf1~on (S); the Bank 
may prohibit the acceptance of deposits by that· nOfPobanking 
institution. 
(5) If any question arises whether any amount borrowed 
or proposed to be borrowed .by a non-banking instituti0l\. is or 
is not a deposit. it shall be referred to the Bank whose deCision 
thereon shall be final. 
as-to 
deposits 
and to give 
directions. 

Power of 
Bank to 
call for 
tnforma-
tionfrom 
financial 
inatitUtiOlll 
and to 
etvedlreo-
UODI. 
Duty of 
non-bank-
ing institu-
tions to 
fUrn"iah 
statemeDta, 
etc., requir-
ed b1BDJ1:. 
4 
(8) Every non-banking institution receiving deposits shall, 
if 10 required by the Bank and within such time as the B~'lk 
may specify, cause to be sent at the cosb of the nem-banking 
institution a copy of its annual balance-sheet and profit and loss 
account or other 'annual accounts to every p~rson from whom S 
the non-banking institution holds, as on the laft day of the year 
to which the accounts relate, deposits higher 'than such sum as 
may be specified by the Bank.-
45L. (1) If the Bank is satisfied that for the purpose of 
enabling it to regulate the credit system of ·the country to its 10 
advantage it is necessary so tv do, it may-
(a) require financial institutions either generally or 
any group of financial institutions or financial institution in 
particular, to furniSh to the Bank in such form, at such in-
tervals and within such time, such statements, information IS 
or particulars relating to the business of such financial in-
stitutions or institution, as may be specified by the Bank 
by general or special order; 
(b) give to such institutions either generally or to any 
such institution in particular, directions relating to the con- 20 
duct of business by them or by it as financial institutions 
or institution. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power vested 
in the Bank under clause (a) of sub-section (1), the statements, 5 
information or particulars to be furnished by a fimmcial fnsti- 2 
tution may relate to all or any of the followin~ matters, name-
ly, the -paid-up capital, reserves or other liabilities, the invest-
ments whether in Government securities or otherwise, the per..; 
sons to whom, and the purposes and periods for which, fina·nce 30 
is provided and the tenns and conditions, including the ratps of 
interest, on which it is provided. 
(3) In issuin.~ directions to any financial institution under 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) ,the Bank shall have due regard 
to the conditions in which, and the objects for -which, the in- 35 
stitution has been established, its statutory responsibilities, if 
any, and the effect the business of such financial institution is 
likely to have on trends in the money and capital markets. 
4~M. It shall be the duty of every non-banking institution 
to furnish the statements, information or particulars called for, 0 
and to comply wit:tl any direction given to it, under the prov!- 4 
sions of this Chapter. 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
5 
• 
4liN. (1) The Bank may, at any time, for the purpose of Inspection. 
veryfying the correctness or completeness of any statement, in-
formation or particulars furnished. to it by a non-banking institu-
tion or for the purpose of obtaining any information or particu-
lars which a non-banking in!rtitution hils failed to furnish on its 
being called upon to do so, cause an inspection to be- made by one 
or more of its officers or employees or other persons (hereinafter 
in this section referred to as the inspecting authority), of any 
such institution and its books and accounts. 
(2) It shall be the duty of every director or member of any 
committee or other body for the time bein~ vested with the 
management· of the affairs of the non-banking institution or 
other officer or employee thereof to produce to the inspecting 
authority all such books, accounts and other documents in his 
custody or power and to furnish that authority with any state-
ments and information relating to the business Of the institu-
tion as that authority may rpquir,.. of him, within such time 
as may be specified by that authority. 
(3) The inspecting authoritv may examine on oath any 
director or member of any committee or body for the time-being 
vested with the m~nl'lP.'P.m.ent of the 8ft'~irs of the non-banking 
institution or other' offleer or employee thpreof. in relation to 
its business and may administer. an oath aceordingly. 
450. (1) Whoever in any return, sbt~ment or information Penalties. 
2S required or furnh;hed by or under Or for the purposes of any 
provision of this Chrnt,er. wilfullv makeR a ~bltement which is 
false in any material partiCUlar, knowintt it to be false, or wil-
fullv omits to mAke a mgterial Rt!ltement. shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a t~rm which may extend to three years 
30 and shan also be liable to fine. 
(2) If any pI'TSOn fails to produce any book, account or 
other document or to furnish Imy sta.tement, information or par-
ticulars, which under this Ch1'\pter it is his duty to produce or 
furnish, or to answer any Clupstion relatin~ to the business of a 
35 non-bankin~ institution which h~ is asked by the inspecting 
authority under this Chapter, he RhRll be punishable with fine 
. which mllv p.~rtend to two thousand rupees in rE'!-lpE'ct of each 
otfencl', and, if he persists in such rp.fm~al. with a further fine 
which mlly extend to one hundred rupees for every day during 
40 which the offence continues. 

Conlllil-
anee ot 
'offence. 
Chapter 
IIIBto 
over-ride 
other 
lawi. 
Amend'-
mentol 
lection Ii. 
• 6 
(o!) n any non-banking instithtion-
(4) receives any deposits in contravention of any' dfrec-
tion given to it under this Chapter; or ' 
(b) issues· any· prospectus or advertisement otherwise 
than in I accordance with any order made under section 415J; 5 
or 
(c) fails to comply with the provisions of su~tion 
(6) of section 45'1( or with the directions issued under sub-
section (3) of that section or clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of 1Iection 45L, 10 
every director or member of any committee or other body for 
, the time being 'v'estedwith the management of the affairs of the 
non-banking institution. unless he proves that the contreverirtion 
took place without his knowledge or that he exercised a11 due 
<Ulfgence to prevent it. shall be punishable with fine wlUch may 15 
e;t!end-
(4) in the case CJIf a contraventioft falling under clause 
(a), to twice the amount of the deposits received; 
(b) in the case of a contravention falllnJ;C 'under c1tluse 
(b), to twice the amount of the deJjosits called foriby the 20 
prospectus or advertisement; and 
(e) in any other (,lse. to ·two thousand rupees. 
45P. No court shall t:1ke cognisance of any offence punish-
able under section 450 except upon a complaint in wrHing made 
by an officer of the Bank. generally or specially authorised in 25 
writing in this behalf by the Bank. and no court inferior to that 
of a 'pri!sfdeney magistrate or a magistrate of 'the first class shall 
try any such offence. 
45Q. The provisions of this Chapter· Id'lall ha\l'e'~ not-
Withstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any 30 
other law for the time being in ,force or any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any such law." 
CHAPrER TIr 
AMBNDMENT OF THE BANRING COMPANIES ACT, 1949 
8. In section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949 (hereinafter 35 10 of 1949. 
in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act), for the brackets, 
figUre abd '~rds "'(1) In this Act", the words uIn this Act" shall be 
substituted. 

1 of 1956. 
s 
10 
IS 
., 
7. For section 7 of the principal Act, the following leetiO~ ,hall Substitu-
be substituted, namw,y:- tion.of new 
section for 
section 7. 
"7. (1) No company othertbrm a. ):>anking. eompany shall use Uae of 
as part of :its Jl8IQe,any of, thewol'ds 'bank', 'baDker'· or 'blnking' ~: .. 
and no company shall carryon the business of banking in India "bank~r", 
unless it uses as part of its :nJlme at le~to:ne of .1d1 :woteis. ''blllkiDa'', 
(~) No fb:lQ., in.fii.vtdq_l.or gIp\lP of.iJ1dMdlBlls,shaU, for the r!, baD&-
purpose of carrying on any business, us.e.es p~; of ita, or h.iB Company. 
n~e any of the words 'bank', 'ban,kiQ.g' or 'ban,lWlg company'. 
(3) Nathin.g in this section shall apply to-
(a) a subsidiary of a banking company formed for one 
or more of the purposes mentioned in sUb-sectioD (1) of 
section 19, whose name indioates that it is a subsidiary of 
that banking company; 
(b) any association of banks formed for the protection 
of their mUitual interests and registered under section 25 of 
the Companies Act, 1956.". 
8. In section 10 of the principal Act,- Amend-
mentof (a) in sub-section (1), in sub-cla\1Se (iiU of clause (c)- section 10. 
30 (i) for the words "who hJls a contract with the company 
30 
3S 
for its ~gement", the wor4s "whc:we .term of office as a 
per$Qn . managiQ.g the· company is" shall be, substituted; 
(ti) fel' the first pl"Gviso, the following provisos shall be 
SqbJUtQte4, namely:-
"Provided that the term of office of any such person 
mpy be renewed or exten.ded by· ·futother periods not 
exceec;Upg five years one~h occasion sub;ect·to the con-
ditwn that such renewal or extension shall·not be ~anc­
tiQned earlier than two years from the date on . which 
it is to come into force: 
Provided also that where the term of oftlce of such 
person is for an indefinite period, suchtenn, unless it 
otherwise comes to an end earlier, shall come to an end 
immediately on 'the expiry of five years from the date 
of his appointment or on the e:t(plllY of three months 
from the date of commellcement of section 8 'of the 
Bankillg Laws (Miscellane()us ProvlsiQlls) AQt, J,g63, 
which~er is later."; 
(b) lub-sectiona (3), (4) and (5) .,lW1 b. onlltted. 

8 
Amend- 9. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), lor the. 
ment of words "in excess of five per cent.", the words "in excess of one per 
section 12. cent." shall be substituted. 
Amend- 10. In section 18 of the principal Act, in c~use (b) Of the· Explana-
ment of tion, the brackets and word "(Private)" shall be omitted. S 
section 18. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 20. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
after sec-
tion'20. 
Restric-
tions 
on power 
toremlt 
debts. 
11. In section 20 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in section 77 of the Companies Act, 1956, no banking com- 10 1 of 11158. 
pany shall-
(a) make any loans or advances on the security of 
its own shares; or 
(b) grant unsecured 108118 or advances-
(i) to any of its directors; or 15 
(U) to firms or private companies in which any 
of its directors is interested as partner or m8naging 
agent or guarantor or to individuals in cases where 
any of its directors is a guarantor; or 
(iii) to any public company in which the chair- 20 
man of the board of directors of the banking .com-
pany (where the articles of association of the banking 
company provide for the appointment of a chainnan 
for a fixed tenn) is interested as chairman or 
managing director of the pubUc company or 88 25 
director or partner of the managing agent of such 
company."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "granted by it to com-
panies in which it or", the words, brackets and figure "granted 
by it to companies in cases (other than those in which the bank- 30 
ing company is prohibited under sub-section (1) to make unsecur-
eti loans and advances) in which" shall be substituted. 
12. After section 20 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely: - . 
"20A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to 'the contrary con- 35 
tained ill section 293 of the Companies Act, 1956, a banking com- lot 1958. 
pany shall not, except with the prior approval of the Reserve 
Bank, remit in whole or in part any debt due to it by-
(a) any of its directors; or 

9 
(b) any firm or company in which any of its directors 
is interested as director, partner, managing agent or gua-
rantor, or 
(c) any individual if any of its directors is his partner or 
S guarantor. 
(2) Any remission made in contravention of the provisions 
of sub-section (1) shall be void and of no effect.". 
13. In section 21 of the principal Act,- Amend-
mentol 
.. section 21. (a) in sub-section (1), after the words "pubbc mterest", 
10 the words "or in the interests of depositors" shall be inserted; 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
.' 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words beginning with "as 
to the purposes" and ending with "directions as so given.", the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
(a) the purposes for which advances mayor may 
nat be made, 
(b) the margins to be maintained in respect of 
secured advances, 
(c) the maximum amount of advances or other 
financial accommodation which, having regard to the 
paid-up capital, reserves and deposits of a bankin~ 
company and other relevant consideratioal, may be 
made by that banking company to anyone company, 
firm, association of persons Or individual, 
(d) the maximum amount up to which, having re-
gard to the considerations referred to in clause (c), 
guarantees may be given by a banking company on be-
half of anyone company, firm, association of persons or 
individual, and 
;0 .......... -.....,.... ....... 
(e) the rate of interest and other terms and condi-
tions on which advances or other financial accommoda-
tion may be made or guarantees may be given."; 
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) Every banking company shall be bound to com-
ply with any directions given to it under this section.". 
142'1 (B)L.S.-3. A' 

10 
Amend- If. In section 26 of the principal Act, the words "giving particu-
ment of lars of the deposits standing to the credit of each such account" 
section 26. shall be omitted. 
Amend- 15. In section 30 of the principal Act, in clause (d) of sub-section 
ment of (3), for the words "of profit and loss", the words "of profit or loss" S 
section 30. shall be substituted: 
Amend-
mentof 
Sec~OD 
34A. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 35. 
16. In section 34A of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) For the purposes of this 'Section, "banking com,any" 
and includes the Reserve Bank, the State Bank of India and 10 
any subsidiary bank as defined in the State :Balik of lndia (Sub-
sidiary Banks) Act, 1959."; 38 of 1959. 
17. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) and in 
sub-section (3), after the words "director or other offtce't", the \Vords 
"or employee" shall be inserted. IS 
Insertion 1.8. After Part II of the principal Act, the following Part and of new part after seetioris shall be inserted, namely:-
Partn. 
Power of 
Reserve 
Bank to 
remove 
managerial 
and other 
perIODS 
from oftice. 
"PART IIA 
CONTROL OVER MANAGEMENT 
S6AA. (1) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that in the 20 
public interest or for preventing the affairs of a banking com-
pany being conducted in a manner detrimental t() the interests of 
the depositors or for securing the proper management of any 
banking company it is necessary sO to do, the Reserve Bank 
may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by ottier, remove 25 
from office, with effect from such date as may be specified in 
the order, any director, chief executive office'r (by whatever 
name called) or other officer or employee of the banking com-
pany. 
(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made unless 30 
the director or chief executive officer or other officer or employee 
concerned has been given a teaso:nal:He opportunity of making a 
repreSentation to the Reserve Bank against the proposed order: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to give any such 
opportunity if, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, any delay 3S 
would be detrimental to the interests of the banking company 
or its depositors:' 
("> Where any order is made in respect of a director or 
chief ·executive oftlcer or other officer or emploree of a b~nkins 

s 
10 
IS 
11 
company under sub-section (l). he shall cease to be a directot 
or, as the case may be, chief executive officer or other ~fticer 
or em.plQyee of the banking company and shall not, in anyway, 
whether directly or indirectly, be concerned with, or take part 
in the IQ,Bnag~t of, allY ,banking company for such period 
not exceeding five years as may be specified in the order. 
(4) If any person in res~ct of whom an order is made by 
the Reserve Bank under sub-section (l) contravenes the pro--
visions of this section; he shall be punishable with fine which 
may e~tend to two hundred and fifty rupees for each day during 
which such contravention continues. 
(5) Where an order under sub-section (1) has been made, 
the Reserve Bank, IJl&Y, by order in writing, appoint a SUitable 
person in place of the director or chief executive offi~er or other 
officer or employee who has been removed from his office under 
that sub-section, with effect from such date as may be specified 
in the order.' 
(6) ArJ,y person appointed as director or chief executive 
oJ!lcer or other officer or employee under this section, shall-
2.0 (a) hold office during the pleasure of the Reserve Bank 
and subject thereto for a period not exceeding three years 
or such further periods not exceeding three years at a time 
as the Reserve Bank may specify; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only 
2.5 of his being a director or chief executive officer or other 
officer or employee or for anything done or omitted to be 
done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his 
office or in relation thereto. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or in 
30 any contract, memorandum or articles of association, on the re-
moval of a person from office under this section, that person 
shall ~ot be entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or 
ter~4tation of office. . 
3~AB. (1) If the Reserve Bank is of opinion th~t in the in- Power of 
35 terests of the 'banking 'company' or its depositors it is necessary Hellerve 
so tR do, it may, from time to time by order in writin,g, appoint, ~;::!~ 
vy,ith effect from such date as may be specified in the order, not additional 
moret~n five persons to hold office as additional directors of directors. 
the .banking cPlPpany. . 1-,· 

PartIIA 
to over-
ride other 
h,ws. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
44A. 
1~ 
(2) Any person appointed as additional director in pur-
suance of this section-
.. (a) shall hold office during the pleasure of the Reserve 
Bank and subject thereto for a period not exceeding three 
years or such further periods not exceeding three years at S 
a time as the Reserve Bank may specify; 
(b) shall not incur any obligation or liability by reason 
only of his being a director or for anything done or omitted 
to be done in good faith in the execution of the duties of 
his office or in relation thereto; and 10 
(c) shall not be required to hold qualification-shares In 
the banking,company. 
(3) For the purpose of reckoning any proportion of the 
total number of directors of the banking company, any additional 
director appointed under this section shall not be taken into IS 
account. 
36AC. Any appointment or removal of a director, chief 
executive officer or other officer or employee in pursuance of 
section 36AA or secl:ion 36AB shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956, 20 1 of 1958. 
or any other law for the time 'being in force or in any contract .... 
or any other instrument.". 
19. In section 44A of the principal' Act,-
(a) sub-section (5), shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (6), for the words "the' terms of the :as 
order sanctioning the scheme", the words "the provisions of the 
scheme as sanctioned" shall be substituted. 
(c) after sub-section (6), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:-...: 
"(6A) Where' a scheme of amalgamation is sanctioned 30 
by the Reserve Bank under the provisions of this section, 
the Reserve Bank may, by a further order in writing, 
direct that on such date as may be specifted therein the 
banking company (hereinafter in this section referred as the 
amalgamated banking company) which by reason of the 3S 
amalgamation W'ill cease to function, 'shall stand dissolved 
and any such direction shall take effect notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any other law. 

5 
10 
~ -; 
15 
13 
(6B) Where. the Reserve Bank directs a dissolution of 
the amalgamated banking company, it shall transmit a copy 
of the order directing such dissolution to the Registrar before 
whom the banking company has been registered and on 
receipt of such order the Registrar shall strike off the name 
of the company. 
(6C) An order under sub-section (4) whether made 
before or after the commencement of section 19 of the Bank-
ing: Laws (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1963 shall be con-
clusive evidence that all the requirements of this section re-
lating to amalgamation have been complied with, and a copy 
of the said order certified in' writing by an officer of the 
Reserve Bank to be a true copy of such order and \ a copy of 
the scheme. certified in the like manner to be a true copy 
thereof shall, in all legal proceedings, be admitted as evi-
dence to the same extent as the original order and the ori-
ginal scheme.". 
20. In' section 44B of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for Amend-
the words "unless the compromise or arrangement", the words "or met~t of . sec Ion 
20 sanctIon any modification in any such compromise or arrangement 44B. 
30 
unless the compromise or arrangement Or modification, as the 
case may be", ~hall be substituted. 
21. In section 45 of the' principal Act, after sub-£ection (7), the Amend-
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: _ ment of section 45. 
"(7A) The sanction accorded by the Central Government 
under sub-section (7), whether before or after the commence-
ment of section 21 of the Banking Laws (Miscellaneous Provi-
sions) Act, 1963, shall be conclusive evidence that all the re-
quirements of this section relating to reconstruction, or, as the 
case may be, amalgamation have been complied with and a copy 
of the sanctioned scheme certified in writing by an officer of 
the Central Government to be a true copy thereof, shall, in all 
legal proceedings, be admitted as evidetlce to the same extent as 
the original scheme.". 
22. In section 45F of the principal Act,- Amend-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "proceedings by or me~.t of 
against the' banking company", the words "legal proceedings!' ::~.I~n 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2)-
40 (a) after the word "directors", the words "officers and 
other employees" shall be inserted, and 

Amend-
mentof 
section 
45S. 
14 
(b) the words, br$ckets and figures "before the com-
mencement of the Banking Companies (A.J:nenq~t) Act, 
1953" shall be omitted. 
23. In section 45S of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1)- 5 
(i) the words "which has been ordered to be wound up" 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the words beginning with "take possession of 
such property" and ending with "special officer", the follow-
in&! shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) take possession of such property, books of 
accounts or other documents, and 
(b) forward them to the official liquidator or the 
special officer."; 
10 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be IS 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) Where any such property and effects are in the 
possession of the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the Dis-
trict Magistrate, as the case may be, such )4~strate shall, 
on request in writing being made to him by the Qfticial 20 
liquidator or the special officer referred to in su~ctiQD. (1), 
sell such property and effects and forward the ·net ,proceeds 
of the sale to the official liquidator or the special oftlcer: 
Provided that such sale shall, as far as practicable, be 
effected by public auction. 25 
(3) For the purpose of securing compliance with the 
provisions of sub-section (1), the Chief Presidency Magis-
trate or the District Magistrate may take or cause to be taken 
such steps and use or cause. to be used suchfol'ce as may, 
in his opinion, be necessary. ... 30 
(4) No act of the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the 
District Magistrate done in pursuance of this section shall be 
called in question in any court or before any a~thority.". 

of 1908. 
15 
U. In sectIon 45T of the principal Act,- Amend-
(a) in sub-section (3) J for the words "in the same manner met~t of sec Ion as an arrear of land revenue", the following shall be substituted, 45T. 
namely:-
S "by the liquidator in the same manner as an arrear of 
land revenue and for the purpose of such recovery the liqui-
dator may forward to the Col1ector within whose jurisdic-
tion the property of the person against whom any order or 
deciSion of the High Court has been made, is situate, a certi-
10 Hcate under his signature specifying the amount so due and 
the person by whom it is payable"; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shaH be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4) On receipt of a certifibate under sub-section (3), 
15 the Collector shall proceed to recover from such person the 
amount sp::!dfied therein as if it were an arrear of land 
revenue: 
20 
35 
Provided that without prejudice to any other powen; of 
the CollecLor, he shall, for the purposes of recovering the 
said amount, have all the powers, which, under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, a civil court has for the purpose of 
the recovery of an amount due under a decree.". 
ZS. In section 46 of th:." principal Act, for sub-section (4), the Amend-
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: - ment of 
section 46. 
"(4' If any other proviSion of this Act is contravened or if 
8fly (J~tault is made in complyin-g with any requirement of this 
Act or of any arder, rule or direction made or condition Unposed 
thereunder, any person guilt' of such contravention or default 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand 
rupees, and where a contravention or -default is a contintling 
one, with a further fine which may extend to one hundred 
rupees for every day during which the contravention or default 
continues. 
(5) Where a contravention or default has been committed 
by a company, every person who, at the time the contravention 
or default was committed, WIl'S in charge of, and was responsi-
ble to, the company for the conduct of the business of the com-
J),any, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the contravention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded 
Ilsain$t and punished accordingly: 

Amend-
16 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person lia;ble to any punishment provided in this 
Act if he proves that the contravention or default was committed 
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the contravention or default. S 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), 
where a contravention or default has been committed by a com-
pany, and it is proved that the same was committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any gross negli-
gence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 10 
officer of the company, such d!rector, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention 
or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
Explanat1.on.-For the purposes of this section,- IS 
(a) "company'" means any body corporate and includes 
a firm or other association of individuals; and' 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in 
the firm.". 
mimt of 26. In section 47 of the princip'31 Act, after the words "punishable ao 
section 47. under", the words, brackets, figures and letters "sub-section (4) of 
section 36AA or" shall be inserted. 
Amend- 27. In section 49 of the principal Act, for the figures "384", the 
ment of figures and lette r "3BBA" shall be substituted. section 49. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
49A. 
28. In section 49A of the principal Act, for the words "banking 2S 
institution notified by the Central Government in this behalf", the 
words "banking institution, firm or other person notified by the 
Central Government in this behalf on the recommendation of the 
Reserve Bank" shall be substituted. 
Amend- 29. In section 53 of the principal Act, after the words "any bank- 30, 
ment of ing company", the words "or institution" shall be inserted. section 53. 
Amend-
ment of 
pection 19. 
CHAPTER IV 
AMFNDMENT OF 'l'H~ STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS) ACT, 
1959 
30. In section 19 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) 35 
Act, 1959, in sub-section (2). for the words "in excess of five per cent", 38 of 1959. 
the words "in exce~ of one per cent" shall be substituted. 

STATEMENT or OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The existing enactments relating to banks do not provide for any 
control over companies or institutions, whioh, although they are nat 
treated as banks, accept deposits from the geneml public or carry OD 
other business which is allied to banking. For ensuring more effec-
tive supervision and management of the monetary and credit system 
by the Reserve Bank, It is desirable that the Reserve Bank should be 
enabled to regulate the conditions on which deposits may be accepted 
by these non-banking companies or institutions. The Reserve Bank 
should also be empowered to give to any financial institution or 
institutions directions in respect of matters, in which the Reserve 
Bank, as the central banking institution of the country, may be 
interested from the point of view of the control of credit policy. The 
Reserve Bank's powers in relation to commercial banks should alao 
be enhanced and extended in certain directions, so as to provide for 
meter supervision of the opemtions and working of such bankL 
The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. 
2. Opportunity is being taken to omit certain provisions of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, which are no longer necessary, and to 
bring out more clearly the intention underlying certain provfsioDl 
of the Banking Companies Act. 
S. The provisions of the Bill are explained in detail in the DO_ 
on the various clauses. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHAlU. 
Nzw Da.mi 
The 19th Nooembn, 1983. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLm 11'7 0"1 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 16 (3) -BC/63, dated the 20th November, 
1963 from Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed. of the subject matter of the 
proposed Banking Laws (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, 1963, recom-
mends the introduction of the Bill in the Lot Sabba under claUM (1) 
of article 117 of the Constitution. 
1'7 
MI'f (D) LI-I. .' , 

Notes on. claUse. 
Clause 2.-According to section 34 of the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, currency notes issued by Government and taken over by the 
Bank, or bank notes issued by the Bank, if they are not presented 
for payment within forty years after the date of issue, are deemed 
to have been lost and to have gone out of circulation. The assets 
held against such notes me then resumed. If subsequently it is 
proved that any note has not really been lost and has to be honoured, 
the claim is settled ad-hoc. The advantages of this procedure, which 
provides for assets being resumed in certain circumstances, are not 
commensurate with the labour and expenditure involved in maintain-
ing detailed statistics for the purpose of ascertaining when any notes 
are due io be written off from circulation. It is, therefore, proposed, 
after an examination of the practice and legal requirements in other 
countries, to delete the provision in section 34, requiring notes to be 
tte,ted as not being in effective circulation if they are not presented 
for payment for a period of forty years or more. The net loss, if 
any, to Government or to the Reserve Bank as a result of the'pro-
posed ~endment, after taking into account the saving in expendi-
tureas a result of the discontinuance of the system of maintaining 
dl!tailed statistics, is not expected to be substantial. 
Clauses 3 and 4.-When the Reserve Bank was established, it was 
considered desirable to provide for the Bank's assets, in the form of 
rupee coins (which technically include rupee notes) to be maintained 
at certain minimum levels related to the total note issue. Section 36 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act accordingly provides that the wlue 
of rupee coins including one rupee notes should not be less than 
Rs. 50 crores or one-sixth of the total assets held in the Issue Depart-
ment, whichever may be higher. In existing conditions, it is not 
considered necessary to 'prescribe any statutory minimum for assets 
held in the form of rupee coins including rupee notes. It is, there-
fore, p~pqsed to delete section 36 and to make certain consequential 
amendments ill section 38. 
Clause 5.-A new Chapter is proposed to be introduced in the 
Reserve Bank of India Act for enabling that bank to obtain returns 
and information from (a>, certain financial institutions, namely, firms, 
companies or other bodies corporate which are financing trade, 
industry, commerce or agriculture, or are carrying on as B part of 
their business the acquisition of shares, stocks, bonds, debentures 
18 

19 
or other aeeurittes, or ve engaged mainly in the ftnancmg of h1fe. 
purchase transactions and (b) non-banking institutions accepting 
deposits from members of the general public. The objects in view 
are to provide for-
(i) the supervision and control of the financial institutioN 
mentio·ned above in the interests of better or more effective 
control of credit, and 
(ii) the regulation of the business of acceptance of 
deposits by these and other non.lbanking institutions, in ~e 
public interest. 
The Reserve Bank will be emI'owered to provide, by general or 
special order, for the forms in which returns and information are 
to 'be furnished to it, and also to give directions to any class of insti-
tutions or to any institution in particular for the purposes speci1led. 
The Reserve Bank will also be enabled to carry out inspections, where 
necessary, for carrying out the purposes of the new Chapter. 
Clause 7.-Section 7 of the Blnking Companies Act now provid~ 
that no company other than a banking company shali use as a part of 
its name any word or words which indicate that it carries on the 
business of banking. As it is desirable that a similllr prohibition 
should also apply to firms, individuals or groups of individuals, it fa 
proposed to amplify the existing section suitably. 
Clause 8.-It is not clear whether under section 10 as it is now 
worded the appointment for an indefinite period of any person manag. 
ing the affairs of a bank will be in order. It is proposed to make 
It clear that the appointment cannot in any event be in excess of five-
years at a time and that any renewal of the term or contract should 
not be sanctioned earlier than two years before the date from which 
it is to be renewed. 
Clauses 9 and 30.-The voting rlghts of individual shareholders 
of any banking company or of any subsidiary of the State Bank are 
now restricted by law to five per cent of the total voting rights of 
all the shareholders of that company. It is proposed to reduce thil 
figure to one per cent. 
Clause 10.-As the Refinance Corporation has ceased to be a 
private company the word 'Private' in the reference .to the company 
is proposed to be omitted. 
Clause ll.-Sub-section (1) of section 20 now prohibIts the grant 
of unsecured loans to directors and to private companies in which 
they are interested. It is proposed to amend this section 10 as (ci) 

se 
to make it clear that the question of a ·banking company being a 
partner or managing agent of any other concern does not arise and 
(b) to extend the prohibition to public companies also in cer1aJ.n 
cases. 
ClaUle 12.-It is proposed that a banking company should be 
prevented, without the approval of the Reserve Bank from writfn, 
off any loan due from a director, or a company, firm or tndividual. 
in which or in whom a director may be interested. 
Clause 13.-It is proposed that the Reserve Bank should be 
enabled to give to any bank dir~tions, in case this is considered 
necessary, regarding the maximum amount of the advances that 
may be granted to, or guarantees given on behalf of, anyone com-
pany, firm or individual. 
ClaUle 14.-Banks are required at present to submit tG the S. 
serve Bank an annual return showing particulars of deposits which 
have not been operated upon for a period of ten years or more. 
A. the total amount of such deposits all over India is only about 
RI. 4 crores, it is not worthwhile to ask for detailed particulars and 
it is proposed to amend the section so as to provide for retU1'!a 
ihowmg only the total amount of such unclaimed deposits in the 
case of each bank. 
Clause 15.-The amendment proposed is clariftcatory. 
Clause 16.-Section 34A of the Banking Companies Act prevent. 
the disclosure of information regarding the secret reserves of bank-
'ing companies with offices in more than one State to tribunals or 
other authorities established under the Industrial Disputes Act, but 
provides for a suitable procedure for the supply of some., essential 
Information to such authorities through the Reserve Bank. It fa 
proposed to extend the provisions of this section to all other bank-
ing companies. 
Clause 17.-The amendment is of a clariflcatory nature and II 
Intended to make it clear that employees of a banking company who 
may not be classified as officers will be required to furnish informa-
tion to the Reserve Bank during inspections. 
ClaUle 18.-There is no provision. according to the law u it now 
ltands, for the Reserve Bank to make appointments directly on it. 
own initiative to the post of a director or chief executive officer of 
a banking company. The provisions regarding the removal of the 
chairman, director, manager or chief executive oftleer of • banking 

21 
company are also inadequate for the purpose of enabling the Re-
serve Bank to control the affairs of any such banking company, as 
a chainnan Or other director, manager or chief executive omcer 
cannot now be removed. unless he has been found by any tribunal 
or authority, other than a crimi-nal court, to have contravened the 
provisions of any law in circumstances which make it undesirable 
for him to continue to be associated with the banking company. It 
is now proposed that the Reserve Bank should be enable!! to remove 
any person associated with a banking company, if it is considered 
necessary or desirable to do so, whether or not that person has been 
found to have contravened the provisions of any law, and that the 
Reserve Bank should be enabled to appoint any other person in 
place of the person who may be removed. A new section is also 
proposed to be included in the Act, conferrin~ on the Reserve Bank 
the power to appoint not more than five additional directors in the 
case of any banking company. 
Cla1LBe 19.--Section 44A of the Banking Companies Act now pro-
vides for the voluntary amalgamation of banking companies in 
accordance with schemes drawn up for this purpose and sanctioned 
by the Reserve Bank. The transferee banks. which have taken 
over other institutions under these schemes. have experienced some 
dimculties as a result of litigation by other parties requiring them 
to prove that all the requirements and formalities in connection with 
the amalgamation have been complied with. It is proposed to 
amend the section, so as to make it clear that the orders of the 
Reserve Bank sanctioning the schemes shall be conclusive evidence 
to the effect that the amalgama1:ions have been in order. 
Clause 20.--Section 44B of the Banking Companies Act now re-
"quires the concerned High Court to sanction a scheme of compro-
mise or arrangement with the creditors only after it has been certi-
fied by the Reserve Bank as being reasonable and in order. It ill 
proposed that modifications, if any, in the schemes should also be 
subject t.o the Reserve Bank's approval. 
Clause 21.--Section 45 of the Banking Companies Act deals with 
the compulsory reconstruction or amalgamation of banks by the Cen-
tral Government in pursuance of the policy which is being follow-
ed after the failure of the Palal Central Bank. It is proposed to 
amend this section so as to make it clear that an order or a certified 
copy of an order issued by the Central Government, reconstntcting 
or amalgamating a banking company shall be conclusive evidence 
that the procedure prescribed by law has been followed and that 
the reconstruction or amalgamation, as the case may be, is valid. " 

!! 
Clause 22.-Section 45F of the Banking Companies Act now pro-
vides that in the event of the liquidation of a banking company, the 
entries in the documents or certified copies of the documents shall 
be admitted as evidence in proceedings by or against the banking 
company. This section is proposed to be amended, so as to make it 
clear that such entries shall be admissible as evidence in all legal 
proceedings (and not only in proceedings by or against a banking 
company) and against all oft\cers and employeeR (and not only 
against directors). The section, after it is amended, will inciden-
tally be appUcable not only in relation to banking companies which 
were wound up before 1953, but also in relation to other banking 
companies in liqUidation. 
Clause 23.-Section 458 of the Banking Companies Act now 
authorises certain officers of the State Governments to take charge 
of the properties and assets of banking companies in liquidation on 
behalf of the liquidators concerned. It is proPOSed to amend the 
section so as to empower these oftlcers to sell the properties locally 
on behalf of the liquidators. 
-Clause 24.-Sub-section (3) of section 45T of the Banking Com-
panies Act now provides that ahy amount due to a banking 'com-
pany may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue. It is proposed 
to amend this section, so ras to make it clear that the liquidator con-
cerned will be able to issue the necessary certificates and to realise 
the amounts. 
Clause 25.-The amendment is clarificatory. 
Clause 26.--Section 47 of the Banking Companies Act now pro-
vides that no court shall take cognisance of certain offences under 
the Act, except on a complaint by the Reserve Bank. In view of the 
other amendments to the Banking Companies Act, a consequential 
modification is proposed, inserting a reference to the proposed sec- . 
tion 36AA. 
Clause 27.-According to the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1960, 
the provisions relating to the tennination of the appointment of a 
chief executive officer, after a period of five years from the 1st April, 
1956 when the Companies Act, 1956 came into force are not appli- . 
cable in relation to private limited companies. It is proposed to make 
it clear that the amendment to the Companies Act, in so far as it 
has the impUedi ,effect of continuing indefinitely the appointment of 
chief executive ofBcer of a private limited company will not be 8.ppli-
cable Or effective in relation t.o private limited banking companies. 
Cla'UHB 28 and 29.-The proposed amendments are of a drafting 
nature. 

ANNEXlJRP! 
EXTRACTS FROM'THJ!: RESERVE BANK 01' INDIA Act, 1934 
(2 OF 1934) 
• • • • • 
CHAPl'ER m 
CENTRAL BANKING FUNCTIONS 
• • • • • 
34. (1) The liabilities of the Issue Department shall be an LiabiliUel 
amount equal to the total of the amount of the currency notes of the ot the 
Government of India and bank notes for the time being in circulation. =~~t. 
(2) For the purposes of this sectian,-
(a) any currency note of the Government of India or 'bank 
note whu:h has not been presented for payment within forty yeara 
from the 1st day of April following the date of its issue, and 
(b) any 'bank note referred to in section 26A, 
shall be deemed not to be in circulation, and the wIue thereof shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in su'b-section, (2) of section 23, 
be paid by the Issue Department to the Central Government or the 
Banking Department, as the case may be: 
Provided that any note referred to in clause (4), if subsequently 
presented for payment, and any note referred to in clause (b), if 
directed to be paid by the Central Government, shall be paid by the 
Banking Department and any such payment in the case of currency 
note of the Government of India shall be debited to the Central 
Government. 
• • • • • 
36. (1) After the close of any financial year in which the mini- Method 
mum amount of rupee coin held in the assets, as shown in any of ?f de~l. 
the weekly accounts of the Issue Department for that year prescribed ~g ~lth 
under sub-section (1) of section 53 is greater than fifty crores of ti:~ u:; 
rupees 0; one-sixth of the total amount of the assets as shown in that rupee coin 
account, whichever may be the greater, the Bank may deliver to the asset.. 
Central Government rupee coin up to the amount of su~ exeeas but 
33 

Ob!iJa-
tiona of 
Govern-
mentand 
the Bank 
in respect 
of rupee 
oo1n. 
~ 
not without that Government's consent exceeding dve crores of 
rupees, against payment of legal tender value in the form of bank 
notes, gold or securities: 
Provided that if the Bank so desires and if the amount of gold 
coin, gold bullion and foreign securities in the assets does not at that 
time exceed one-half of the total assets, a proportion not exceeding 
two-fifths of such p.1y~ent shall be in gold coin, gold bullion or such 
foreign securities as may be held as part of the assets under sub-
section (6) of section 33. 
(2)' After the close of any financial year in which the maximum 
amount of rupee coin held in the assets, as so shown, is less than 
fifty crores of rupees or one-sixth of the total amount of the assets, 
as so shown, whichever may be the greater, the Centml Government 
shall deliver to the Bank rupee coin up to the amount of such defi-
ciency, but not without its consent exceeding five crores of rupees, 
against payment of legal tender value. 
(3) At the close of an¥ week in which the amount of rupee coin 
held in the assets, as shown in the weekly accounts of the Issue 
Department for that week, is less than fifty crores of rupees or one-
sixth of the total wnount of the assets as so shown, whichever may 
be the greater, the Central Government may, with the consent of the 
Bank, deliver to the Bank rupee coin up to the amount of such 
deficiency against payment of legal tender value. 
• • • • • 
38. The Central Gove~nt shall, undertake not to re-issue any 
rupee coin delivered under section 36 nor to put into circulation any 
rupees, except through the Bank; and the Bank shall undertake not 
to dispose of rupee coin otherwise than for the purposes of' circula-
tion or by delivery to the Central Government under that sectiOn. 
• • • • • 
ErraACTS nOM 'l'HlI: BANKING COMPANIES A~, ID4G 
(10 01' 19~) 
• • • • • 
Interpre- S. (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the sub-
tatloD. ject or context,-
, 
(4) "approved securities" means securities in which a trustee 
may invest money under clause (4), clause (b), clause (bb), 
claus. (c) or claus. (d) of section 20 of the Indian TrUIW Act, loUIII. 
1882; 
• • • • • 

1 of 1958. 
2S 
7. After the expiry of two years from the commencement of thia Use of 
Actt no company, other than a banking company, shall use as part of worcW 
itl name any of the words "bank", "bank.e!''' or '~baDking" aDd no "bank", 
company shall carry on the business of banking in India, unleu it "banker", 
uaes as part of its name at least one of such words: "banldDl". 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to-
(a) a sUibsidiary of a banking company formed for one more 
of the purposes mentio~ in sub-section (1) of section 19 whose 
name indicates that it is a subsidiary of that banking company; 
(b) any association of banks formed for the protection of 
their mutual interests and registered under section 25 of the 
Companies Act, 1956. 
• • • • • 
Ie. (1) No banking company-
• • • • • 
(c) shall be managed by any person-
• • • • • 
Prohibition 
of employ. 
mentof 
man8ling 
agents and 
. . restrictiona 
(iii) who has a contract with the company for its manag~ on certain 
ment for a period exceeding five years at anyone time: forms of 
employ. 
Provided that any contract with the company for its manage- ment. 
ment may be renewed or extended for a further period not 
exceeding five years at a time if and so often as the directors 
so decide: - . _.. ! 
• • • • • 
(3) Where a person holding the office of a chairman or director 
or lllIllUlger or chief executive officer (by whatever name called) of 
a 'banking company is, or has been found by any tribunal or other 
authority (other than a criminal court) to have contravened the pro-
vision of any law and the Reserve Bank is satisfied that the contra-
vention is of such a neture that the association of such person with 
the banking company is or will be detrimental to the interests of the 
banking company or its depositors or otherwise undeairable, the 
Reserve Bank may make an order that that person shall cease to hold 
the office with effect from such date as may be speci1ied therein and 
thereupon, that office shell, with effect from the said date, become 
vacant. . t • ~ 
(4) Any order made under sub-section (3-) in respect of any per-
son may also provide that he shall not, without the previous permJa-
sion of the Reserve Bank in writing, in any way, directly or indirectly, 
14.27 (B)L.S,-4 

Regulation 
ofpald-up 
~6 
be concerned with, or take part in the management of, the banking 
. j"'] ,'" 
cOm~y or any other banking company for such period not exceecUng 
five years as may be speci1ied in the order. 
(5) No order under sub-section (3) shall be made lin J'eapect of 
any person unless he has been given an opportunity of making a 
representation to the Reserve Bank against the proposed order: 
Provided tbat it shall not be necessary to give any sueb oppor-
tunity if, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, any delay would be 
detrimental to the interests of the banking company or its depositon . 
• • • • • 
12. (1) • • • • • 
capital, (2) No perSon holding shares in a banking company shall, in 
sublcribed capital and respect of any shares held by him, exercise voting rights on poll 
a~ in excess of five per cent. of the total voting rights of all the share-
cap1teland votiaI hol~ers of the banking company. 
riChtaot 
abare-bol-
den. 
CBhRe-
Ie"e. 
• • • • • 
18. Every bankiIlg company, not being a scheduled bank, shall 
maintain in India, by way of cash reserve with itself or in current 
account Qpen~ w,ith the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India 
or any other bahk notified by the Central Government in this be-
half or partly in cash with itself and partly in such account or 
accounts, a sum equivalent to at least three per cent. of the total of 
it~; time and, demand :liabilities in India, and shall submit to the 
Reserve Bank . before the fifteenth day of every month a return 
showing the amount so held on Friday of each week of the preced-
ingmonth . ~th particulars of its time and demand liabilities in 
Ind,~a on ea,cb such Friday, or, if any such Friday is a public holiday 
under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of business 28 of 1881. 
on the preceding working day. 
E.xPl~tion.-In this section and in section 24, llliabilities in 
India" shall not include-
: (CI) thepeid-up CApital or the reserves or any credit balance 
in the 'profit and loss account of the banking company; 

2 of 1934. 
1 of 1956. 
27 
(b) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from the 
State Bank of India or from the Refinance Corporation for In-
dustry (Private) Limited, or from any bank notified by the 
Central Govenunent under clause (e) of the Explanation to sub-
section (1) of section 42 of the Resen-e Bank of India Act, 1934. 
• • • • • 
ZOo (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Restric-
section 77 of the Companies Act, 1956, no banking company shall :iOns on 
make any loans or advances on the security of its own shares or ad0aD8 and , vance •. grant unsecured loans or advances to any of its direetors or to' firms 
or private companies in which it or any of its directors is interesb!d 
as partner or managing agent or to any incUviduals, fums or private 
companies in cases where any of the directors is a guarantor. 
(2) Every banking company shall, before the close of the month 
succeeding that to which the return relates, submit to the Reserve 
Bank a return in the prescribed form and manner, showing all' un-
secured loans and advances granted by it to companies in which 'it 
or any of its directors is interested as director or managing agent or 
guarantor. 
(3) If on examination of any return submitted under : sub-section 
(2) it appears to the Reserve Bank that any loans or advances re-
ferred to in that sub-section are being granted to the detriment of 
the interests of the depoSitors of the banking company, the Reserve· 
Bank may, by order in writing, prohibit the banking company f-rom 
granting any such further loans or advances or impose such res-
trictions on the grant thereof as it thinks fit, and may by like oMer 
direct the banking company to secure the repayment of any such 
loan or advance within such time as may be specified in the order. 
%1. (1) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that it is necessary Power of 
or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may detennine the Reserve 
policy in relation to advances to be followed by ba·nking companies Bank to 
rall kin . part' __ 1 d h th control ad-gene y or by any ban g company In h.:w-ar, an· w en e vances b 
policy has been so determined, all banking companies Oi' the· banking banking Y 
company concerned, as the case may be, shall be bound to follow companies. 
the policy as so determined. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power vested in 
the Reserve Bank under sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank may give 
directions to banking companies, either generally or to allY banking 
company or group _ of banking companies in particular, as to the 
purposes for which advances mayor may not be macle, the margins 

RetW'llot 
unclaimed 
deJ)Olltl. 
Production' 
ofdocu-
28 
to be maintained in respect of secured advance. and the rates of 
interest to be charged on advances, and each banking company shall 
be bound to comply with any directions as so given. 
• • • • • 
26. Every banking company shall, within thirty days after the 
close of each calen~ar year, submit a return in the prescribed form 
and manner to the Reserve Bank as at the end of such calendar year 
of all accounts in India which have not been operated upon for 
ten years, giving particulars of the deposits standing to the credit 
of each such account: 
Provided that in the case of money deposited for a fixed period 
the said term of ten years shall be reckoned from the date of the 
expiry of such fixed period. 
• • • • • 
30. (1). • • • • • 
(3) In addition to the matters which under the aforesaid Act the 
auditor is required to state in his report, he shall, in the case of a 
banking company incorporated in India, state in his report,--
• • • • • . ". .. 
(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance 
of proftt and loss for the period covered by such account; 
• • 
MA. (1) • 
• • • • • 
• 
menta of (3) For the purposes' of 
conMential have the meaning assigned 
nature. 1947. 
this section, "banking company" shall l' of 1147. 
to it in the Industrial Disputes Act, 
IupecUon. 35. (1) • • • • • 
(2) It shall be the duty of every director or other officer of the 
banking company to produce to any officer making an inspection 
under sub-section (1) all such books, accounts and other documents 
in his custody or power and to furnish him with any statements and 
information relating to the affairs of the banking company as the 
said officer may require of him within such time as the said officer 
may specify. 
(3) Any person making an inspection under 6ub...aection (1) 
may examine on oath any director Ol" other ofticer of the banking 
company in relation to its business, and may administer an oath 
accordingly. 
• • • • • 

lllf 1872. 
29 
44A. (1) '" • '" • • Procedure 
toramal-
(5) Where a scheme of amalgamation is sanctioned by the Re- gamaUon 
serve Bank under the provisions of this section, the Reserve Bank ?f bank-
shall transmit a copy of the order sanctioning the scheme to the 1~ Com-
. t bef h h nk" pa es. regIs rar ore w om t e ba mg campa rues concerned have been 
'!'egistered, and the registrar shall, on receipt of any such order, 
~rike off the name of the company (hereinafter in this section re-
ferred to as the amalgamated banking company) which by reason 
of the amalgamation will cease to function. 
(6) On the sanctioning of a scheme of amalgamation by the Re-
serve Bank, the property of the amalgamated banking company 
shall, by virtue of the order of sanction, be transferred to and vest 
..il;l, and the liabilities of the said company shall, by virtue of the said 
order he transferred to, and become the liabilities of, the banking 
company which under the scheme of amalgamation is to acquire the 
business of the amalgamated banking company, subject in all cases 
to the terms of the order sanctioning the scheme. 
44B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for Restriction 
the time being in force, no High Court shall sanction a compromise o~ compro-
or arrangement between a banking company and its creditors or any mISe or arrange-class of them or between such company and its members or any ment bet-
class of them unless the compromise or arrangement is certified by ween bank-
the Reserve Bank in writing as not being incapable of being work- ing corn-
ed and as not being detrimental to the interests of the depositors pand~tand ere 1 ors. of such banking company. 
• • '" • • 
45F. (1) Entries in the books of account or other documents of Documents 
a banking company which is being wound up shall be admitted in ?f bank-
evidence in all proceedings by or against the banking company; and ~:~;~~~e 
all such entries may be proved either by the production of the evidence. 
books of account or other documents of the banking company con-
taining such entries or by the production of a copy of the entries, 
certified by the official liquidator under his signature and stating 
that it is a true copy of the original entries and that such original 
entries are contained in the books of account or other documents of 
the banking company in his possession. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, all such entries in the books of account 
or other documents of a banking company shall, as agai~st the 
directors of the banking company in respect of which the winding 

30 
up order has been made ,before the commencement of the Banking 
Companies (Amendment) Act, 1953, be prima facie evid,ence of 52 of 1953. 
tb~ tr:W..h of ~l matters purporting to be therein recorde4 . 
... ... ... ... ... 
Chief 4.55. (1) For the P1ll1>Ose of enabling the official liquidator or the 
Pres~dency sp'~~ officer appo.inted under sub-section (3) of section 37 to take 
~n1~:~t. in~o his custody or under his control, all property, effects and action-
Magistrate abl~ cJ.aiIns to which a banking company, which has been ord,ered 
to allriat to be wound up, is or appears to be entitled, the offtcial liquidator 
oftlcial or the special officer, as the case may ibe, may request in writing 
~q~da- the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the District Magistrate, within 
~, whose jurisdiction any property, books of acc,ount or other docu-
charge of mtmte of such banking company may be situate or be fo;und, to take 
property possession thereof, alld the Chief Presidency Magistrate or the DiS-
ofbanJdng trict Magistrate, as the case may be, shall, on such request being 
eonlpany made to him, take possession of such property, books of account or being 
wound other documents and forw&rd them to the offtcial liquidator or the 
up. special officer. 
PenaWes. 
(2) For the P!lrpose of securing compljance with the provisions 
of sub-sectiqn (1). the Chief Presiclency :M:agistrate or the District 
Magistrate may tak~ or cause to be taken su~h steps and use or cause 
to be used such force as may, in his opinion, be necessary. 
, , ' 
45". (1) ... ... ... ... ... 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), any amount found due to the banking company by an 
order or decision of the High Court may, with Ute leave of the High 
Court, be recove~ in the Slmle manner as an arre8l' of land reve-
nue. 
... ... 
46. (1) ... 
... 
PART IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
... ... 
... ... 
... ... 
(4) If any other provision of this, Act is contrallened or if any 
default is made in complying with any requirement of this Act or 
of any order, rule or direction made or condition imposed there-
under. everydirecrtor, liquidator and other officer of the company 
and any other person who is knowingly a party to the contravention 
or default shall be, punishable with fine which may extend to two 

of 1956. 
31 
thousand rupees, and where a contravention or default is aeontinu-
ing one, with a further fine which may extend to one hundred 
rupees for everyday during which such contravention or default 
continues . 
• • • • • 
47. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable Co;ntzanee 
under section 46 except upon complaint in writing made by an om- of offence •. 
cer of the Reserve Bank generally or specially authOrized in Wrlt-
ing in this behalf by the Reserve Bank, and no Court 'inferiOr to 
that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any such offence . 
• • • • • 
49. The exemptions, whether express or implied, in favour of a Special 
private company in sections 90, 165, 182, 204 and 255, cla1;lses (a) p.rovi-
and (b) of sub-section (1) of section 293 and sections 300, 384 and 8lo.na for 
416 of the Companies Act, 1956, shall not operate in favour of a =~~ 
private company which is a banking company. companie •. 
49A. No person other than a banking company, the Reserve Restridion 
Bank, the State Bank of India or any other banking institution noti- on accept-
fied by the Central Government in this behalf shall accept from the anee of 
public deposits of money withdrawable by cheque: d':poaithdrta 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any 
savings bank scheme run by the Government. 
• • • • • 
WI aw-
able by 
cheque. 
53. The Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Powerto 
Reserve Bank, declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, that exempt in 
any or all of the provisions of this Act shall not apply to any bank- ::!.a1n 
ing' company or to any class of banking companies either generally . 
or for such period as may be specified. 
• • • • • 

Restriction 
onindivi-
dual hold-
in, •. 
Ex'l'RACT FROM '1'HK STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSWIARY BANKS) ACT, 
1959 
• 
19. (1) . • 
(38 OF 1959) 
• • 
• 
• 
• • • • 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no 
person referred to in the proviso to that sub-section, other than the 
State Bank, shall be entitled to exercise voting rights in .respect of 
any shares held by such person in excess of five per cent .• f the 
issued capital of the subsidiary bank concerned. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BIll.. 
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the 
Banking Companies Act, 1949 and the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. 
(Slari T. T. K,i~l, 
Minister of Plntltlt».) 