BILL No. :fa., 1m: 
THE INDUSTRIAL DIS~UTES 
(A1\IENDMENT AND M(SCE[LANEOUS 
PROVISIONS) BILL, 1955 
(AN INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

2 
(b) after clause (kk), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(kka) 'Labour Court' means a Labour Court constituted 
under section 7;"; 
(c) after clause (l), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
U (ll) 'National Tribunal' means a National Industrial 
Tribunal constituted under section 7B;"; 
(d) for clause (p), the following clause shall be substituted, 
.tnamely:-
U(p) 'settlement' means a 'settlement arrived at in the 
\ eourse of. ool'lCiliatioDl', proceeding and includeS a 
written agreement between the employer and work-
men arrived at .otherwise than in the course of conci-
liation proceeding where such agreement has been 
. "Signed- by the parties thereto in· ,sum manner' as may 
be prescribed and a copy thereof h8s\~been\,sent to the 
\sppropriate·Gevemment and the ,conciliation officer;"; 
(e) in clause (r), for the words "under this Act':, the words, 
figure and letter 'under section 7A' shall be substituted; 
(f) for cla1a!fe(&),~followine,fllaUiSe .. shall be s\W&tituted, 
"namely:-
"(8) 'workman' means any person· (including an appren-
tice) employed in -any industry to do any !!Skilled or 
unskilled manual, supervisory, technical or'--clerical 
, ;wOI'k fOJ,,,hire'.r·:.a:eward,1 whether, the·>terms of em-
I,' ~t be'e»Pl'eeaesGl'limplied, and tor the:purposes 
of any .pIIIM!eeding. :tJlldft this Aot in II lIrelation to an 
indWitrial disp~iliM!ludes.·any·person' who has been 
, . c' 41,smissed. rdisch,arged or. - r~trenched j.u connection 
.. !.wUh, D1: ,,8s.a co.q.sequence of,: that.-dispute, or whose 
, .. ~ dismissal, ,discharge or .. retrenchmen.t. has led to that 
< •• ·f diaplUer.but-does .not~iBclude. any. . .such person-
(i) who i8--.bjeot te,·the A'rmy Ac~,.1950, or the Air 
.. Force . Act.,. .1950, ' or. the Navy _ (Dia.cipline) Act, 
1934; or 
) h(it) -!Who, dIt.empioyed·. in ttbe.'polioe service or as an 
II officer or, IOtber lent.ployee of [;a prison; or 
_ (iii) who is .employed mainly in. a managerial or ad-
ministrative capacity; or 

5 
10 
15 
20 
3C 
~ 
(11') ·who, being· employed ,in 1/ su.penUo.y"capacity, 
draws wages·· exceeding five :hwtdred7upees per 
mensem or exercises, either by the.ftIltwlettof the 
duties attached·to the offiee·.<W by reQSQn .-0£ the 
powellS vested in him, functions.,mainly; of a 
managerial nature."'. 
4. For section 7· 'of the principal Act, the followin8~MCtiolll shall Sub~titulion 
b b · d I of new sec-e su stltute , name y: - tions for 
kction 7. 
"7. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notifieadotl. in Labour 
the Official Gazette, constitute one or more LaboUt Courts Courts. 
for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating' to any 
matter specified in the Seeend·Scbedele-.iMI-f811 f'erferm-
ing sa~h other funetions· as' may·be 811fJiped,*0·~"JUDder 
this Act. 
(2) A Labour Court sh~ll consist of one person only to be 
appointed by the 'appropriate ·Government.. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 
presiding officer of a Labour·Court,· unless he has held,,· 
any judicial office in India for not less ,than seven year .. ··, 
7A. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in Tribunals. 
the Official. GaMUe, 1:onatitllte.:one . or more .Indastrial 
Tribuna'" for . the :atljudic:a6ion ,of iDdUlltrial ·diapates re-
lating to, ... y matter,~ .whether . specified:,,·m ,the.Second 
Sch.tWe'.r the; Third Sehetlule.uf' 
(2) A Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appoint-
ed by the appropriate Government. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 
presiding officer of a Tribunal unless-
(a) he is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court;·or 
(b) he has held the office' of a member of a· Tribunal for 
a continuous period of not less than two years 
immediately before the. commencement· of the Indus-
trial Disputes (Amendment . and Miscellanerus, Pro-
visions) Act, 1955. . 
(4) The appropriate Government may, if it so thinks fit, 
appoint two persons as assessors to advise the Tribunal in 
the proceeding before it. 
7B. (1) The Central GDvernment may, by notification in the National 
Official Gazette, constitute one or more National Indus- Tribunals 
trial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes 
whieh, cin the opinion'of. the CeatraliGDYerDm.eDt"iIlvolve 
questiensr of aatioaal. illlp.taaee ~er are.:oi luch)a:,nature 

• 
Disqualifica-
tion for 
the presiding 
officers of 
Labour 
Courts, Tri-
bunals and 
National 
Tribunals. 
~ 
that industrial estabUshmeDts situated ia more than oil6 
State are likely to be iaterested in, or afteetetl by, IUCh 
disputes. 
(2) A National Tribunal shall consist of one person only to 
be appointed by the Central Government. S 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 
presiding officer of a National Tribunal unless he is, or 
has been, a Judge of a High Court. 
(4) The Central Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint 
two persons as assessors to advise the National Tribunal 10 
in the proceeding before it. 
7C. No person shall be appointed to, or continue in, the office 
of the presiding officer of a LabolU' Court, 'tribunal or 
National Tribunal if-
(a) he is not an independent person; or 
(b) he has attained the age of slxty-five years.". 
IS 
Substitution 5. For section 8 and section 9 of the principal of new sec- . Act, the following 
tions for sections shall be substituted, namely:-
sections 8 
and 9. 
Filling of 
vacancies. 
Finality of 
orders con-
stituting 
Hoards, etc. 
"8. If, for any reason 8' vacancy (other than a temporary 
absence) occurs in the office of the presiding officer of a 20 
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal or in the 
office of the chairman or any other member of a Board or 
,Court, then, in the case of a National Tribunal, the Central 
Government and in any other case, the appropriate Gov-
ernment, shall appoint another person in accordance with 2S 
the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy, and the pro-
ceeding may be continued before the Labour Court, Tri-
bunal, National Tribunal, Board or Court, as the case may 
be, from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 
9. (1) No order of the appropriate Government or of the 30 
Central Government appointing any person as the chair-
man or any other member of a Board or Court or as the 
presiding officer of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner; and 
no act or proceeding before any Board or Court shall be 3S 
called in question in any manner on the ground merely 
of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the consti-
tution of, such Board or Court. 
(2) No settlement arrived at in the course of a conciliation 
proceeding shaH be invalid by reason only of the fact that 
40 

• 
S 
[0 
IS 
20 
35 
! 
such 'uttiement was arrived at after the expiry of the 
period referred to in su~section (6) of section 12 or su~ 
section (5) of section 13, as the case may be. 
(3) Where the report of any settlement arrived at in the 
course of the conciliation proceeding before a Board is 
signed by the chairman and all the other members of 
the Board, no such settlement shall be invalid by reason 
only of the casual or unforeseen absence of any of the 
members (including the chairman) of the Board during 
any.stage of the proceeding.". 
'-
I. After' section 9 of the principal Act, the following shall be lnacnion of , new Chapter inserted,":namely:- IIA. 
"CHAPTER llA 
Notice of change 
9A. 'If any employer proposes to effect any change in the con- ~~~:.Of 
ditions of service applicable to any workmen in respect 
of any matter specified in the Fourth Schedule, no such 
change shall be effected by the employer,-
(a) without giving to the workmen concerned in such 
change a notice in the prescribed manner of the nature 
of the change proposed to be effected i or 
(b) within twenty-one days of giving such notice: 
ProVided that no such notice shall be required for effecting 
any such change where the workmen concerned in the 
change are persons to whom the Fundamental and Supple-
mentary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and 
Appeal) Rules, Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 
Revlsed'Leave Rules, Civil Service Regulations, Civilians 
in Defence Services (ClaSSification, Control and Appeal) 
Rules or the Indian Railway Establishment Code or any 
other rules or regulations that may be notified in this be-
half by the 'appropriate Government in the Official 
Gazette, apply. 
9B. Where the appropriate Government is of opinion that the Power of 
application of the provisions of section 9A to any clalSs of tGovernmetnt '.. ,oexemp. industrIal establIshments or to any class of workmen em-
ployed in any industrial establishment affect the employ-
ers in relation thereto so prejudicially that such applica-
tion may cause serious repercussion on the industry con-
cerned' and that public interest so requires, the appropriate 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that the provisions of the said .section shall not, 
subject to such conditions as may be specified in the noti-

Amendment 
of aection 
10. 
6 
~cation, apply to that class of industrial establishments or 
to that class of workmen employed in any industri811 
establishment." . 
'J. In section 10 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),- S 
(i) for clause (c), the following clauses shall be substitut-
ed, namely:-
"(c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be 
connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, if it 
relates to any matter specified in the Second 10 
Schedule, to a Labour Court for adjudication; or 
(d) refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be 
connected' with, or relevant to, the dispute, 
whether it relates to any matter 'specified in the 
Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, to a IS 
'l'ribunal for adjudication: 
Provided that where the dispute relates to any matter 
specified in the Third Schedule and is not likely 
to affect more than one hundred workmen, the 
appropriate Government may, if it so thinks fit, 20 
make the reference to a Labour Court under 
clause (c)."; 
(ii) in the proviso, for the words "Provided that", the 
words "Provided further that" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 25 
inserted, namely:-
"(1A) Where the Central Government is of opinion that 
any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended and 
the dispute involves any question of national import-
ance or is of such a nature that industrial establish- 30 
ments situated in more than one State are likely to pe 
interested in, or affected by, such dispute and that the 
dispute should be adjudicated by a National Tribunal, 
then, the Central Government may, whether or not 
it is the appropriate Government in relation to that 3' 
dispute, at any time, by order in writing, refer the 
dispute or any matter appearing to be connected with, 
or relevant to, the dispute, whether it relates to any 
matter specified in the Second Schedule or the Third 
Schedule, to a Nationd Tribunal for adjudication."; 40 
(c) in sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), for the words "or 
Tribunal", the words "Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal" shall be substituted; 

7 
(d) in sub-section (4),-
(i) for the words "a Tribunal", the words "a Labour Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal" sltaU be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "the Tribunal", the words "the Labour 
5 Court or the Tribunal or the National Tribunal, as the 
case may be" shall be substituted; 
(e) in sub-section (5), for the word "Tribunal", the words 
"Labour Court, Tribunal or Nationa'~ Tribunal" shall be 
substituted; 
10 (f) after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(6) Where any reference has been made under sub-
section (lA) to a National Tribunal, then, notwith-
standing anything contained in this Act, no Labour 
IS Court or Tribunal shaoll have jurisdiction to adjudi-
cate upon any matter which is under adjudication 
before the National Tribunal, and accordingly,-
(a) if the matter under adjudication before the 
National Tribunal is pending in a proceeding be-
20 fore a Labour Court or Tribunal, the proceeding 
before the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the 
case may be, in so far as it relates to such matter, 
shall be deemed to have been quashed on such 
• reference to the National Tribunal; and 
25 (b) it shall not be lawful for the appropriate Govern-
ment to refer the matter under adjudication be-
before the National Tribunal to any Labour Court 
or Tribunal for adjudication during the pendency 
of the proceeding in relation to such matter be-
30 fore the National Tribunal. 
3S 
40 
(7) Where any industrial dispute,in relation to which 
the Central Government is not the appropriate Gov-
ernment, is referred to a National Tribunal, then, not-
withstanding anything contained in this Act, 8Ily 
reference in section 15, section 17, section 17A, sec-
tion 19, section 3M and section 33B to appropriate 
Government in respect of the National Tribunal in 
relation to such dispute shall be construed as a refer-
ence to the Central Government but, save as afore-
said and as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, 
any reference in any other provision of this Act fo 
appropriate Government in respect of the National 
TriJ:>unal in relation to that dispute shall mean a 
reference to the State Government.". 

• 
Insertion of 
new section 
loA. 
Voluntary 
reference of 
dis~ute8 to 
arbitration. 
8 
8. In Chapter III, after section 10 of the principal Act, the follow-
ing aection shall be inserted, namely:-
• "lOA. (1) Where any industrial dispute exists or is apprehend-
ed and the employer and the workmen agree to refer the 
dispute to arbitration, they may, at any time ·before the S 
dispute has been referred under section 10 to a Labour 
Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal, by a written 
agreement, refer the dispute to arbitration and the refer-
ence shall be to such person or persons (including the' 
presiding officer of a Labour Court or Tribunalor' National 10 
Tribunal) as an arbitrator or arbitrators as may be specified 
in the arbitration agreement. 
(2) An arbitration agreement referred to in sub-section (1) 
shall be in such form and shall be signed by the parties 
thereto in such manner as may' be prescribed. IS 
.(3) A copy of the arbitration agreement shall be forwarded to 
the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer 
and the appropriate Government shall, within fourteen 
days from the date of the receipt of such copy, publish the 
same in the Official Gazette. 20 
(4) The arbitrator or arbitrators' shall investigate the dispute 
and submit to the appropriate Government the arbitration 
award signed 'by the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as 
the case may be. 
(5) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 shall apply to arbitra· 25 
tions under this section.". 
Amendment of section II,' 9. In section 11 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
5ubRtituted, namely:-
II (1) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf 30 
an arbitrator, a Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Tribunal shall follow such procedure as 
the arbitrator or other authority concerned may think 
fit."; e' 
(b) in sub-section (2), fer the wAJrds '~Court <>r Tribunal", the 35 
words "or Court or the ,presiding officer of a Labour Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal" shall .be· substituted; 
(e) in Bub-secti01'l (3),-
(i) for the words "and Tribunal", the words "Labour 
Court, Tribunal and National Tribunal" shall be sub- 40 
stitufed; 

V of 1908. 10 
IS 
20 
XLV of 
11160. 25 
30 
35 
9 
(ii) for the words "or Tribunal", the words "Labour Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal" shall be substituted; 
(d) to sub-section (4), the following words shall be added, 
namely:-
."or to .be necessary for the purpose of verifying the im-
plementation of any award or carrying out any other 
duty imposed on him under this Act. and for the 
aforesaid purposes, the conciliation officer shall have 
the same powers as are vested in a civil cow1; under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of com-
pelling the production of documents."; 
(e) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(5) A Court, Labour Court, Tribunal 01' National Tribunal 
may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one or more persons 
having special knowledge of the matter under oonsi-
deration as assessor or assessors to advise it in the 
f>roceeding before it."; 
(f) for sub-section (6) and sub-section (7), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted. namely:-
.. (6) All conciliation officers, members of Ci Board or 
Court and the pl'csiding officers of a Labour Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be deemed to be 
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code."; 
(7) Subject to any rules made under this Act, the costs 
of, and incidental to, any proceeding before a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be in the 
discretion of that Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal and the Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal, as the case may be, shall have full power to 
determine by and to whom and to what extent and 
subject to what conditions, if any, such costs are to be 
paid, and to give all necessary directions for the pur-
pose;; aforesaid and such costs may, on application 
made to the appropriate Government by the person 
entitled, .be recovered by that Government in the 
same manner as an arrear of land revenue."; 
(g) in sub-section (8), for the word "Tribunal", the words 
"Labour Court, Tribunal or Nati9nal TriQull@l" shl\ll be 
substit"tec:l. 

Amendment 
of lCCtion u. 
10 
10. In section 12 of the. prin~lpal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (~), for the werds "or 'Fribunal", the words 
"Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) to sub-section (6), the following proviso shall be added, 5 
namely:-
"Provided . that the time for the submission of the report 
may be extended by ~uch period as may be agreed 
upon in writing by all the parties to the dispute.". 
Amendrr.ent 11. In sub-section (4) of section 13 of the principal Act, for the 10 
of section 13· word "Tribunal", the words "Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal" shall be substituted. . 
Substitution 12. For section 15, section 16 and section 17 of the principal Act, 
:ction: ew the following sections shall be substituted, namely:-
forae:tions IS " 
16 and 17. 
Duties of 
Labour 
Courts, Tri-
bunals and 
Natinnal Tri-
bunal •. 
Form of re-
pan or award. 
Publination 
of report a 
and awards. 
"15. Where an industrial dispute has been referred to a IS 
Labour Court, .Tribunal or Natio!lal Tribunal for adjudica-
tion, it shall hold its proceedings expeditiouldy and shall, as 
soon as it is practicable on the conclusion thereof, submit 
its award to the appropriate Government. 
16. (1) 1'he report of a Board or Court shall be in writing and 20 
shall be silmed by all the members nf the Board or Court, 
as the case may be: 
Provided that .nothing in this section shall be deemed to pre-
vent any member of the Board or Court from recording 
any minute of dissent from a r£'port or' from any recom- 25 
mendation made therein. 
(2) The award of a Labour Court or Tribual or National 
Tribunal ·Ilhall be in writing and. 5hall be signed by its 
presiding officer. 
1~. (l) The report of a Board or Court together with any minute 30 
of dissent recorded therewith, and the award of a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall. within a period 
of thirty days from the datt' of its receipt by the appropri-
ate Government, .be published in such manner as it thinks 
fit. 
, (2) Subject to the provisions of sectiQll 17A, the award publish-
ed under sub-section (1) shall be final' and shall not be 
called in question by any court in any manner whatso-
~ver.". " -" ". 
35 

5 
10 
IS 
it 
tt-ln section 17 A of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) the words "of a Tribunal" shall be omittedj 
(ii) in the proviso, for the words "in cases where the 
award is not appealable and", the words '''in the case 
of an award of a Labour Court or Tribunal" shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"Provided :further that in the case of an award of a 
National Tribunal, where the Central Govern-
ment in of opinion that it will be inexpedient on 
public grounds affecting national economy to give 
effect to the whole O't any part of the award, it 
may, before the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, by order in the Official Gazette, either re-
ject thE! award or modify it."; 
(b) in sub-section (3), the words "of a Tribunal" shall be 
omitted. 
Amendment 
of section 
17A. 
:&0 14. Section 18 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub· AMendment 
section (3) thereof and in that section _ of section , 18. 
(a) the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
tl (1) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the 
employer and workmen otherwise than in the courfle 
zS of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the 
parties to the agreement. 
(2) An arbitration award which has become enforce-
able shall be binding on the parties to the agreement 
who refern!d. the dispute to arbitration."; 
30 (b) in sub-section (3) as so re-numbered,-
35' 
(i) after the words "an award", the words "of a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal" shall be in-
serted; 
(ii) in clause (1)), for the words "or Tribunal", the words 
"Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal" shall 
be substituted. 
15. In section 19 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
ofaection 
• (a) in· sub-section (2), after the wor~ "sbc months", the 19. 
words "from the date on which the memorlU).dum of 

Amendment 
of section 
20. 
Amendment 
of section 
:n. 
12 
settlement is signed by the parties to the dispute" shall be 
inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), after the words "for a period of one 
year", the words, figures and letter ."from the date on 
which the award becomes enforceable under section l7A" 5 
.hall be inserted; 
(c) in sub-section (4),-
(i) for the words "to a Tribunal", the words "to a Labour 
Court, if the award was that of a Labour Court or to 
a Tribunal, if the award was that· of a Tribunal or of 10 
a National Tribunal" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "the Tribunal", the words "Labour 
Court or the Tribunal, as the case may be" shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) the words "subject to the provision for appeal" shall IS 
be omitted; 
(d) sub-section (7) shall be omitted. 
16. In section 20 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (c) of sub-section (2). for the words "or Tribu-
nal", the words "Labour Court, Tribunal or National 7.0 
Tribunal" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3),-
(i) for the words "before a Tribunal", the words, figures 
and letter "before an arbitrator under section lOA or 
before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal" 2S 
Bhall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "reference of dispute for adjudication", 
the words "reference of the dispute for arbitration or 
adjudication, as the case may be" shall be substitut-
~ ~ 
17. In section 21 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "or Tribunal" occurring for the first time, 
the words l'Labour Court, Tribunal~ National Tribunal or 
an arbitrator" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "or Tribunal" occurring for the second and 3S 
third time, the words "Labour Court, Tribunal, National 
Tribunal or arbitrator" shalf be substituted; 
'.e) for the words "Court or Trihunai" occurring for the_ fourth 
.time, the words "or Court or the presiding ofllcer of the 

.. 
13 
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal or the 
arbitrator" shall be substituted. 
lB. In clause (b) of section 23 of the principal Act, for the words Amen~ent 
"a Tribunal", the words "a Labour Court, Tribunal or National of section 23 
, Tribunal" shall be substituted. 
It. In sub-section (2) of section 24 of the principal Ac:t, for the Afmendm.ent 
words "or Tribunal", the words "LabouT Court, Tribunal or National ~4. section 
Tribunal" shall be substituted, 
20. Section 251 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of 
scction 25 I, 
10 21, For section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall ~t:!~!!~~ 
be substituted, namely:- tion for sec-
tion 29. 
"29. Any person who commits a breach of any term of any Penalty h 
settlement or award, which is· binding on him under this ~~r8e~tlea: 
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term ment or award. IS which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with 
both, and the Court trying the offence, if it fines the 
offender, may direct that the whole or any part of the 
fine realised from him shall be paid, by way of compen-
sation, to any person wlio, in its opinion, has been injured 
20 by such breach.". 
22. For section 33 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitution 
b b t 't ted I . of new sec-e su S 1 U ,name y, - tion for sec' 
tion 33. 
"33. (1) During tIle pendency of any conciliation proceeding Conditions 
before a coDciU.tion officer or a Board or of any proceed- of service, 
. bef Lab C T'b al N' etc., to 25 mg ore a our ourt or rl un or ational Tri- remain 
bunal in respect of an industrial dispute, no employer uncdhanged' un er cer-
shall,- tain cir-
cumstan-
(a) in regard to any matter connected with the dispute, ccs during 
alter, to the prejudice of the workmen concerned in ~nd~~~ 
30 such dispute, the conditions of service applicable to ceedings. 
them immediately before the commencement of such 
proceeding; or 
(b) for any misconduct connected with the dispute, dis-
charge or punish, whether by dismissal or otherwise, 
35 any workmen concerned in such dispute, 
save with the express permission in writing of the autho-
rity before which the proceeding is pending. 
(2) During the pendency of any such proceediug in respect 
of an industrial dispute, the employer may, in accordance 

14 
with the standing orders applicable to a workman con-
cerned in such dispute,-
(a) alter, in regard to any matter not connected with the 
dispute, the conditions of service applicable to that 
workman immediately before the commencement of S 
such proceeding; or 
(b) for any misconduct not connected with the dispute, 
discharge or punish, whether by dismissal or other-
wise, that workman: 
Provided that no such workman shall be discharged or dis- r 0 
missed, unless he has been paid wages for one month and 
an application has been made by the employer to the 
authority before which the proceeding is pending for ap-
proval of the action taken by the employer. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (Z), 15 
no employer shall, during the pendency of any such pro-
ceeding in respect of an industrial dispute, take any action 
against any protected workman concerned in such dis-
pute-
(a) by altering, to the prejudice of such protected work- ZO 
man, the conditions of service applicable to him im. 
mediately before the commencement of such proceed. 
ings; or 
(b) by discharging or punishing, whether by dismissal or 
otherwise, such protected workman, 2, 
save with the express permission In writing of the autho-
rity before which the proceeding 11 pending. 
Ezplanation.-For the 'pu!'POses of this sub-section, a 'protected 
workman', in relation to an establishment, means a work-
man who, being an officer of a registered trade union 30 
connected with the establishment, is recognised as such 
in accordance with rules made in this behalf. 
(4) I~ every establishment, the number of workmen to be 
recognised as protected workmen for the purposes of sub-
section (3) shall be one per cent. of the total number of 35 
workmen employed therein subject to a minimum number 
of five protected workmen and a maximum number of one 
hundred protected workmen and for the aforesaid pur-
pose, the appropriate Gov~rnment may make rules provid-
ing for the distribution of such protected workmen amcmg 40 
various trade unions, if any, connected with the establish-
ment and the manner in which the workmen may be 
chosen and recognised as protected wormen. 

1$ 
(5) Where an employer makes an application to a conciliation 
officer, Board, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tri-
bunal under the proviso to sub-section (2) for approval 
of the action taken by him, the authority concerned shall, 
5 without delay, hear such application and pass, as ex-
peditiously as possible, such order in relation thereto as 
it deems l1t.". 
23. In section 33A of the principal Act, for the word "Tribunal" Amen~ent 
wherever it occurs, the words "Labour Court, Tribunal or N~tional ~;A~ctlon 
10 Tribunal" shall be substituted. 
15 
20 
30 
35 
24. After section 33A of the principal Act, the following sections Insertion of 
shall be inserted namely' _ new section. , • 33 Band 
33C. 
"33B. Where any proceeding under section 33 or section 33A Power to 
. d' b f T'b 1 N t· al Trib I th transfer cer-IS pen mg e ore a n una or a Ion una , e tain proceed-
appropriate Government may withdraw such proceeding ings to La-
f h T 'b INt' 1 T'b 1 th bour Courts. rom t e rl una or a lona rl una, as e case may 
be, and transfer the same to .any Labour Court for the 
disposal of the proceeding and the Lajlour Court to which 
the proceeding is so transferred may, subject to any spe-
cial directions in the order of transfer, proceed either 
de novo or from the stage at which it was so transferred. 
"33C. (1) Where any money is due to a workman from an Recovery of 
employer under a settlement or an award or under the me oney due • • rom an em-
provisIOns of Chapter VA, the workman may, WIthout ployer. 
prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an appli-
cation to the appropriate Government for the recovery of 
the money due to him, and if the appropriate Government 
is satisl1ed that any money is so due, it shall issue a certi-
l1cate for that amount and proceed to recover the same 
in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 
(2) Where any workman is entitled to receive from the em-
ployer any benefit which is capable of being computed in 
terms of money, the amount at which such benefit should 
be computed may, subject to any rules that may be made 
under this Act, be determined by such Labour Court as 
may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate Govern-
ment, and the amount so determined may be recovered as 
provided for in sub-section (1). 
(3) For the purposes of computing the money value of a 
benel1t, the Labour Court may, if it so thinks fit, appoint 
a commissioner who shall, after taking such evidence as 
may be necessary, submit a report to the Labour Court 
and the Labour Court shall determine the amount after 

Amendment 
of sel:tion 
36• 
Amendment 
of section 
38• 
16 
<lOllsidering :the report of the commissioner and other 
circumstances of the case.". 
25. In sub-section (4) of section 36 of the prineipal Ad,-
(a) for the words "before a Tribunal", the words "before a 
Labour Court, TribUD.81 or National Tribunal" shall be S 
substituted; 
(b) for the words "with the leave of the Tribunal", the words 
"with the leave of the Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal, as the case may be" shall be substituted. 
26. In section 38 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) in·clause (a), for the words "and TribUDals". the words 
"Labour Courts, Tribtmals and National Tribunals" 
shall be substituted; 
10 
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be insert- 15 
ed, namely:-
• " (au) the form of arbitration agreement, the manner 
in which it may be signed by the parties, the 
powers of the .arbitrator named in the arbitration 
agreement and the procedure to be followed by 20 
him;"; 
(iii) in clause (c), fortbe words "Boards and Tribunals", the 
words "and Boards an.;i presiding officers of Labour 
Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals" shall be 
substituted; 2S 
(iv) in clause (d) and clause (f), for the words "or 
Tribunal", the words "Labour Court, Tribunal or Na-
tional Tribunal" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sedionshall be 
inserted, namely: - 30 
" (4) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as 
possible after they are made, be laid before the State 
Legislature or, where the appropriate Government is 
the Central Government, before both Houses of Parlia-
ment.". 3S 
Substitution 27. For seetkm 39 of the principal Act, the follwing section shall 
of new sec-;be iDsertecl, namely:- . 
tion for sec:-
tion 39. 
Delegation 
or powers, 
"39. The aPP1"Qpriate Government may, by notification in the 
OfBeial Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it 

10 
17 
under this Act or rules made thereunder shall, in relation 
to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as 
may be specified in the direction, be exercisable also,-
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central 
Government, by such officer or authority subordinate 
to the Central Government or by the State Govern-
ment or by such officer or authority subordinate to 
the State Government, as may be specified in the 
notification; and 
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State Gov-
ernment, by such officer or authority subordinate to 
the State Governments as may be specified in the 
notification." . 
28. After section 39 of the principal Act, the following section Insenj~~ of . new Ia;uon IS shall be Inserted, namely:- 40. 
20 
"40. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Power of 
Official Gazette, add to, alter or amend the Second aGoppropriatet . • vemmen Schedule or the ThIrd Schedule and on any such notiftca- to amend the 
tion being issued, the Second Schedule or the Third Tsech.odDdsanLd lr Cue" 
Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be dules. 
amended accordingly.". 
29. For the Schedule to the principal Act, the fQ!lowing shall be Substitution 
substituted namely:- S~d~les 
"THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (n) (vi)] 
Industries which may be declared to be public utility services under 
sub-clause (vi) of clause (n) of section 2. 
1. Transport (other than railways) for the carriage of pas-
sengers or goods, by land, water or air. 
for the Sche-
dule. 
30 2. Coal. 
3. Cotton textUeli. 
4. Foodstuffs. 
5. Iron and liteel. 
6. Defence establishments. 
3S 7. Service in hospitallil and dispensaries. 
8. Fire Brigade service. 

IS 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 7) 
Ju.risdiction of Labou.r CouTts 
1. The propriety or legality of an order passed by an employ,er 
under· the standing orders; 
2. The application and interpretation of standing orders; 
3. Discharge or dismissal of employees" including re-instatement 
of, or grant of relief to, a person wrongfully dismissed; 
4. Withdrawal of any customary concession or privilege; 
5 
5. Illegality or otherwise of a strike or lock-out; and 10 
6. All matters other than those specified in the Third Schedule. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 7A) 
Jurisdiction of Industrial Tribunaz., 
1. Wages, including the period and mode of payment; 
2. Compensatory and other allowances; 
3. Hours of work and rest intervals; 
4. Leave with wages and holidays; 
5. Bonus, pr~fit sharing, provident fund and gratuity; 
IS 
6. Shift working otherwise than in accordance with standing 20 
orders; . 
7. Classification by grades; 
8. Rules of discipline; 
9. Rationalisation; 
10. Retrenchment of workmen and closure of establishment; and 25 
11. Any other matter that may be prescribed. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 9A) 
Notice of change 
1. Wages including the period and mode of payment; 
2. Contribution paid, or payble, by the employer to any pro-
vident fund or pension fund or for the benefit of the employees 
under any law for the time being in-force; . 
3. Compensatory and other allowances; 
4. Hours of work and rest intervals; 
5. ·'i.eave with wages and holidays; 
3S 

"19 
. 6. Startin'g, alteration or disconl'kluance of shift working· other-
wise than in; accordance with standing orders;' 
7. Classification by grades; 
8. Withdrawal of any customary concesSion or privilege or change 
5 in usage; 
10 
XIV of 1947, IS 
XIV of 19471 
25 
9. Introduction of new rules of discipline, 'or--.Iteration of exist-
ing rules, except in so far as they are providecf"iO standing orders; 
10. Rationalisation, standardisation or in:tproYem.ent of plant or 
technique which is likely to lead to retrenchment of employees; 
11. Any increases or reductio~ ,(either than casual) in the num-
ber of persons employed or to ~e. employed in any occupation or 
process or department or shift, riot du,e to forced matters.". 
....•. 
30. If, immediately before the commencement of this Act, there Savings d 
is pending any proceeding in relation -to "'4n industrial dispute before ~~~r~~~: -
a Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as in ~j1'!~ befire 
force before such commencement, the dispute: may be adjudicated n U!1a 8. 
and the proceeding disposed of by that Tribunal after such com-
mencement, as if the said Act' as amended by thi&. ~ct had not been 
passed. ' • _- : 
31. (1) It; immediatelv before the commencement of this Act, Act n.,:: to 
there is in force in any State any provinciW Act or State Act relat- ~tVa;~rla!s. 
ing to the settlement or adjudication of disputes, the operation of 
such an Act in that State in 'relation ~ matters covered by that 
Act. shall not be affected by the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as 
amended by this Act. 
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing Ii 
in this section shall be deemed to preclude the Central Government 
or the National Tribunal from exercising any powers conferred on 
it by the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as amended by this Act. 
< '.-
30 32. The Industrial Employmeht (Standing Orders) Act,'l94i·shall Amcndmcr t 
be amended in the manner hereinafter specified, namely:- ~~ ~;lt.x - . 
(a) in section 4, for the words "shall not be the function", the 
words "shall be the fu~ction" shalf be substituted-;' 
(b) in section 10, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section 
3S shall be substitute<;l .• namely:-
"(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), an em-
ployer or workman may apply to the Certifying Offi-
cer to have the -standing orders modified, and such 
application shall be accompanied by five copies of the 
40 standing orders in which shall be indicated the modi-
fications proposed to be made, and where such modi-
fications are proposed to be made by agreement 

Interpreta-
tion, etc., of 
Btanding 
orden. 
Act not to 
apply to 
certain in-
dustrial es-
tablish-
ments. 
20 
between the employer and the workmen, a certified 
copy of that agreement ~all be filed along with the 
application."; 
(c) after section 13, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:- 5 
"13A. If any question arises as to the application or inter-
pretation of· a standing order certified under this Act, 
any employer or workman may refer the question 
to anyone. of the Labour Courts constituted under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and specified for the 10 XIV (If J9<l7. 
disposal of such proceeding by the appropriate Gov-
ernment by notification in the Official Gazette, and 
the Labour Court to which the question is so referred 
shall, after giving the parties an opportunity of being 
heard, decide the question and such decision shall be IS 
final and binding on the parties. 
13B. Nothing in this Act shall apply to an industrial 
establishment in so far as the workmen employed 
therein are persons to whom the Fundamental and 
Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, 20 
Control and Appeal) Rules, Civil Services (Tempo-
rary Service) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Ser-
vice Regulations, Civilians in Defence Service 
Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules or the 
Indian Railway Establishment Code or any other rules 25, 
or regulntions that may be notified in this behalf by 
the appropriate Government in the Official Gazette, 
apply.". 
~~LVl~ 33. (1) The Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950 is 
of 1950 and hereby repealed. 
laving. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, if, immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act, there is pending any appeal or olher pro-
ceeding before the Appellate Tribunal constituted under the said 
Act, the appeal or other px.ceeding shall be decided or disposed 
30 
of by the Appenate Tribunal as if the said Act had not been repealed .3, 
by this Aoi and every such d .. ilion or order disposing of a proceed-
ing, whe_ber pron01lDced or made before or after the commence-
ment of .his Act, shaH be enforced in accordance with the proviaions 
of the said Act. 

~I 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASQNS 
The Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provi-
sions) Bill, 1955, seeks to make certain long needed changes in the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Act, 1946, and to repeal the Industrial Disputes 
(Appellate Tribunal) Act. 1950. 
2. The present cleflnition of 'workman' in section 2(,) ,of the 
Industrial Disputes Act has led to uncertainty, particularly in the 
case of technical and supervisory personnel. It is, therefore, pro-
posed to enlarge the definition to cover supervisory personnel, 
whose emoluments do not exceed Rs. 500 per mensem, and also the 
technical personnel. . 
3. There has heena persistent demand that notice 'should be 
given whenever it is proposed to make any change in the condi-
tions of service of workmen. Therefore, a new Chapter, namely, 
Chapter IIA is proposed to be inserted to provide that the employer 
shall not introduce any cbange in respect of certain specified mat-
ters without giving to the workmen concerned 21 days' notice of his 
intention to do so. 
4. The existing provisions of section 33 of the Act prohibit dur-
ing the pendency of any conciliation proceeding or proceeding be-
iore a Tribunal .any change being made in the conditions of serviee 
of, or any action being taken against, the workmeli concerned in the 
dispute except with the express written permiSSion of the authority 
concemed. The number of applications for such permission is fre-
quently large and their disposal takes time. Employers have com-
plained that they are therefore prevented from taking action even 
in obvious cases of misconduct and indiscipline unconnected with 
the dispute till long after the offence has been committed. 
It is proposed to alter the existing provisions so as to pro-
vide that, where, during the pendency of proceedings an 
employer finds it necessary to proceed against any work-
man in regard to any matter unconnected with the dispute, 
he may do so in accordance with the Standing Order appli-
cable to the workman, but where the action taken involves dis-
charge or dismissal, he will have to pay the workman one month's 
wages and simultaneously file an application before the authority, 
before which the proceeding is pending, for its approval of the 
action taken. Protection on the lines of the existing provisions will 
continue to be available to all workmen in regard to any matter or 
misconduct co~cted with the dispute. A limited number of repre-
sentatives of the workers will, however, be given protection in all 
matters whether connected with the dispute or otherwise. 

22 , 
5. There is a large volume of criticism that appeals filed before the 
Appellate Tribunal take a long time for disposal and inVlOlve a great 
deal of expenditure which the workers cannot afford. It is proposed 
to repeal the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, and 
at the same time. to substitute the present system of tribunals by 
a three-tier system of original tribunals, manned by personnel of 
appropriate qualifications. References to the National Tribunals 
will be made by the Central Government and they will cover dis-
putes which involve questions of national importance or which are 
of such a nature that establlshments situated in more than one State 
, are likely to be interested in, or affected by, the disputes. 
6. Provision is also made for voluntary reference of disputes to 
Slrbit1"Jltion by the parties themselves by written agreement and for 
the enforcement of agreements between employers and workmen 
reached otherwise than in the course of conciliation. 
7. Opportunity has been taken to carry out certain essential 
amendments to the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 
1946. It is proposed to empower both the Certifying Officer and 
the Appellate Authority to take into account the fairness or reason-
ableness of the standing orders before they are certified. Under 
the present law, only the employer can take steps to modify the 
existing standing orders. A similar right is being provided in the 
Bill for workmen. Provision has also been made for the resolution 
of difterences that may arise between the parties as to the applica-
tion aDd interpretation of standing orders. In case of any such 
difterence, the parties can approach a Labour Court without the 
intervention of the appropriate Government. 
KHANDUBHAI K. DESAI. 
NEW DI:Lm; 
The 9th September, 1955. 

23 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill contemplates the setting up of three types of original 
tribunals, namely, Labour Courts, Industrial Tribunals and National 
Tribunals. 
Under clause 4, the proposed section 7 empowers the appropriate 
Government to appoint Labour Courts. So far as the Central 
Govem'ment is concerned, it is proposed to set up three Labour 
Courts, one exclusively for mines and the other two for other 
Central sphere undertakings. Each Labour Court will be presided 
over by a judicial officer of not less than 7 years' standing. The 
expenditure on the salaries of the presiding officer and the staff and 
other incidental charges is likely to be about Rs. 28,000/- per annum 
for each Court. The total amount required for three Labour Courts 
would be about Rs. 84,000/- per annum. 
The proposed section 7B empowers the appropriate Government 
to appoint Industrial Tribunals. So far as the Central Government 
is concerned, it is proposed to retain the existing Central Govern-
ment Industrial Tribunal at Dhanbad for the purpose. The Indus-
trial Tribunal will be presided over by a person who is or has been 
a Judge of a High Court or a person who had immediately before 
the commencement of these provisions served at least for two yeara 
as a member of an Industrial Tribunal. It is not likely that there 
will be any appreciable additional expenditure on this aecount. 
The proposed section 7B empowers the Central Government to 
appoint one or more National Tribunals for the adjudication of 
Industrial disputes which Involve questions of national importance 
or are of such a nature that establishments situated in more than 
one State are likely to be affected by them. It is diftlcult to foresee 
the number of disputes which may have to be referred to National 
Tribunals but it may not be necessary to have more than one 
National Tribunal. A National Tribunal will be presided over by a 
person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court. The expendi-
ture on the salaries of the presiding officer and the staff and other 
incidental charges is likely to be about Rs. 60,000/- per annum. 
On the other hand, clause 33 seeks to abolish the Labour 
Appellate Tribunal constituted· under the Industrial Disputes 
(Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950. A sum of Rs. 5,59,000/- has been 
provided in the .budget for 1955-56 for meeting the expenditure on 
the Appellate Tribunal and it is likely that there would be a saving 
of about Rs. 51 lakhs per annum on account of the abolition of the 
Appellate Tribunal. 

24 
To sum up, while there may be an additional expenditure of about 
Rs. 1i lakhs per annum on account of the establislunent of Labour 
Courts and National Tribunals, there is likely to be a saving of 
about Rs. 51 lakhs per annum on account of the abolition of the 
Appellate Tribunal. 

M~MORANnUM REGARDING Ol!!LEGAT1!:o LEGISLATION 
Clause 26 of the Bill amends section 38 of the Act which em-
powers the appropriate Government to make rul,ea. The matte~ 
'in respect of which such rules may be made are specified therein. 
They relate to the form of arbitration agreement, the manner in 
which it may be signed by the parties, the powers of the arbitrator 
and the procedure to be followed by him. They also relate to 
certain consequential matters. The matters specified in section 38 
are of a routine character. Provision has been made that any 
rules' made under this section shall be laid, when they are made by 
any State Government, before the State Legislature and when they 
are made by the Central Government, before both Houses of 
Parliament. 
Clause 27 of thE' Bill substitutes a new section for section 39 of 
the Act. Under section 39 as it originally stood, the appropriate 
Government was empowered to delegate its powers under section 
3 to any officer or authority subordinate to it. The new section 
widens the scope of delegation and it empowers the Central Gov-
ernment, where it is the appropriate Government, to delegate its 
powers to the State Government or to any officer of the State Gov-
ernment. The Central Government does not have its officers in 
all parts of India and it is necessary to empower the Central Gov-
ernment to delegate its powers to the State Governments or to 
officers subordinate to State Governments. 
The delegation is of a normal character . 
. ""_ ..... -...... 

36 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DIsPUTES ACT. 1947 
(AcT No. XIV OF 1947) 
• • • • • • 
L Short title 
Eztent and. 
• • • • *' • COIDmencc-Mento 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
aDd Kashmir. 
• • • • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant. in the subject Definition •. 
or- ~ontext,-
• • • • • • 
(b) "award" means an interim or final determination by an 
Industrial Tribunal of any iDdustrial dispute or of ·any 
question relating thereto; 
• • • • • • 
(p) "setUement" means a settlement arrived at in the course 
of conciliation proceeding; 
• • • • • • 
(1) "Tribunal" means an Industrial Tribunal constituted 
under this Act; 
(s) "workman" means any person employed (including an 
apprentice) in any'!lndutry to cleo any skiTh!!d orunsldtled 
manual or clerical work for hire or reward and includes, 
for the purposes of any proceedings under this Act in 
relation to an Industrial dispute, a workman discharged 
during that dispute. but -does not include any person 
employed in the naval, military or air service of the 
Government. 
• • • • • • 
7. (1) The appropriate Government may constitute one or more Industrial 
Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes in Tri bunals 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) A tribunal shall consist of such number of independent mem-
bers as the appropriate Government may think lit to appoint, and 
where the Tribunal consists of two or more members, one of them 
shall be appointed as the Chairman,' thereof. . 

Filling 
vacancie. 
2,7 
(3) Where a Tribunal consists of one member oQIy, thatmem· 
ber, and where it consists of two or more members,the Chairman 
• of the Tribunal, shall be a person wh~ 
of 
(a) is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or 
(b) is or has been a district judge; or 
(c) is qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court: 
Provided that no appointment under this sub·section to a 
Tribunal shall be made of any person not qualified under clause (a) 
or clause (b) except with the approval of the High Court of the 
State in whi«h the Tribunal has, or is intended to have, its usual seat. 
(4) Where a Tribunal consists of two or more members, every 
such member (other than the Chairman) shall possess such quailfi. 
cations as may be prescribed, and .where an industrial dispute 
affecting any banking or insurance company is referred to a Tribu-
nIH, one of sueh members may be a person who, in the opinion of 
the appropriate Government, has special knowledge of banking 
or insurance, as the case may be. 
(5) A Tribunal, where it consists of two or more members, may 
act notwIthstanding the casual and unforeseen absence of the 
Chairman or any other member, and when the Chairman or other. 
member rejoins his office after such absence, the proceedings may 
be continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which he s(> 
rejoins. 
8. (1) If for any reason a vacancy occurs in the office of the 
Chairman or any other member of a Board, the appropriate Gov-
ernment shall appoint, in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (3) of section 5, another person to fill the vacancy and the 
proceedings may be .continued before the Board so reconstituted 
from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 
(2) If for any reason a vacancy occurs in the office of the 
Chairman or any other member of a court or Tribun!ll, the appro~ 
priate Government shall, in the case of a Chairman, and may, in the 
case of any other member, appoint another independent' person, in 
accordance with the provisions of section 6 or section 7, as 'the case 
may be, to ftll the vacancy, and the proceedings may be continued 
before the court or the Tribunal so reconstituted from the stage at 
which the vacancy Is ftlled. 
Finality of t. (1) No order of the appropriate Government appointing any 
orden person as a member of a Board, Court or Tribunal shall be called con.titu-tina a Board, in question·in· any manner. 
~=.or TtI- (2) Where thp. report of any settlement arrived at in the course 
9f 1he co~~i!i!t~~n pr~¢ln~s ,b~fl?re ~ poard or ~he !lw~rd Qt ~ 

28 
Tribunal consisting of two or more members is signed by the 
Chairman and all the other members of the Board or the Tribunal, 
as the case may be, no such settlement 01' award shall be invalid by 
reason only of the casual and unforeseen absence of any of the 
members (including the Chairman) of the Board or the Tribunal, as 
the case may be during any state of the hearing of the proceedings . 
• • .. * 
CHAPTER III 
Reference oj Disputes to Boards, Courts or Tribunals 
10. (1) Where the appropriate Government is of opinion that any RefcrenC(~ of 
industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, it may at any time by Disputes to 
rd · 'tin Boards, o er m wn g,- Coutts or 
• • • • • 
(c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected. 
with, or relevant to, the dispute to a Tribunal for adjudi-
cation: 
Provided that where the dispute relates to a public utility 
service and a notice under section 22 has been given, the appro-
priate Government shall, unless it consi~ers that the notice has been 
frivolously or vexatiously given or that it would be inexpedient 
so to do, make a reference under this sub-section notwithstanding 
that any other proceedings under this Act in respect of the dispute 
may have commenced. 
(2) where the parties to an industrial dispute apply in the pres-
cribed manner, whether jointly or separately, for a referencC! of the 
dispute to a Board, Court or Tribunal, the appropriate Government, 
if satisfied that the persolls applying represent the majority of each 
party, shall make the reference accordingly. 
(3) Where an industrial dispute has been l'eferred to a Board 
or Tribunal under this section. the appropriate Government may by 
order prohibit the continuance of iiny strike or lock-outin connec-
tion with such dispute which may he in existence on the date of 
the reference. 
(4) Where in .an order referrIng an industrial dispute "to a 
Tribunal under this section or in a subsequent order, the- appro-
priate Government has specified the points of dispute for adjudica-
tion the Tribunal shall confine its adjudication to those points and 
matters incidental thereto. 
Tribunals . 
(5) Where. a dispute concernil'lg any establishment or establish- .r 
ments has been, or is to be, referred to a Tribunal under this sec-
tion and the appropriate Government is of opinion, whether on any 
~ppUcation ~"-e tg ~~ ~ tb~ l?ehaU C?~ otlwrwi1'e, that the cUsput, 
"' .. 

29 
is of such a nature that any other establishment, group or class of 
establishments of a similar nature is likely to be interested in, or 
affected by, such dispute, the appropriate Government may, at the 
time of making the reference or at any time thereafter but before 
the submission of the award, include in that reference such estab-
lishment, group or class of establishments, whether or not at the 
time of such inclusion any dispute exists or is apprehended in that 
establishment, group or class of establishments. 
CHAPTER IV 
Procedure, powers and duties of Authorities. Procedure 
and .J;lowers 
~~ =~: 11. (1) Conciliation officers, Boards, Courts and Tribunals shall, 
~=:, and subject to the provisions of this Act, follow such procedure as may 
Tribunal.. be prescribed. 
(2) A conciliation officer or a member of a Board, Court or 
Tribunal may for the purpose of inquiry into any existing or 
apprehended industrial dispute, after giving reasonable notice, 
enter the premises occupied by any establishment to which the 
dispute relates. ' 
(3) Every Board, Court and Tribunal shall have the same powers 
as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (V of 1908), when trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
(b) compelling the production of documents and material 
objects; 
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; 
(d) in respect of such other matters as may be prescribed; 
'and every inquiry or investigation by a Board, Court or Tribunal, 
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning 
of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (XL V of 1860) . 
• • • • • • 
(5) With the consent of all parties to the dispute, a Court or 
Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit. appoint one or more persons as 
assessors to advise it in the proceedings. 
(6) Every. conciliation officer and every member of a Board, 
Court or Tribunal· shall be deemed to be a ,pUblic servant within 
the meaning of section '21 of the Indian Penal. Code (XLV of 1860). 
(7) Subject to the rules made under this Act, the costs of, and 
.incidental to, any proceeding before a Tribunal shall be in the 
discretion of that Tribunal, and the Tribunal shall have full power 

30 
to determine by and to whom and to what extent and subject to 
what conditions, if any, such costs are to be paid, and to give all 
necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid, and such costs may, 
on application made to it by the person entitled, be recovered as 
arrears of land revenue or as a public demand by the appropriate 
Government. 
(8) Every Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the 
purposes of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898 (Act V of 1898). 
12. (1) 
• • • • • • 
(5) If, on a consideration of the report referred to in sub-section 
(4), the appropriate Government is satisfied that there is a case 
for reference to a Board or Tribunal, it may make such reference. 
Where the appropriate Government does not make such reference 
it shall record and communicate to the parties concerned its reasons 
therefor. 
• • • • • • 
13. 
• • • • • • 
(5) If. on the receipt of a report under sub-section (3) in 
respect of a dispute relating to a public utility service, the appro-
priate Government does not make a reference to a Tribunal under 
section 10, it shall record and communicate to tIN! parties concerned 
its reasons therefor. 
• • • • • • 
Dutica . of" 
co.nciliation 
oIken. 
Duties of 
Boards. 
15. Where an industrial dispute has been referred to a Tribunal Duties of 
for adjudication, it shall hold its proceedings expeditiously" and Tribunals. 
shall, as soon as practicable on the conclusion thereof, submit its 
award to the appropriate Government. 
" . 
16. The report of a Board or Court and the award of a Tribunal Porm of 
ghatl be in writing and shall be signed by all the members of the :.:;~. or 
Board, Court or Tribunal, as the case may be: 
Provided that nothing iri this section shall be deemed to prevent 
any member of the Board, Court or Tribunal from recording a 
minute of disSent from a report or award from any recoIrimenda- " 
tion made therein. 
17. The report of a Board qr Court and the award of a Tribunal, PUblication 
together with any minute of diSsent recorded therewith, shall, ~d .:.:.~ 
within a period of one month from the date of its receipt by the 

~I 
appropriate Government, be published in such manner as it thinks 
fit. 
Commcnc:c- 17A. (1) The award of a Tribunal shall become enforceable on 
=~.or the the expiry of thirty days from the date of its publication under 
section 17: 
Provided that in cases where the award is not appealable and 
where the appropriate Government is a party to the dispute and is 
of opinion that it will be inexpedient on public grounds to give 
effect to the whole or any part of the award, it may, before the ex-
piry of the said period of thirty days, by order in the Official Gazette, 
either reject the award or modify it. 
• * • * 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the award of a 
Tribunal shall co\l1e into operation with effect from such date as 
may be specified therein, but where no date is SO specified, it shall 
come into operation on the date when the award becomes enforce-. 
able under sub-section (1). 
Penona on 18. A settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceed-
=~: ae:=ci ings under this Act Or an award which has become enforceable shall 
awards 
binding. are be binding on-
Period of 
operation of 
Rttlements 
and awards. 
(a) all parties to the industrial dispute; 
(b) all other parties summoned to appear in the proceedings 
as parties to the dispute, unless the Board or Tribunal, 
as the case may be, records the opinion that they were 
so summoned without proper cause; 
(c) where a party referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) is an 
employer, his heirs, successors or assigns in respect of the 
establishment to which the dispute relates; 
(d) where a party referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) is 
composed of workmen, all persons who were employed in 
the establishment or part of the establishment, as the 
case may be, to which the dispute relates on the date of 
the dispute and all persons who subsequently become in 
that establishment or part. 
19. (1) 
• • • * 
(2) Such settlement shall 'be binding for such period as is agreed 
upon by the pallties, and if no such period is agreed upon, for a period 
of six months, and shall continue to be binding on the parties after 
the expiry of the period aforesaid, until the expiry of two months 
from the date on which a notice in writing of an intention to termi-
nate the settlement is given by one of the parties to the other party 
or parties to the settlement. 

Ai 
(3) An award shall, subject to the provisions of this section, re-
main in oPE¥"8tion fc-r a period of one year: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may reduce the said 
period and fix such period as it thinks fit: 
Provided further that the appropriate Government may,' before 
the expiry of the said period, extend the period of operation by any 
period not exceeding one year at a time as it thinks fit so, however, 
that the total period of operation of any award does not exceed three ' 
years from the date on which it ca~e into operation. 
(4) Where the appropriate Government, whether of its own mo-
tion or on the application of any party bound by the award, consi .. 
ders that since the award was made, there has been a material change 
in the circumstances on which it was based, the appropriate Gov-
ernment may refer the award or a part of it to a Tribunal for deci .. 
sion whether the period of operation should not, by.reason of such 
change, 'be shortened and the decision of the 'Tribunal on such refer-
ence shall, subject to the provision for appeal, be final. 
• • • ... 
(7) In the computation of the period of operation of an award 
under sub-section (3), the period during which the implementation 
of the award is stayed by the Labour Appellate Tribunal constitut-
ed under the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, shall 
be excluded. 
ZOo \~ • 
• • • * 
Commence-
ment and 
conclusion of 
(2) A conciliation proceeding shall be deemed to have concluded- proa:edinp. 
• • " * • 
(c) when a reference is made to a Court or Tribunal under 
section 10 during the pendency of conciliation proceedings. 
(3) Proceedings before a Tribunal shall be deemed to have com-
menced on the date of the reference of dispute for adjudication and 
such proceedings shall be deemed to have concluded on the date on 
which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A. 
21. There shall not be included in any report or award under CcrtaiDI 
this Act any information obtained by a conciliation officer, Board, g:nera, k~~ 
Court or Tribunal in the course of any investigation or inquiry as conft<bntiaf. 
to a trade union or as to any individual business (whether carried 
on by a person, firm or company) which is not available otherwise 
than through the evide~ce given before such officer, Board, Court 
or Tribunal, if the trade union, person, firm or company, in question 
has made a request in writing to the conciliation officer. Board, 
Court or Tribunal, as the case may be, that such information shall 

33 
be treated· as confidential; nor shall such conciliation officer or any 
individual member of the Board, Court or Tribunal or any person 
present at or concerned in the proceeding disclose any such infor-
mation without the consent in writing of the secretary of the trade 
union or the person, firm or company in question, as the case may 
be: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a 
disclosure of any such information for the purposes of a prosecu-
tion under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code (XLV of 1860). 
• • • * 
Gencral pro- 23. No workman who is employed in any industrial establish-
~.:n an~ ment shall go on strike in breach of contract and no employer of 
loc:Ir:-outi. any such workman shall declare a lock-out-
lllepi Itri-
kes and 
lock-OUla. 
• * • * 
(b) during the pendency of proceedings before a Tribunal and 
two months after the conclusion of such proceedings; Ol' 
• * • * 
Z4. (1) 
• * • * 
(2) Where a strike or lock-out in pursuance of an industrial dis-
pute has already commenced and is in existence at the time of the 
reference of the dispute to a Board, or Tribunal, the continuance of 
such strike or lock-out shall not be deemed to be illegal, provided 
that such strike or lock-out was not at its commencement in con-
travention of the provisions of this Act <¥ the continuance there-
of was not prohibited under sub-section (3) of section 10. 
• * • * 
R f HI. Any money due from an employer under thE' provisions of 
m~c::.ev;:' d::e this Chapter, whether by way of compensation or by way of wages, 
from omp!2- may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be recovered 
en u ....... r. th f I hI· thll Chapter m e same manner as an arrear 0 and revenue or as a pu IC de-
mand by the appropriate Government on an application made to it 
by the person entitled to the money. 
• • • 
Pc I ~ 29. If any person commits a breach of any term of any settle-
bNna~:! ~~ ment or award which is binding on him under this Act, he shall on 
lIC~ment or his first conviction therefore be punishable with fine which may 
aw. extend to two hundred rupees and in the event of a second or sub-
sequent conviction, with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees. 
• • • * 

~4 
33. DUJiing. the pendeBcy -of any· ..conciliation· 1 ~BgS!'Qr. pro,,",(,:oudition8 
eedi h~f T'b l' anAI'Iot f; ~_A "_~_1 ...J ......... t . or ICrvice, C ngs· """ or~ a· III una . In· re""f"'_',o "aay ,: ~us_-,,·_l"'f' e.,·DO ·ett.;!tto ro-
employer· shall- main. un-
charlfed dur-
(a) alter, .to the p!'ejudioe'oi' the·!Workmell:.ftmleamed\m:iUch~_ndency 
dispute, the .conditiClllSllaf .aeNicetl appU~~lt.to ~ltheml~r.roceed­
immediately before the commencement of such proceed- ::. 
ings; or 
(b) discharge or punisa, whetheri!by Jdismiatal~ oc Othenrise.l;:I. 
any workman coneerne:HI'l.sucbldYpute,(;,,' 
save with the express permission in writing of the conciliation offi-
cer, Board or Tribunal, as the case may be. 
33A.Where an emplo)!er' c:ootrlW'eot!I8· ,1be: . pl'OWaiena; of seCtion., ~cia1 .• pro-, .. ) vTllon !; •• "for .. of 
33 during the pendency of prooee8inlS :·befOle Ii ,Tribunal,"any em.· a~Caw.I"'·'" 
ployee aggrieved by such contravention, ma~ make a complaint in u tOdiwihethcrr . con tonI 0 
writing, in the prescrlbed manner to such Tribunal and on receipt aervice, etc., 
of such complaint that tribunal shall adjudicate upon the complaint ~::­
as if it were a dispute referred to or pending before it, in accord- or' procI:ICl 
ance with the provisions of this Act and shall submit its award to inal. 
the appropriate Government and the provisions of this Act shaU·~, 
apply accordingly. 
• • • * 
36. (1) ReprelCnta-
. tion of 
• • • * Pllftiel. 
(4) In any proceeding before a Tribunal, a party. to dispute may . 
be represented by a legal practitioner with the consent of the 
other parties to the proceedinr and with the leave .of the Tribunal., 
• • • * 
38. (1) 
• • • * 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the' 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow''': 
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the powers and procedure of concUiation officers, Boards, 
Courts and Tribunals including rules as to the summon-
ing of witnesses, the production of docUJlleDb' ftleyenb te' 
the subject-matter of an inquir,"'OI"invest~atien;1: the '··,r' 
number of members necessary ,to form'··aquorum • ..m AIbe ":" 
manner of submission of reJ)Oris''8Jld 'awards; ~, 
• • • * 
(C), the allowances admissible to members of Courts. Boards, 
and Tribunals and to assessors and witnesses; 

;' ~~ 
(Il) the ministerial establishment which may be alloted to a 
Court, Board or Tribunal and the salaries and allowances 
payable to members of such establishments; 
• • • * 
(f> the conditions subject to which parties may be represent-
ed by legal practitione~ in proceedings under this Act 
before a Court or Tribunal; 
• • • * 
1>eIeSllion 39. The appropriate Government may by order direct that its 
or power. power under section 3 shall, in such circumstances and under such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be \xercised by 
any officer or authority slfbMdinate to that Government. 
• • • * 
. ; :l~seHEDULE 
".. lttdust'ries whim' may be'-declared to be pub tic utility services under 
sub-clause (vi) of clause (n) of section 2. 
1. Transport (other than railways) for the carriage of passen-
gers or goods, by land, water or air. 
2. Coal. 
3. Cotton textiles. 
4. Food stuffs. 
5. Iron and steel. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) 
ACT, 1946 (ACT No. XX OF 1946) . 
• • • • • • 
Condidon. ;,.J ,." IteDdiae1U'd8lW1llua.l! ,bereMtifiaWe lunder i thW· Act If-
f~r cc:.~- (a) provision is made therein fOt' every matter set· out in the 
J,t:/ orden: Schedule which is applicable to the industrial establish-
ment, and 
Duration and 
modiicatlon 
of ItaDdinl 
oMen. 
.. Ii ·(b) the standing orders are otherwise in conformity with the 
'. provisions of this Act; 
and it shall not be the function of the Certifying Officer or appellate 
authority to adjudicate upon the fairness or reasonableness of the 
provisions of any standing orders. 
• • • * 10. (I) 
• • • * 
(2) An employer desiring to modify his standing orders shall ap-
ply to the Certifying Officer in that behalf, submitting five copies 
of the standing orders inwhica. shall be indicated the modifications 
he pNpOSelt/andhwhere"such 'Jrtodiftcations are made in agreement 
with the w~en. \a~. copy of the agreement shall accom-
pany the application. 
• • • • • 

I 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the 
.Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 and to 
repeal the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 
1950 . 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabbs the 
consi deration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Khandubhai K. Desai, 
M,,,,ster 0/ Labour). 