CLAUSES 
As INTRODt1ClQ) IN Lox SABRA OK 
BIll No. 48 of 1_ 
THE WEALTH (INHERITANCE) DUTY BILL. 1889 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
Pu:r.n.mfAllY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Act not to apply in certain cases. 
CHAPl'ER n 
IMPosmON OF WBALTJI (XNHIRl'l'AXcs) DO'ft 
4. Levy of wealth (inheritance) duty. 
5. Net wealth to include certain assets. 
6. Exemptions in respect of certain assets. 
7. Exclusion of assets and debts outside India. 
8. Value of assets, how to be determined. 
9. Funeral expenses. medical expenses, tax due and expendit~ for 
obtaining probate, etc., to be allowed in computing net wealth. 
10. Allowance for quick succession to net wealth. 
CHAPTER m 
WEALTH (INHERITANCE) DUTY' AV'I'IIOJtIfiiB 
11. Wealth (inheritance) duty autlaoritiel. 
12. Control of wealth (inheritance) duty authorities. 
13. Instructions' to subordinate authorities. 
14. Jurisdiction of Assessing Oftleers and power to transfer cues .. 
15. Appointment of Valuation omeers. 
16. Powers of Director General, Director, Chief Commiuion.er, Com. 
missioner and Deputy Commissiol'ler to make enquiries. 
CHAPTER IV 
ASSESSIdNT .' 
]7. Persons accountable and their duties and liabilities. 
18. Return of net wealth passing "on deatli. 
(~ 

(Ii) 
C::U .. 
19. Return after due date and amenclment of return. 
20. Return by whom to be signed. 
,21.,; .earn ... 
22~ Kfference"fo Valuation Officer. 
28. Net'~hi'~~~, ~~rif. 
24. Time limit fBr completion of' assessment and reaueeament. 
25. Interest for a~f~u1'ts' in ;lurn~lng te't~: of net wealth. 
2&. Penalty for failure to c,!m~~l~~, ,notlcel. 
1:1. Penalty for failure to ~'q1leatlons, sip statements, furnish 
information, allow inspection~ ~. 
28. Penalty for concealment QIf assets, etc. 
29. Power to reduce or waive penalty in certain cases. 
CHAPTER V 
.APPEALS, REVISIONs AND R£1I'I:RBNCES .. ,.\ ",' 
30. Appeals to Deputy Comniissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner 
(Appe8lfs) frim;: & 6¥ders of A'SSesdnf ~. 
31. Appeal to the Appellate 'l'1'ibuMl trom orden of the Deputy Com-
missioner (Appeals) or the Commissiofter (Appeals). 
S2. Powers of Commisalener to revise ord(!r of subordinatle autho-
rities. 
.,; I· 
33. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal from orders of enhancement by 
Commissioners . . , • ,~ ( rl ':," " r I ' . .., . 
~( .. l\'eference tQ. High Court. 
'" -. "' '. I 
35. Hearing by High Court. 
36. Appeal to Supreme Court. 
''0' '1'''. t" 
37. Duty to be paid not~thstancfing l"eferenee, etc, 
38. Definition of Htgh' C6Uri. 
,' .. : 
CHAPTER VI 
PAYMbT AND R~ OF WE'AL'rJIr {INHERITANCS')' Jro'l"t" 
39. #6ti~ ofdenland. 
40. Wh~ duty. etc.. payable ~~d w'nen accountable person deemed 
tft ci«1iWt . 
. ,.' .,. , ... :.... __ ' ·-1 r 
41. Mode of recovery. 
42. Payment of duty by ttBhsfe'r of ptOperty. 
43. Copy of aftldavlt of valWltionof property to be furnished to the 
Allessing Oftlcer and penaity for the failure to do so. 
44. Refunds. 
cHAPTER VH 
REFUNDs 

CLAvus 
(iii) 
CHAPTER VIII 
RImsTatI:D v ALtTDS 
45. Appearance by registered valuers. 
46. Refistered valuera. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
47. Provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain calM. 
48. Rectiftcation of mistakes. 
49. O1!encel and prosecutions. 
60. Certain oftenC8s to be non-cognizable. 
51. Bar on prosecution and on inadmissibility of evidence in certaiD 
circumstances. 
52. Jurisdiction of COUl'ts. 
~. Section 380 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and the 
Probation of Offenders Act. 1958, not to apply. 
M. Presumption as to culpable mental state. 
i5. Power to tender immunity from prosecution. 
58. Power to take evidence on oath, etc. 
&7. Provisions relating to matters connected with powers of wealth 
(inheritance) duty authorities, valuation officers, publication and. 
disclosure of information respecting accountable persons. 
68. Power to make rules. 
19. Power to remove cUfticulties. 
SCHEDULE I. 
SCHEDULE II. 

Bill No. 48 of 1989 
THE WEALTH (INHERITANCE) DUTY BILL, 1989 
A 
BILL 
to provide jor the levy and collection of a duty on the inheritance 
of wealth. 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: - I 
C}L6J)TER I 
PRB:LIMINAR'Y 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Wealth (Inheritance) Duty Act, 
1989. ! 
(Z) it extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notiftcation in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoint. 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and com-
meDCe. 
ment. 

Dedni.. 
tlon .. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(0) "accountable person" or "person accountable" meana the 
persOD accountable for duty chargeable under this Act. and includes 
every person in respect of whom any proceeding under this Act hal 
been taken for the assessment of the net wealth passing on the death 5 
of a deceased; 
(b) "affidavit of valuation" means the affidavit of valuation 
filed under section 19-1 Of the Court-fees Act, 1870, in connection 7 of 1870. 
with an application for the grant of probate or letters of ac:lmiDis-
tratiOll under that section; 10 
(c) "deceased person" or "the deceased" means a person dying 
after the commencement of this Act; 
(d) "duty" or "wealth (inheritance) duty" means the wealth 
(in.beritance) duty chargeable under this Act; ~ 
(e) "net wealth" means the amount by which the agaregate 15 
value computed in accordance with the provisiOns of this Act, of-
(i) all assets, wherev~ located, belonging to the deceased 
on the date of his death; 
(ii) the assets required to be included in his net wealth as 
on that date under this Act; and 20 
(iii) the interest of the deceased in the coparcenary pro-
perty of any Hindu undivided family of which he was a 
member, 
and passing on his death, is in excess of the aggregate value of all 
debts so passing, other than- . . - 25 
(A) debts which under section 7 are not to be taken into 
account; 
(B) debts which are sec~ed on, or which have been mcur-
l'ed in relation to, any pt6pmy in respect of which duty is 
not chargeable under this Act. 30 
ExplanatiJn.-For the purposes of U·Js clause,-
(i) the interest of the decealled in the coparcenary property 
of any Hindu undivided family of whichl he was a member shall 
be deemed to be the' "Share m the coparcenary property that 
would have been allotted to the deceased if a; partition of such 35 
property had t:tken place immediately before ~ death; I 
(ii) "passing on the d~ath" includes. passinJ, e!t~_er imme-
diately on the death or after any interval either certaiDly or 
conttugently and either originally or by way· of. aubfUtutlve 

43 of 1961. S 
27 of 1957. 10 
limitatoWn, and "on the death" includes "at a period ascertain-
able only by reference to the death"; 
(iii) "a building or part thereof" i referred to in clause (flO, 
claLl8e (tiia) or clause (mb) of section 27 of the Income-tax Act, 
1961 shall be deemed to be includible in the net wealUl passing 
on the death of the deceased if he had been deemed under the 
said clause to be the owneI' of that building or part thereof; 
(f) "presctibed" means prescrjbed by rules made under this 
Act; ~'. 
(g) ·'Wealth·tax Act" means the Wealth-tax Act, 1957; 
(1&) all other words and expresSiohsused Rerein but not defined 
and defined in the Wealth-tax Act shall have the meanings respec-
tively assigned to them in that. Act. 
3. The prOVisions of this Act shall not apply to a case where the net 
15 wealth of, a deceased person on the valuation date under the Wealth-tax 
Aet immediately preceding the date of his death was such that no 
wealth-tax had been payable. 
Ezplaootion.-For the purposes of this section, "net wealth" means 
net wealth computed under the Wealth-tax Act. 
CHAPTER II 
IMPosITION' (1F WEALTH (INHERITANCE) DUTY 
4. In the case of every person dying after the commencement of this 
Act, there shall, save as bereinafter expressly provided, be levied and 
pidd upon the net wealth a duty called "wealth (inheritance) duty" at the 
25 rate or rates specified in Schedule I. 
30 
35 
40 
5. (1) In cOIIjputmg the net wealth of a deceased, there shall be 
included, as belonging to that deceased-
(a) the value of assets which on the date of his death are held-
(i) by the spouse of sucb deceased to whom such asseta 
have been transferred by the deceased, directly or indirectly, 
otherwise than for adequate consideration or in connection with 
an agreement to live apart, or 
(ii) by a minor child. not being a ~arried daughter, of such 
deceased, to whom such assets 'have been transferred by the 
deceased, directly or indirectly, otherwise than for adequate 
consideration, or 
(iii) by a person or association of persons to whom SUch 
assets have been transferred by tQe deceased, c{irecUy or indirect-
.1y" otherwise than for adequate consideration for the immediate 
or deferred benefit of the deceased, his or her spouse or minor 
child (not being a married daughter) or both, or 
Act not 
to apply 
in certain 
cases. 
Levy of 
wealth 
(inheri-
tance) 
duty. 
:!,'et 
wealth to 
includo 
certain 
asaets. 

4 
(iv) by a person or association of persons to whom sucl1 
assets have been transferred by the deceased otherwise than 
under an irrevocable transfer, or 
(v) by the son's wife, or the son's minor child. of sum de-
ceased, to whom such assets have been transferred by the de- 5 
ceased, directly or indirectly, on or after the 1st day of June, 
1978, otherwise than for adequate consideration, Or 
(vi) by a person or association of persons to whom such 
assets have been transferred by the deceased, directly or indi-
rectly, on or after the 1 st day of June, 1973, otherwise than for 10 
adequate consideration for the immediate or deferred benefit of 
the son's wife, or the I son's minor child, of such deceased or both, 
whether the assets referred to in any of the sub-clauses aforeaaid 
are held in the form in which they were transferred or otherwise: 
Provided that where the transfer of such assets or any part 15 
thereof is either chargeable to gift-tax under the Gift-tax Act, 1958, 18 of 1958. 
or is not chargeable under section 5 of that Act, for any assessment 
year commencing afte.r the 31st day of March, 1964. but before the 
1st day of April, 1972. the value of such assets or part thereof, as the 
case may be, shall not be in'eluded in computing the net wealth of 20 
the deceased; 
(b) where the deceased was a partner in a firm Or a member of 
an association of persons (not being a co-operative housing society) 
there shall be included as belon~ng to the deceased the value of bis 
interest in the firm or association determined in the manner laid 25 
down in Schedule II: 
Provided that where a minor is admitted to the benefits of a 
partnership in a firm. the value of tne interest of such minor in the 
firm, determined in the manner specified above, shall be included in 
the net wealth of the deceased for the purposes of this Act. if it was 30 
so included or includible in his net wealth for the purposes of the 
Wealth-tax Act. 
(2) Where, in the case of a deceased being a member of a Hindu un-
divided family, any propertv havin~ heen the separate property of the 
deceased has, at any time after the 31st day of December, 1969. been con- 35 
verted by the deceased into property belonfrlng to the family through the 
act of impressing ~uch separate prof)erty with the character of property be-
'onginJ;! to the family or throwing it into the common stock of the family or 
been transferred by the deceased. directly or indirectly, to the family 
otherwise than for adequate consideration (toe property SO converted or 40 
transferred being hereinafter referred to as the converted property), tlien, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other proviSion of this Act 
or in anv other law for the t.ime bein~ in force. fol" the purpose of com-
puting the net wealth of the deceased under this Act,-
(a) the deceased shall be deemed to have transfened the con- 45 
verted property, throU!th the family, to the memht"rs of the family 
for being held by them jointly; 

(b) the converted property or any part thereof shall be deemed 
to be assets belonging to, the deceased; 
. .; ~',' - ." .', ,~ : ~ , . \ J , ' 
(c) where the converted property has been the subject-matter 
?f,B partitio~ (whether ,~tial or total) amongst th~rp1embers of the 
falnily, the converted property or any part thereof which ~ received 
by the spouse or minor child of t.he deceased on such partition shall 
be deemed to be assets transferred indirectly by the deceased to the 
spouse or minor child and the provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so 
far 88 may be, apply accordingly. 
1'0 (a) ,Where the value of anya~setil is to be included in the net wealth 
of a deceased in accordance with clause (a) of sub-~ecti9n (1) or sub-
section (2), the provisions of secticn 6 shall apply in relation to such 
assets as if such assets were assets belonging to the deceased. 
, ~. I 
(4) Nothing contained in clause (a.) of sub-section (1) shall apply to 
IS any such transfer as is referred to therein made by a deceaSed before 
the 1st day of April, 1956, and the value of any assets so transferred 
'halI not be inclUded in the computation of his net wealth passing on 
his death. " 
: - I, 
(5) The value of any assets transf4!rred under an irrevocable 
2Otra'nsfer shall be liable to be 'included in computing the Bet wealth of 
'the transferor as and when the pOwer to revoke arises to him. 
(6) Where a g'lft of money from one person to another is made by 
means of entries in the books of account maintained by the person 
, making the gift or by an )ndividual or a Hindu undivided 1ami,ly or a 
2S ft~ or an associati~n of persons or body of individuals with whqm , or 
which he has business or other relaUonship. the value of l!Juch, gift ~all 
be liable to be inchlded in computing the net wealth of, .the I.~!son 
making the gift unless he proves to the satisfaction of the Assessing 
Officer that the money has actually been delivered to the other person 
30 at the time the entries were made, 
,. ~7). ,For the purposes of thi~ ,Act. the holder of an,i~I?~,nible estate 
shall be deemed to be the indiVidual owner of all the properties com-
prised in the estate. 
(8) Where the deceased wasQ member of ap. aS$ociation at ,persons, 
35 being a co-operative housing society. and a building or a part thereof 
was allotted or leased to him under a house building scheme of the 
society, the deceased shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act or any other law for the time being in forc~. be deemed to be the 
owner of such building or part and the value of such bUilding or part 
40 shall be inchlded in col't:lpu~~n,g the net wealth of ~hedeceased passing 
on his' de'sth; and; in' netermlnfhg the value of ~ch building or part, 
the value of any outstanding instalments of the amount payable under 
sucb scheme by the deceased to the society towards the cost of such 
,building or part. and the land ap'purtenantthereto ,shaU, whether the 
e' amount so payable is described as sucll or in anyotber manner in such 
sb'h~'tite, be dedu~tea· a~· a: debt owed ~y him in relation to such building 
or part. 

EJtemp. 
tion in 
respect of 
certain 
assets. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section.-
(a) the exprassion ''transfer'' includes any disposition, settle-
ment, trust, covenant, agreement or arrangement; 
-' L' 
. (9) the; expression "child" includes a step-child and an adopted 
child; s 
(c) . the' expression "irrevocable transfer" includes a transfer 
of assets which, by the terms of the instrument effecting it, is not 
revocable for a period exceeding six years or during the lifetime 
of the transferee, and under which the transferor derives no dire~~ 
Or indirect benefit, but does not include a transfer of assets if SUCh 10 
1nstTurnent- : (. 
(i) contains any provision for the retransfer, directly or 
indirectly, of the whole or any part of the assets or income 
therefrom to the transferor, or 
(it) in any way gives the tranllferor a right to reaS8Wne 1, 
power. directly or indirectly, over the whole or any part of 
the assets or income therefrom; and 
(d) the expression "property·, wludes any interest in any 
.' . property, movable or immovable, the proceeds of sale thereof and 
any. money or investment for the time being representing 'the 20 
proceeds of sale thereof and where the property is converted into 
any other property by any method, such other property. 
6. (1) The provisions of section ~ of the Wealth-tax Act shall, so far 
a.s may be, apply for the purposes of this Act as they apply for the pur-
poses of the Wealth-tax Act. subject to the modifications specified in sub- 25 
sectlon (2). 
(2) The modifications referred to in sub-section (1) shall be that ill 
section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act.-
(a) the reference to "wealth-tax" shall be construed as a refer-
ence to "wealth (inheritance) duty"; 30 
(b) the references to "aseenee" and "individual" shall be cons-
trued as a. referenee to "deeeued"; 
(c) in sub-section (1),-
(i) clauses (ii) , (via), (vii), (zvia) , (xviib). 
(mic). (~) and (X%) shall be omitted; 
(miba) , 
(ii) after clause (iv). the following clause shall be inserted 
namely:-
35 
II (iva) one house or part of a house belonging to the de-
ceased which was exclusively meant to be used by him for 
residential purposes, subject ~ a ~axQJlu~ of flv~ htUldrecf 40 
~housand rupeee ~ Val~~i 

1 
~ _ . ~I • Ii ! ... ~.t l 
Provided that where in computing the net wealth of thJ~", 
deceased, the exemption has been claimed under ~lause (iv) , ' 
no exemption shall be allowed under this clauae;"; . ,..' 
(d) sUb-section (2) shall be omitted. , .. 
5 7.' In computing the net wealth of a deceased who was not a ctUzeD of r. " . Exclusion 
of assets 
and 
debt. 
olltside 
India. 
India or of a deceased not resident in India or resident but not ordinarily ~ 
resident in India during the year ending on the date of death-
(i) the value of the assets and debts located outside India; and 
(ii) the value of the assets in India represented by any loans or 
10 debts owing to the deceased in any case where the interest, if any. 
payable on such loans or debts is not to be included in the total income 
of the deceased under section 10 of the Income-tax Act; 
ahall not be taken into account 
Explanation I.-A deceased shall be deemed not to be resident in India 
is Ql' resident but not ordinal'ily resident in India during the year ending 
on the date of his death if in respect of that year the deceased is not resident 
in India or resident but not ordinarily resident in India within the meaning 
of the Income-tax Act, 
Explanation 2.-Where in the case of a deceased the value of an asset 
20 in India is represented by any debt owing to him, being any moneys to his 
credit in a Non-resident (External) Account, the interest is not to be in-
cluded in his total income under sub-clause (ii) of clause (4) of section 
10 of the Income-tax Act, the provisions of this section shall, in relation to 
such asset, apply subject to the modification that the references in this 
2S section to a deceased not resident in India shall be construed as a reference 
to a person resident outside Iftdia as defined in clause (q) of section 2 of 
46 of 1973. the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973. 
8. (1) SubjeCt to the provisions of sub-section (2), the value of 
any asset other than cash, for the purposes of this Act shall be its value as 
J 
30 On the date of death determined in the manner laid down in Schedule 
II.'I 
(2) The value of a house belonging to the deceased and exclusi-
vely used by him for residential purposes throughout the period of 
twelve montbs immediately preceding the date of death, may, at Ihe 3S . " option of the ac<!ountable person. be taken to be the value determined 
in the tnanner laid down in Schedule n as on the valuation date, for 
the purposes of wealth-tax next following the date on which the de_ 
ceased became the owner of the house or the valuation date for the 
Value of 
assets, 
how to 
be decer_ 
mined. 
.:" 

Funeral 
~, 
medical 
~, 
tax due 
and_-
penditure 
for 
obtaiDiq 
probate. 
etc., to 
be al-
lowed in 
eomput-
inlnet 
wealtb. 
Allow-
aneefor 
quick 
~ 
lion to 
net 
wealth. 
8 
Provided that where more than one house belonging to' the decea-
8ed was exclusively used by him for residential purposes, the provi-
sions of this sub.section shall apply only in respect of one such hoJlS~ 5 
, r.. . ,'" ~ .' ,,' . f., I ' , , ( ,,~, '. ., 
, wfuch the accountable persori may,' at his option, specify in this b~~ 
.. ' , "., ,--f F' • .~. I 
in the'return of net w~alth. 
- r' .. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section,-
! .. .-' :, .' ""', " \. . • , .. . : .. ~ r ~ r '\,", ' 
(i) where the house has been constructed by the deceased, he 
shall be' d~~ed to have become the owner thereof on the date on 10 l '-. 1: '., . 1t tJ(" ~ '~' .• '1 :'-'J.~~, V'~: ' it ··~~,~l .... ;·~ !..'ll .. ' ',#,' ... 
w~.~~,h ,the cons,~ruc_iion of ,suc~ ,h~~se, wa~ cOJ?~leted,; 
(ii) "house" includes a part of a house being an independent 
residential unit. 
t. In computing the net wealth fOf the purposes of wealth (in. 
." . '. - . 
heritance) duty. alloyvancessha,ll be mad~ 15 
>~, ~~ .I .. '._~' ,.:'." . ...,' •. 
(a) for funeral expenses of the deceased (not exceeding ten tho':l- , 
sand rupees); 
(b) for any amount of expenditure incurred on the medical 
expeBSes of the, deceased which is due on the date of his death; 
(c) for any amount of tax. duty or penalty levied on the de- 20 
ceased that is due on the date of his death; 
(d) for, any amount of expenditure incurred by way of court 
f.~ paid under any law in force in any State for ob~g pr0-
bate, ,letter of administration or a succession certificate in respect 
of an:r property, on which the wealth (inReritance) duty is levia~ 25 
ble under this Act. 
E.2:planation.-For the purposes of this sec~ion, "funeral expen- t 
ses" incltide' all expenses which ~y have to be incunred in connecti,on 
with the srCidd:ha. o~ barsi ceremonies (by ~ha~ever name called) of' th~ 
decea~d for·~ pJrl~d' of ~ne y~a~'troni'the dat~"of his death. " 
10. Where the Chief Commissio~er C?f the Director Genera,l, as I 
the case ma.yJ>e, is satisfied that th~ we~th (inheIitance) duty has 
become payable ~ the net ~ealth in respect of any as~et p~s~llg upon 
the d~th of 'any pe~son and that subsequently withil'l five. ~ears the 
wealth" '" '(inherliance)' "duty' has agai'~ beco~e" payable on, ~ ;~,5 
same "asset ~r any part thereof, pa~sjng on"~h~,d~tp ,of the perS,on to 
," I, ..' ' I " ,,' " . ,,' ( 
whom the asset passed on the first de~.~h, the amount of wealth 
f • ." 1" ) ~, , 

.5 
10 
9, 
(inlwr_&) dutypay"bJ.e oa(tbe ~ death in4'8speet of· the 1tfsset·so . 
p.g., ~ lbe:~~ as,,£o11.o..,s: .,:. :. 
" 
Where the second death occurs within one year of the first 
death, by ftfty per cent.; 
WheJe ,the sej:X)nd.death, OQC\,U'S ,within" 'two ye~s of· the- f\rst 
de.at.b.. by for.ty. percen.tJ; .-
Where the second death occurs wi~hin thrce years of the first 
death, by thirty per cent.; 
Where the second death occurs within four years of the first 
death, by twenty per cent.; 
WQI)~ ,th". seoond; death, occurs,: within :five yeairs . of the ·first 
~th. by teD pe.r ceQt.: 
Proviqed that where the value, on which the wealth (itlheritance) 
du~ is payable, of the asset on the second death exceeds the value, 
15 on which the wealth (inheritance) duty. was payab~, of the .asse~ .on_ 
the first death, 'the latter value shall be substituted for the former for 
the PU1'p(>$e .0fcalculating .. U1e amount ot.,wealth (inheritance), duty on 
which. the .. reciJ,.lctioll under this section is to -be calculated. . 
Ezp~tiOn I.-For the purposes of this section, every death 
20 shall be deemed to be second death in relation to the death immedia_ 
tely .,preceding. 
J:zplaftCltion 2.-ln computing any period for the purposes of this 
section deaths occurring within a period of three months after the 
death of .a~,· . .pe~son in respectof,whose asset wealth . (inheritance) 
2S duty has become payable, shall be treated as one death, and no wealth 
(~"dtlty'shaU agatnbe'payebleon the same! aSget'by reason of 
the .~eq,uentdeatbs occurring .. within' the said period of three 
IIlQll'MI ... 
30 WULm (~ITANCE) Dun AUTHORITIES 
Wealth 
11. ~Jre.. "eOllle'tax authe»rities . specified in section 116 of the· (inheri-
Income-tax Act.aJ1.u .be the w~81th. (in~ritaDce) duty authorities fur tance) 
the pUQ08ei.of . this Act and every SQch authority shall exercise the duty 
po.,JerB ad perform the fuDdioas of, a wealth. (~eritance) duty authori-
d ties. 35 authority under this Aet in respect of the net wealth of any decease 
penMUl 1P4 .. fOJ:",thi'.~, bis .jurisdjdion ,uodel' thi .. Act shall be 
the ~ ..... has untler. the Income-tax Act by \'irtue of orders ~ direc-
tJnU,,~cMr,_djOlall%O . .of. that .Ac:t(inc:ludilllr:~nlenliJr Wectio.-
... .,.,..J;GIP~.,jul'jaIcIjction.), . .or ..J,IDder .. any Gtber provision of that 
40 Ac~" •.• JliWle io aucJa,.deceue •. person. 
. " 
Ez.p.W~-Fol'.· th ... ~~w;pos~.~ ' .... aection", the· . wealth,(iu· . 
"'t_o.) duty authority hum&, jurisdiction in relation to a person wM.' 

Control or 
wealth 
(inheri-
tance) 
duty 
authori-
ties. 
Instruc-
tions to 
subordi-
nate 
authori-
ties. 
to 
Will net ...... see withiD the m ...... of tile IDCOme-tax Act shall be \ 
the wealth (iDheritllDee) duty authority havlag jurisdietlonin ~cf (if' 
the area in which the deceased resided at the t,ime of his death. 
n. Section 118 of the Income_tax Act and any notification issued 
thereunder shall apply in relation to the control of wealth (inheri- S? 
tance) duty authorities as they apply in relation to the control of' the 
corresponding income-tax authorities except to the extent t9 which 
the Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, otherwise direct ,in 
respect of any wealth (inheritance) duty authority. 
13. (1) The Board may, from time to time, issue such orders, instruc- 10 
tions and directiona to other wealth (inheritance) duty authorities, as it 
may deem fit for the proper administration of this Act, and such authorities 
and all other personl employed in the execution of this Act shall observe 
and follow such orders, instructions and directions of the Board: • 
Provided that no luch orders,wtructions or directions shall be issued- IS 
(0) so as to require any wealth (inheritance) duty authority to 
make a particular assesament or to dispose of a particular case in a 
particular manner; or 
(b) so as to interfere with the discretion of the Deputy Com-
missioner (Appeals) or Commissioner (Appeals) in the exercise of 20 
his appellate functions. J 
(2) Without prejudice to the generaUty of the foregoing power,-
(0) the Board may, if it considers it neceuary or expedient 10 to 
do, for the purpose of proper and efticient management of the work 
of aaessment and collection of revenue, issue, from time to titne 25 
(whether by way of relaxation ot any of the provisions of sections 
21, 23, 26 and 48 or otherwise). general or special orders 
in respect of any cla. ot ca&eI, setting forth directions or instructions 
(not being prejudicial to accountable persons) as to the guidelines, 
principles or procedures to be followed by other wealth (inheritance) 30 
duty authoritiea in the work relating to assessment or coP.~tion , of 
revenue o.r the initiation ot proceedings for the imposi~~on of pen~lti~s 
and any such order maY,'if the Board is of opinion that it is nece~s~y 
in the public interest 80 to do, be published and circu]atf;d in the 
prescribed manner tor general infonnauon; ,~S 
f' 
(b) the Board may, if it considel'll it deai.rableor eXped1ent,; s? ,to," ',\1 
do for avoiding genuine hardship in any case or class of ca'Se~, by " 
general or special order, authort..e any wealth (inheritan~e)' ~uty'(:::' ,1 
authority, not being a Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) . oi'p~rniorl.r~- j r . 
sioner (Appeals), ~o admit an application or claim for any exeffil'tiOri, 40' 1,1, 
deduction, refund or any other relief under this Act after the expiry 
of the period specified by or under this Act fo.r makin~ such, ~ppli~a-
tlon or clldm and deal with the ame On merits in accordanC!e ,'WIth. . law. . , ,;, ,'r";" , ~<)\'. 
, 

II 
14. (1) The provisions of sectiODl 124 and 127 of the Income-tax Act 
shall, so far as may be, apply for the purposes ot this Act 81 they apply 
for the purposes of the Income--tax Act subject to the modi1lcatloDB 
specified in sub-section (2). ' 
5 ' (2')' The' 'modifications referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the 
.f9UowIng, namely:-
10 
.'j., 
(a) in section 124 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the reference to "person" shall be 
construed as a reference to "deceased"; 
(ii) in sub-section (3) ,-
(A) the reference to "person" shall be construed Is a 
reference to "accountable person"; 
(B) the references to the provisions of the. Income-tax 
Act shall be construed as references to the corresponding 
provisions of this Act; 
(iii) sub-section (5) shall be omitted; 
(b) in s~tion 127 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the reference to "the assessee" shall 
be construed as a reference to "the accountable person"; 
20 (ii) in the Explanation below sub-section (4), the refereaces 
to proceedings under the Income-tax Act shall be construed as 
;'nc1uding the references to proceedings under this Act. 
15. (1) The Central Government may appoint as many Valuation 
Oftlcers as it thinks fit. 
25 . (2) Subject to the rules and orders of the Central Government regu-
lating the condit~ons of service of persons in public services and posts, 
a wealth (inheritance) duty authority may appoint as many overseers, 
surveyol'l and assessors as may be necessary to assist the Valuation Offi-
cers in the performance of their functioM. 
30" 16.' The Director General, the Director, the Chief Commissioner, the 
.; .. 
Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioner shall be competent to make 
any enquiry under this Act, and tor this purpose shall have all the powers 
that an Assessing Officer has under this Act in relation to the makiDI 
of e~CJ~iries. 
Jurisdic-
tionof 
Aasessing 
Oftlcen 
and 
power to 
transfer 
cases. 
Appoint-
mentof 
Valuation 
Oftlcers. 
Powers of 
Director 
General, 
Director, 
ChIef 
Commis-
sioner, 
Commis-
sioner 
and 
Deputy 
Commis-
sionerto 
make 
enquiries. 

.. " . 
. Person, 
BCCOunt-
ableall,d 
their 
dUties 
and 
liabilJ.. 
ties. 
Return 
·.ofnet 
wealth 
passing 
on.deatb. 
Return 
after 
due date 
and 
amend-
mentof 
return. 
12 
CHAPTER IV 
"of',' 
17. q?,. Where any n~t wealth ~ses on the death of the deceuecI,-
(a) every legal representative to whom the net wealth )0 ....... 
for any beneficial interest in possession or in whom any interett in 5 
the property so passing is at any time vested, 
(b) every tfusflee, gu~diiih, committee or other p4!rson in whom 
any interest in the net wealth so pass:ng or the manag&ment thereof 
is at any time vested, and 
(c) every person in whom any interest in the net wealth 10 10 
passing -Is· vested in possesSion 'by alienation or other derivative title, 
, 
Ihall be accountable for the whole of the wealth (inheritance) duty on 
the ¥let wealth passing on the death but shall not be liable for any wealth 
(inheritance) duty m excesS' of tileuaetl of the deeeas6d which he 
actually received or which, but for his oh JlegJeet or fiefwlt, he might 15 
have received: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall render a person accountable 
for wealth (inheritance) duty who acts metely as an agent or bailiff 
for another person in the management of th~ property. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in su~etiol'l (1), where an 20 
. ~~l'.at-law: 'proves, to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that some 
ptherperson is in advers~ possession of any asset of the deceased person, 
the heir.at;-law shall not be accountable for the portion of the wealth 
(inheritance) duty payable in respect of such assets: 
Provided tnat he shall become 908ccoun.table if, aDd to the extent 2$ 
that, he subsequently recovers possession of such ....... 
(3) Where two or more persons are accountable. wh~ bl the am., 
capacity ot 1n different capacities, for Wealth (inheritanet!) d\lty fA rea-
pect of any net wealth passing on the death of the deeeesed, tlWy-lihall 
'be liable jointly and severally for the whole crf. the wedth (lDIle!ttIllWe) 30 
duty on the net wealth so passing. 
18. Every person accountable for wealth (inheritance) duty under 
,this At1-shali:,"'Nl..'thfn six months -of.the· deata·of ·the deceued, dellwr to· 
the Assessing Officer, a return. in the prescribed form and verifted in the 
. p!'elCribed manner" setting forth the net wealth of the deceased as on 35 
. the date of deathv I 
19. If any person has not furnished a return within the time allowed 
under section 18 or under a notice ~ssued under clause (i) of sub-sectlon 
(4) of section 21, or having furnished a return discovers any omission 
or wrong statement therein, he may furnish the return or a reviled..., 
return, as the case may be, at any time before the expiry of one year 
from the end of the financial year in which the return was due _under 
section 18 or before the completion of the assessment, whichever is ear-
lier. 

... t 13 
~~ TIt~·l'etW'Il made u~er section J,8'Of se~~l~ ~all b~ sj~ and 
venfi.ed- .. . '. 
, l' 
(i) by tbe accountable person himself; 
. -
, ... w) W'~te he is absent !tom India, by" the &ccoWltable person 
S . f#tnSel'l or by any person duly authorised by him in this belJ,alf; 
, ~ ,I • 
(iii) where he is mentally incapacitated frtim attending·lIohis· 
affairs, by his guardian. or any other person competent to act on. his 
behalf; and 
. (i11) where, ~r any other reuoQ, itia not possible for the 
10 accountable person to stgn the return, by any person duly autaoriaed 
by him in this behalf: 
Provided that in a case referred to in clause (ii) or clause (iv), the 
person signing the return holds a valid· power of attorney from ~ 
accoWltable person to do so, which shall be attached to the return. 
IS 21. (1) If the Assessing Officer is satisfied without requiring Ule pre-
sence of the accountable person or production of any evidence tQat· a. 
return made under. section 18 or section 19 is correct an~ complete, he 
shall assess the net wealth of the deceased and aeter~e the aUlount of 
wealth (inheritance) duty payable on such net wealth. 
20 (2) If the Assessing Officer is not so satisfied, he shall serve a notice 
on any of the accountable persons either ~o attend in person at his office 
on a date to be specified in the notice or to produce or cause to be pro--
duced on that date any evidence on which such person may rely in sup-
port of return of net wealth of the deceased passing on death. 
25 (3) The Assessing Officer, after hearing such evidence as the account-
able person may produce and such other .evidence as he may require on 
any specified points, and after taking into account all the relevant mate-
rial which the A-ssessing Officer has gathered, shall, by order in Writing, 
assesa the net wealth of the deceased and determine the amount of 
30 wealth (inheritance) duty payable. 
(4) For the purposes of making an assessment under this Act, the 
Assessing Officer may serve, on any person who has made a return 
Wlder section 18 or section 19 or in whose C8t!le the time allowed under 
section 18 for furnishing the return has expired. a notice requiring him. 
3S on a date to be specified therein,-
40 
(i) where such person has not made a return within the time 
allowed under section 19 to furnish a return of the net wealth of the . , 
deceased in the prescribed form and vertfted in the prescribed man-
ner, setting forth the particulars of IUCh netweelth, aM IUCh other 
particulars as may be preecrlbed; or 
(ii) to produce or cause to be produced such accounts, records 
or other documents as the Aaaesaing 08leer may ",mra. 
(5~ If flny person-,-
(d) fails to make a return requiri!ld 1.DldAtr l8Otlon 11 aDd hIS DOt 
4S made a return or a reviMd return under Ift'tioll 1_, or 
Return 
by whom 
lobe 
el,ned. 
l 
Assess-
ment. 

Reference. 
to Valua-
tion 
Officer. 
14 
(b) tana to comply 'With aU the terms of a notice issued under 1Ub. 
tee:tion (2) or sub-Jeetion (4), 
the AaMssiDg 0fBcer after taking Into account, all relevant material which 
he has gathered, shall, after giving such person an opportunity of being 
heard, estimate the net wealth of the deceased to the best of his judcment 5 
and determine the sum payable as the wealth (inheritance) duty on the 
basis of sucJ1l81eBlment: I 
Provided that such opportunity aba1l be given by the Assessing Oftlcer 
by serving a notice calling upon the person to show cause, on a date and 
time·to be spec1fted in the notice, why the assessment should not be com .. 10 
pleted 10 the best of his judgment: I 
Provided furthel'l that it shall not be necessary to give such oppor-
tunity in a case where a notice under sub-section (4) has been issued prior 
to the making of the assessment under this sub-eection. 
zz. (1) For the purposes of making an assessment under this Act, where IS 
the provisions of section 8 read with the rules made under this Act or, U 
the case may be, the rules in Schedule n, the market value of any asset 
is to be taken into account in such assessment, the Assessing Officer may 
refer the valuation of any asset to a Valuation Ofticer-
(0.) in a case where the value of the asset as retumed is in accord- 20 
ance with the estimate made by a registered valuer, if the Assessing 
OfBcer is of opinion that the value so returned is less than its fair 
market value; I 
(b) in any othel'i case, if the Assessing Officer is of opinion.-
(i) that the fair market value of the asset exceeds the value 25 
of the asset as returned by more than such percentage of the value 
of the asset as. returned or by more than such amount as may be 
prescribed in this behalf; or 
(ii) that having regard to the nature Of the asset and other 
relevant circumstances, it is necessary so to do. 30 
(2) For the purpose of estimating the value of any asset in pursuance 
of a reference under sub-section (1), the Valuation Officer may' serve on 
the accountable person, a notice requiring him to produce or cause to be 
produced on a date specified in the notice such accounts, records or other 
documents as the Valuation Officer may require. 35 
(3) Where the Valuation ·OfIlcer i8 of opinion that the va1-ue of the 
asse.; baa been correctly declared in the return made by the accountable 
person Under section 18 or .eetion 19, he shall pass an order in writing to 
that effect and send a copy of his order to the Assessing Officer and to the 
accountable person. ' ! 40 
(4) Where the Valuation Offteer is 'of opinion' that the value of the 
asset is higher than the value declared in the return made by the accoun-
table person under section 18 or section 19, or where the asset is not df8-
closed~or the ftlu&· ot the assetJs not declared in such return or iWhere no 
such return has been a.ade, the Valuation Oftlcer shall serve a notice on 45 
.. _-----

15 
the accountable person intimating the value which he proposes to estimate 
and ~ving the accountable l>erson an opportunity to atate, em a "ate to be 
ll*i1*i.ln the notice, his objections either in pe1'8Oll or~ wdting before 
the Valuation Oftlcer aIld. to produce or caUSe to be pJ:'odQCed OIl that date 
S such evidence as the accountable person may ~ly in support of his objec-
tions. I 
·(5) On the date specified in the notice under sub-section (4), or as 
lOOn thereafter as may' be, after hearing such evidence as the accountable 
person may produce and after considering such evidence as the Valuation 
10 Officer may require on any specifled points and after taking into account 
aU relevant material which he has gathered, the Valuation Offlcer shall, by 
order in w.r1ting, estimate the valUe of the asset and send a COpy of his 
order to the Assessing Officer and to the accountable person. 
(6) On receipt of the order under sub-section (3) or sub-section (5) 
15 from the Valuation Officer, the Assessing Officer shall, so far as the valua-
tion of the asset in ques'tion is concerned, proceed to complete the assess-
ment in conformity with the estimate of the Valuation Oftlcer. 
23. (1) If the Assessing Officer. has reason to believe that the net 
wealth of a deceased chargeable to wealth (inheritance) duty has es-
20 caped assessment (whether by reason of under assessment or assessment 
at too Iowa rate or otherwise), he may, subject to the other provisions 
of this section and section 24. serve upon the accountable person a notice 
requiring him to furnish within such period, not being lesS than thirty 
days as may be specified in the notice, a return in the pre8Crlbed form 
25 and verifted in the preScribed manner setting forth the net . wealth of 
the deceased, along with such particulars as may be requ1red. by the 
notice, and may proceed to assess or reassess such net wealth, which 
has escaped assessment and which comes to his notice subsequently in, 
the course of the proceedings under this section and the provisions of 
30 this Act, shall, so far as may be, apply as if the return were a return 
required to be furnished under section 18: 
Provided that where an assessment under sub-section (3) of section 
21 has been made, no action shall be taken under this section after the 
expiry of four years from the end of the financial year in which 
.3S the return of net wealth was due under section. 18, unless any net 
wealth chargeable to wealth (inheritance) duty has escaped assess-
ment by reason of the failure on the part of the accountable person 
to make a return under section 18 or section 19 or in response to a notice 
issued under sub-section (4) of section 21 or this section or to disclose 
40 fully or truly all material facts necessary for the assessment of the 
net wealth passing on the death of the deceased. 
45 
(Z) No notice under sub-section (1) shall be issued,-
(4) in a case where an assessment under suh-section (3) of sec-
tion 21 or sub-section (I) of this section has been made,-
(i) i~ four years have elapsed from the end of the financial 
year in which the return of the net wealth was due under section 
18, unless the case falls under sub-elause (ii) or sub-clause (iii) 
Net 
'Wealth 
escaping 
assess· 
mellt. 

16 
(it) if· four years, but not more than seven years, have 
elapsed ftom the end of the ftnanclal year in which the re11um of 
the· aet wealth was due under section 18, uniess the 
.' ." . 4et 'wealth chargeilble to wealth {itlh~ritaIlce) duty which has 
eeeaPed ... esameM amounts U> or is likely to amount to rupees s 
five lakhs or more; , , 
(iii) if seV8l1 Yearl, but not more than ten years, have 
~psed from' the end. of the financial year in which the return of 
the net wealth was·. due under section 18, unleaa the 
Det wealth chargeable to wealth (i~tance) duty which bN 10 
eecaPed US8Ssment amounts to or is likely to amount to ru~ 
ten lakhs or more; 
(b) in any other case,-
(i) if four years have elapged from the end of the financial 
year in which the return of the net wealth waa due under section 15 
18, unless the case falls under sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii); 
(ii) if four years, but not more than seven years, have elapsed 
from the end of the financial year in which the return of 
the net wealth was due tinder section 18. unless the net 
wealth chargeable to wealth (inheritance) duty which has 20 
escaped assessment amounts to or is likely to amount to rupees 
two lakhs and fifty thousand or more; 
(iii) if seven yearl, ~t not more than ten years, have 
elapaec:l '!rom' the end of the financial year in which the return of 
th.net wealth was due under section 18, unless the net wealth 25 
chargeable to wealth (iclleritaDce) duty whieh bas escaped 
a81e88Dlent amount. to Gr is likely to amount to rupees five lakhs 
or more. I 
i"zp14nation-For the purpose of SUb-section (1) and sub-section (2), 
the follOWing shall also be deemed to be cases where net wealth charge-· 30 
able to wealth (inheritance) duty has escaped assessment, namely:-
(a) where no return of net wealth has been furnished by the 
aceountable person. although the net wealth of the deceased in res-
peot of which he is assessable under this Act exceeded the maxi-
mum amount which is not chargeable to wealth (inheritance) duty; 35 
(b) where a return of net wealth has been furnished by the 
accountable person but no assessment has been made and it is notic-
ed by the Assessing Officer that the accountable person has under-
stated the net wJ!alth or has claimed excessive exemption or deduc-
tion in the rt!turn. ' 40 
(3) (a) In a case where an assessment under sub-section (3) of sec-
tion 21 or sub-section (l) of this section has been made, no notice shall 
be issued under sub-section (1) except by an Assessing Officer of the 
ranlC ot an Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner: 
Provided that, after the expiry of four years from the end of the 45 
financial year ill which the return of net wealth was due under section 
.18, no such notice shall be issued unless the Chief Comm.tssioner 
or Commi~oner is.atisfted that it is a fit case for the issue of such 
notice. 

;,. 17 
: ' (b) In a .eue other than' a ease falling under t!~au8@' . (,Jt~, no notice 
dlall be ill8ue'd under sub-aectlon (1) by lin Assessing Offte.i, who is 
below the rank of a. Deputy Commissioner, after the ~piry of ~our 
'. years fromtne' end of the financial year in which retufll' of net wealtn 
S was due under section 18, unless the Deputy Commissioner is sati~1ied, 
on the reasons 1'!eCOrded by such Assessing Officer. that it is a fit case for 
the issue of such notice. . , 
(4) Nothing contained in this section limiting the time within which 
any proceeding for 8S'Se!sment or reassessment may be cOMmenced, 
10 shall apply to an asselsment or reassessment to be made bn!nlch 
person in consequence of or to give effect to any ftnding or dtroeetion 
contained in an order under section 30, 31 t 32, 34 or 36 or by any court 
in any proceeding under any other law. 
24. (1) No order of assessment shall be made uftder section 
J~ 21 at any time after the expiry of two years from the end 'Of the fmecial 
year in which the return of net wealth under settion 18 is due. 
(2) No order of assessment or reassessment shall be made under 
I18Ction 23 after the expiry of two years from the end of the financial year 
in which the notice under sub-section (1) of that section was served. 
20 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
an order of fresh assessment in pursuance of an order passM under sec-
tion 30, section 31 or section 32, setting aside or cancelling an assessment. 
may be made at any time before the expiry of two years from the end of 
the financial year in which the order under section '30 or section 31 is 
2S received by the Chief Commissione.r Or Commissioner or, as the ~ase may 
be, the order- under section 32 is passed by the Commissioner, 
(4) The ptOVislOllS of sub-sfJetiotll!f (l) and (I) gbalt Bot apply to the 
assessment or ,reassessment made in the CIUIe of net wealth of a 
deceased in consequence of. or to give effect to" any finding or direction 
30 contained in an order un~er section 30, section 31, section 32, section 34 
or section 36 o~ in an order of any court in a proceeding othel'iWise than 
by way of appeal or reference under this Act, and such assessment or 
reassessment may .. subject to the provisions of sUb-section (3). b~ cem-
pleted at any time. 
35 E.xp1a.nla.tion_In computing the period of limitation for the purpoees 
of this section,-
(i) the time taken in reopening the 'Whole or any part of the 
proceeding or in giving an opportunity to any accountable person to 
be rehea~d under the proviso to section 39 of the Wealth-tax Act 1m 
40 applicable under section 57 of this Act; or 
(ii) the period during which the assessment proceeding is stayed 
by an order or injunction of any court, shall be excluded. 
25. (1) Where the return of net wealth of a deceased under section 
18 or section 19. or in response to a notice under clwse (i) of Sllbisection 
45 (4) of section 21, is furnished after the due date, or is not furnished, the 
accountable person shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 
two per eent. for etrery month or part of a month comprised in the period 
eommendng on the date, immediately foDowi1!g the due date, and,-
(a) where the return is furnished after the due date, ending on 
50 the date of furnishing the return, or 
Time 
limit fOr 
comple-
tion of 
assess-
ment and 
reas&el!B-
ment. 
Interest 
for de-
faults in 
turn.iahing 
return of 
Jle'!WllLlth. 

Penalty 
for 
failure to 
comply 
with 
notices. 
11 
(I» where no return ·has been furniahed, ending on the date of 
completion of the assessment under 1Ub-sect10J;L . (5) of aact1Q1). al, 
on the amouni of duty payable on the net wealth as determined on regu-
lar assessme~t~ 
Explanation t.-In this section, "due date" means the date specified S 
in section 18. 
E~lana.tiO'n 2.-Where, an assessment is made for the first time under 
section 23, the assessment so made shall be regarded as a regular aSlesa-
ment for the pu,rposes of this section. 
(2) Where the return of net wealth required by a notice under sub- 10 
section (1) of section 23 issued after the completion of an assessment 
~ section 21 or section 23, is furnished after the expiry of the time 
allowed under such notice or is not furnished, the accountable person 
shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of two per cent. for 
every month or part of a month comprised in the period commencing on IS 
1.1le date immediately following the expiry of the time allowed as afore-
said, and- ';~!i~)! "' '~I."'. 
(a) where the return is furnished after the expiry of the time 
aforesaid, ending on the date of fumishing the retumj or 
(b) where no return has been furnished, ending on the date of 20 
completion of the reassessment under section 23, 
on the amount by which the duty Ob the net wealth determined on the 
bulsof such reasaessment exceeds the dUty 'on the net wealth as deter-
mined on the basis of the earlier assessment aforesaid.. 
(3) Where, as a result of an order under section 30 or section 31 or 2!i 
IeCtion 32 or section 34 or section 36 or section 48, the amount of duty 
on which interest was payable under this section has been increased or 
reduced, as the case may be. the interest shall be increased or reduced 
accordingly, and- I 
(i) in a case where the i~terest is increased, the Assessing Officer 30 
shall serve upon the accountable person a notice of demand in the 
prescribed form specifying the sum payable, and such notice of de-
mand shall 'be .deemed to be a notice under section 39 and the provi-
sions of this Act shall apply accordingly, and 
(ii) in p case where the interest is reduced, the excess interest 35 
paid, if any, shall be refunded . 
•. (1) If the Assessing Officer. in the course af any proceedings 
under this Act, is satisfied ·that any person has· failed to comply with 
the .notice under sub-se~on (2) or sub-seetion (4) of section 21, the 
Asseasing .Ofti.cer may, by order in ,writing, direct ·tbat such person shall 40 
pay, 'by w~y of penalty, a sum which shall not be less than one thousand 
rupees but which may extend to twenty-five thO'llsand rupees for each 
such failure: . 

19 
Provided that-
(a) Do penalty ahall be impoaable under this section, if the per-
IOD proves that there was reasonable cause for the failure referred 
to in this sub-section; 
(b) no order imposing a penalty under this section shall be made-
(i) by the Income-tax O1Jl.cer, where the penalty ex~ 
ten thousand rupees; . 
(ii) by the Assistant Commissioner, where the penalty ex-
ceeds twenty thousand rupees, 
10 except with the prior. approval of the Deputy Commissioner. 
(Z) No order shall be made under sub-sedion (1) unless the person 
concerned has been heard, or has been given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard. 
(3) No order imposing a penalty under sub-section (1) shall be pass-
t S ed after the expiry of the financial year in which the proceedfugs, in the 
course of which action for the imposition of penalty has been initiated, 
are completed, or six months from the end of the month in which action 
for imposition of penalty is initiated, whichever period expires later. 
Explanation.-In computing the period of limitation for the purposes 
20 of this section,-
(i) the time taken in giving an opportunity to any accountable 
person to be rehead under the proviso to section 39' of the Wealth-tax 
Act as applicable under section 57 of this Act; and 
(ii) any period during' whioh a proceeding under this section 
2S for the levy of penalty is stayed. by an order or injunction of any 
court, 
30 
3S 
shall be excluded. 
27. (1) If any person,-
(a) being legally bound to state the truth of any matter touch-
ing the subject of his assessment refuses to answer any question 
put to him by a wealth (inheritance) duty authority in the exercise 
of his powers under this Act; or 
(b) refuses to sign any statement made by him in the course of 
any proceedings under this Act, which a wealth (inheritance) duty 
authority may legally require him to sign; or 
(c) to whom a summons is issued under sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 56 either to attend to give evidence or produce books of 
account or other dO<."UIIlents at a certain place and time, omits to 
attend or produce the books of account or documents at the place 
40 and time, 
he shall pay, by way of penalty, a sum which shall not be less than five 
hundred rupees but which may e~nd to ten thousand rupees for each 
such default or failure: . 
Provided that no' penalty shall be imposable under clause (c) If 
45 the person proves that there was reasonable ca~se for the said failure. 
Penalty 
for failure 
to answer 
questions, 
sign .tate. 
ments, 
funrlah 
tDforma-
tion, allow 
inspection, 
.. 

Penalty 
for con. 
cealmen.t 
of 
Ulet., 
etc. 
20 ," '. I 
(2) If a person fails to furnish in due time any statemeat ~,iD&Qq. 
mation which such person is bound to furnish to the Aueestng 0JBcer 
undett' ~edori '38 of the Wealth-tax 'Act as applicable under stcticin 57 
of tais, Act;, he shall pay, by way of 'penalty, a sum which shall. not 
be less than one hundred rupees but which may eztead to' two huadre4 S 
rupees for every day during which the failure ~ontinues: 
~ovided U,w.t no penalty shall be, imposable Q,1lder this sub-section 
if the perSon proves that there was reasonable cause fOr the said failure. 
(3) Any penalty imposable under su}).section U) Of sub-section (2) 
shall be imposed- 10 
(a.) ia • cue where the contraventiOn, failure or default in ra-
~ of which such penalty is imposable occurs in the course of any 
pr~~ing before a wealth (inheritance) duty authority not lower 
in rank than a Deputy D,rector or a Deputy Commissioner., by such 
wealth (inheritance) duty authority; IS 
(b) in my other case, by the Deputy DirectQr or the Deputy 
Conunissioner. 
(4) No order under this section shall be passed by any wealth (in-
heritance) duty authority referred to in sub-section (3) unless the per-
son on whom the penalty is proposed to be impo&ed has been heard, 01' 20 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter, by 
such authority. I 
E:DpWtnatt.on.-In this section, "wealth (inheritance) duty authority" 
includes a Director General, Dinector, Deputy Director, AssIstant Direc-
tor and a Valuation Ofti~ef whUe exercising the powers vested in a court 2S 
under the Code of Civil Prqcedure, 1908, when tryin& a suit in respect of 
the matters specified in sub-section (1) of section 56. 
28. (1) If the Assessing Officer.. Deputy Commissioner (Appeals), 
Commissioner (Appeals), Commiss:oner or Appellate Tribunal in the 
course of any proceedings under this Act is satisfied that any account- 30 
able person has concealed the particulars of any assets or furnished in-
accurate particulars of any assets or debts, pertaining to the determina-
tion of net wealth of the c:leceased., he or it may, by order in writing, 
direct that such person shall pay by way of penalty in addition to any 
wealth (inheritance) duty payable by him. a sum which shall not be 3S 
less than, but which shall not exceed five times. the amount of wealth 
(inheritance) duty sought to be evaded by reason of the concealment 
of particulars of any assets or the fumishing af inaccurate particulars 
in respect of any IUsets or debts. ' 
Explana.tion I.-For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression 40 
"the amount of wealth (inheritance) duty sought to be evaded",-
(a) in a case to which Explo.'ootion 3 applies, means the wealth 
(inheritance) du.ty on the net wealth 8S1N'secl; 
(b) in any other case, means the difference between the wealth 
(inheritance) duty on the net wealth assessed and the wealth (in- 45 
heritance) duty that would have ~n chargeable had the net wefjlth 
5 ot 1908 

s 
10 
15 
21 
assessed ~n reduced by the amount which represents the value of 
any assets in respect of which ~rticulars have been concealed or 
inaccurate particulars have been .furnished and of any debu. in res-
pect of which inaccurate particulars have been· furnished. 
ExpZanation 2.-Wherein respect, of any ·fact,· ma~ to the com~ 
putation of the net wealth of the deceased Wlderthis Act.-
(A) the accountable person fails to offer an .explanation or 
offers an explanation whichia found by ,the Asle.ng· OfAoer or the 
Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) to 
be false, or : 
(B) such accountable person offers an explanation which ·he is 
not able to substantiate and fails to prove that such explanation fa 
bona fide and that all the facts relating to the- same aad· material to 
the computation of the net wealth of the deceased have been ' dis-
closed by him, I 
then, the amount added or disallowed ln computing the net· wealth 
of the deceased as a result thereof shan be -deemed to t'epresent· the· 
value of the assets in respect ·of which particulars have beep ,concealed. 
Exp14nation 3.-Where any accountable 'person whoois required. to " 
20 furnish under section 18 a return of net wealth,of the deceased, has failed 
to do so within the time allowed therein. and the Assessblg Oftlcer or 
the Deputy Commissioner (Alppeals)or the ,Commissioner., (Appeals) is 
satisfied that such accountable ~r80n is assessable in respect of the net 
wealth of the deceased passingon death, then. such. person shall be 
25 deemed to have concealed the particulars of the assets or turnished inaccu-
rate particulars of any assets or debts notwithstanding that suell pel'POn 
furnishes a return of the net wealth so passin~ at anv· time after the 
expiry of the :period specified aforesaId. in pur~l,lance of a notice nnder 
section 23. I I 
30 Explanation ·4.-Where the value of any asset returned by any account-
able person is le9S than sevehty per cent, at the value of such asset as 
determined in an assessment under section 21 or section 23. such person 
shall be deemed to have furnished inaccurate particulars of Bueh agSets. 
within the meaning of sub-sectton (I), unless he 1)I'oves . that the value 
35 of the asset..:; as returned ~ him is the correct value. 
(2) No order shall be made unCler sub-section (1) unless the account-
able person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of belnllt 
heard .. , 
(3) Notwithstandin~ anvthin~ contained in su~ectlon (1), if the 
40 amount (af' determined by the Assessinll! Otftcer on assessment) in respect 
of which penalty. is imposable under sub-secti~l,1 (1) exceeds a 
sum of twentv. five thousand rupee.s"the As~Sfin~. Oft\cer shall not fssue 
any direction under sub-section (1) for paynt~t, by .V/ay of penalty 'with-
out the pl"evjous approval of the Deputy ~0~17l15Sfon~r. 
366 ·LS-4. 

Power to 
reduce 
or waive 
penalty 
in 
certain 
easeL 
~ 
22 
(4) A Deputy Commissioner (Appeals), a Commissioner (Appeals). 
a Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal on making an order under this 
aeetion imposing a penalty. shall forthwith send a copy of the same to the 
Assessing Officer. 
(5) No order ·imposing a penalty under this section shall be pasaed ~ 
after the expiry of the financial year in which the proceedings, in the 
course of which action for the imposition of penalty has been tntUated. 
are completed, or six months from the end of the month in which ac-
tion for the imposition of penalty is initiated, whichever period expires 
later; I i 10 
Ezp14MtWn.-In computing the period of limitation for the purposes 
of this seetion,-
(i) the time taken in giving an opportunity to the aceountable 
person to be reheard under section 39 of the Wealth-tax Act as 
applicable under section 57 of this Act; and IS 
(ii) any period during which a proceeding un de!' this section tor 
tlie levy of penalty is stayed by an order or injunction! of any court, 
shall be excluded. I 
21. (1) Notwfthstandin~ anything contained in this Act, the Chief 
Commissioner Or Comm.i88ioner may, in his discretion, whether on hta 20 
own motion or otherwise if he is satisfied that such person has, prior to 
the detection by the Assessing Officer of the concealment of particulars 
of assets or of the inaccuracy of particulars furnished in respect of any 
asset or debt in respect of which the penaltv is imnosable, voluntarily 
and in good faith made full and true disclosure of such particulars, 2S 
and also has co-operated in any inClufrv relatin~ to the assessment ot the 
net wealth of the deceased and has either naid or made satisfactory 
Ilrran~ements for the payment of any duty or interest payable in conse-
quence of an ordE"r passed under this Act. reduce or waive the amount 
of Penalty imposed or imposable on a person under section 28. 30 
EX1>lanation.-For the purposes of. this sub-section, a person sliall be 
deem,ed to have made full and true disclosure of the particulars of tbe 
assets or debts of a deceased in anv case where the excess of net wealth 
assessed over the net wealth returned is of such a nature as not to 
attract the provisions of 'section 28. 35 
1 ) (2) Notwithstandin~ 'anything contained in sub-section (1), if in a 
t~ ~ CRse faUin~ under section 28, tne net wpalth in resoect. of which the pe-
~, nalty is imnosed or imposabJe exceeds five hundred thousand rupees, no 
~ ~ order reducin!! or waivine- the penaltv under wb-section (1) shall be 
. I
I made by the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner. except. with the pre. 40 
~ violls approval of tlie Board.-"· 
~ __ ._ t .' 
~~f j (3) Without prejudice to the nov~'f'rc: conferred on him by any other 
i' ,provision of this Act. the. Chief ,Commissioner or Commis:;!ioner may. on 
f an Af'olication made in ihis ·,~h9,lf by ~n _accoUntable nerson, and after ,., . .,' . , . 
j\ l"eeordin~ his reasons for so doin~, reduce or waive the amount of an, 45 
~~ penalty payable by th~ a,ccQuntable person under this Act or stay 01' 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
2i 
eo~POUDd any proceeding for the recovery of any 8uch amount if he fa satisfied that- .• . . 
(i) to do otherwise would C&U&e genuine hardship to the account-
able person having regard to the circumstances of the case, and 
. (ii) the accountable person has co-operated in any inquiry rela-
ting to the assesament or any proceeding for the recovery of any 
amount due from him.. 
(4) Every order made under this section shall be final and shall not 
be called into question by any court or any other authority. 
CHAPTER V 
,ApPEALS, REVISIONS AND ItEFlRENCES 
30. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2). any person,-
(a) objecting to the amount of net wealth determined under this 
Act; or 
(b) objecting to the amount of wealth (inheritance) duty deter-
mined as payable under this Act; or 
(c) denying his liability to be assessed a8 an accountable persoll 
under this Act; or 
(d) objecting to any penalty imposed by the Assessing Officer 
under section 26, or section 28; or 
(e) objecting to penalty imposed by the Assessing Officer under 
the provisions of section 221 of the Income-tax Act as applicable 
under section 41 of this Act for the purposes ,of wealth (inheritance) 
duty; or I I .:. 
(f) objecting to any order of the Assessing officer under section 
48, having the effect of enhancing the assessment or reducing the 
refund or refusing to allow the claim made by the accountable person 
under the said section; or 
(g) objecting to any order of Valuation Officer under section 48, 
having the e1fect of enhancing the valuation of any asset or refuslDa 
to allow the claim made by the accountable person under the said 
section; or 
(h) objecting to any order of the Assessing Officer or Valuation 
Officer imposing a fine under sub-section (2) of section 56, 
may appeal to the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner 
3S (Appeals) against the assessment or ordel\ as the case rr'IlY be, in the 
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner. 
40 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-JJeCtion (1), any 
person,-
(4) objecting to the amount of net wealth determined under 
this Act or objecting to the amount of wealth (inberi~) duty de-
termined as payable by him under this Act or denying his liabiltty to 
Appeals 
to Deputy 
CoDlDli8-
sianer 
(Apple&ls) 
or Com-
missioner 
(Appiea.U) 
tromthe 
orden of 
Assess.ln, 
Officers. 

" be;-eaed U!lder' this· Act, wheN Uw·l18t wealth determined on 
assessment made under section 21 exceeds fifteen lakh rupees; or 
(b) &bjecting toany'peiIlalty imposed'under section 20; or 
(c) objecting to any penalty imposed under section 28 where the 
penalty has' baeD·1mposed 'With' the prewous-approval of thE' Deputy 5 
Commissioner .\lDde1'sub-aectlon· (8)01 ectioo 28; or 
(d) objecting to any assessment or orderl referred to in clauses 
,(a) to (j). (both mclusive) of ' sub-section (1) where tluch assess-
ment or ord .. · ·has· been made.' blythe ·Deputy . Commissioner in exer-
cise of the powers or functions conferred on or assigned to him under 10 
section 11 or Bection 14; or 
(e) objecting to an order made by an Assessing Officer in the case 
of such persons or classes of persons as the Board may, having regard 
'. to the natura of calles, the complexities' involved and other relevant 
considerations direct. 15 
may appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) against the aaaeasment o! 
order, as the case may be, in the prescribed form and verified in the 
. prescribed marmer. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
J Board, or if 80 authotlaedby the 'Board; 'the Director General or the Cbief 20 
Comm.ssioner, may by order in writing, trlinsfer any appeal which is 
pending before a Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) and any matter arising 
out of or connected with such . appeal arid which is so pending, to the 
Commissioner (Appeals) if tlie Board, or, as the case may be, the DIrec-
tor General or Chief Commissioner (at the request of :the appellant or 25 
otherwise) is -tided l that it is, necessary or ,expedient 90 to do having 
regard to the nature of the case, the complexities involved and other 
relevant considerations and the Commissioner (Appeals) may proceed 
with such appeal or matter from the stage at which it was before it was 
so transferred: 30 
PrOvided that the appeUmt may demand that before proceeding fur-
ther with the appeal or matter, the previous proceeding or any part 
··tllereof be re:-opened or that he be 'reheard. 
(4) An appeal ahallbe presetUed witbbl thirty days ·of the'receipt of 
the notice of demand relating to the assessment Or penalty objected to, 35 
or the date on whicp any order objected to, iscomm'Ullicated to him, but 
the Deputy CarroniaSioner (Appeals) or, 81 the case may be, the Com-
lI'issioner . (Appeals) . may admit an appeal after the expiration of the 
periOd· aforesaid if be is .. tisfledthat . the appellant had sufticient cause 
fo:: not presenting the "Ppeal w.Ithin that period. 
(S) , Wbere II 'return· has' beet! . ft1ed by an . ate()untabIe person, no 
appeal under this section shall be admitted unless at the time of the 
filing of the' 'appeal he has paid . the· wealth (inheritance) duty due on 
. the net wealth returned by him. 
40 

(6)Tbe Deputy Commissioner (Appeals), or as the case may be, the 
Commissioner (Appeals) s~all fix a day and place fOr the' hearing of the 
appeal and' may from time to time adjourn th~ hearing. 
(7) If the valuation of any asset is objected to in an· 'appeal under 
S clause (a) of sub-section (1) or of sub-section (2), the Deputy Commis-
sioner (Appeals) or, as the case may be. the Commissioner (Appeals) 
shall.-
(a) in a case where such valuation has been made by a Valua-
tion Officer under section 22, give such Valuation Officer an oppor-
10 tunity of being heard; 
.( b) in any other case, on a request being made ttl this behalf 
by the AsseSSing Officer, give an opportunity of being heard to any 
ValuationOfticer nominated for the purpose by the Asll9SSing 
Officer. 
(8) The Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or, as the case may be, the 
15 Commissioner (Appeals) may.-
20 
25 
(a) at the hearing of an appeal, allow an appellant to go into 
any ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of ;appeal; 
(b) beiOlt'e disposing of an~ appeal, make such further inquiry 
as he thinks fit or cause further inquiry to be made by the Assessing 
Officer or, as the case may be, the Valuation. OfIlcer. 
(9) In disposing of an appeal, the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) 
or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals) may pass such 
order as he thinks fit which may include an order enhancing the 818e18-
ment or penalty: 
Pr<lVided that no order enhancing the assessment or penalty shall 
be made unless the person affected thereby has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement. 
(10) In disposing of an appeal, the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) 
or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals) may consider aDd 
30 decide any matter arising O'I1t of the proceedings in which the order 
appealed against was passed, notwithstanding, that such matter was not 
raised before the'Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or, as the case may 
be, the Commiss:oner (Appeals) by the appellant. 
(11) The order of the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or, as the 
35 case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals) disposing of the appeal shall 
be in writing and shall state the points for determination, the decision 
thereon and the reasons for the decision. 
(12) A copy of every order passed by the Deputy CODunlssioner 
(Appeals) or, as the case may ~ the Commissioner (Appeals) under 
010 this section shall be forwarded to the appellant and the Chief Commis-
sionel" or ·Commissioner. 

Appeal 
to the 
Appellate 
Tribunal 
from arden 
oftbe 
Deputy 
Com-
milliODel' 
(Appeals) 
or the 
Com-
mi.1oaer 
(Appeala). 
31. (1) An accountable person objecting to an order passed by the 
Deputy Uommissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) under 
section 26 or section 28 or section 30 or sub-section (2) of section 56 
may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within sixty days of the date on 
which the order is communicated to him. S 
(2) The Commissioner may, if he is not satisfied as to the correctness 
of any order passed by a Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or a Com-
missioner (Appeals) under section 30, direct the Assessing Officer to 
appeal to. the Appellate Tribunal -against such order and such appeal 
may be made at any time before the expiry of sixty days of the date on 10 
which the order is communicated to the Commissioner. 
(3) The Assessing Officer or the accountable person, as the case may 
be, on receipt of notice that an appeal against the order of the Deyc1ty 
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) has been pre-
ferred under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) by the other party, may, 15 
notwithstanding, that he may not have appealed against such order or 
any part thereof, within thirty days of the receipt of the notice, rue a 
memorandum of cross-objections, verified in the prescribed manner, 
against any part of the order of the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) 
or the Commissioner (Appeals) and such memorand~ shall be disposed 20 
of by the Appellate Tribunal as if it were an appeal presented within 
the time specified in 6ub-section (1) or sub-seetion (2). 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or permit the filing 
of a memorandum of cross-objections after the expiry of the relevant 
period referred to in sUb-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section 25 
(3), if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting 
it within that period. 
(5) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed 
form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner and shall, except 
In the case of appeal refer!"ed to in sub-section (2), be accompaniec:? by 30 
a fee of two hundred rupees. 
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, after glvmg both parties to the 
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it 
thinks fit ana any such orders may include an order enbanc1Dg tile ... 
sessment or penalty: 3S 
Provided that if the valuation o~ any asset is objected to. the Appel-
late Tribunal shall.-
(4) in, a case where such valuation has been made by a Valua-
tion OOcer under section 22, also gives such Valuation Officer 1ft 
opportunity of being heard; 40 
(b) in any other case, on a request being made in this behalf 
by the Assessing Officer give an opportunity of being heard also to 
any Valuation Officer nominated for the purpose by the A88e8Iing 
Officer: 
Provided further that no order enhancing an assessment or penalty 4S 
shall be made unless the person affected thereby has been given a rea-
.... ble opportunity of showing cause against such eMmcemeBt. 

27 
(7) A copy of every order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under 
this section shall be forwarded to the a<:countable person and the Com-
missioner. . 
(8) Save as otherwise provided in section 34, any order passed by the 
5 • Appellate Tribunal on appeal shall be final. 
(9) The provisions of sub-section (1), (4) Bnd (5) of section 255 of 
the Income-tax Act shall apply to the Appellate Trilntnal in the dis-
charge of its fundions under this Act as they apply to it in the discharge 
of its fUnctions under the Income-tax Act. 
10 32. (1) The provisions of section 25 of the Wealth-tax Act shall, so 
far as may ,be, apply fo1') the purposes of Ulis Act as they apply for the 
purposes of the Wealth-tax Act. subject to the modifications specified 
in sub-section (2). 
(2) The modifications referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the 
15 following, namely:-
(4) the word "assessee" wherever it occurs shall be construed 
as a reference to the words "accountable person"; 
(b) in the Explanation to sub-section (2), in clause (4), tae refer-
ence to section '8 of the Wealth-tax Act shall be construed as a 
20 reference to section 11 of this Act. I 
33. (1) Any accountable person objecting to an order passed by the 
Chief Commissioner or Commissioner or Director General or Director 
under section 26 or section 'l:7 or section 32, as the case may be" may 
appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which 
25 the order is communicated to him. ' 
Po .... 
01 Com-
missioner 
to revise 
order of 
sub ordi-
nate 
, authori-
ties. 
Appeal 
toAp-
pellate 
Tribunal 
from 
orders of 
enhance-
ment 
by Chief 
Commia. 
(2) An appeal to the Appel1ate Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall 
be in the prescribed form and shall be verified! in the prescribed manner 
and shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred rupees. 
sionett or 
(3) The prOVisions of sub-sections (4). (6), (7) and (8) of section 31 Comml ... 
30 shall apply in relation to any appeal under this section as they apply in stoners. 
relation to any appeal under that section. 
M. (1) The provisions of section 'J:l of the Wealth-tax Act shall, so 
far as may be, apply for the purposes of this Act as they apply for the 
purposes of the Wealth-tax Act, subject to the modifications specified 
35 in sub-section (2). I 
(2) The modifications referred to in sub-section (1) shan be the 
following. namely:-
(4) th~ reference to "assessee" shall be construed as a reference 
to "acCountable person"; . i 
40 (b) the references to sections 24 and 26 of the Wealth-tax Act 
shan be construed as references to sections 31 and 33 of this Act. 
respectively. .: 
Refer-
eneeto 
High 
Court. 

Hearing 
byHlCh 
Court. 
Appeal to 
Supreme 
Court. 
Duty 
lobe 
paid 
notwlth_ 
..... iq 
nle&'llllDe, 
eIG. 
Deftnftlon 
ofHiah 
Court. 
Notice Of ' 
domaDd. '.' . 
When 
duty 
etc., 
payable 
28 
35. The proviliODl of section 28 of the W Hlth-taz Act ahall. 10 far u 
may be, apply for the purpoaea of thla Act. subject to the mocWlcaUon 
that the reference to section 27 of the Wealth-tax Act .hall be construed 
as a reference to settion 34 of this Ad. 
31. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from &Dy judgment 5 
of the High Court delivered on a case stated under section 34 in any case 
which the High. Court certifies as a fit case for appeal 00 the Supreme 
Court. I 
(2) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed On 
appeal under this section, effect shall be given to the order of the 10 
Supreme Court in the manner provided in section 27 of the Wealth-tax 
Act as applicable under section .34 of this Act. 
(3) The High Court may, on application made to it for the ex€.cution 
of any, order of the Supreme Court in respect of any costs awarded by it, 
transmit the order for execution to any court subordinate to the High 15 
Court. I I 
31. Notwithstanding that a reference hu been made to the Blgh Court 
or the Supreme Court, or an appeal ha9 been preferred to the Supreme 
Court, wealth (inheritance) duty shall be payable in accordance with the 
assessment made in the case. 20 
38. In this Chapter" the expression "High Court" shall have the same 
meaning 3S in section 29B of the Wealth-Tax Act 
CHAPTER VI 
PAn4DT .um RBCOVBRY c:. WZAL'l'B (1l'UlDUtAKCI:) DU'l'!' 
39. When any wealth (inheritance) duty, interest, penalty, fine or 25 
any other sum is payable in consequence of any order passed under this 
Act, the Assessing Officer shall serve upon the accountable person a 
notice of demanGl in the prescribed form specifying the sum so payable. 
4.0. (1) Any amount specified as payable in a notice of demand under 
section 39 shall be paid within thirty days of the service of the notice at 30 
the place and to the person mentioned in the notice: 
IlDd Provided that, where the Assessing Officer has any reason to believe 
=::nt. that it will be detrimental to revenue jf the full period of thirty days 
able aforesal.d. is allowed, he may, with the previous approval of the Deputy 
person Conuni~oll!8r, direct that the sum. specified in the notice of demand 35 
deemed J.n;' shalI be paid within such period being a period less than the period of 
default. thirty days aforesaid, as may be specified by him in the notice of de-
mand. 
(2) If the amount specified in any notice of demand under section 39 
is no~ paid within the periQd limited under sub-section (1), the accoun- 40 
table person shall be liable to pay simple interest calculated at the rate 
of one and one-half per cent. for every month 01" part of a month com-
pri8ecl,j,n the period (!ommencin~ from the day immediately fonowing 
the end of the period mentioned in sub-section .(1) and ending with the 
day on which the amount is paid: 45 

-,---. ~ ~t, w~re as a result of an order under section 30, or 
18¢i9n 3~, Or section 32, or section 33, or section 34, or section 36, or 
.~op. 48, the amount on which interest was payable under this section 
had been J:'educed, the interest shall be .reduced accordingly and the 
, excess int~rest paid, if any, shall be refunded. 
10 
, (3), NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Chief 
CoIIiliilliiioner or Commissioner may reduce or waive the amount of 
Interest paid or payable by an accountable person under the said sub-
I8Ction it he is satUfted that-
(1) payment of such amount has caused or would cause genuine 
hai-d8l1ipto the accountable person; 
Hi) default in the payment of the amount on which interest has 
been paid CJr was payable under the said 8ub-section was due to cir-
cumStances beyond the control of the accountable person; and 
15 (iii) the accountable pel'lJOn has co-operated in any inquiry 
relating to the asseument or any proceeding for the recovery of any 
amount due from him. 
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), 
on 'an apphcation made by the accountable person before the expiry of 
20 the due date under sub-section (1). the Assessing Officer may extend 
the time for payment or allow payment by instalments, subject to such 
conditions as he may think fit to impose in the circumstance;,; of the case. 
(5) It the amount is not paid within the time limited under sub-
section (1) or extended under sub-section (4), as the case may be, at the 
~ place and to the person mentioned in the said notice, the accountable 
penon shall be deemed to be in default. 
(6) Ii in a case where payment by instalments is allowed under sub-
Idon (4), the' accountable person commit. default in paying anyone of 
the -iDlrtalmenta within the time fixed under that sub-section, that 
30 accountable person shall be deemed to be in default as to the whole of 
the amount then outstanding, and the other instalment Or instalments 
shati be deemed to have been due on the same date as the instalment 
actually in default. 
(7) Where an accountable person has presented an appeal under 
35 section 30, the AsseIB1ng Officer may, in his discretion, and subject to such 
conditiona u he may think fit to impose in the circumstances of the case, 
treat the accountable person as not being in default in respect of the 
amo\\hf'ik diJPute'in the appeal, even though the time fOJ' payment bas 
dp1fed, u long .. such appeal remain. undispoled at 
-40 (8) Where the net wealth of a deceased includes assets located in a 
country outside India, the laws of which prohibit or restrict the remit-
tan~1i! of money to India, the Assessing Officer shall not treat the accoun-
table person as in default in respect of that part of the duty which is 
attributable to those assets., and shall continue to treat the accountable 
45 pe~n""not in default in respect of that part of the duty untill the 
prohibition or restriction of remittance is removed. 
386_~. 

Mode of 
recovery. 
Payment of 
duty by 
tran.rer r:A 
property. 
.'.' -- 30 
41. The provisions contained in sections 221 to 227, 228A, 229, 231'" 
232 of the Income-tax Act and the Second and Third Schedulee to .. 
Act and any rules made thereunder shall,· so far as may be, apply III If' 
the said provisions were provisions of this Act and referred to 'wealth' 
(inheritance) duty and sums imposed by way of penalty, fine and 5 
interest under this Act instead of to income-tax and sums impOsed bJ 
way of penalty, fine and interest under that Act and to the corresponding 
wealth (inheritance) duty authorities instead of the income-tax auttiorl-
ties specified therein. 
Explanation I.-Any reference to sub-section (2) or su\).section (6) 10 
or sub-section (7) of section 220 of the Income-tax Aet in the IUd JII'O" 
visions of that Act or the rules made thereunder shall be colisttued • 
references to sub-section (2) or sub-section (7) or sub-section (8) of 
section 40 of this Act. 
Explrm,ation 2.-The Chief Commissioner or Commissioner and the 15 
Tax Recovery Officer referred to in the Income-tax Act shall be deemed 
to be the corr~sponding wealth (inheritance) duty authorities tor the 
purpose of recovery of wealth (inheritance) duty and SUID8 impoNeibs 
way of penalty, fine and interest under this Act. 
42. (1) The Central Government may, on an application of tIae 20 
person accountable for wealth (inheritance) duty, accept in aatisfactkIB 
of the whole or any part of such duty any property passing OD the 
death of the deceased at such price as may be agreed upon between the 
Central Government and that person and thereupon such person Ihall 
deliver possession of the property to such authority as may be spedfled 25 
by that Government in this behalf. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force. on the date the possession of the property is deli-
verf>d to the authority under sub_section (1)-
(i) the property shall vest in the Central Government; ~ 30 
(ii) the Central Government shall, where DecM.ary, Intlmatl 
the registering authority concerned accordingly, 
and the authority shall ac:lmitlUter the property in IUCb manner .. the 
Central Government may direct. 
(3) Where the price referred to in sub-section (1) exceeds the 35 
aggregate of the amount due under this Act in respect of the net wealtlh. 
of the deceased, the excess shall be applied in the following order to 
the payment of any tax, penalty. interest or other amount-
(i) whic!1 the legal representative of the dace_1d 11 Uable Ip 
'pay in respect of the income, or wealth of, or gift made by, the de- 40 
ceased under the InCome-tax Act, the Wealth-tax Act, aDd the 
Gift-tax Act, 1958; 
(ii) which the executor is . liable to pay under any of the Acts 
aforesaid in respect of the property of the deceased for the period 
of the administration of the property; 4.S 
(iii) which the person beneficially entitled to the propeny ~ 
question is liable to pay under any of tho~ Acta, 
110t 1"1. 

31 
and the balance, if any. shan be paid to the accountable persQJl. 
43. (11) In all cases where the net wealth of the deceased is asses-
I8ble under this Act and an application is made for obtaining a probate 
or a letter of administration, the legal heir or the executor, as the case 
"5 may be, of the deceased, shall fu.mish to the Assessing Officer a copy 
df ~e aftidavit of valuation within one month from the date of filing the 
aftldavit in the court. 
.(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law for the 
time being in force, if a person fails to comply with the provisions of 
18 sub-section (1). he shall, on an. order passed by the Assessing Officer, pay 
by way of penalty, a sum which shall not be less than five hundred rupees 
but which ma,y extend to ten thousand rupees. for such failure: 
l\-ovided that no order under this sub-section shall be passed un-
le~ the person on whom the penalty is proposed to be imposed is given 
15 I~ op})(?rtunity of being heard in the matter. 
CHAPTER VII 
R.I:Ftnms 
44. (1) Where, as a result of any order passed in appeal or other 
proceedings (including a rectification proceeding) under this Act. re_ 
20 fund of any amount becomes due to the accountable person, the Asses-
sing Officer shall. except as otherwise provided in this Act, refund the 
amount to the accountable person wIthout his having to make any 
('laim in this behalf: 
Provided that where, by the order aforesaid,-
(a) an assessment is set aside or cancelled and an order of 
fresh assessment is directed to be made. the refund, if any. shall 
become due only on the making of such fresh assessment; 
(b) the assessment is annulled. the refund shall become due 
only of the amount, if any. of the duty paid in excess of the duty 
chargeable on the net wealth returned. 
(2) Where an order giving rise to a refund is the subject-matter of an 
apPf'al or further proceeding or where any other proceeding under this 
", . A.ct fs pending and the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that the 
grant of the refund is likely to adve1'Sely affect the revenue. the As-
35 sessing Officer may with the previous approval of the Chief Commis-
sioner or Commissioner withhold the refund till such time as the Chief 
Commissione.r or Commissioner may determine. 
(3) (a) Where. in pursuance of any order passed under this Act, 
the refund of any amount becomes due to the accountable person he 
.., shall, subject to the provisioT's of this sub-section, be entitled to receive. 
in addition to the said amount. simple interest thereon calculated 
at the rate of one and a half per cent for every month or part of a 
mOnth comprised i'n the period or periods from the date or, as the case 
may be, dates of payment of the wealth (inheritance) duty or penalt v 
45 to the date on whic:h the refund is granted. 
Copy of 
affidavit of 
valuation of 
property to 
be furnished 
to the 
Assessing 
Officer and 
pcMlty for 
the 
failure to 
do 10. 

Appeawa 
by 
registered 
¥alum. 
Kesistm'cd 
valuers. 
Provi-
sional 
attach-
mentto 
protect 
revenue 
in certain 
cases. 
32 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause "date of payment of, 
the wealth (inheritance) duty or penalty" means the date on' and'liroJr( 
which 'the amount of wealth (inheritance) duty or penalty 8~~ in 
th? notice of demand issued under section 39 is paid in excess of ~~~h 
demand. 5 
(b) If the proceedings resulting in the refund are delayed for rea-
sons attributable to the accountable person, whether wholly or in part, 
the period of the delay so attributable to him shall be excluded from 
the period for which interest is payable and where any qu~on arlaes 
as to the period to be excluded, it shall be decided by the Chief Com- 10 
missioner or Commissioner whose decision thereon shall be final. 
(c) Where. as a result of an order under section 23 or section 30 or 
section 31 or section '32 or section 34 or section 36 or section! 48, the 
amount on which interest was payable under clause (4) has been increased 
or reduced. as the case may be, the interest shall be increased or ~~ 15 
accordingly and. in a case where the interest is reduced, the ~g 
Officer shall serve on the accountable person a notice of demand in the 
prescribed form specifying the amount of the excess interest paid and 
requiring him to pay such amount, and such notice of demand shall be 
deemed to be a notice under section 39 and the provisions of this Act 20 
shall apply accordingly. 
CHAPI'ER VIII 
45. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any account-
able person who is entitled to or required to attend before any wealth 25 
(inheritance) dUty authority or the Appellate Tribunal in connection with 
any matter relating to the valuation of any asset, except where he is 
required under this Act to attend in person, IIl8iY attend by a registered 
valuer. 
46. A person whose name is included! in the Register of Valuers 30 
under sub-section (1) of section 34AB of the Wealth-tax Act shall be 
the registered valuer for the purposes of this Act. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCaLANIlOUS 
47. (1) Where, during the pendency of any proceeding for the. asseu- 35 
ment of net wealth or for the assessment or reassessment of net wealth 
()f deceased wr.ich has escaped assessment, the Assesslni OfBcer is of the 
opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interests of the revenue it 
is necessary so to do, he may, with the previous approval of the Cbitd 
Commissioner or Commissioner. by order in writing. attach provisioD8Uy ..0 
any property of the deceased passing on death in the manner provi4ed in 
the Second Schedule to the In<!ome-tax Act as made applicable to this Act· 
by section 41. 
(2) Every such provisional attachment Jhall cease to have e«ect 
after the expiry of a period of six months from the date . of the c;;rder 4, 
made under sub-section (1): . .. "f ' 

33.~ 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner may. for 
reuOlll to be recorded in writing, extend the aforesaid period by such 
further period or periods as he thinks fit, so, however, that the total 
period of extension shall not in any case exceed two years. 
5 1;8. «)With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the ll ..... 
reeord- tiOD Of 
a.tAbI. 
(cz) the A.easing Officer may amend any order of a.element 
or ot refund or any other order passed by him; 
(b) the Valuation Oftlcer may amend any order passed by him 
,10 under section 22; 
(c) the Deputy Commissioner or the Director or CommiJsioner. 
or Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner (Appeals) 
may amend any order passed by him under section 28 or section 
30; 
15 (d) the Commissioner may amend any order passed by him 
under section 32; 
(e) the Appellate Tribunal may amend any order passed by it 
under section 31 or section 33. 
(2) Subject to the other pl'QVisions of this section, the auth~ty 
20 concemed-
(a) may make an amendment under sub-section (1) of its own 
motion; 
(0) shall make such amendment for rectifying any such mis-
take which has been brought to its notice by the accountable per-
2' son, and where the authority concerned is the Valuation Officer or 
the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissi<mer (Ap_ 
peals) or the Tribunal, by the Assessing Officer also. 
(S) An amendment which has the effect of enhancing an assess-
ment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of the 
30 accountable person, shall not be made under this section unless the 
authority concerned has given notice to the accountable person of its 
Intention so to do and has allqwed the accountable person a [['easonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
(4) Wb~e an amendment is made under this section, an order . . 
3$ .hall be passed in writing by the wealth (inheritance) duty authority 
concerned or the Tribunal, as the case may be. 
(5) Where any such amendment has the effect of enhancing the 
assessment or reducing refund already made, the Assessing Officer shall 
serve on the accountable person a notice of demand in the prescrIbed 
40 form specifying the sum payable and such notice of demand shall be 
deemed to be issued under section 39 and the provisions of this Act 
shall apply accordingly. 
"(6)' Where any amendment made b:r the Valuation Offic~r under 
clause <b) of sub-section (1) has the eft'ect of enhancing the valuation 
45 of any asset, he shall send a copy of his order to the Assessing Offtcer 

BlrOa 
PlOiiCGdon 
...so8 
bwdmk.. 
dbiUty ~ 
md8:e 
ill cettain 
cit,.... 
Section 
3eo of the 
a.de ~ 
0IIDIDm 
Pruoadare. 
1973, IJl4 
die 
ProbIdoD 
Of 
ar ... 
Act, 1''', not to 
apply. 
who shall thereafter proceed to amend the order of assessmeat in c0n-
formity with the OJ'der of the Valuation Oftlcer and the provtMna of 
tUb-section (5) shall apply accordingly. 
(7) No amendment under this section shall be made after the _ ex-
piry of foUll'" years from the end of the financial year in which the order ., 
sought to be amended was passed. . 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7), where 
the valuation of any asset has been enhanoed by the Valuation Officer 
under this section. the consequential amendment to the order of assess-
ment may be made by the Assessing Officer at any time before the expiry 10 
of one year from the date of the order of the Valuation OfB.cer under this 
section. 
(9) Where any matter has been considered and decided in a pro_ 
ceeding by way of an appeal .or revision relating to an order referred to 
in sub-section (1), the authority passing such order may. notwithstand. 15 
ing anything contained in any other law for the time being in force. 
amend the order under this section in relation to any matter other than 
the matter which has been so considered and decided. 
U. The provisions of sections 35A, 3SB. 3SC. SSD, 35P', 350. 35-'1 
3SL, 35M and 350 of the Wealth tax Act shall, so far as may be, apply-for m 
the purposes of this Act as they apply for the purpose. of the Wealth-
tax Aet. - .. 'Of' ..... 
50. The provisions of section 353 of the Wealth-tax Act shall, 10 
fRr as .may be. apply for the purposes Of this Act as they apply for- \he 
purposes of the Wealth-tax Act. . 2' 
51. The prOvisions of section 35K of the Wealth-tax Act shall, 80 
far as may be. apply for the purposes of this Act as they apply for the 
purposes of the Wealth-tax Act. 
51. No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act. 30 
,- 53. Nothin~ contained in section 360 of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1973, or in the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, shall apply to a 
person convicted of an offence under this Act unless that person is under 
eighteen years of age. I 
2 f!l It74. 
2Iot 1.51. 

35 
~. (1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act which re- PreI1ID1P-
quires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the court ah.u tion II to culpable 
presume the existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for mental 
the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental state with state. 
S respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution. 
Ezplanation.-In this sub-section, "culpable mental state" includes 
intention, motive or knowledge of a fact, or belief in, or reason to believe, 
• fact..' I J. ,J ....!;.. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only 
10 when the court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not 
merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of proba-
bility. 
~5. The provisions of section 36A of the Wealth-tax Act ahall, 
ao far as may be, apply for the purposes of this Act as they appl1 for 
l' the purposes of the Wealth-tax Act. 
56. (1) The Asses9ing Officer, Valuation Officer, Deputy Comm;aio-
ner (Appeals), Commissioner (Appeals), Chief Commissioner or Com-
missioner and the Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes of this Act, 
have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil 
5 ., 1'01. 20 Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, 
name1y:- I 
(eI) discovery and inspection; i 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, includi.DI any 
officer of a banking company and examining him on oath; 
2S (c) compelling the production of books of account and other 
documents; and 
(d) issuing commissions. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisiOIlS of any other law for the time 
being in force, where a person to whom a summons is ilsued either to 
30 attend to give evidence o.r produce books of account or other documents 
at a certain place and time, intentionally omits to attend or produce the 
bOoks of account or documents at the place or time, the authority em-
powered to issue such summons may impose upon him such 1lne not 
exceeding five hundred rupees, as it thinks fit, and the fine so levied may 
35. be recovered in the manner provided in Chapt~ VI. 
(3) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any authority referred 
to in Bub-section (1) may impound and retain in its custody for aucb 
periOd as it thinks fit any books of account or other documents produced 
bllore it in any proceeedin, under this Act: 
PoMr to 
tab 
evideuc:e 
OD oala, 
etc. 

ProviliOlll 
rei'" 
tomau.r 
CODDeelod 
with 
powers of 
wealth 
(iDheIL 
umce) dutJ 
authoritiea, 
valuation 
officers. 
publica-
tioD and 
account_ 
able 
perlOJll. 
Power to 
mate 
rw.. 
36 
ProVided that an Assessing Officer or a Valuation 0fBcer or an 
Assistant Director shall not-
(4) impound any books of account or other documen1:i without 
recording his reasons for so doing. or 
(b) retain in his custody any such books or doC'UlJlefttl" lor a 5 
~iod exceeding fifteen days (exclusive of holidays) ,without q~~ .. 
ing the approval of the Chief Commissioner or Director General or 
Commissioner or Director therefor, as the case may be. 
(4) Any proceeding under this Act before a wealth (inheri~) 
duty authority or the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceed- 10 
ing within the meaning of sections 19S and 228, and fo:r the purP0ae8 
of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code. 
5'1. The provisions of sections 38, 38A, 39, 40, 41, 42A, 42B, 42C, 43, 44, 
44A, 448. 44C and 44D of the Wealth-tax Act shall, BO far sa may be, 
apply for the purposes of this Act as they apply for the PUl'pOlef of the 15 
Wealth-tax Act. 
58. (1) The Board may, by notification in the 0JB.clal Gazette, make. 
rules for carrying out the provisions of thil Act. 
(2) In particular. and without prejudice to the aenerality of the f~ 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matterS. namc1y:- 2d" 
(a) the manner in which the orders relating to instructions to 
subordinate authorities shall be published. and circulated" for Jfiiiii-
.oj rat information under sUMection (2) of section 13; 
(b) the form in which returns under aection 18 8h8ll be ~ 
and the manner in which they shall be verified under that aeettOl1; " 25 
(c) the other particulars which may have to be furnished ilitbe retUm 
under lub-eectlon (4) of aection 21; 
(d) the form in which appeals unde'r sub-&eetibrl' (1) ot~: 
section (2) of section 30 ~,.. be "mad., . aDd the . mam*tn"Ilkfi'; 
~ tbI1l be ver1fltd; 10 
'IS of lNO. 

I. 
31 
(e) the form in which a. memorandum of cross'objections'under 
sUb-section (3) of section 31 shall be made and the manner in whiCh 
it shall be verified; 
(f) the fo~. in which. an appeal under sub-section (5) of section 31 
s shall be made and the manner in which it shall be verified; , 
(8) the form in which an appeal nnder section 33shaU be made and 
the manner in which it shall be verified; 
(h) the form of any notice of demand under section 39; 
(i) the form of any notice of demand under clause (c) of sub-
10 section (3) of section 44; 
(j) the form of any notice of demand under sub-section (5) of section 
48; 
(k) any other matter which by this Act is to be or may be 
prescribed. 
15 (3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include 
the power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the 
date of commencement of this Act to the rules or any of them and. 
unless the contra.ry is permitt~d (whether expressly or by necessary 
implication), no retrospective effect shall be given to any rule so as 
20 to prejudicially affect the interests of the accountable persons. 
(4) The Central Government shall cauSe every rule made under this 
Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
nf Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
25 and if before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made. the rule shall thereafter have effect oruy in such 
modified form Or be of no effect. as the case may be; so. however, that any 
30 such modifiCfltion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule. 
59. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Poww to 
Act, the Central Government may. by order, do anything not inconsis- reDIOW 
tent with such provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty: dit&uldel. 
35 Provided ·that no such order shall be made after the expiration of three years 
from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub··section (J) shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament. . __ ... 
366 LS-6. 

· ., ,.: ~' 
38 
SCHEDULJ: I 
(See section 4) 
Rates of wealth (inh~nce) duty 
." 
In the case of net wealth which passes or is deemed to have pused 
on the death of the deceased- 5 
(1) where the net wealth does 
not exceed Rs. 2,50,000 
Nil; 
2& per cent. on the amount by 
which the net wealth ex-
(2) where the net wealth 
exceeds Rs. 2.50,000 but 
does not exceed Rs. 10 
lakhs 
ceeds Rs. 2,50,000; 10 
(3) where the net wealth 
exceeds Rs. 10 lakhs but 
does not exceed Rs. 20 
lakhs 
Rs. 18,750 plus 5 per cent. of the 
amount by which the net 
wealth exceeds RI. 10 IS 
lakhs; 
(4) where the Tlet wealth 
exceeds Rs. 20 lakhs 
Rs. 68.750 plus 10 per cent. of 
the amount by which the 
net wealth exceeds Ha. 20 
lakhI. 
SCHEDULE n 
[See section 8 (1)] 
RULES FOR DETERMINING THE VALUE OF ASSETS 
The value of any asset other than cash for the purposes of this Act. 
shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Schedule III 
20 
to the Wealth-tax Act. which shall apply subject to the following modi- 25 
fications. namely:-
In the said Schedule.- .... 
(a) the reference to "valuation date", wherever it occurs, 
shall be construed as a reference to "date of death"; 
(b) for the word "assessee", wherever it occurs (except 30 
in rule 16, the ward "deceased" shall be substituted, and such 
other consequential amendments as the rule of grammar may 
require, may also be made; 
(c) reference to "wealth-tax", wherever it occurs, shall be 
construed as a reference to "wealth (inheritance) duty": 35 
(d) in rule 3. the refernce to section 7 of the Wealth-tax 
Act shall be construed as a reference to section 8 of this Act; 
(e) in sub-item (iii) of item (a) of sub-rule (2) of rule 
14, for the words "previous year relevant to the corresponding 
assessment year", the words "previous year ending on the date 40 
of death" shall be substituted; 

39 
(f) in rule 16, the reference to section 5 shall be construed 
as a reference to section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act; 
(g) rule 17 and rule 19 shall be omitted; 
(h) in rule 18 and in sub-rule (2) of rule 20, reference to 
section 16A of the Wealth-tax Act shall be constrUed as a 5 
reference to section 22 of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The levy of estate duty was abolished from the 1~th March, 1985, so 
as to avoid any stress to the heirs at the time of their personal 'distress. 
However, there is a strong case on the ground of social justice for taxing 
the transfer of wealth through inheritance. especially where the volume 
of wealth involved is large. The Bill, therefore, proposes to impose a 
duty on the net wealth passing on the death of an individual, only where 
the individual was assessable to tax under the Wealth-tax Ad, 1957 (27 
of 1957) on the last valuation date immediately prior to his death, 
2. The Bill is more or less based on the lines of the Wealth-tax Act, 
1957 and the Estate Duty Act, 1953 and has the following salient features-
(i) the "wealth (inheritance) duty" will be levied on the net 
wealth passing on the death of an individual taking place after the 
commencement of the proposed legislation i 
(ii) the interest of the deceased in the coparcenery property of 
any Hindu undivided family of which he was a member will be 
included in the net wealth; 
(iii) in computing the net wealth for the purposes of this Act, 
the exemptions and deductions including the basic exemption of 
Rs. 2.5 lakhs available under the Wealth-tax Act shall be taken into 
consideration; , 
(iv) "wealth (inheritance) duty" will be levied at progressive 
rates which will be fiVe times the rates of the wealth tax; 
(v) separate exemption up to Rs. five lakhs in respect of resi-
dential house property belonging to the deceased which was exclu-
sively used for his ,residential purposes will also be allowed subject 
to the condition that in such cases exemption relating to a house 
property which is allowed under the Wealth-tax Act along with 
other assets specified in sub-section (1A) of section 5 of that Act 
shall not be allowed: I I 
(vi) for mitigating the hat'dship which may be caused on 
account of the proposed duty in case of successive deaths in qulc~ 
suoeesslon, necessary relief is proposed. 
3. The Bill also provides for all other matter!'; relating to levv of 
interest filing of appeals rectiftcation of mistakes. recovery of duty. 
imposition of penalty and prosecution and matters relattn~ to procedure 
on the lines of the relevant prov1sions of the Wealth-tnx Act. 
NEW DELHI; S. B. CHAVAN .. 
~ 2nd Mcy, 1989 
4Q 

Mu[""/, ··.I~.>·r: --AHC::G.· •• ~~ ," , ..... , .... ~! ...... .' .... ,I .1t~.jl,'.,., •• D..a.n, ... ILYJ.~~ ..• I,.l. 'J".,. 
19:OI1\Ue"lI1o!',theiBil{ Iee)a.·~ oma ........ (1nlIeritanoe) edu1.J.reCl:tho-
ri~s I'for::die. '~II~ of,1htUldnri,ajtUation of(~ Act. ;) 
"d~.)'" ,;.; it",.(:" .~.:: _' _,:" '0;.." ·,·i,~··.· ~.q .h_ . ,I .,,'," ,-'" 
., ... ~;, the. :cr~»tion pi-ui~, :postS Qf . ?Ne&ltb',(iilh,ept80ce), dUtY'. ali,ihQrl. 
w~l.~l¥olVfl:~ 'r~,q¥i~iAi, eJpe~.6itW'p,.0!,)ts<ao.22. ~'9R:: .. ~ .~: 
allo~lill~.espf,.~~r~s;,~ ~taft::~d.(p~~~, ~tab~eDt ,.~,~ 
<\ Jloll~~~r?:ing~~J?4i,~r~.Gf ~ 9,~.~ OI\;~""~ 
etc. However. for meeting this expenditure, ~~io.a ~ ~~.~ 
provided by the Income tax Department and as such no amount sh8ll 
be IdraWlli, frGin" the eousolidated. Fund'·,ilf'lilcla.r. for i the 1..-dmt-t*tt'aUon 
clIii.the:Aott,··" • ,,~: !:,'.' '[", .';.":", !,' u 
,:,' ;. ''1.~~··I') -•. ,", _,' I ". <-~. ;'.1' J '" " •• :t- · .. '>t,:'1 
• ~>8. ;TAe FQvi~Qns :~ .tb~·~ilL~i;ij, ~t i~"o1veq:o~r .. ~ 
~,alq~e\U'dng Qtd'IQP-J:e~p'ill8t ~~Ur."" . )\". ,', (;,, '~;.: ('" 
:.~ .... { .. ,: '. ; ," O.! 
~~.:.~ •• 4~~ ;' "'~~: • .--"j.,.i ~.,7 .\.')' I<,.;):~~ -!~~·1· .~ 
.::.~.'l. ~ .~"'~.;~J 

MEMORANDUM RJlGAlU)lNG DlILBGATED LEGISLATION 
CIauJe· &8 of the Bill authorlaeBtbe Cem:Nl BMnI of Dlrect Taxes 
to make rules with leIp8Ct to matten like the manner in wbich the 
orders relating to instruction to .lUbordinate authorities shall be pub-
lished and circulated for general infonnattcm, the form in which returns 
may be made under. YJrioUB proviaions of the Aet, the form in which 
appeals should be fUid, the form in which a memorandum of crOiS ob-
jectfon under the Act shall be made and the form in which notices of 
demand should he issued. 
2. ClaUSe 59 of the BUlrelates to power to remove diftlculties. The 
provisions of the said clause empower the Central Government to make 
qrden for removing any difticulty which may arise in giving effect to 
the provtllons of the proposed legislation. It S. alao being provided that 
no such order shall be made after the expfratlon of three years from 
the date of commencement ot the propoaed legislation and every wch 
order shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
3. The matters in reapect of which the said ruJ.e. or ordel'I may be 
made are matters of procedure ad administrative detail, aDd it II DOt 
practicable to provide them in the propoaed legillatton itlelf. 
! .. ~.:. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of a duty on the inheritance of 
wealth. 
(ShoTi S. B. Chavan, 
Minister of Finance) 