Bill No. 48 of 2006
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment)
Act, 2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After Part IXA of the Constitution, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
‘PART IXB
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
243ZH. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “authorised person” means a  person referred to as such  in  article
243ZQ;
(b) “board” means the board of directors or the governing body of a co-
operative society, by whatever name called, to which the direction and control of
the management of the affairs of a society is entrusted to;
(c) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be
registered under any law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in
force in any State;
(d) “multi-State co-operative society” means a society with objects not
confined to one State and registered or deemed to be registered under any law
for the time being in force relating to such co-operatives;
(e) “office bearer” means a President, Vice-President, Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson, Secretary or Treasurer of a co-operative society and includes any
other person to be elected by the board of any co-operative society;
(f) “Registrar” means the Central Registrar appointed by the Central
Government in relation to the multi-State co-operative societies and the Registrar
for co-operative societies appointed by the State Government under the law
made by the Legislature of a State in relation to co-operative societies;
(g) “State Act” means any law made by the Legislature of a State;
(h) “State level co-operative society” means a co-operative society having
its area of operation extending to the whole of a State and defined as such in any
law made by the Legislature of a State.
243ZI. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by
law, make provisions with respect to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of
co-operative societies based on the principles of voluntary, democratic member- control,
member-economic participation and autonomous functioning.
243ZJ. (1) The board shall consist of such number of directors as may be provided
by the Legislature of a State, by law:
Provided that the maximum number of directors of a co-operative society shall
not exceed twenty-one, except in the case of a State level co-operative society.
(2) The term of office of elected members of the board and its office bearers shall
be five years from the date of election and the term of office bearers shall be co-
terminus with the term of the board:
Provided that the board may fill a casual vacancy on the board by nomination
out of the same class of members in respect of which the casual vacancy has arisen, if
the term of office of the board is less than half of its original term.
(3) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, make provisions for co-option of
persons to be members of the board having experience in the field of banking,
management, finance or specialisation in any other field relating to the objects and
activities undertaken by the co-operative society as members of the board of such
society:
Insertion of
Part IXB.
Definitions.
Incorporation
of co-operative
societies.
Number and
term of
members of
board and its
office bearers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Provided that the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed two in
addition to twenty-one directors specified in the proviso to clause (1):
Provided further that such co-opted members shall not have the right to vote in
any election of the co-operative society in their capacity as such member or to be
eligible to be elected as Vice-Chairman or Vice-President, Chairman or President of the
board.
243ZK. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law made by the
Legislature of a State, the election of a board shall be conducted before the expiry of
the term of the board so as to ensure that the newly elected board assumes office
immediately on the expiry of the term of the outgoing board:
Provided that in case the co-operative society has failed to conduct such elections
in time the Registrar or an authority or officer authorised by the Registrar shall cause
the elections to be conducted within a period of sixty days after the expiry of the term
of the outgoing board at the cost of the co-operative society.
(2) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral
rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society shall vest in the
general body of the co-operative society:
Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the procedure
and guidelines for the conduct of such elections.
243ZL. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, no board shall be superseded or kept under suspension for a period exceeding
six months:
Provided that the board may be superseded in case –
(i) of its persistent default; or
(ii) of negligence in the performance of  its duties; or
(iii)  the board has committed any act prejudicial to the interests of  the co-
operative society or its members; or
(iv) there is a stalemate in the  constitution or functions of the board; or
(v) the general body has failed to conduct the elections as per the provisions
of  article 243ZK:
Provided further that the board of any such co-operative society shall not be
superseded where there is no Government shareholding of loan or financial assistance
or any guarantee by the Government:
Provided also that in case of a co-operative society doing the business of banking,
the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 shall also apply:
Provided also that in case of a co-operative society, other than a multi-State co-
operative society, doing the business of banking, the provisions of this clause shall
have the effect as if for the words “six months”, the words “one year” had been
substituted.
(2) In case of supersession of a board, the administrator appointed to manage
the affairs of such co-operative society shall arrange for conduct of elections within
the period specified in clause (1) and hand over the management to the elected board.
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the conditions of
service of the administrator.
Election of
members of
board.
10 of 1949.
Supersession
of board and
interim
management.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
243ZM. (1) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect
to the maintenance of accounts by the co-operative societies and the auditing of such
accounts at least once in each financial year.
(2) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, lay down the minimum qualifications
and experience of auditors and auditing firms that shall be eligible for auditing the co-
operative societies.
(3) Every co-operative society shall cause to be audited by an auditor referred to
in clause (2) appointed by the general body of the co-operative society.
(4) The accounts of every co-operative society shall be audited before the expiry
of a period of six months of the financial year to which such accounts relate.
243ZN. The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions that the annual
general body meeting of every co-operative society shall be convened within a period
of six months of close of the financial year to transact the business as may be provided
in such law.
243ZO. (1) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for access to every
member of a co-operative society to the books, information and accounts of the co-
operative society kept in regular transaction of its business with such member.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions to ensure the
participation of members in the management of the co-operative society providing
minimum requirement of attending meetings by the members and utilising the minimum
level of services as may be provided in such law.
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for co-operative education
and training for its members.
243ZP. Every co-operative society shall file returns, within six months of the
close of every financial year, to the authority designated by the State Government
amongst others, the following, namely:–
(a) annual report of its activities;
(b) its audited statement of accounts;
(c) plan for surplus disposal as approved by the general body of the co-
operative society;
(d) list of amendments to the bye-laws of the co-operative society; if any;
(e) declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting and
conduct of elections when due; and
(f) any other information required by the Registrar in pursuance of any of
the provisions of the State Act.
243ZQ. (1) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for defining
the offences relating to co-operative societies and penalties for such offences.
(2) A law made by the Legislature of a State under clause (1) shall include the
commission of the following act or omission as offences, namely: –
(a) a co-operative society or an officer or member thereof wilfully making
a false return or furnishing false information, or wilfully not furnishing any
information required from him by a person authorised in this behalf;
(b) any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeys any
summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under the provisions of the
State Act;
Audit of
accounts of
co-operative
societies.
Returns.
Right of a
member to get
information.
Convening of
the general
body meetings.
Offences and
penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(c) any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a co-
operative society amount deducted by him from its employee within a period of
fourteen days from the date on which such deduction is made;
(d) any officer or custodian who wilfully fails to hand over custody of
books, accounts, documents, records, cash, security and other property
belonging to a co-operative society of which he is an officer or custodian, to an
authorised person; and
(e) whoever, before, during or after the election of members of the board or
office bearers, adopts any corrupt practice.
243ZR. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the multi-State co-operative societies
subject to the modification that any reference to “Legislature of a State”,  “State Act” or
“State Government” shall be construed as a reference to “Parliament”,  “Central Act” or “the
Central Government” respectively.
243ZS. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their
application to a Union territory, having no Legislative Assembly as if the references to the
Legislature of a State were a reference to the administrator thereof appointed under article
239 and, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative
Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the provisions of
this Part shall not apply to any Union territory or part thereof as he may specify in the
notification.
243ZT. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating to co-
operative societies in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2006, which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent
Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such
commencement, whichever is less.’.
Application
to Union
territories.
Application
to multi-State
co-operative
societies.
Continuance of
existing laws.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The co-operative sector, in spite of its voluminous growth and its contribution to
various sectors of national economy, have left much to be desired from the point of view of
safeguarding the interests of the members and fulfilment of objects for which these institutions
were organised.  Elections are often postponed indefinitely and nominated office bearers or
administrators take over, thereby reducing the accountability of the management of co-
operative societies to their members.  Unprofessional management has led to poor services
and low productivity.  Therefore, there is a need to initiate fundamental reforms to revitalise
these institutions in order to ensure their contribution in the economic development of the
country and to serve the interests of members and public at large and also to ensure their
autonomy, democratic functioning and professional management.
2. The “co-operative societies” is a subject enumerated in Entry 32 of the State List of
the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and the State Legislatures have accordingly enacted
legislations on co-operative societies.   Within the framework of State Acts, growth of co-
operatives on large-scale was envisaged as part of the efforts for securing social and economic
justice and equitable distribution of the fruits of development.  It has, however, been
experienced that in spite of considerable expansion of co-operatives, their performance in
qualitative terms has not been up to the desired level. Viewing the need for reforms in the Co-
operative Societies Acts of the States, consultations with the State Governments have been
held at several fora and in the conferences of State Co-operative Ministers.   One view that
has emerged is for amending the Constitution so as to keep the co-operatives free from
unnecessary outside interferences and also to ensure their autonomous organisational set
up and their democratic functioning.
3. The Central Government is committed to ensure that the co-operative societies in
the country are functioning in a democratic, professional, autonomous and economically
sound manner.  With a view to bring the necessary reforms, it is proposed to incorporate a
new Part in the Constitution so as to provide for certain provisions covering the vital aspects
of working of co-operative societies like democratic, autonomous and professional
functioning.  The proposed new Part in the Constitution, inter alia, seeks to empower the
Parliament in respect of multi-State co-operative societies and the State Legislatures in case
of other co-operative societies to make appropriate law laying down the following matters,
namely:—
(a) provisions for incorporation, regulation and winding up of co-operative
societies based on the principles of  democratic member-control, member-economic
participation and autonomous functioning;
(b) specifying the maximum number of  directors of  a co-operative society to be
not exceeding twenty-one members;
(c) providing for a fixed term of  five years from the date of election in respect of
the elected members of the board and its office bearers;
(d) providing for a maximum time limit of six months   during which a board of
directors of a co-operative society could be kept under suspension;
(e) providing for independent professional audit;
(f) providing for right of  information access to the members of the co-operative
societies;
(g) empowering  the State Governments  to obtain periodic reports of activities
and accounts of co-operative societies;
6

(h) providing  for offences relating to co-operative societies and penalties in
respect  of such offences.
4. It is expected that these provisions will not only ensure the autonomous and
democratic functioning of co-operatives, but also ensure the accountability of management
to the members and other stakeholders and also to provide for deterrence for violation of the
provisions of the law.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
SHARAD PAWAR.
N
EW DELHI;
15th May, 2006.
7

LOK SABHA
——————————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
—————
(Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture and  Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution )
MGIPMRND—690LS(S-5)—18.05.2006

LOK SABHA 
------  
 
 
CORRIGENDUM  
 
to  
 
 
THE  CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH  
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006 
 
 
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha] 
 
 
1. Page 1, after the title, -  
 
 
       insert           “A  
                            Bill”    
 
   
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; 
 
 May 19, 2006_________ 
Vaisakha 29, 1928 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 