1
THE MEGA PROJECTS (TIMELY COMPLETION) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI P.L. PUNIA, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for timely completion of all mega projects and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act  may be called the Mega Projects (Timely Completion)  Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) ‘mega project’ means and includes any project which has been undertaken
by the Central Government either on its own or as a joint venture with any
State Government or a Corporation or a Company or a private limited company for
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  48  of  2011
Definitions.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

setting up of any industry or construction of any dam, irrigation scheme or roads or
any communication facility or power project or any other developmental scheme for
the welfare of the public in any part of the country or where the major share of the
expenses on the project is borne by the Central Government and where the cost of
project exceeds fifty crore rupees;
(ii) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
3. The Central Government shall prepare a list of mega projects pending with all
Ministries and departments of the Central Government including public sector undertakings
under its control.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee to be known the Project
Monitoring Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to monitor the progress of
implementation and completion of mega projects.
(2) The Project Monitoring Committee shall consist of the following:—
(i) the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission who shall be the Convener of
the Committee;
(ii) Secretaries of the Central Ministries of Finance, Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises, Road Transport and Highways, Shipping, Civil Aviation, Power and
Agriculture;
(iii) any other Minister or Secretary of the Central Government or of a
State Government who may be invited by the Convener of the Committee to attend
the sittings of the Committee;
(iv) members, as may be deemed necessary, to be nominated by the
Central Government from amongst the persons who are experts in the fields of
Agriculture, Power, Water Resources, Industry, Civil Aviation, Transport and Shipping.
5.  The Committee shall review the progress of the implementation of all the
mega projects and fix a target date for completion of each of such projects.
6. The Committee shall meet once in a month and review the progress of  the work of
the pending mega projects.
7. The Central Government shall, on the basis of the recommendation of the
Committee, release necessary funds for completion of a mega project.
8. The Central Government shall ensure timely completion of all mega projects within
the time schedule fixed by the Committee:
Provided that if any mega project is not completed within the time schedule, due to
any reason beyond the control of the Central Government, the Central Government shall
record the reasons therefor.
9. If any project is not completed within the time schedule, except for the reasons
beyond control, the officer-in-charge of the mega project shall be held responsible for the
delay and shall be subject to such disciplinary action as the Central Government may think
fit:
Provided that in case the delay in the completion of the project has occurred on
account of lapse on the part of any private company, in the first instance, it shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to rupees ten lakh and in the second instance, its
licence shall be cancelled.
2
Preparation of
list of pending
mega project.
Constitution
of a Commit-
tee to be
known as the
Project
Monitoring
Committee.
Review of the
progress of
the implemen-
tation of the
mega projects
in the country.
Meeting of the
Committee.
Central
Government to
provide fund
for completion
of the mega
project.
Timely
completion of
mega projects.
Fixing
responsibility
for delay in
completion of
mega project.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
10. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a memorandum
of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, insofar as they relate to the
Central Government and the reasons for non-implementation, if any, of any of such
recommendations of the Committee to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are
received, before each House of Parliament.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to lay report
on action
taken in the
House.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Development is the buzzword today in emerging India, even as the country resolves to
build an economically stronger, more efficient set up which is devoid of bureaucratic delays.
Mega projects popularly known as infrastructure projects are started with much pomp
and show. But they are hardly completed in time. The estimated cost of projects always
overrun for the simple reason that the projects are not completed within the target date. In
many cases, the escalation in cost of projects result in manifold expenditure and loss to the
public exchequer. Time and cost overruns in projects in the environment of uncertainties,
inadequate funding, delay in land acquisition, law and order problems, general escalation in
costs, etc. are required to be eliminated altogether.
At present, there is no mechanism to supervise the progress of the completion of mega
projects. Moreover, for many projects necessary funds are not released by the Central
Government. As a result, the projects are held up.
Therefore, in order to ensure timely completion of all projects, it is proposed to provide
a mechanism at the bureaucratic level and also accountability of the executive to the legislature.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; P.L. PUNIA
August 1, 2011.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide for the setting up of a Committee to monitor the
progress of implementation and timely completion of mega projects. Most of the members on
the Committee will be Government functionaries, but a few experts in the fields of agriculture,
power, etc. are to be associated with  the Committee. Clause 7 provides for  release of
necessary funds by the Central Government for completion of all mega projects. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely
to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand crore from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty thousand crore will also be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—844LS(S3)—10-08-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for timely completion of all mega projects and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri P.L. Punia, M.P.)