THE NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
BY
SHRI VINCENT H. PALA, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the National Green Tribunal (Amendment) Act, 2014. Short title.
Bill No.  48  of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After section 14 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
"14A. Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1) of section 14, the Tribunal
shall have no jurisdiction over cases arising out of,—
(a) implementation of such matters of policy as are aimed at securing
economic welfare or security of the citizens and are the exclusive responsibility
of the Union Government; or
(b) matters that gravely affect the common man by prohibiting or denying
them to engage in employment or earn livelihood.".
Insertion of
new
section 14A.
Tribunal to
have no
jurisdiction
over matters
relating to
economic
welfare or
security.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The recent interim order of the National Green Tribunal banning the rat-hole coal
mining in the State of Meghalaya has resulted in deleterious economic consequences. The
protection of environment should not be at the cost of humanity. If there is a conflict between
livelihood of common man and protection of environment, the former has to be favoured.
Hawkish protection of environment at the cost of livelihood of children, labourers and
traditional workers is not indicative of a progressive society.
The ban on rat-hole coal mining has resulted in labourers abandoning their children or
selling them as they are no more economically capable to take care of them. Transport
industry has been stricken. Cement plants are starfed of fuel. Those who are traditionally
engaged in the mining for more than half a century stand suddenly uprooted. The recent
orders of Tribunal comes at a time when the owners and others engaged in the mining
industry are ready to be inclusive in becoming more economic-friendly. Banning the rat-hole
mining activities, without providing an alternative means for survival to thousands of labourers
is gross injustice to them.
There are also several such other orders of Courts and Tribunals which throw out of
gear the smooth progression of society in the name of dispensation of justice and strict
implementation of law. What constitutes public welfare is a subject matter of serious discourse
and demands fulfillment of legitimate expectations of common man by the State. The banning
of rat-hole coal mining in the State of Meghalaya is causing deep unrest among the owners
and miners as it is leaving them without the means of earning a livelihood.
The jurisdiction of the Tribunal, therefore, needs to be restricted so as to prohibit it to
decide on cases which if upheld by it would result in denial to a considerable number of
citizens the right to earn their livelihood.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINCENT H. PALA
June 26, 2014.

GMGIPMRND—759LS(S3)—01-07-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010.
————
(Shri Vincent H. Pala, M.P.)