1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution ( Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2)  It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Constitution,—
(1) Part IVA and article 51A thereunder shall be re-numbered, as Part IIA and
article 11A, respectively; and
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 48 of  2008
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of Part IVA.
5

2
(2) after article 11A, as so re-numbered, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
"11B. (1) A person making and subscribing oath or affirmation under this
Constitution or holding a public office shall observe the aforesaid fundamental
duties more meticulously than other citizens.
(2) The Supreme Court or the High Courts may take cognizance of specific
violation of any of the aforesaid fundamental duties or of the oath or affirmation
made and subscribed under this Constitution on a petition and issue appropriate
directives or orders.".
Duty of
persons
subscribing
oath or
affirmation to
the
Constitution
and holding
public offices.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is facing many challenges today in the form of erosion of ethical values and
weakening of commitments to duties which are so vital for a civil society, inspite of progress
and developments made in almost all fields. This is well reflected in the growing rate of crimes
and violence which is posing a threat to the unity and the integrity of the country.
The reason behind this alarming state of affairs in the country is the rapid decline of
credibility of the basic institutions and the overt and covert behaviour of persons holding
responsible positions and whom ordinary citizens accept as role models. This has necessitated
reiteration of the close casual relationship between rights and duties of not merely the
ordinary citizens, but more importantly of those who are engaged in the service of the
people.
It is worth mentioning that a new Part IV A with a new article 51A on Fundamental
Duties was added to the Constitution of India, by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976 (which came into force on 3rd January, 1977), which enumerates certain duties on
citizens of India.
Growing consciousness of rights sans realization of corresponding duties is leading
to unwarranted frustration and social tension. Equally alarming is the growing public
perception that persons holding public office take oath or affirmation of allegiance to the
Constitution of India, but violate the same with impunity, thereby creating a privileged class,
rendering 'Right to Equality' enshrined in article 14 of the Constitution redundant. The
proposed amendments to the Constitution seek to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
April 30, 2008.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
* * * * * * *
PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the
people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities;
to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers and wildlife, and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity
so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his
child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
* * * * * * *
Fundamental
duties.
4

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2341LS(S5)—09-09-2009.