1
THE  SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
JHARKHAND BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes of citizens and for the development, exploitation and proper
utilization of its resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Jharkhand
Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
Bill No. 48 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Jharkhand to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Union Government for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Classes of citizens and for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the
resources in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Jharkhand.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Jharkhand is socially and economically backward. The problems of poverty,
unemployment and illiteracy are required to be addressed urgently and in a time-bound
manner. Besides measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of weaker sections in
the region and initiating new development schemes are required to be undertaken in an
expeditious and time-bound manner. The State of Jharkhand has also been facing the problem
of naxalite violence for a number of years. In view of its economic backwardness, the naxalites
have found sympathetic elements within the population. Therefore, economic backwardness
is the root cause of the naxalite problem. It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government
should provide special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand for its all-round
development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the development and
exploitation of its vast natural resources which include coal, iron ore, manganese and
strategically important resources such as uranium. Such a step of providing financial
assistance to the State would go a long way in building this nation more and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
February 10, 2015

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law
provide, as special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand to meet the costs of such
schemes of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the
Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Jharkhand as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Central Government are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Jharkhand for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Classes of citizens and for the development, exploitation and
proper utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4756LS(S3)—02-03-2015.