 Bill No. 48 of 2023
THE CENTRAL SANSKRIT UNIVERSITIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
SHRI RA VI K ISHAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Sanskrit Universities
(Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the First Schedule to the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020, in
entry 2, under the heading “Name of the Campus”, after item (b), the following
item shall be inserted, namely:–
“(c) Gorakhpur Campus”.
Short title
and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Amendment of
the First
Schedule.
5 of 2020
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Sanskrit language represents the soul of India. It has been the
vehicle of Indian thoughts for millions. Sanskrit contains literature of
exemplary value and the finest Indian minds found the expression in it.
Sanskrit is not only mother of different Indian languages but also of some
foreign languages.
In a situation where the new generation is running away from its own
roots and has developed contempt for the cultural traditions of our country,
the importance of teaching Sanskrit becomes crucial. The time has come when
we must make sincere efforts to make the new generation aware of the great
traditions and thoughts of India. It is important to highlight here that relation
between Sanskrit language and Indian scheduled and non-scheduled languages
are symbiotic in nature and as a result, development of Sanskrit means
development of other languages also.
The Government has enacted the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020
to establish and incorporate Universities for teaching and research in Sanskrit
and develop all-inclusive Sanskrit promotional activities. Under the said Act,
the Lucknow Campus and the Ganganath Jha campus of the Central Sanskrit
University has been established in respect of the State of Uttar Pradesh.
However, the need has been felt to establish the campus in Gorakhpur district
to enable the propagation and teaching of Sanskrit in the Gorakhpur and nearby
districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Central Sanskrit Universities Act,
2020 with a view to establish a campus of the Central Sanskrit University at
Gorakhpur in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                                       RA VI KISHAN
January 24, 2023.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to establish a campus of the Central Sanskrit
University at Gorakhpur in the State of Uttar Pradesh. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred
crore will be involved per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to
be involved.
3

4
ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL SANSKRIT UNIVERSITIES
ACT, 2020]
(ACT NO. 5 OF 2020)
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
  [See section 3(1)(a)]
Serial No. Name of the State Name of the Campus
(1) (2) (3)
1. * *
2. Uttar Pradesh (a) Lucknow Campus
(b) Ganganath Jha Campus
* * * * *

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to amend the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020.
————
(Shri Ravi Kishan, M.P .)