1
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION (AMENDMENT)
 BILL, 2016
By
SHRI Y. V.  SUBBA REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment)
Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 48 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  In section 46 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, (hereinafter referred
as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), after the words "backward areas", the words "including
Prakasam district" shall be submitted.
3. In section 94 of the principle Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(2) The Central Government shall support the programmes for the development
of backward areas, particularly the areas comprising the district of Prakasam, in the
successor States, including expansion of physical and social infrastructure for a
period of 20 years.".
Amendment
of section 46.
Amendment
of section 94.
5
 6 of 2014.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Prakasam district was formed by merging the most backward areas from Kurnool,
Guntur and Nellore districts of the State of Andhra Pradesh with the sole objective to
develop these backward areas by taking Prakasam district as a unit. But, unfortunately,
nothing has been done since its formation in 1972.
Even after nearly four and a half decades of its existence, Prakasam is still one of the
districts in the country facing acute drinking water problem. Forty-eight out of fifty-six
Mandals are affected with Fluorosis. This district is a part of Red Corridor. There is no
perennial river. It is irony that there is no IIT or IIM or Central University or even
Government Engineering College or University to say the least. The district has only one
four lane road which is NH-5 and two lane roads are rare in the district.
Prakasam being the drought-prone, only tobacco can be grown as no other crop is
suitable to the soil of the region. There is no basic infrastructure, not even a Port inspite
of having huge coastline and no airport also. There are no major industries which otherwise
would have provided employment to the people of this area.
Due to this, there have been persistent demands to declare Prakasam as backward
district. But, even when number of backward districts increased to 250, shockingly,
Prakasam has not been considered.
In view of this, it is proposed to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act,
2014 to include Prakasam as a backward district under section 46 to give statutory backing
to this district for development package on the lines of KBK districts in Odisha and
Bundelkhand in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh which will help in improving the living
conditions of the people of Prakasam. The Bill also seeks to amend section 94 of the Act
so as to include Prakasam district along with other identified districts in the successor
States of Andhra Pradesh for its development through fiscal incentives and other
programmes of the Central Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; Y . V . SUBBA REDDY
February 8, 2016.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to include Prakasam district along with other identified
districts in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh for its development through fiscal
incentives and other programmes of the Centre. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from Consolidated Fund of India. An annual recurring expenditure of rupees
fifty crore would be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2014
(6 OF 2014)
* * * * * *
46. (2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Central Government may,
having regard to the resources available to the successor State of Andhra Pradesh, make
appropriate grants and also ensure that adequate benefits and incentives in the form of
special development package are given to the backward areas of that State.
* * * * * *
94. (2) The Central Government shall support the programmes for the development
of backward areas in the successor States, including expansion of physical and social
infrastructure.
* * * * * *
Distribution of
revenues.
Fiscal
measures
including tax
incentives.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
————
(Shri Y.V . Subba Reddy, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4254L(S3)—1.03.2016.