1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
By
SHRI KIREN RIJIJU , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
2. For article 371H of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
“371H. Notwithstanding anything in the Constitution, the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh shall consist of not less than sixty
members.”.
Short title.
Special
provision
with respect
to the State
of Arunachal
Pradesh.
Bill No. 48 of 2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Substitution
of new
article for
article 371H.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Arunachal Pradesh is different from other border States of the country in
the sense that even though economically backward, it is one of the most peaceful States of
the country. As per existing constitutional provisions, the Governor of the State has been
vested with special discretionary powers of overruling the decisions of the State Government.
This is not in accordance with the democratic principles as the State Government is elected
by the people. Because of the two centres of power in the State the development projects
aimed at overall development of the State are not cleared or are cleared after long delays. It
also hampers the smooth functioning of the State Government. This is affecting the
development of the State and hampering the democratic aspirations of the people of
Arunachal Pradesh and may result in discontent among the people. Therefore, it is in the
best interests of the State that the special powers of the Governor is done away with and
State Government put on equal footing vis-a-vis other States. Besides, in the year 1990, on
persistent demand of the people of Arunachal Pradesh, the total membership in the Legislative
Assembly was raised from thirty to sixty. However, the same is not reflected in the
Constitution. Therefore, the Bill seeks to replace the figure 'thirty' with 'sixty'.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIREN RIJIJU
April 18, 2007.
2

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*******
371H. Notwithstanding anything in the Constitution,—
(a) the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall have special responsibility with
respect to law and order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh and in the discharge of his
functions in relation thereto, the Governor shall, after consulting the Council of
Ministers, exercise his individual judgment as to the action to be taken:
Provided that if any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as
respects which the Governor is under this clause required to act in the exercise of his
individual judgment, the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and
the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called in question on the
ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in the exercise of his individual
judgment:
Provided further that if the President on receipt of a report from the Governor or
otherwise is safisfied that it is no longer necessary for the Governor to have special
responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, he may
by order direct that the Governor shall cease to have such responsibility with effect
from such date as may be specified in the order;
(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh shall consist of
not less than thirty members.
*******
Special
provision
with respect
to the State
of Arunachal
Pradesh.

LOK   SALOK  SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kiren Rijiju, M.P. )
MGIPMRND—1615LS(S5)—25-04-2007.