1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE COMPULSORY FIRST-AID TRAINING IN SCHOOLS BILL, 2018
By
SHRI SHIVAJI ADHALRAO PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory first aid training to students in schools in the country.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India
 as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory First-Aid Training in Schools Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Bill No. 48 of  2018
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "first-aid" means emergency care or treatment given to an ill or injured person
before regular medical aid may be obtained;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "school" means—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate
Government or a local authority or a Non-Governmental Organisation; or
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its
expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority or a
Non-Governmental Organisation; or
(iii) an educational institution managed by a private entity, society or a
trust,
which imparts education at elementary, secondary or senior secondary level.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, training of first-aid shall be compulsorily imparted in all schools.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, include compulsory First-Aid training in
theory and practical of the curriculum from ninth to the twelfth standard irrespective of
stream of study selected by the student.
(2) The appropriate Government shall evaluate the curriculum regarding first-aid training
from time to time and also issue necessary directions to schools within its jurisdiction.
5. The appropriate Government shall issue certificates to all students who successfully
complete first-aid training.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments of carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
7. The Central Government shall issue such directions to the State Government or, as
the case may be, the local authority, as it may deem fit for the purposes of implementation of
the provisions of this Act.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rules made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Compulsory
training of
First-Aid in
schools.
Compulsory
First-Aid
training.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
Certificates.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to issue
directions.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Thousands of lives in our country are lost every year, due to lack of trained and skillful
citizens for providing medical First-Aid to victims of accidents and absence of primary
healthcare system in many parts of the country. Accidents and emergency situations are not
always completely preventable or unavoidable. In some situations if the patients do not
receive basic first-aid immediately their situation may deteriorate rapidly. Without proper
First-Aid, a simple injury could become severe and in some cases fatalities can occur as a
result of lack of immediate medical treatment.
A trained and skillful person in providing medical first-aid becomes more than just
another bystander, but extends life saving support not only to a victim, but also helps the
professional emergency responders and medical practitioners.
In its most basic form, First-Aid is the initial assistance given to a victim of injury or
illness. Basic First-Aid knowledge is comprised of relatively simple techniques and procedures
that can be performed with limited equipment and is typically carried out until professional
medical assistance arrives. First-Aid can and often lessens the severity of an emergency in
a given time and place. By being able to provide basic care one can stabilize a patient until
emergency medical services arrives. First-Aid Training teaches how to use basic household
items as tools if a first-aid kit is not available. While it is natural for most of us to rush to
support any injured person, a trained person is more reliable, confident and in control of
himself and his actions while in traumatic situations.
In our country, training in First-Aid has always been a neglected subject. If compulsory
First-Aid training is given to students, a wide population of our country shall become trained
in providing First-Aid services and many lives will be saved in emergency situations.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; SHIV AJI ADHALRAO PATIL
January 17, 2018.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for inclusion of First-Aid training compulsorily in school
curriculum from ninth to twelfth standard. Clause 5 provides for the Central Government to
issue certificates to all students who have successfully completed First-Aid Training. Clause  6
provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The expenditure relating to State Governments
shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of States concerned. The expenditure in
relation to Union Territories shall be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crores may involve as recurring expenditure per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crores is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory first aid training to students in schools in the country.
————
(Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4091LS(S3)—19-02-2018.