Short title and 
commencement.
5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 48 of 2024
THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT 
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Shri C.N. Annadurai, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 

2
2. In Section 3 of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, –
“(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “one hundred days”, the words “two 
hundred and fifty days” shall be substituted ; and 
(b)  for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–
(2) Every person who has done the work given to him shall be entitled 
to receive wages at the rate of rupees seven hundred for each day of work or 
at such wage rate for each day of work as may be determined, whichever is 
higher.”.
 
Amendment of 
section 3.
42 of 2005.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 is a social 
security legislation that provides employment for rural population and ensuring minimum 
number of employment days.
We all are aware that India is a Welfare State and Indian Constitution itself stipulates 
desirable implementation of the provision of Directive Principle of State Policy as enshrined 
in Part-IV of the Constitution. Even in Fundamental Rights as enshrined Part-III provides 
the right to a decent living, which is not possible without adequate means of living with 
gainful employment. 
The number of working days and wages being given under the Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act is at present very less. Keeping in view, the 
current rate of inflation, the wages needs to be enhanced to an amount of rupees seven 
hundred per day and also there is need to enhance the number of days of employment under 
the Act to two hundred and fifty days. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                                    C. N. ANNADURAI 
July 3, 2024

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for increasing the number of days of employment of the 
registered persons from one hundred days to two hundred and fifty days under the Act. It 
also provides for ensuring minimum wage of registered persons to rupees seven hundred 
for each day of work. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten 
lakh crore per annum is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
.
4

ANNEXURE
[Extract from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural  
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005.]
(42 of 2005)
*            *             *                     *  *
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural area in the 
State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose 
adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days of 
such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act.
(2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall be entitled 
to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work.
*            *             *                     *  *
Guarantee 
of rural 
employment to 
households.
5

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment  
Guarantee Act, 2005.
_______ 
(Shri C.N. Annadurai, M.P .) 