Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
  
Bill No. 48 of 2025
THE UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE BILL, 2025
By 
Sඁඋං Aඇൺඇൽ Bඁൺൽൺඎඋංൺ, M.P.
ൺ 
BILL
to provide for unemployment allowance to all unemployed 
persons and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
 Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:–
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Unemployment Allowance Act, 2025.
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act; and 
(b) “unemployed person” means a  person above the age of eighteen years 
having no source of livelihood.
Short title and 
commencement.
Definitions.
5

5
3. (1) Every unemployed person shall be entitled to receive such monthly 
unemployment allowance, at such rate, as may be prescribed, till the time he is 
provided with gainful employment.
(2) While fixing the rate of unemployment allowance, the appropriate 
Government shall take into account age, educational qualifications technical 
skills, physical disabilities and such other factors, as it may deem necessary:
Provided that different rates of unemployment allowance may be prescribed 
for different categories of persons and for persons living in different States or 
parts of States.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by law by 
Parliament in this behalf, provide adequate funds to State Government for the 
purpose of payment of unemployment allowance to unemployed persons in the 
States. 
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
2
Unemployment 
allowance to 
unemployed 
persons.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Power to make 
rules.
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 There are a large number of unemployed persons in the country, even after getting 
educational qualifications, a good number of youth are not getting employment.
 It is therefore, proposed that all unemployed youth be entitled to unemployment 
allowance till they get gainful employment.
 Hence, this Bill.
 N ൾඐDൾඅඁං;                                            ANAND BHADAURIA
February 21, 2025
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every unemployed person shall be entitled 
to receive monthly unemployment allowance as the appropriate Government 
may fix after taking into consideration certain factors.  Clause 4 provides that the 
Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for 
payment of unemployment allowance to unemployed persons in the States. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is estimated that a sum of about rupees one thousand crore  will be involved 
as recurring expenditure per annum. 
 No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
 
5

LOK SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to provide for unemployment allowance to all unemployed 
persons and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
 
(Shri Anand Bhadauria, MP)