     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 48 of 2022
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI APARUPA PODDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 88 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to
as the Code) the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—
“Provided that nothing in this section shall exempt teachers, parents
or caregivers from liability of having committed an offence by using force or
Short title
and
commencement.
5
.
Amendment
of section 88.
10

inflicting any punishment, physical or mental, that has the potential of causing
harm to the child under eighteen years of age, physically or emotionally.”.
3. In section 89 of the Code,—
(i) for the words, “benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or of
unsound mind,”, the words, “benefit of a child under eighteen years of age, or
of a person of unsound mind,” shall be substituted; and
(ii) after the fourth proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Fifthly.—That this exception shall not exempt teachers, parents
or caregivers from liability of having committed an offence by using
force or inflicting any punishment, physical or mental, that has the
potential of causing harm to the child, physically or emotionally.”.
5
10
Amendment of
section 89.
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child defines
corporal punishment as “any punishment in which physical force is used and
intended to cause some degree of pain or discomfort, however light”. Such
punishments commonly range from hitting a child with a hand such as
smacking, slapping, spanking, shaking, etc. or equipment such as a whip,
stick, belt, etc. It may also include forcing children to stay in uncomfortable
positions, belittling, humiliating or denigrating them, etc.
Corporal punishment, commonly understood in the context of a teacher
and student, also extends to caretakers in alternative care institutions such
as orphanages, juvenile homes, foster care homes, hostels, etc. and parents.
By virtue of the quasi-parental authority they enjoy, they find themselves in
the position to educate, and often, discipline the child using any means they
see fit. Under the garb of getting disciplined, children are punished.
Punishments, both violent and non-violent, have gruesome impact upon the
mental and physical well-being of a child.
The UNICEF has found that around 60 per cent. of children between
2 to 14 years of age experience corporal punishment at the hands of their
caregivers. The World Health Organization has found that corporal punishment
defeats the goals it sets to achieve, by triggering harmful psychological and
physiological responses. Apart from the obvious physical harms caused due
to violent or strenuous punishment, such children are far more likely to
experience issues such as depression, anxiety low self-esteem, alcohol and
drug dependency, feelings of hostility, delinquency and increased
aggressiveness, all of which continue to into adulthood.
Article 39(e) and 39(f) of the Constitution of India direct the State to
ensure that the tender age of children is not abused and they are allowed
to develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of dignity. Article 21 of the
Constitution further guarantees to all a life of dignity, one that is robbed
from victims of corporal punishment, who have to go through physical
violence and denigration, that is most often public. The Committee on the
Rights of the Child has iterated by way of General Comment No. 8 that
upholding the right of the child to protection from corporal punishment and
other cruel or degrading forms of punishment is an obligation of all State
Parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, India being one of
them.
While many statutes at present attempt to abolish corporal punishment,
there exists a lacuna, leaving sections 88 and 89 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860 as the only applicable law. Section 17 of the Right of Children to Free
and Compulsory Education, 2009 makes corporal punishment, both physical
and mental, a punishable offence but applies only to children ages 6 to 14
years. This means that all children are not being equally protected against
corporal punishment, violating Article 14.
3

The Guidelines for Eliminating Corporal Punishment in Schools released
by the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights also acknowledge
the contribution of Sections 88 and 89 in enabling corporal punishments. In
many cases such as M. Natesan vs. State of Madras and Anr. AIR 1962
Mad. 216, Ganesh Chandra Saha vs. Jiw Raj Somani AIR 1985 Cal. 32,
Abdul Vaheed vs. State of Kerala 2005 CriLJ 2054, these sections have
been utilized by teachers to escape the liability of corporal punishment. Such
a benefit has also been extended to teachers in the recently concluded case
of Ambika S. Nagal vs. State of Himachal Pradesh CRMMO No. 331 of
2018.
The objective of this Bill is, therefore, to protect our children from
corporal punishments, by taking away the immunity that Sections 88 and 89
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 grant to its perpetrators. It is only by doing
so the responsibility of taking necessary precautions to ensure that no child
is subjected to any physical or mental harassment and is disciplined only
through positive engagement that is cast on the State by the National Policy
for Children 2013 and the Draft National Plan of Action for Children, 2016
can be fulfilled completely.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;            APARUPA PODDAR
16 February, 2022.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
* * * * *
88. Nothing, which is not intented to cause death, is an offence by
reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to
cause, or be known by the doer to be likely to cause, to any person for
whose benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a consent,
whether express or implied, to suffer that harm, or to take the risk of that
harm.
* * * * *
89. Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under
twelve years of age, or of unsound mind, by or by consent, either express or
implied, of the guardian or other person having lawful charge of that person,
is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the
doer to cause or be known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person:
Provided—
Provisos. First.—That this exception shall not extend to the intentional
causing of death, or to the attempting to cause death;
Secondly.—That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything
which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose
other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous
disease or infirmity;
Thirdly.—That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary causing
of grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause grievous hurt, unless it be for
the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous
disease or infirmity;
Fourthly.—That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of
any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
* * * * *
5
Act not
intended to
cause death,
done by
consent in
good faith for
p e r s o n ’ s
benefit.
Act don e in
good faith for
benefit of
child or insane
person, by or
by consent of
guardian.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
 further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shrimati Aparupa Poddar, M.P .)