1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF SANSKRIT LANGUAGE IN
SCHOOLS  BILL, 2017
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PA TIL M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory language in schools.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Sanskrit Language in
Schools Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 48 of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, the Sanskrit language shall be taught in every school as a compulsory
subject up to eighth standard in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue direction for teaching of Sanskrit language as a compulsory subject
upto eighth standard in every school within its jurisdiction.
5. The Central Government and the State Governments shall equally share the
expenditure likely to be incurred on the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Teaching of
Sanskrit as a
compulsory
language in
schools.
Definitions.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
teaching of
Sanskrit
language in
schools.
Expenditure
to be shared
by Central
Government
and State
Governments.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Sanskrit, the mother of all Indo-Aryan languages, which has also helped in
development and enrichment of almost all languages across the globe is fighting a tough
battle in its own country of origin i.e. India. The language, acknowledged and documented
to be the most structured and scientific language in the entire world, and which was once
the lingua-franca, has now been reduced to a vanishing minority with just about 14,000
speakers left, across a country of over 1.2 billion population.
India's official education policy specifically mentions that facilities for the intensive
study of Sanskrit have to be encouraged. Still, the apathy, neglect and propaganda against
Sanskrit went on to such an extent that the Supreme Court of India had to intervene in 1994
to declare that Sanskrit had to be a part of education. However, the various States of India
are still disadvantaging, discouraging and discriminating with teaching of Sanskrit language
at school, college and University level.
It is absolutely essential that Sanskrit be taught as language in all schools and
institutions of higher learning. State must ensure that institutions of higher learning produce
good Sanskrit teachers and that all vacancies of Sanskrit teachers in schools are filled-up
immediately.
It is highly deplorable that such a language which has a vast literature is being
neglected in its own country. It is high time now to make sincere efforts to increase awareness
in the younger generation about the importance of Sanskrit. Teaching of Sanskrit as a
compulsory language in schools at least upto eighth standard will enable the younger
generation to enrich their personality and to be aware of the noble traditions and thoughts
of India which would help them become better citizens.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
February 23, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the total expenditure incurred on teaching of Sanskrit
as a compulsory language in every school upto eighth standard shall be borne equally by
the Central Government and the State Governments. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Although, the exact amount of
expenditure cannot be estimated, however, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure of
about twenty crore rupees per annum is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the teaching of Sanskrit as a compulsory language in schools.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4821LS(S3)—16-03-2017.