Bill No. 19 of 19s! (fiJ 
THE BO~1BAY, CALCUTTA AND 
MADRAS PORT TRUSTS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL,I9SB 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No. 49 of 19S8 
THE BOMBAY, CALCUTTA AND MADRAS PORT 
TRUSTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to a.mend t~ Bomba.y Port Trust Act, 1879, the Ca.lcutta 
Port Act, 1890, and the Madra.s Port Trust Act, 1905. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Bombay, Calcutta and Madras Port Short title. 
Trusts (Amendment) Act, 1958. 
5 2. After section 42K of the Bombay Port Trust Act, 1879, 
following section shall be inserted, namely:-
the Insertion or 
r>ew section 
42KK in 
Bombay Act 
TO 
IS 
6 of 1879. 
"42KK. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act Power of 
or in any other law for the time being in force, the Board may, Bboard to orrow 
with the previous sanction of the Central Government and on money from 
such terms and conditions as may be approved by that Govern- the'olnntaler-lilt! 
ment, raise for the general purposes of this Act loans in any Bank for Re-
currency or currencies from the International Bank for Re- :d8b~::;" 
construction and Development or from any other bank or insti- ment or other 
tution in any country outside India; and no other provision of ~~~i~~. fD8ti-
this Part shall apply to or in relation to any such loan unless the 
terms and conditions of the loan or the approval thereof by the 
Central Government shall otherwise provide.". 

Insertion of 
new section 
27KK in 
Bengal Act 
3 of 1890· 
Power of 
Comn iSliion-
ers to b rrow 
money 
from the 
Inte-. natioruol 
Bank for Re-
constructi· n 
and Deve1op-
:nent or other 
foreign insti-
tutions. 
2 
3. In the Calcutta Port Act, 1890, after section 27K, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"27KK. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or 
in any other law for the time being in force, the Commissioners 
in meeting may, with the previous sanction of the Central Gov- 5 
ernment and on such terms and conditions as may be approved 
by that Government. raise for the purposes of this Act loans 
in any currency or currencies from the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development or from any other bank or 
institution in any country outside India; and no other provi- 10 
sion of this Chapter shall apply to or in relation to any such 
loan unless the terms and conditions of the loan or the appro-
val thereof by the Central Government shall otherwise pro-
vide.". 
Insenion of 4. In the Madras Port Trust Act, 1905, after section 72A, the fol- 15 
new ~ection lowing section shall be inserted, namely:-
72B In MId-
raa AQ 2 
of 19)5. 
Pow. of 
Boa d to 
borlow 
m.>, ey from 
th~ Inter-
1111 ional Bank 
for Recons-
truction and 
Development 
or.other 
foreign inati-
tutions. 
"72B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in 
any other law for the time being in force, the Board may, with 
the previous sanction of the Central Government and on such 
terms and conditions as may be approved by that Government, 20 
raise for the purposes of this Act loans in any currency or cur-
rencies from the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development or from any other bank or institution in any 
country outside India; and no other provision of this Chapter 
shall apply to or in relation to any such loan unless the terms 25 
and conditions of the loan or the approval thereof by the Cen-
tral Government shall otherwise provide.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Doubts have arisen whether the borrowing powers of the Cal-
cutta Port Commissioners and the Madras Port Trust Board under 
the Calcutta Port Act, 1890, and the Madras Port Trust Act. 1905, res-
pectively, are adequate to enable these port authorities to obtain 
loans from institutions outside India like the International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development. Even if the power to bor-
row from such an institution can be inferred, the borrowings 
would, under the existing provisions, be subject to certain res-
trictions which are not suitable for the purpose of the loans grant-
ed by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment. The Calcutta and Madras Port Authorities have negotiated 
loans from the International Bank to cover the foreign exchange 
expenditure on their development projects. Before the loan agree-
ments can be entered into, it is necessary to place beyond doubt 
the legal competence of the port authorities to obtain loans from 
the Bank on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the 
Central Government. The Bill seeks to achieve this object. Oppor-
tunity is also being taken to amend the Bombay Port Trust Act, 
1879, for the same purpose. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 16th April. 1958. 
S. K. PATIL. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Bombay Port Trust Act, 1879, the Calcutta 
Port Act, 1890, and the Madras Port Trust Act, 1905. 
(Shri S. K. Palil, 
Minister of Transpart 
and Communications.) 