Bin No. 49 of 196' 
P; . I 4., "" " \ 
DISTRICTS EMIGRANT LABOUR (REPEAL) 
BILL, 1966 
~ 
BILL 
for the repeal of the Tea Districts Emigrant Labour Act, 
1932, and fOT matters connected therewith. 
'enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
of India as follows:-
Act may be called the Tea Districts Emigrant Labour Short title. 
) Act, 1966. 
Tea Districts Emigrant Labour Act, 1932, is hereby repeal- ~~f~~l ~i 
1932 • 
,otwithstanding the repeal of the Tea Districts Emigrant S3\'ings. 
,Act, 1932, by section 2, and notwithstanding anything to the 
" contained in the said Act,-
:., (a) every emigrant labourer in whose case, on the 3rd day 
". August, 1960, a period of three years from the date of his 
~).ry into Assam had not expired, 

2 
(b) every emigrant labourer entering Assam on or aJ 
the 3rd day of August, 1960, being the date of the Agreem 
arrived at at the Ninth Session of the Industrial Committee 
Plantations, and before the commencement of this Act, and' 
(c) every emigrant labourer who is in Assam immediat 
before the commencement of this Act and whose right of 
patriation has not been waived or forfeited by a greemetit l 
otherwise under any provisions of the said Act, 
~ 
shall, as from the date of expiry of a period of three years It 
the date of his entry into Assam, whether such expiry occurs bd 
or after the commencement of this Act, have the right to be rej 
riated, and may be repatriated, under the said Act, as if it hadi 
been repealed and the provisions of the said Act in so far as tI 
relate to the enforcement of the right of -repatriation of emi~ 
labourers shall continue to apply as if for the references thereii.i 
the Controller, references to the State Government of Assam] 
an officer authorised by that Government in this behalf had ~ 
substituted: ~ 
j 
Provided that no such emigrant labourer shall have the righl 
be so repatriated unles~ he makes an application in this beh~ 
.~ 
(a) within a period of six months from the commence~ 
of this Act, where the aforesaid period of three years has e~ 
ed before such commencement, or ~ 
(b) within a period of six months after such commenceme 
where the aforesaid period of three years expires after ~. 
commencement. 1 
, 

:t STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
~ i)e Tea Districts Emigrant Labour Act, 1932 regulates recruit-
~i'Of workers for tea gardens in Assam from outside the State and 
. Tepatriation. Experience gained in the working of the Act for 
'. few years has shown that it is no longer necessary to con-
in existence the pattern of assisted emigrant labour, for tea 
in Assam, as conditions which justified the introduction of 
"l1enle about thirty years ago, have greatly altered during the 
BYIII;&U>'6 period. It is, therefore, }1roposed to repeaJ this Act. 
"I!I1IQW!U functions after the repeaI of the Act that may be leit 
proposed to be entrusted to the Government of Assam by 
'an express provision to that effect in the repealing Act. 
JAGJIVAN RAM . 
.... ,."'I:'· .. Tm'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
of letter No. 61 15/65-PL, dated the 21st July, 1966 from 
. agjivan Ram, Minister of Labour, Employment and Rehabilita-
the Secretary Lok Sabhal. 
President having been Wonned of the subject matter of the 
provide for the repeal of the Tea Districts Emigrant Labour 
""6t;~"'. and for matters connected therewith, recommends the 
. of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under article 117 (1) of'the 
lltitution of India. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
.1 
The repeal of the Tea Districts Emigrant Labour Act, 1932'i w' 
entail abolition of a cess known as Emigrant Labour Cess leviaq' 
under section 5 of that Act. The cess is payable in respect of 
entry into Assam of each assisted emigrant as defined in section 2 ( . , 
of that Act by the employing interest on whose behalf he is t, I 
cruited. The proceeQ~ of t~e cess are credited to a f4Dd called . 
Emigrant Labour Fund which is utilised for qlesting expendit 
on the Organisation of Conkoller of Emigrant Labour and for ~ 
ministering the A~t. With the repeal of the Tea Districts Emigr. 
Labour Act, the Organisation of the Controller of Emigr~t La~q 
will be wound up and so there will be no need for the levy of 
Emigrant Labour Cess. After the repeal of the Act, any resid 
functions that may be left over will be entrusted to the GovernIW! 
of Assam but this will not entail any expenditure from the Can 
lidated Fund of India. 

LOR SABHA 
• 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the repeal of the Tea Districts Emigrant Lab 
Act, 1932, and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Jagji'()(ltJ Ram, 
Minister 0/ Labour, Employmenl 
and Rehabilitation) 