As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA olt 
BIU No. 49 of I"S 
THE PAYMENT OF BONUS BILL, 1965 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and application. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Establishments to include departments, undertakings and 
branches. 
4. Computation of gross profits. 
5. Computation of available surplus. 
6. Sums deductible from gross profits. 
7. Calculation of direct tax payable by th£.· employer. 
8. Eligibility for bonus. 
9. Disqualification for bonus. 
10. Payment of minimum bonus. 
11. Payment of maximum bonus. 
12. Calculation of bonus with respect to certain employees. 
13. Proportionate reduction of bonus in certain cases. 
14. Computation of number of working days. 
15. Set on and set off of allocable surplus. 
16. Special provisions with resped to certain establishments. 
17. Adjustment of customary or interim bonus against bonus 
payable under the Act. 
18. Deduction of certain amounts from bonus payable under the 
Act. 
19. Time-limit for payment of bonus. 
20. Application of Act to establishments in public sector in eel'-
taincases. 
21. Recove·ry of bonus due from an employer. 
22. Reference of disputes' under the Act. 
(i) 

CLAUSES 
23. Presumption about accuracy of balance sheet and profit and 
loss account of corporations and companies. 
24. Audited accounts of banking companies not to be questioned. 
25. Audit of accounts o.f employers, not be1ng corporations or 
co~anies. 
26. Maintenance of registers, records, etc. 
27. Inspectors. 
28. Penalty. 
29. Offences by companies. 
30. Cognizance of offences. 
31. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
32. Act not to apply to certain classes of employees. 
33. Act to apply to certain pending disputes regarding payment 
of bonus. 
34. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act 
35. Saving. 
36. Power of e'Xemption. 
37. Power to remove difficulties. 
38. Power to make rules. 
39. Application of certain laws not barred. 
40. Repeal and saving. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THmD SCHEDULE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. 

BID No. 19 of I"S 
~ 
THE PAYMENT OF BONUS BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the payment of bonus to perso71.8 employed in certczin 
establishments a.nd for" ma.tters connected thereWith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the RepubUc 
of India as follows:- . 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965. Short tide. 
cztcDt IDd 
(2) It extends to the whole of India: except the State of Jammu application. 
5 and Kashmir. 
(3) Save as otherwise provic!ed in this Act, it shrrU apply to-
(a) every factory; and 
(b) every other establishment in which twenty or more per-
sons are employed on any day during an accounting year. 
10 (4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this 
Act shall, in relation to a factory or other establishment to which 
this Act applies, have effect in respect of the accounting year com-
mencing on any day in the year 196~ and in respect' of every sub 
sequent accounting year. 

2 
(5) An esta'blishment to which this Act applies under clause (b) 
of sub-section (3) shall continue to be governed by this Act notwith-
standing that the number of persons employed therein falls bE'low 
twenty. ,- ; ~-. J. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "accounting year" means-
(i) in relation to a corporation, the year ending on the 
day on which the books and accounts of the aorporatlon are 
to be closed and balanced; .. 
s 
(ii) in relation to a company, the period in respect of 10 
which any profit and loss account of the company laid before 
It in annual general meeting is made up, whether that 
period is a year or not; 
(iii) in any other J1se-
(a) the year commencing on the 1st day of April; or IS 
(b) if the accounts of an establishment maintained 
by the employer thereof are closed and balanced on 
any day other than the 31st day of March, then, at the 
option of the employer, the year ending on the day 
on which Itr accounts are so closed and balanced: 20 
Provided that an option once exercised by the 
emplojer und~r .paragrnph (b) of this. Sub~lause shall 
not again be exerci~d except with the previous per-
mission in writing of the prescribed authority and upon 
such conditions as that· authority may think fit; IS 
.(2)· uagricultural income" sballhave the same meaning- as 
in the Income-tax Act; . 
. - .. (3) "agriccltural -income-t"ax la~" means any l~w·· for- the 
time being in force relating to the levy ot· tax on . agrlcu1tutal 
~~; ~ 
(4) "allocable surplus" means-
(a) in relation to an employer, being a company (other 
than a banking company) which has not made the arrange-
ments prescribed under the Income-tax Act for the declara-
tion and payment within India of the dividends payable out 3~ 
of its profits in accordance with the provisions of section 
194 of that Act, sixty-seven per cent. of the avaiJable surplus 
in an accounting year; 
I (b) in any other case, sixty per .. cent. of such available 
\ surplus, . 1 4Q 
and includes any amount treated as such under sub-..section (~~ 
of section 34; -: -- . 

14 at '94' ... -----
s 
10 
14 of '941. 
IS 
10 of 1949· 20 
38 of 19S9. 
25 
I of 19S6. 
a of 191Z. 30 
14 of 1963. 
.7 of 1964. 
35 
3 
(5) "appropriate Goveaunent" means-
(i) in relation to an establishment in respect of which 
~e appropriate Government under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, is the Central Government, the Central 
Government; 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Govern-
ment of the State in which that other establishment is 
situate; 
(6) "available surplus" means the available surplus comput-
ed under section 5: 
(7) "award" means an interim or a final determination of 
any industrial c:lispute (ft!"-Ot'·any question relating tberetcJ. by any 
Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Tribunal constitut-
ed under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or by any other 
authority constituted under any corresponding law relating to 
Investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in a 
State and includes an arbitration award made under section lOA 
of that Act or under that law; 
(8) "banking company" means a banking company as defined 
in section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, and includes the 
State Bank of India, any subsidiary bank as defined in the 
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, and any other 
banking institution which may be notified in this behalf by the 
Central Government; ,.., 
(9) "company" means any company as defined in section 3 of 
the Companies Act. 1956. and includes a foreign company within 
the meaning of section 59-1 of that Act; 
, C4!1) "co-operaIive society" means a society registered or 
'deemed to' be registered under the C(H)perative Societies Act, 
1912, or any other law for the time being in force in any State 
.. rela.ting to co-operative societies; 
(11) "corporation" means any body corporate established by 
or under any Central, Provincial or State Act but does not include 
a company or a co-operative society; 
(12) "direct tax" means-
• (a) any tax chargeable under-
(i) the Income-tax Act; 
(ii) the Super Profits Tax Act, 196:t; 
(iii) the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964; 
(iv) the agricultural income-tax law; and 
(b) any other tax which, having regard to its nature or 
incidence, may be declared by the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, to be a direct tax for the 
purpos~ Qf this Act; 

," 
(13) "employee" mean§'iany person (other than an apprentice) 
employed on a salary or wage not exceeding one thousand and 
six hundred rupees per mensem in any industry to do any skilled 
or unskilled manual, supervisory, managerial, administrative, 
technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms S 
of employment be express or implied; 
(14) "employer" includes-
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, 
the owner or occupie'r of the factory, including the grant of 
such owner or occupier, the legal representative of a deceased 10 
owner or occupier and where a person has been named as a 
manager of the factory under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of 
section 7 of the Factories Act, 1948, the person so named; and 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the person 
who, or the 3uthority which, has the ultimate control over 15 
the &iffairs of the establishment and where .. the said affairs are 
entrusted to a manager, managing director or managing 
agent, such manager, managing director or managing agent; 
(15) Ilestablishment in private sector" means any establish-
ment other than an establishment in public sector; 20 
e 
(16) "establishment in public sector" means an establishment 
owned, controlled or managed by-
(a) a Government company as defined in section 617 of 
the Companies Act, 1956; 
(b) a corporation in which not less than forty percent. 2S 
of its capital is held (whether singly or taken together) by-
(i) the Government; or 
(ii) the Reserve Bank of India; or 
(iii) a corporation owned by the Government or the 
Reserve Bank of India; 30 
(17) "factory" shall have the same meaning as in clause (m) 
of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948; 
en) "gross profits" means the gross profits c'3lculated under 
IeCtion 4; 
(1~) "Income-tax Art" means the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
• 
I of 1",-
.' . 
63 of 1'4L 

24 of 1947. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
I. 
{' { 
(20) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(21) "salary or wage" means all remuneration (other than 
remuneration in respect of over-time work) capable of beini ex-
pressed in terms of money, which would, if the terms of employ-
ment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payuble to an employee 
in respect of his employment or of work done in such employ-
ment and includes dearness allowance (that is to say, all cash 
payments, by whatever name called, paid to an employee on 
account of a rise in the cost of living), but does not include-
(i) any other allowance which the employee 13 for the 
time being entitled to; 
(ii) the value of any house accommodation or of supply 
of light, water, medical attendance or other amenity or of 
any service or of any concessional supply of foodgrains or 
ather articles; 
(iii) any travelling concession; 
(iv) any bonus (including incentive, production and 
attendance bonus); 
(v) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to 
any pension fund of provident fund or for the benefit of the 
employee:otlnder any law for the time being in force; 
(vi) any retrenchment compensation Or any gratuity or 
other retirement benefit payable to the employee or any 
ex gra.tia payment made to him; 
(vii) any commission payable to the employee. 
Explanation.-Where an employee is given in lieu of the 
whole or part of the salary or wage payable to him, free food 
allowance or free food by his employer, such food allowance or 
the value of such food shall, for the purpose of this clause, be 
deemed to form part of the salary or wage of such employee; 
(22) words and expressions used but not defined in this 
Act and defined in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
3S 3. Where an establishment consists of different departments or EatabUah-
undertakings or has branches, whether situated in the same place or :ce;:eto 
in difterent places, ell such departments or undertakings or branches depart-
shall be treated as parts of the same establishment for the purpose :'ne::'kinp 
of computation of bonus unde·r this Act: b~ea. 
40 Provided that where for any accounting year a separate balance-
sheet and profit ond loss account are prepared and maintained in 

Compu tatiOD 
afpot. 
profitt. 
e 
respect of any such department or undertaking or branch, then, such 
depar~~!nt or undertaking or branch shall be treated as a separate 
establishment for the purpose of computation of bonus imder this 
Act for that year, unless such department or undertaking or 
branch was, immediately before the commencement of that account- S 
ing year treated as part of the establishment for the purpose of 
computation of bonus. . 
4. The gross profits derived by an employer from an establishment 
in respect of any accounting year shall-
.r;......-'_,.-' (4) in the case of a banking' company, be calculated in the 10 
manner specified in the First Schedule; 
(b) in any other case, 'be calculated in the manner specified 
in the Second Schedule. 
Computation 5. The available surplus in respect of any accounting year shan 
af available be the gross profits for that year after deducting therefrom the sums IS turpiua. 
Sumt 
deductible 
from aro •• 
profits. 
referred to in section 6. 
6. The following sums shall be deducted from the gross profits as 
prior charges, namely:-
I 
(4) any amount by way of depreciation admissible in accord-
ance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 32 of the 20 
Income-tax Act, or in accordance with the provisions of the agri-
cultural income-tax law, as the case may be: 
Provided that where an employer has been paying bonus to 
his employees under a settlement or an award or agreement 
made before the 29th May, 1965, and subsisting on that date 25 
after deducting from the gross profits notional normal deprecia-
tion, then, the amount of depreciation to be deducted under this 
clause shall, at the option of such employer (such option to be 
exercised once and within one year from that date) continue to 
be such notional normal depreciation; 30 
(b) any amount by way of development rebate or develop-
ment allowance which the employer is entitled to deduct from 
his income under the Income-tax Act; 
(c) subject to the provisions of section 7, any direct tax which 
the employer is liable to pay for the accounting year In respect of 3S 
his income, profits and gains during that year; 

o .f 196.5. 
7 
(d) such further sums as are specified in r~spect of the 
employer in the Third Schedule. 
1. For the purpose of clause (c) of section 6, any direct tax payableCa1culatiea 
by the employer for any accounting year shall, subject to the follow-~ dtt;blt 
.sing provisions, be calculated at the rates applicable to the income ofb, ;... 
th 1 e .. p ... ~. 
10 
e emp oyer for that year, namely:-
(4) in calculating such tax no account shall be taken of-
(i) any loss incurred by the employer in respect of any 
previous accounting yejJ.:..ind carried forward under any law 
for ~he time being in force relating to direct taxes; 
(ii) any arrears of depreciation which the employer il 
entitled to add to the amount of the allowance for deprecia-
tion for any following accounting year or years under sub-
section (2) of section 32 of the Income-taK Act; 
(iii) any exemption ~onfcrred on the employer under sec-
tion 84 of the Income-tax Act or of any deduction to which he 
is entitled under sub-section (1) of section 101 of that Act, as 
in force immediately before the commencement of the 
Finance Act, 1965; 
ao (b) where the employer is a religious or a charltable institu-
tion to which the provisions of section 32 do not apply and the 
whole or any part of its income is exempt from tax under the 
Income-tax Act, then, with respect to the income So exempted, 
such institution shall be treated as if it were a company in which 
as the public are substantially interested within the meaning of that 
Act; 
(c) where the employer is an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family, the tax payable by such employer under the Income-tax 
Act shall be calculated on the basis that the income derived by 
30 him fro~ the establishment is..his only income; 
(dt where the income of any employer includes any profits 
and gains derived from the export of any goods or merchandise 
out of India and any rebate on such income is allowed under any 
law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes, then, no 
35 account shall be taken of such rebate; 
(e) no account shall be taken of any rebate (other than deve-
lopment rebate or development allowance) or credit or relief or 
deduction (not hereinbefore mentioned in this section) in the 
payment of any direct tax allowed under any law for the fune 

" \. 8 
being in ferce relating to direct taxes or under the relevant 
a~n~al FinBl!~~_~ct,for the development of any industry. 
8. Every employee shall be entitled to be paid by his employer in 
an accounting year, bonus, in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act, provided he has worked in the establishment for not less S 
than thirty working days in that year. 
~qualifica. 9. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, an lion for . bonus. employee shall be dIsqualified from recE·iving bonus under this 
Payment of 
nUnimum 
Itonus. 
Act, if he is dismiUed from service ifor-
(4) fraud; or 10 
(b) riotous or violent behaviour while on the plemises of the 
establishment; or 
(c) theft, misappropriation or sabotage of any property of the 
establishment. . 
10. Every employer shall be bound to pay to every employee who IS 
has worked in the establishment for all the working days in an 
accounting year a minimum bonus which shaH be four per cent. of 
the salary or wage or-the employee for the accounting year or forty 
rupees, whichever is higher, whelher there are profits in the account-
ing year or not: ao 
Provided that where such employee has not completed fifteen years 
of age at the bf"ginning of the accounting year, the provisions of this 
section shall have effect in relation to such employee as if for the 
words "forty rupees", the words "twenty-five rupees" were substituted. 
Payment of 11. (1) Where in respect of ~my accounting year the allocable 25 
lUXimum bonus. surplus exceeds the amount of minimum bonus payable to the 
.. employees under seMion 10, the employer shall, in lieu of such mini· 
mum bonus, be bound to pay to every employee who has work-
ed in the establishment for all the working days in the accounting 
year bonus which shall be an amount in proportion to the salary or 30 
wage of the employee ,for the accounting year subject to a maximum 
of twenty per cent. of such salary or wage. 
(2) In computing the allocable surplus under this section, the 
amount set on or the amount set off under the provisions of section 15 
shall be taken into account in accordance with the provisions of that 35 
aediOl1. 

9 
:12. Where the salary or wage of an employee exceeds seven hun- CIlc:uIatiM 
elred and ~ty rupees per mensem, the ·bonus payable to such employee ~~ 
under section ~O or, as the case may be, under section 11, shall be =: 
calculated as if his salary or wage were seven hundred and ftfty employeee. 
S rupees per mensem. 
. 13. Where ~ employee has not worked for all the working days PlOpordaa-
In any accountmg year, the mnount of bonus to which he shall be~:J: of 
entitled under section 10 or, as the case may be under section 11 boa1ll ill 
shall be proportionately reduced. ' , = 
10 14. In computing for the purposes of sections 10, Il and 13 the ComputldcNa 
number ~days on which an employees has worked in' an establish- 0ee D~~ 
of 1946. 15 
of 1947. 
20 
t '. 0 ~.~ 
men In any accountmg year, the days on which- cia,.. .. 
(a) he has been laid ofT under an agreement or as permitted 
by standing orders under the Industrial Employment (Standing 
Orders) Act, 1946, Or under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or 
under any other law applicable to the establishment· , 
(b) he has been on leave with salary or wage; 
(C) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused 
by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment; 
and 
(d) tn, employee has been 011 maternity leave with salary or 
wage, 
during the accounting year shall be included. 
15. (1) Where for any accounting year the allocable surplus exceeds· Set 0; -rs 
25 the amount of maximum bonus payable to the employees in the ~b': 
establishment under section 11, then, the excess shall, subject to a lurplUl. 
limit of twenty per cent. of the total salary or wage of the employees 
employed in the establishment in that accounting year, be carried 
forward for being set on in the succeeding accounting yE1U' and 80 
30 on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year to be uWised 
for the purpose of payment of bonus in the manner illustrated in 
the Fourth S'chedule. 
(2) Where for any accounting year, there is no available s1,;rplus 
or the allocable surplus in respect of that year fells short of the 
3S amount of minimum bonus payable to the employees in the estab-
lishment under section 10, and there is no amount or sufficient amount 
carried forward and set on under sub-section (1) which could be 
utilised for the purpose of payment of the minimum bonus, then, such 
minimum amount or the deficiency, as the case may be, shall be 
40 carried forward for being set off in the succeeding ~(!counting. year and 

V\' , 
Spedal 
~ 
=~e:c' atabliah-
menll. 
... 
10 
10 on U" to ~. I . .. ana mc USlve of the fourth accounting year in the manner 
JllU'st11ded in the Fourth Schedule. 
(3) The principle of set on and set off as illustrated in the Fourth 
Schedule shall apply to all other cases not covered by sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2) for the purpose of payment of bonus under this S 
Act. 
(4) Where in any accounting year any amount has been carried for-
ward and set on or set off under this section, then. in calculating 
bonus for the succeeding accountin~ year, the amount of set on or 
set off carried f<>.r~ard from the earliest accounting year shall first 10 
·be taken into account. 
16. (1) Where an establishment is newly set uP. whether before 
or after the COmmE'IlCement of this Act, the employees of such 
establishment shall be entitled to be paid bonus under this Act only-
(a) from the accounting year in which the employer derives IS 
profit from such establishment; or 
(b) from the I)ixth accounting year followin~ the accounting 
year in which the employer sells the goods produced or manu-
factured by him or renders services, as the case may be, from 
such establishment, 20 
whichever is earlier: 
Provided that in the case of any such establishment the employees 
thereof shall not, save as otherwise provided in section 33, be entitl-
ed to be paid bonus under this Act in respect of any accounting 
year prior to the accounting year commE'ncing on any day in the year 2S 
1964. 
Explanation I.-For the purpose of this section, an establishment 
shall not be deemed to be newly set up merely by reason of a change 
in its location, management, name or ownership. 
Explanation n.-For the purpose of clause (a), an employer shall 30 
not be deemed to tmve derived profit in any accountin2 year unless-
(a) he has made provision for that year's depreciation to 
which he is entitled under the Income-tax Act or, as the case may 
be, under the agricultural income-tax law; and 
(b) the arrears of such depreciation and losses incurred by 3S 
him in respect of the establishment for the previous accounting 
years have been fully set off against his profits. 
Explanation I1I.-For the purpose of clause (b), sale of the goods 
produced or manufactured during the course of the trial run of aDY 

11 
factory or of the prospecting stage of any mine or an oil-field shall 
not be taken into consideration and where any question arises with 
regard to such production or manufacture, the decision of the appro- ... _ ..... 
priate Government, made after giving the parties a reasonable oppor-
5 tunity of representing the case, shall be final and shall not be called 
in question by any court or other authority. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as may be, 
apply to new departments or undertakings or branches set up by 
existing establishments: 
10 Provided that if an employ.er in relation to an existing establish-
ment consisting of different departments or undertakings or branches 
(whether or not in the same industry) set up at difterent periods 
has, before the 29th May, 1965, been paying bonus to the employees 
J of 1965· of all such departments or undertakings or branches irrespective 
IS of the date on which such departments or undertakings or branches 
were set up, on the basis of the consolidated profits computed in 
respect of all such departments or undertakings or branches, then, 
such employer shall be liable to pay bonus in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act to the employees of all such de·partments or 
20 undertakings or branches (whether set up before Qr after that 
date) on the basis of the consolidated profits· computed as afore-
said. 
1'7. Where in any accounting year-
(a) an employer has paid any puja bonus or other customary ~d=:,. 
25 bonus to an employee; or ~n~terim 
(b) an employer has paid a part of the bonus payable under abopiDit nus pay-
this Act to an employee before the date on which such able under 
bonus becomes payable, the Act. 
then, the employer shall be entitled to deduct the amount of bonus 
30 so paid4rom the amount of .\wnus payable by him to the employee 
under this Act in respeGt of that accounting year and the 
employee shall be entitled to receive only the balance. 
18. Where in any accounting year, an employee is found guilty of ~= 
misconduct causing financial loss to the employer, then, it shall be amounta 
35 lawful for the employer to deduct the amount of loss from the =.,toaUI 
amount of bonus payable by him to the employee· under this Act under Ihe 
in respect of that accounting year only and the employee shall be Act. 
entitled to receive the balance, if any. 

12 
1 ime-limit 19. All amounts payable to an employee by way of bonus' under 
!,ir :::=~nt this Act shall be paid in cash by his employer-
(a) where there is a dispute regarding payment of bonus 
pending before any authority under section 22, within a month 
of the settlement or award 'in respect of such dispute; 5 
(b) in any other case, within a period of eight months from 
the close of the accounting year: 
Provided that the appropriate Government or such authority ,as 
the appropriate Government may specify in this behalf may, upon 
an application made to ir'-'bythe employer and for suflici8llt reasons, 10 
by order, extend the said period of eight months to such further 
period or periods as it thinks fit; so, however, that the total period 
so extended shall not in any case exceed two years. 
Applicati\ln 20. (1) If in any accounting year an establishment in public sec-
of Act 
to establish- tor sells any goods produced or manufactured by it or renders any IS 
menta in services, in competition with an establishment in private sector, and public sec-tor in the income' from such sale or services or both is not less than twenty 
certain per cent. of the gross income of the establishment in public sector 
cases. for that year, then, the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation 
Recovery c:f 
boaUi dllf' 
from an 
employer. 
to such establishment in puillic sector as they apply in relation to a 20 
like establishmE,nt in private sector. 
(2) An establishment in public s'ector to which this Act 
applies shall continue to be governed by this Act notwith-
standing that in any subsequent accounting year its income from the 
sale of goods produced or manufactured by it or from services ren- :zS' 
dered or from both, in competition with an establishm€11t in private 
sector, falls below twenty per cent. of its gross income for that ac-
counting ~ear. 
21. Where any money is du~ to an employee by way d bonus from 
his employer under a settlement or an agreement or award, the 30 
emplbyee himself or any dther person authorised by him in writing 
in this bE'half, or in the case of the death of the employee, his 
assignee or heirs may, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovery, make an application to the appropriate Government for 
the recov£'ry of the money due to him, and if the appropriate 35 
Government or such authority as the appropriate Government may 
specify in this behalf is satisfied that any' money is so due, it shall 
issue a certificate for that amount to the Collector who shall pro-
ceed to recover the same in the same manner as an arrear of land 
revenue: 40 

13 
Provided that every such aPPlication shall be made within one 
year from the date on which the money became due to the employee 
from the employer: 0_ _ _ 
" .. Provided further that any such application may be entertained 
5 after the expiry of the said period of one year, if the appropriate 
Government is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not 
making the application within the said period 
ExpZanation.-In this section and in sections 22, 23, 24 and 25, 
.. "employee" includes a person who is entitled to the payment of bonus 
10 under this Act but who is no longer in employment. 
22. Where any dispute arises between an employer and his Reference 
I . h . . of dillputn emp oyees wIt respect to the bonus payable under thiS Act or with under the 
respect to the application of this Act to an establishment in public Act. 
sector, then, such dispute shall be deemed to be an industrial dis-
14 aC 1947. 15 pute within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or of 
any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of 
industrial disputes in force in a state and the provisions of that Act 
or, as the case may be, such law, shall, save as otherwise expressly 
provided, apply accordingly. 
14 of 1947. 
I of 1956. 
• 
20 23. (1) Where, during the course of proceedings before any arbi- Pre.umpdOll 
trator or Tribunal under the InduStrial Disputes Act, 1947, or under :.~t :ra-
any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of ~~~~ 
industrial disputes in force in a State (hereinafter in this section f:.'1t ad 
and in sections 24 and 25 referred to as the "said authority") to which of~=t 
25 any dispute of the nature specified in section 22 has tionl __ ~ 
comp~ 
been referred, the balance-sheet and the profit and loss account of an 
employer, being a corporation or a company (other than a banking 
company), duly audit€d by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India or by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of companies 
30 under sub-section (1) of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956, are 
produced before it, then, the said authority may presume the state-
ments and particulars contained m such balance-sheet and profit and 
loss account to be accurate and it shall not be necessary for the 
corporation or the company to prove the accuracy of such statements 
35 and particulars by the filing of an aftldavit or by any other mode: 
Provided that where the said authority is satisfied that the state-
ments and particulars contained in the balance-sheet or the proftt 
and loss account of the corporation or the company are not accurate, 
it may take such steps as it thinks necessary to find out the accuracy 
40 of such-statements and partioulars. 

Audited 
accounts of 
bankinl. compames 
not to be 
questioned. 
14 
(2) When an application is made to the -said authority by any 
trade union being a party to the dispute or where there 
is no trade union, by the employees being a .. party to .the _ dis-
pute, requiring any clarification relating to any item in the 
balance-sheet or the profit and loss account, it may, after satisfying S 
itself that such clarification is necessary, by order, direct the corpora-
tion or, as the case may be, the company, to furnish to the trade union 
or the employees such clarification within such time as may be 
specified in the direction and the corporation or, as the case may be, 
the company, shall comply with such direction. 10 
24. (1) Where any dispute of lI'"':rthe nature specified in 
section 22 between an employer, being a banking company, and its 
employees has been referred to the said authority under that section 
and during the course of proceedings the accounts of the banking 
company duly audited are produced before it, the said authority IS 
shall not permit any trade union or employees to question the 
correctness of such accounts, but the trade union or the employees 
may be permitted to obtain from the banking company such informa-
tion as is necessary for verifying the amount of bonus due under this 
Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall enable the trade 
union or the employees to obtain any informition which the banking 
company is not compelled to furnish under the provisions of section 
20 
34A of the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 10 of I,.,. 
Audit of 25. (1) Where any dispute of the nature specified in 25 
accounts of section 22 between an employer, not being a corporation or a company, 
~~p~;, and his employees has been referred to the said authority under that 
corporatIons section and the accounts of such employer audited by any auditor or campan-
ia. duly qualified to act as auditor of companies under sub-section (1) 
of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956, are produced before the 30 I of 19" 
said authority, the provisions of section 23, shall, so far as may be, 
apply to the accountSoso audited. '. 
(2) When the said authority finds that the accounts of such 
employer have not been audited by any such auditor and it is of 
opinion that an audit of the accounts of such employer is necessary 35 
for deciding the question referred to it, then, it may, by order, direct 
the employer to get his accounts audited within such time as may be 
speCified in the direction or within such further time as it may allow 
by such auditor or auditors as it thinks fit and thereupon the 
~101er sh~l comply with such direction. 40 

15 
(3) Where an employer fails to--get the accounts audited under 
sub-section (2) the said authority may, without prejudice to the 
provisions of section 28, get the ac~~~ts audited by such auditor or 
auditors as it thinks ftt. 
s (4) When the accounts are audited under sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) the provisions of section 23 shaU, so far as may be, apply 
to the accounts so aUdited. 
(5) The expenses of, and incidental to, any audit under sub-section 
(3) (including the remuneration of the auditor or auditors) shall be 
10 determined by the said authority (which determination shall be final) 
and paid by the employer and iltitefault of such payment shall be 
recoverable from the employer in the manner provided in section 21. 
26. Every employer shall prepare and maintain such registers, Main~. 
records and other documents in such form and in such manner as ~co~!~~: 
I S may be prescribed. 
27. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the lnapecton. 
Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors 
"or the purposes of this Act and may define the limits wHhin 
which they shall exercise jurisdiction. 
20 (2) An Inspector appointed under sub-section (1) may, for the 
.2S 
30 
3,5 
purpose of ascertaining whether any of the provisions of this 
Act has been complied with-
(a) require an employer to furnish such information as he 
may consider necessary; 
(b) at any reasonable time and with such assistance, if any, 
as he thinks fit, Enter any establishment or any premises 
connected therewith and require anyone found in 
charge thereof to produce before him for examination any 
accounts, books, registers and other documents relating to the 
employment of persons or the payment of salary or wage or 
bonus in the establishment; 
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any of 
the purposes aforesaid, the employer, his agent or servant or any 
other person found in charge of the establishment or any premises 
connected therewith or any person whom the Inspector has 
reasonable cause to believe to be or to have been an employee in 
the establishment; 
(d) make copies of, or take extracts from, any book, register 
or other document maintained in relation to the establishment: 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 

"Dllly. 
I 
OffeDces by 
companies. 
1& 
(3) EvelY IDspector shall be deemed to be--a pubUe servant within 
the meaning of the Indian Penal Code. 
(4) Any person required to produce any accounts, book, register 
or other docwnent or to give information by an Inspector 
under sub-section (1) shall be legally bound to do so. 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall enable an Inspector to 
require a banking company to furnish or disclose any statement or 
information or to produce, or give inspection of, any of its books of 
account or other documents, which a banking company cannot be 
compelled to furnish, disclose, produce Q~ ~:ve inspection of, under 10 
4S ofla~ 
the provisions of section 34A of the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 10 of 1'4'. 
28. If any person-
(4) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or 
any rule made thereunder; or 
(b) to whom a directiun is given or a requisition is made IS 
under this Act fails to comply with the direction or 
requisition, 
he shall be punishabl~ with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend 1.0 six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. ao 
29. (1) If the person committing an off~!nce under this Act 
is a company. every person who, at the time the offence was commit-
ted, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of business of the company, as well as the compdny, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded as 
aaainst and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diliience to prevent the commissioA of such offence. ,0 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under ,this Act has 'been committed by a company 
and it is proved that· the offence has been committed with the conse~t 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, iuch 3$ 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence end shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 

17 
E~lanation.-For the purposes of this seetion,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and 
finn or other association of individuals; and 
ineludel a 
(b) "director", in relation to a finn, means a partner in the 
ftnn. 
30. (1) No court shall take co~izance of any offence IJunishable Cosn'uace 
d th · A . of G«cacea. un er IS ct save on complaint made by or under the 
authority of the appropriate Government. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a presidency magi!;trate or a magis-
10 trRte of the first class shall try any ~e punishable under thi. 
Act. I . ·~'---r--l 
31. No suit, prosecution or other le~al proceeding shall lie against Protectioa 
the Government or any officer of the Government for anythfnl{ which of Ictioa 
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this :: ~d.' 
IS Act or any rule made thereunder. 
32. N athing in this Act shall apply to- Act 
not to 
(i) employees employed by any insurer carryin,rz cn general :~a to 
insurance business and the employees employed by the Life CIuICl of 
Insurance Corporation of India; employeea. 
20 44 01 19S8. (ii) seamen as defined in clause (42) of section 3 of the Mer· 
chant Shipping Act, 1958: 
9 or 1941. 
30 
(iii) employees registered or listed under any scheme made 
under the Dock Workers (Regulation 01 Employment) Act, 1948, 
and employed by registered or listed employers; __ 
(tv) employees employed by an establishment engaged in any 
industry carried on by or under the authority nf any department 
of the Central Government or a State Government or a loeal 
authority; 
(v) employees employed by-
(a) the' Indian Red Cross society or any other institution 
of a like nature (including its branches); 
(b) universities and other educational institutions; 
(e) institutions (inc1udin~ hospitals, chambers of com-
merce and social welfare institutions) p.stablished not for 
35 purposes of profit; 
(v.i) employe~s emplo;ved throu~h contractors on building 
eperattoDr. 

to 
to 
18 
(vii) employees-
(a) who have E'ntered before the 29th May, 1965, into 
any agreemen.t_ gr settlement with their employers for pay- 3 of 1~6s. 
ment of an annual bonus linked with production or pro-
ductivity in lieu of bonus based on profits; or S 
. (b) who hove (·ntered or may enter after that date 
Into any agreement or settlement with their employers for 
payment of such annual bonus in lieu of the bonus payable 
under this Act. 
for the period for which such agreement or settlement is in 10 
operation; 
(viii) employees employed by the Reserve Bank of India' 
(i,x) employees employed by- ' 
(a) the Industrial Finance Corporation of India: 
(b) any Financial Corporation established under section IS 
3, or ally Joint Financial Corpo:ation established under sec-
tion 3A, of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951; 
ee) the Deposit Insurance Corporation; 
(d) the Agricultural Refinance Corporation: 
(e) the Unit Trust of India; and 
(f) the Industrial Development Bank of India; 
(x) employees employed by any establishmEnt in public sec-
tor, save .as otherwise provided in this Act. 
20 
63 of 19,51. 
33. Where·, immediately before the 2nd September, 1964, any 
industrial dispute regarding payment of bonus relating to any 25 
accounting year, not be~ng an accounting year earlier than the accoun-
ting year ending on any day in the year 1962, was pending be{ore 
"YJ:Dent of th~ appropriate Government or before any tribunal or other autho-
rity under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or under any correos- J4 of 1947. 
ponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial 30 
disputes in a State, then, the bonus shall be payable in accordance 
with thE' provisions of this Act in relation to tb.,eaccounting year 
to which the dispute relate; and any subsequent accounting year, 
notwithstanding that in respect of that subsequent accounting year 
no such dispute was pending. 35 
Explanation.-A dispute shall be de-emed to be pending before 
the appropriate Government where no decision of that Government 
on any application made to it under the said Act or such correspon-
ding law for reference of that dispute to adjudication has been made 
or where having received the report of the Conciliation Officer (by 40 
whatever designation known) under the said Act or law, the appro-

18 
priate Government has not passed any order refusing to make such 
reference. 
34 .. (1) Save "as-otherwiseprovided in this section, the provisions Etteet 01 
of this Act shall have effe-ct notwithstanding anything inconsistent law, and 
S the~ewith contained in any other law for the time being in force ~!~-:- in 
or In the terms of any award, agreement, settlement or contract of conlis-
service made before the 29th May, 1965. tent with 
(2) If in resped of any accounting year the total bonus payable 
to all the emp~oyees in any establishment under this Act is less 
10 than the total bonus paid or payable to all the employees in that 
establishment in respe-ct of the base year undeJl lmy award, agree--
ment, settlement or contract of service, then, the employees in. the 
establishment shall be paid bonus in respect of that accounting year 
as if the allocable surplus for that accounting' ye-ar were an amount 
15 which bears the same ratio to the gross profits of the said account-
ing year as the total bonus paid or payable in respect of the base 
year bears to the gross profits of the base year: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall entitle 
any employee- to be paid bonus exceeding twenty per cent. of his 
20 salary or wage for the accounting year: 
Provided further that if in any accounting year the allocable sur-
plus computed as aforesaid exceeds the amount of'maximum bonus 
payable to the- employees in the establishment under the first pro-
viso, then, the provisions of section 15 shall, so far as may be, apply 
25 to such excess. 
Explanation I.-For the purpose of this sub-section, the total 
bonus in respect of any accounting year shall be deemed to be less 
than the total bonus paid or payable in respect of the base year if 
the ratio of bonus payable in respect of the accounting year to the 
30 gross profits of that year is less. than the ratio of bonus paid or 
payable in respect of the base year to the gross profits of that year. 
35 
\4 of 1947. 
40 
E:p1411.a.tion II.-In thi~ sub-seetion,-
(a) "base ye-ar" means--
(i) in a case where immediately before the 2nd Sep-
tember, 1964, any dispute of the nature specified in section 
33 was pending before the appropriate Government ~r before 
any tribunal or other authority under the Industrlal Dis-
putes Act 1947, or under any corresponding law relating to 
investigation ~d settlement of industrial disputes in a State, 
the accounting year immediately preceding the accounting 
year to which the dispute relates; 

tfV\ 20 
Saving. 
Power of 
exemptioD. 
Pawer to 
remove 
difficulties. 
(ii) in any other case, the period of twelve montha im-
mediately preceding the accounting year in which this Act 
becomes applicable to the establishment. , 
. (b) "gross profits" in relation to the base year or, as the case 
may be, to the accounting year, means gross profits as reduced 5 
by the direct taxes payable by the employer in respect of that 
year . 
. (3) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to pre-
clude employees employed in any establishment or class of estab-
lishments from entering into agreement with their employer for 10 
granting them an amount of bonus under a formula which is di.ff£~ 
rent from that under this Act. 
35. Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to a1!ect the 
provisions of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonu3 Schemes 
Act, 1948, or of any scheme made thereunder. 1546 of 19.8. 
36. If the appropriate Government, having regard to the financial 
position and other relevant circumstances of any establishment or 
class of establishments, is of opinion that it will not be in public 
interest to apply all or any of the provisions of this Act thereto, it 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt for such period ao 
as may be specified therein and subject to such conditions as it 
may think fit to impose, such establishment or class of £stablish-
ments from all or any of the provisions of this Act. 
-. 
37. If. any diftlculty or doubt arises in giving effeet to· the provisions 
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published 25 
in the Official Gazette, make such provision, not inconsistent with 
the purposes of this Act as appears to it to be necessary or expedient 
for the removal of the difficulty or doubt; and the order of the 
Central Government, in such cases, shall be flnal. 
p 38. (1) The Central Government may make rules for the purposes 30 
,= :... of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. 

14 of 1947. 
3 of 196". 
21 
f (2) .In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of lhf' 
. oregolDg power, such rules may provide for-
(ai the authority for granting permission under the provl8o 
to sub-clause (iii) 01 claUSe (1) of section 2; 
, (b) the preparation of registers, records and other documents 
and the form and manner in which such registers, records and 
documents may be maintained under section 26; 
IO 
(c) the powers which may be exercised ~&l Inspector under 
clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 27; 
(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total perIod of thirty days, which may be comprised 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry 
15 of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the.rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter heve effect only in such modified form or be of no eftect, 
es the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annul-
20 ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previ-
ously done under that rule. 
39. Save as otherwise expressly provided, the prOvisions of this Arc~JOD 
Act shall be in addition to and Dot in derogation of the Indus- ~_ certlaa 
1a . _w.IOI 
trial Disputes Act, 1947, or any corresponding w relatmg to mves- buzed. 
IS tigation and setUement of industrial disputes in force in a State. 
'0. (1) The payment of Bonus Ordinance, 1965, ta hereby repeal- Repeal ad 
edt SaviaI. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been 
done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 30 
29th May, 1965. 

, , 
THE FIRST SCHEDULB 
[S,. section 4 (a)] 
COMPUTATION OP GROSS PRopm 
AccountiIlg Year mding ...•.•••.••..••••• 
Item 
No. 
Particulars 
-I. Net Profit as shown in 
the Profit and Loss 
Account after making 
usual and necessary pro-
visions. 
2. Add back provision for : 
(a) Bonus. 
Amount of Amount of Remarks 
sub-items main Items 
IG. Rs. 
s 
10 
(b) Depreciation. f 5 
(c) Development Rebate Su foot-note (I) 
Reserve. 
(d) Any other reserves. S" foot-note (I) 
Total of Item No. 2 Ra. 
3. A.dd bacia also : ao 
(a) Bonus paid in l'CIpect 
of previous account-
, ina years. 
a.. $,. foot-note (I) 
(b) Donations in excess 
of the amount admis- 25 
sible for income-tax. 
,----- --'-' ----------,---
*Where the profit subject to taxation is shown in the Proftt and Lon Account and 
the provision made for taXes on incom~ is shown, the actual provi,ion for tuel on income 
,ball be deducted from the profit. 

23 
-----------_._-----
Item Particulars ~ Remarks 
_______________ No. _ .. 
Amount of. Amount of 
sub-items main Items 
h 
5 
JQ 
20 
10 of 1949. 25 
30 
,i 
3' 
(c) Capital expenditure 
(other than capital 
expenditure on scien-
tific research : which 
is allowed as a 
deduction under any 
law for the time being 
in force relating to 
direct taxes) and 
capital losses (other 
than losses on sale of 
capital assets on 
which depreciation 
has been allowed for 
income-tax) . 
(d) Any amount certified 
by the Reserve Bank 
of India in terms of 
sub-section (2) of 
section 3¢ of the 
Banking Companies 
Act, 1949· 
( e) Losses of, or. expen-
diture re1stmg to, 
any business situated 
outside India. 
Total of Item NO·3 Rs. 
4. Add also Income, pr<?fitsd or gains (if any) credlte 
directly to published or 
disclosed reserves, other 
than-
(i) capital receipts -lI!'d 
capital profits (m-
cluding profits· on 
the sale of capital 
• 
Rs. Rs. 
-----------------
$,. foot-note (I) 

24 
-----. ---- - -_._--------_.-
Item 
_No. Particulars 
assets on which de-
preciation has not 
been allowed for 
income-tax) ; 
(ii) profits of, and re-
ceipts relating to, 
any business situat-
ed outside India ; 
(iii) income of forei~ 
banking companies 
from investments 
outside India. 
Amount of Amount of Remarks 
sub-items main Items 
Rs. RI. 
s 
10 
IS 
Net total of Item No. 4 Rs. 
s. Total of Item Nos. I, 2, 3 
and 4. 
6. Deduct: 
(a) Capital receipts and 
capital profits (other 
than profits on the 
sale of assets on 
which depreciation 
has been allowed for 
income-tax). 
(b) Profits of, and re-
ceipts relating to, 
any business situated 
outside India. 
(c) Income of foreign 
banking companies 
from investments 
outside India. 
(d) Expenditure or losses 
(if any) debited di-
rectly to published 
or disclosed reserves, 
other than-
(a') capital expen-
diture and capi-
t~1 losses (other 
Rs. 
s.. foot-Dote (2) 20 
s •• foot-note (2) 
s •• foot-note (2) 
3S 
--------

7"> , 
Item 
------- No. Particulars Amount of Amount of Remarks 
sub-items main Items 
s 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
3S 
40 
than losses on sale 
of capital assets 
on which depre-
ciation has not 
been allowed for 
income-tax) ; 
(ii) losses of any 
business situated 
outside India. 
(e) In the case of 
foreign banking com-
panies proportionate 
administrative (over-
head) expenses of 
Head Office alloca-
ble to Indian busi-
ness. 
(j) Refund of any excess 
direct tax paid for 
previous accounting 
years and excess pro-
vision, if any, of 
previous accounting 
years, relating to 
bonus, depreciation, 
or development re-
bate, if written back. 
(g) Subsidy, if any, re-
ceived from Gmrern-
ment or from any 
body corporate es-
tablished by any 
law for the time being 
in force. 
Total of Item No.6 Rs. 
7. Gross Profits" for purposes"of 
bonus (Itein No. S minUs 
Item No.6). 
Ra. RI. 
See foot-note (3) 
S" foot-note (2) 
See foot-note (2) 
..-.. .. , 
, I 
Rs. 
Poo'-""~ (1) If, and to tbe eatent, chalKed to Profit and Loss ACCOUDL 
(2) If, and to the atcnt, credited to Profit and Lou AciCounL 
(3) In the proportion of Indian Gross Profit (Item Nil. 7) to Tow World Grosl Projlt 
(IS per CODIOUdatcd Profit and Lou kount, dfuated IS in Item No.3 above 
oo1y). 
" I 

24 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[Su section 4 (b)] 
COMPUTATION OF GROSS PROFITS 
A . Y d· ccountmg ear en mg ............. . 
Item 
No. 
Particulars Amount of Amount of 
sub-items main Items 
Remarb , 
I. Net Profit as per Profit and 
Loss Account. 
2. Add back provision for : 
(a) Bonus. 
(b) Depreciation. 
(c) Direct taxes, includ-
ing the provision (if 
any) for previous 
accounting years. 
(d) Development rebatel 
Development allow-
ance reserve. 
Rs. &s. 
10 
IS 
See foot-note (I) 
(e) Any other reserves. Su foot-note (I) 20 
Total of Item NO.2 Rs. 
3. Add back also : 
(a) Bonus paid in respect 
of previous account-
ing years. 
(b) Donations in excess.of 
the amount admis-
sible for income-tax. 
(c) Any annuity due, or 
commuted value of 
any annuity .p.aid, 
under the proVISIOns 
of section 280D of the 
Income-tax Act dur-
ing the accounting 
year. 
Su foot-note (I) 
----------------------------------------
25 
35 

s 
10 
15 
Item 
No. 
Particulars 
(d) Capital expenditure 
(other than capital 
expenditure on 
scientific research 
which is allowed as a 
deduction under any 
law for the time being 
in foree-··· relating to 
direct taxes) and 
capital losses (other 
than losses on sale of 
capital assets on 
which depreciation 
has been allowed for 
income-tax or agri-
cultural income-tax). 
Amount of Amount of 
sub-items main Items 
Rs. RI. 
Remarks 
Su foot-Dote (I) 
20 (e) Losses of, or expen-
-35 
diture relating to, 
any business situated 
outside India. 
Total of Item NO.3 Rs. 
4. Add also Income, profits or 
gains (if any) credited 
directly to reserves, 
other than-
(i) capital receipts and 
capital profits 
(including profits 
on the sale of capi-
tal assets "on which 
depreciation has not 
been allowed for 
income-tax t' or 
agriCUltural income-
tax); 
(ii) profits of, and re-
ceipts relating lito, 
any ;Pusiness)i~­
ted outside IndJa; 

Item 
No. 
Particulars Amount of Amount of Remarb 
8ub.-items main Items 
(iii) income of foreign 
concerns from 
investments outside 
India. 
Rs. 
Net total of Item;No. 4 Rs. 
s. Total of Item Nos. I, 2, 
3 and 4. 
6. Deduct: 
(a) Capital receipts and 
capital profits (other 
than profits on the 
sale of assets on which 
depreciation has 
been allowed for 
income-tax or agri-
cultural income-tax). 
Rs. 
Rs. 
S" foot-note (2) 
s 
10 
IS 
(b) Profits of, and receipts s •• foot-note (2) 20 
relating to, any 
business situated 
outside India. 
(e) Income of foreign 
concerns from invest-
ments outside India. 
(d) Expenditure or losses (if any) de-
bited directly to 
reserves, other than-
-------
(i) capital expendi-
ture and capital 
losses (other than 
losses on sale of 
capital assets 
on which depre-
ciation has not 
been allowed for 
30 
3S 

s 
IC 
IS 
2S 
3S 
29 
----- ---------------
Item 
No. 
Particulars Amount of Amount of Remarb 
or income-tax 
agricultural in-
come-tax) ; 
(ii) losses of any 
business situated 
outside India. 
(,) In the case of foreign 
concerns proportion-
ate administrative 
(overhead) expenses 
of Head Office allo-
cable to Indian b1,lsi-
ness. 
(f) Refund of any direct 
tax paid for previous 
accounting years and 
excess provision, if 
any, of previous ac-
counting years relat-
ing tf) bonus, depre-
ciation, taxation or 
development rebate 
or developnnent al-
lowance, if written 
back. 
(g) Subsidy, if any, re-
ceived from Govern-
nnent or fronn any 
body corporate es-
tablished by any law 
for the tiIne being in 
force. 
lub-items main Items 
RI. RI. 
Total of Item No.6. Rs. 
7. Gross Profits for purposes 
of bonus (Item No. S Rs. 
minus ItClIl No.6). ---
SIt foot-note (3) 
S,. foot-Dote (2) 
----------------------
Poot·notlS--
(I) If, and to the extent, charged to Profit and Loss Account. 
() If, and to the extent, credited to Profit and Loss Account. 
(3} In the proportion of Indian Gross Profit (Item NO.7) to Total World Groll 
Profit (as per Con~lidated Pro"t and Loss Ac:c:ount, adjusted .. ill Item No. 2 
,bove only). 

30 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[S" section 6 (d)] 
Item Category of employer 
No. Further sums to be deducted 
----------------------------------------------(I) 
----------- ----- ----------
I. Company, other than 
a banking company. 
Banking company - . 
-----------------
(i) The dividends payable on its 
preference share capital for the 
accounting year calculated at th e 
actual rate at which such dividends 
are payable ; ~ Q 
(ii) 8" per cent. of its paid up 
equity share capital as at the com· 
mencement of the accounting year; 
(iii) 6 per cent. of its reserves shown 
in its balance-sheet u at the I, 
commencement of the accounting 
year, including any profita carried 
forward from the previous ac-
counting year : 
Provided that where the employer .. 20 
a foreign company within the mean-
ing-of section S91 of the Compania 
Act, 19S6, the total amount to be lor 195'-
deducted under this Item shall be 
8·S per cent. on the aggregate of2S 
the value of the net fixed assets 
and the current assets of the 
company in India after deducting 
the amount of its current liabilitia 
(other than any amount shown u 30 
payable by the company to ita 
Head Office whether towards any 
advance made by the Head Office 
or otherwise or any interest paid 
by the company to its Head 35 
Office) in India. 
(i) The dividends payable on ita 
preference share capital for the 
accounting year calculated at the 
rate at which such dividends are 40 
payable; 
(ii) 7' 5 per cent. of its paid np 
equity share capital u at the 
commencement of the accounting 
year; 4S 
------_._-

Item Cateaory of employer 
No.--·~·--
(I) 
10 
IS 
• 0( IP"," :as 
·u 
11 
.' ( 
Further I1DDI to be deducred 
(3) 
(iii) s per cent. of its reserves mown 
in its balance-sheet u at the 
commencement of the accountinl 
year, including any profits carried 
forward from the previous accoun-
ting year ; 
(n,) any sum which. In respect of the 
~unting year, is traDaferred by 
It-
(a) to a reserve fund under 1Ub-
section (1) of section 17 of the 
Banking Companies Act. 
1949 j or 
(b) to any reserves in India In 
pursuance of any direction 
or advice liven by the 
Reserve Bank of India, 
whichever is higher : 
Provided that where the banking c0m-
pany is a foreign company within 
the meaning of section 591 of the 
Companies Act, 19S6, the amount 
to be deducted under this Item 
ahall be the agglqate of-
(.) the dividends payable to its 
preference shareholders for the 
accounting year at the rate at 
which such dividends are payable 
on such amount u beara the 
l8Dle proportion to its total pre-
ference share capital u its total 
workinl funds in India bear to 
its total world workiDa fUnds ; 
(ia) 7·5 per cent. or such amount u 
bears the I8IDe proportion to ita 
total paid up equity share capital 
u its total workinl funds in 
India bear to its total .wid 
working funds ; 
(iii) 5 per cent. of lOch ~t ., 
bears the same proportlOD to its 
total disclOled reserveI U its 
total working funds in India bear 
to ita total world workina fundi; 

Item Cateaory of employer 
--No. ---- ---------
(I) 
•. Co-Gperative lOCiety 
32, 
Purther IUID. tG be deducted 
(itJ) any sum which, in respect of the 
accounting year, iI deposited by S 
it with the Reserve Bank of India 
under sub-clause (ia1 of clause (6) 
of sub-se,ction (.3) of ~on II of 10 of 19.,. 
the Banking Companies Act, 1949, 
not esCI'ecJing the amount 10 -
required under the Iforesaid 
provision to be IC deposited. 
('1 8· s per cent. of kI paid up 
capital as at the c::ommalCC'JDellt 01 IS 
the accounting year ; 
(n) 6 per cent. of ill reserves, it 
any, shown in ill balance-sheet u 
at the commencement of the 
accounting year, including any 
profits carried forward from the so 
previous accounting year. 
(i) 8· S per cent. of the capital invested 
by such society in its establish-
ment 81 evidenced £rom its boob 
of accounts at the commencement 25 
of the accounting year ; 
(n) such sum 81 has been carried 
forward in respect of the accounting 
year to a reserve fund under any 
law relating to c:o-operative lOCieties 30 
for the time beina in forc:e. 
s. Any other employer not 8· S per cent. ot the capital invested 
falling under any of by him in hJJ establishment u 
the-c..corcsaid categOries. evidenced from hJJ boob of accounll 
... . at the commencement of the 35 
accounting year : . ~ 
Provided that where IUch employer iI a .', 
person to""-whom Oulpter XXIIA .' 
of the Income-tax .... Act appUes, the 
annuity depolit payable by him under 40 
the proviaiODl of that Cbapta"cIurlDa I 
the accountina year Ihall alIo be 
deducted : 

5 
10 
15 
25 
3S 
.' 
Item Catqory of employer 
No. 
-(I) 
·as 
Further IUIDI to be deduc:te4 
(3) 
Provided further that where IUCh 
employer is a firm, an amount equal 
to 25 per cent. of the IfOIS profitl 
derived by it from the establishment 
in respect of the accounting year 
after deducting depreciation in 
accordance with the provisioDi of 
clause (a) of section 6 by way of 
remuneration to all the partnera 
taking part in the conduct ofbuaine.t 
of the establishment Ihall also be 
deducted, but where the partnership 
agreement, whether oral or written, 
provides for the payment of re-
muneration to any such partner, and-
(i) the total remuneration payable to 
all such partners is less than the 
laid 2S per cent., the amount 
payable, subject to a maximum 
of forty-cight thousand rupees 
to each such partner ; or 
(ii) the total remuneration payable to 
all IUch partnCl'l is higher thaD 
the IBid 25 per cent., such per-
centage, or a lum calaalated at 
the rate of forty-cight thousand 
rupees to each such partncr', 
whichever is less, 
Ihall be deducted under this proviso : 
Provided also that where such ap-
ployer is an individual or a Hindu 
undivided famlly,-
'I(itan~amount equal to 25 per cent. of 
:..../the gross profia derived by ~ 
L, employer from the establiah-
. ment in respect of the acc:ountina 
r- Tear after deducting depredatioa 
r In accordance with the provilioDi 
of clause (411) of ledioD 6 ; 01' 
(Ii) lOrty-cilht thoUIIDd rupem. 
whichever iI lea, by way of .... 
DlWleration to IUda 1IDP1oJa. IhalJ 
Il1o be deduded 

Item No. Category of employer 
(I) (2) 
Further IWDI to be deducted 
(3) 
, 
- - - 6. Any employer falling under In addition to the IWDI deductible 
Item No. I or Item under In)' of the aforesaid Ieems, 
NO.3 or Item No ... or IUch IUIDI U are required to be , 
Item No. S and being a appropriated .,y the lic:eDIee in rei-
licensee within the mean- pect of the ac:countina year to a 
ing of the Electricity reserve under the Sixth Schedule to 
Supply Act, 1948. that Act ahaU also be deducted. 54 t6 ' .... 
---.--------------------------------------------------------E~lanation.-The expression "reserves" occurring in column (3) 10 
against Item Nos. l(iii), 2(iii) and 3(ii) shall Dot include any amount 
set apart for the purpose of-
t i) payment of any direct tax which, according to the 
balance-sheet, would be payable; 
(ii) meeting any depreciation admissible in accordance with I, 
the provisions of clause (a) of section 6; 
liii) payment of dividends which have been declared, 
but shall include-
(a) any amount, over and above the amount referred to In 
clause (i) of this Explanation, set apart as specific reserve for the ao 
purpose of payment of any direct tax; and 
(b) any amount set apart for meeting any depreciation iD 
excess of the amount admissible in accordance with the provisions 
of clause (a) of section 6. 
TIm FOURTH SCHEDULB 
(Su section IS) 
In this Schedule, the total amount of bonus equal to four pel' ceDt. oL 
t he annual salary or wage payable to all the employees is usumed to be 
lb. so,ooo. Accordingly, the maximum bonus to which all the employes 
arc entitled to be paid (twenty per cent. of the annual salary or wage at .u 30 
the employees) would be RI. 2,SO,ooo. 
-----------------------------------Year Amount equal Amount payable 
to sixty per as bonus 
cent. or sixty-
~:. aeveD per cent •• 
_ .. as the case 
.... ,.11 I. may be, of 
rr: .. l1Jc;availablo 
~lW'Plus 
allocable as 
"1 bonus 
(I) (a) 
Ra. 
J. 1Q,000 
~ 6.35,000 
(3) 
RI. 
70 ,0100 
2,50.000 • 
Set on or 
let oft' of 
thcyear 
carried 
forward 
(4) 
Ra. 
Nil 
Seton 
a.So,ooo· 
Total set OD 
or let off 
carried 
forward 
(5) 
RI. of (year) 
Nil 
Set OD 
a,jOPOO 00 
IS 
., 

3& 4'1 ~ ~ 
Year AmOllDt equal Amount payable Set on or Total set ott 
to sixty per as bonus aet oft' of or set Off 
cent. or sixty- the~ar carried ..,. 
seven per cent., carried forward 
• 
as the case 
may be, of 
forwll'd 
-----. 
available 
1Ul'p1us 
allocable as 
10 bonus 
(I) (2) (3) (4) (s) 
Ra. Ra. Rs. Ra. of (year) 
3· 2,30,000 2,SO,000· NU Seton 
(mclusive of 2,20,000 (3) 
IS 30,000 from year-2) 
4- • 3,75,000 2,50,000. Seton Set on 
1,25,000 2,20,000 (2~ 
~1,2S,OOO (4 
S· 1*,000 
• • Nil Seton 2,SO,000 
(inclusive of 1,10,000 1,10,000 
~~ 30 from year·2) I,2S,ooo 
6.' 3,10,000 2,5°,000. Seton Seton .. 6oPoo Nilt (2) 
I,2S,OOO 
~:~ l60,ooo 
:as 7·j l,ce,OOO 
• • Nil Seton (6) 2,SO,000 
(inclusive of Ll5.ooo 
I,2S,ooo from year-. 
and 25,000 from 
,I 
year-6) 
30 8. Nil . SO,OOO .. Set off Sct off 
(due to loss) (inJusivc of 3S,000 IS,ooo t. I 5,000 (8) 
from year-6) 
9.J .. 10,000 .,so,ooo" Set off Set off 
40.000 _IS.ooo 
~~ ~,ooo 
is 10. 2,15,000 . 1,60,000 Nil Nil 
(after settlDg oft' 
IS,ooo from year-8 
and 40,000 from 
ye&1'-9) 
NOTBS-
·Maximum. 
tTbe balance of RI. 1,10,000 act on from yeal'-3 Japeel. 
··Minimum. 
" 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A Tripartite Commission was set up by the Govemment of 
India by their Resolution No. WB-20 (9) /61 dated the 8th December, 
1961, to consider, in a comprehensive manner, the question of pay-
ment of bonus based on profits to employees employed in establish-
ments and to make recommendations to the Government. The 
Commission's Report, containing their recommendations, was 
received by the Government on the 24th January, 1964. In their Reso-
lution NCI. WB-20(3) /64 dated the 2nd September, 1964, the Govern-
ment announced acceptance of the Commission's recommendations 
subject to a few modiftcations as were mentioned. therein. With. 
view to implement the recommendations of. the Commission as 
accepted Iby the Government, the Payment of Bonus Ordinance, 
1005, was promulgated on 29th May, 1965. The object of the Bill fa 
to replace the said Ordinance. 
The notes on clauses explain the various provisions of the Bill. 
D. SANJIVAYYA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 5th August, 19G5 
,6 

J1 ota O'n. clauaea 
Clau.te 1.-Sub-claue (2): The subject-matter of the proposed 
legislation is relatable to entry 24 in the ConcWTent List. This 
entry, in so far as it relates to the State of Jammu and Kashmir is , 
applicable only with respect to labour employed in the coal-mining 
industry. Even with regard to coal-mining industry, if it is carried 
on by a company, the application of the proposed legislation will raise 
d11Bculties as the Companies Act, 1956, applies to the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir only to the extent to which the provisions of that Act 
relate to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of banking, 
insurance and financial corporations. For this reason, the Act does 
not extend to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
Sub-clauses (3) and (4) .-The provisions of the Aet appJy from 
the accounting year commencing on any day in the year, 19M, to' 
every factory; and to every other establishment in which twenty or 
more persons are employed on any day during an accounting year. 
Sub-clcruse (5) .-Provision has been made in the sub-clause to 
the e1!ect that an estabHshment to which the Act appUes shan 
continue to be governed by the Act even if the number of persons 
employed therein falls below twenty, subsequently. .' 
Cl4uae 2.-The definition of 'allocable surplus' in sub-clause (4) 
is based on the recommendation of the Bonus Commission made in 
paragraphs 9· 9 and 12· 1 of its report. 
The definition of 'employee' in sub-clause (13) is based on the 
definition of 'workman' in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, except 
that apprentices have been excluded. In accordance with the re-
eommendation of the Commission contained in paragraph 12· 7 of it! 
report, all persons drawing a salary or wage up to Rs. 1,800 per 
menaem will come within the !Cop~ of the deftnitioD of 'employee'. 
The term 'salary or wa~' hit! been deftned in su.~lause (Z1) 
keeping in view the recommendation made by the Commission in 
paragraph U'-4 of its report that bonus should be related to wages 
and dearness allowance taken togeth~r and that all other allowanees 
such as ~ver-time wages and ineentive, produetion and attendance 
bonus including attendanee bonus under ~tatutory !Jonus Schemes 
should be excluded. 
ClatIM S.-The clause pro.vide! for the payment ef bOJlu8 unit-
wiae in certain eues instead of e5tablfahment-wbe. The elause Is 
,., 

38 
based on the recommendation.made by the CommjutOD in parap'lph 
8'12 of its report. . . . 
CZauae 4.-The manner in which gross proftta derived by aD 
employer from an establishment may be ealculated has been indicat-
ed in the clause. 
Clause 6.-The clause provides for deductions of certain 81lDW 
from the gross profits as prior charges for the purpose of computing 
the available surplus. The sums so deductible are-(l) any amount 
by way of depreciation admissible under the IncOme4ax law (tnde 
paragraphs 9: 2 and g. 3 of the report of the Commission); (2) any 
development rebate or development allowance which the employer 
is entitled to deduct from his income under the wome-tax Act; 
(3) all direct taxes; and (4) the sums specified in the Third Schedule 
in respect of the varioUs categories of employers mentioned therein. 
Clauae 7.-The clause explains how the amount of direct tax 
payable by the employer shall be calculated. The provisions pro-
posed in sub-clauses (a) to (d) are based on the recommendation of 
the Commission made in paragraph 9' 5, 9- 6, g. 11 and 17· 20 of its 
report. Under sub-clause (e), any reb"ate, credit, relief, ete. allowed 
for the development of an industry shall not be takeh into account 
in the calculation of the direct tax payable by the employer. ThJs 
provision is intended to promote the development of industries. 
Clause B.-Under the clause, an employee should have worked 
in the establishment at least for thirty working days in an account-
ing year to be entitled to be paid bonus. This provision is based 
on the recommendation of the Commis~ion made in paragraph 19'14 
of its report. 
ClatJ..!e 9.-The clause provides that an employee who has heeD 
dismissed from service for fraud, riotous or violent behaviOur, theft, 
etc., shall not be entitled to receive bonus from the employer. The 
clause is based on the recommendation of the Commiasion made 
in paragraph 11' 18 of its report. 
ClatJ..!e& 10 and l1.-TMse clauses provide for the paymeJlt et 
a minimum and maximum bonus by the employer to his employees. 
Every employee who has worked in the establishment for aU the 
working days in an accounting year shan be entitied to be paid 
bonus which shall not be 1~ than four per cent. of his aJUlual 
salary or wage or ~. 40 whichever is higher, or more than 20 per 
eent. of his annual salary or wage. In the case of an employee 

, (0 
39 
under 15 years of a,e, the minimum bonus payable will be four 
~er cent. of. ~ annual saiary or wage or Rs. 25 whichever is higher. 
These prOViSIons are based on the recommendation of the Commis-
sion made in paragraph 12.5 of its report. 
Clause 12.-1n the case of an employee drawing more than 
Rs. 750 but less than Rs. 1,600 per mensem, as his salary or wage, 
the bonus (whether minimwn or maximum) payable to him, shall 
be calculated as if his salary or wage were Rs. 750 per mensem. 
The clause is based on the recommendation of the Commission made 
ill paragraph 12.7 of its report. 
Clause 13.-The clause provides for a proportionate reduction 
of bonus in cases where an employee has not worked for all the 
working days in an accounting year. A recommendation to this 
effect is contained in paragraph 12.5 of the report of the Commis-
sion. 
Clause 14.-The clause provides for the computation of the 
number of working days for the pu:rpose of calculating the minimum 
and maximum bonus payuhle to an employee. The clause is based 
on the recommendation of the Commission made in paragraph 12' ~ 
of its report and also on the provisions already existin, in the lndust-
!'ial Disputes Act, 1947. -, 
Clause 15.-In certain accounting years, some amount may be 
left in the allocable surplus after the payment of maxiwum bonua 
to all the employees. To meet ,uch cases, a prOvision for set on 
has been made in sub-clause (1). Similarly, in certain accounting 
years, there may not be any allocable surplus at all or the aUocable 
surplus may not be sufficient to pay the minimum bonus to all the 
employees. To meet such contingencies, a provision for set off has 
been made in sub-clause (2). The amounts set on or set off have to 
be carried forward in the manner illustrated in the Fourth Schedule. 
Sub-clause (4) provides that where in any accounting year any 
amount has been carried forward and set on or set off, then, in 
calculating bonus for the succeeding accounting year, the amount 
of set on or set oft brought forward from the earliest accoUDtiDi 
year shall first be taken into account. 
The provisions relating to set on and set off are based on the 
recommendation of the Commission made in paragraph 12.13 of its 
report. 

40 
Clauae 16.--Sub-clauae (1) of the clause provides for conceu1onal 
treatment to newly set up establishments in matters relating to 
payment of bonus. In the case of Dewly set up establishments 
bonus is payable only from the accounting year in which the em~ 
ployer derives profits from the establishment or from the sixth 
accounting year Ifollowing the accounting year in which the em-
ploy~ sells the goods produced or manufactured by him or renders 
sel'Vlces, as the case may be, from the establishment whichever is 
li • ear ere 
Sub-clause (2) makes the provision of sub-clause (1) applic-
able to new de'partments or undertakings set up by existing estab-
lishments. 
The clause seeks to give effect to the recommendation of the 
Commission made in paragraph 12; 9 of its report. 
Clause 17.-In paragraph 12,4 of its report, the Commission re-
commended that Puja bonus and other customary bonus, if paid, 
should be considered as bonus paid 'on account' and deducted from 
the amount finally payable as bonus. The clause is based on this 
recommendation. Provision has also been made in the clause for 
adjustment of any interim bonus paid in advance. 
Clause lB.-The clause provides that-where in any accounting 
year an employee is found guilty of misconduct causing financial 
loss to the employer, it shall be lawful for the employer to deduct 
the amount of loss from the amount of bonus payable by him to 
the employee. A recommendation to this effect has been made by 
the Commission in paragraph 19.17 of its report. 
Clause 19.-The clause provides for the payment of bonus in 
cash and the time-limit for such payment .. In cases where there is 
a dispute regarding payment of bonus, the bonus has to be paid 
within a month of the settlement or award in respect of such dis-
pute. In other cases, bonus has to be paid within a period of eight 
months from the_close of the accountiDg year. Power has been 
taken to extend, for sufficient reasons, the aforesaid period of eight 
months. 
The clause generally follows the recommendation of the Com-
mission made in paragraph 19.20 of its report. 
Clause 20,-The clause provides for the application of the bonus 
formula to those public sector undertakings -which fulfU the 20 per 
cent. compe,tition test in accordance with th~ recommendation con-
tained in paragraph 18.8 of the Commission I report. It hal also 

41 
been provided that once the bonus fotlilula fa appUed to such estab-
1ishments~ it shall continue to apply even if the 20 per cent. competi-
tion test IS .notsatisfled in any accounting year. 
Clause 21.-The clause provides for the recovery from an em-
ploy:x-. of .the amount, due to an employee by way of bonus. The 
proVISIon IS on the lines of section 33C of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947. 
Clause 22.-The clause provides that any dispute regarding the 
bonus payable under the Act or with regard to the application of 
the Act to an establishment in public sector shall be deemed tD be 
. an industrial dispute within the meaning of the Industrial Disput~ 
Act, 1947, or of any corresponding State law and the provisions of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or that State law shan a·pply to 
such dispute. 
Clause 23.-The clause provides, in accordance with the recom-
mendations made in paragraphs 19.6 and 19.7 of the Commission's 
report, that if audited balance sheets and profit and loss accounts 
of any corporation or company (other than a banking company) are 
produced in the course of proceedings before any authority to whom 
a dispute has been referred, that authority may presume the state-
ments and particulars contained in such balance-sheet and profit and 
loss account to· be accurate. Howev&l', where that authority is 
satisfied that the particulars aforesaid are not correct, it may take 
necessary steps to find out the accuracy of such statements or par-
ticulars. 
The authority may also, if it thinks necessary, require the cor-
poration or the company to furnish to the union or the employees 
any clarification required by the union or the employees relating 
to any item in the balance-sheet or the profit and loss account. 
Cla.use 24.-This clause is intended to give effect to the recom-
mendations made in paragraph 19.10 of the Commission's report, 
namely that a:udited accounts of banking companies should not be 
questioned, ·but trade unions or employees may be permitted to 
obtain information for verifying the amount of bonus. 
Clause 25.-This clause provides for the audit of accounts of aD 
employer not being a corporation or a company. Where the 
accounts 'Of such an employer duly audited by qualified auditol'l 
are produced before any authority to whom a. dispute has. been 
referred, that authority shan presume the particulars con tamed in 
such accounts to be accurate. In cases where the accounts pro-
duced are not audited by qualified auditors, that authority has beeD 

42 
given power to direct the employer to~et the accounts audited by 
qua~ed. auditors or to get the accounts audited by such auditors 
_~~ It thm~s fit. A recommendation to this effect is contained in 
paragraph 19' 8 of the Commission's report. 
Clause 26.-The clause provides for the maintenance of regis-
ters, records, etc. by the employer. 
Clause 27.-:rhe clause provides for the appointment of Ins-
pectors and the powers exercisable by Inspectors. 
Clause 28.-The clause provides for penalty for contravention of 
any of the provisions of the Act Ot..Jhel rules made thereunder or 
for non-compliance with any dIrection or requisition made under 
the Act. 
Clause 32.-The clause makes the Act inapplicable to the classes 
of employees specified in sub-clauses (i) to (x). The clause is 
based on the recommendations of the Commission contained in para-
graphs 4' 6; 15' 20; 17' 9; 17'16; 17'19 and 17' 22 of its report. Insti-
tutions like the Reserve Bank of India, Industrial Finance Corpora-
tion, etc. have also been specifically excluded from the scope of 
the Act. 
Clause 33.-The clause makes the Wovlslons of the Act ap-
plicable to certain pending disputes relating to bonus with respect 
to any accQ1,Ulting year ending on any day in the year 1962 and subse-
quent accounting years. Such disputes shall be decided in accord-
ance with the provisions of the Act. 
Clause 34.-ln certain establishments, the employees are getting 
bonus under an award, agreement, settlement or contract of service 
which would be higher than that payable under the Act. The clause 
seeks to safeguard the interest of such employees by providing that 
they would get bonus either on the existing basis or on the basis of 
the formula provided in the Act, whichever is higher. 
Provision has also been made in the clause enabling the em-
ployer and the employees to enter into an agreement with regard 
to the payment of bonus under a formula whi~h is different from 
that under the Act. 
Clause 36.-The clause empowers the appropriate Government 
to exempt for a specified period any esta~!ishment a! ~lass of estab-
lishments froin all or any of the provl~ions of the Act, if, having 
rellard to the financial position and ot~er relevant circumstancp.~ 

43 
of the establishment or class of establishments, the appropriate Gov .. 
ernment is satisfied that such exemption is necessary in pubUc in-
terest. 
The First Schedule an.d the Second Schedule.-The First Sche-
dule provides for the manner in which the gross profits of an em-
ployer, being a banking company, shall be calculated and the Second 
Schedule provides for the manner in which the gross profits of any 
other employer shall be calculated. These Schedules generally 
follow the proforma suggested by the Commission in paragraph 8.10 
of its report. 
The Third Schedule.-This idledule has reference to sub-claUle 
(d) of clause 6. . The sums deductible as prior charges· under the 
Schedule are generally on the lines suggested by the Commission 
with respect to the various categories of employers (vide paragraphs 
11: 7; 11: 8; 11'13; 11'17; 11'18; 15'11 and 17'5 of the report of the 
Commission) . 
The Fourth Schedu.le.-This Schedule follows the illustration 
given by the Commission in paragraph 12.13 of its report. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clause 22 of the Bill, any Pispute arising between an 
employer and his employees with respect to the payment of bonUJ 
under the Act or with respect to the application of the ACt to an 
establishment in public sector shall be deemed to be an industrial 
dispute and the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or 
of any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of 
industrial disputes in force in a State shall apply to such dispute. 
Clause 27 of the Bill provides for theGppointment of Inspectors. The \ 
work connected with the handling of disputes and inspectiolll, In 
so far as it relates to establishments in respect of which the Central 
Government is the appropriate Government, is proposed to be en-
trusted to the Industrial Tribunals already set up under the indus-
trial Disputes Act, 1947, and the existing staff of Chief Labour Com-
missioners' Organisation. It is difficult at present to assess precisely 
the additional work-load that may be involved. The position wUI 
be reviewed in the light of the actual working of the Act when a 
more realistic idea of the additional work-load would be avallable. 
The Bill is not likely to involve any appreCiable additional expen-
diture in the near future. 
44 

--
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 38 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying into e1fect the provisions of the Act. The matten 
in respect of which such rules may be made are specified in that 
clause. They, inter alia, relate to the authority for granting per-
mission for changing the accounting year; the preparation and main-
tenance of registers: records and other documents; and the powers 
of Inspectors. These are matt~~~ administrative procedure and 
detail. The del~gation of legislative power is thus of a normal 
character. 

, 
··r .. 
LOK~SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the payment of bonus to pc:r;;O:l1 employed in 
certain establishments and for mr.tters connected 
therewith. 
(Shri D. SanjifJayya, 
Minister of Labour & Employment.) 