THE DELHI MUNICIPAL COR.PORATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

tim No. 49 or 19fii _. -
THE DELat MUNtCIPAL CORPORATION (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, '1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi Municipal Corporation; Act, 1957. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Delhi Municipal Corporation Short title. 
(Amendment) Act,.1961. 
66 of 15151· 5 2. In section 2 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 Amendment 
(hereinafter refeITed to as the principal Act) , in clause (48), after the of section z. 
word! "made", the words "by the Corporation" shall be inserted. 
3. (1) For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section Substitution 
Ihalll be substituted, namely: - ~:C~i~'! for 
section s. 
10 "5, (1) For the purposes of election of eounc:ilIors, Delhi shall Delimitation 
be divided into sinaie-member wards. of wards. 
(2) The Central Government shall, by order in the Omcial 
o.sette, d~tennine,-
(a) the number of wards; 
(b) the extent of each ward; and 
(c:) the warda In wh1c:h seats ahaU be reserved for the 
Seheduled Cut .. ". 
(2) The provisions of section 5 of the principal Act as substituted 
by su1Hec:tlon (1) of· this section shan not apply in relation to any 
ao eleetlon to 811 a c:uual vacaDCY oecurriDI in the oftlee of a councillor 

2 
at any time before the general electioh of councillors to be held next 
after the commencement of this Act. 
AmeD4ment 4. In section 10 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) shall be omit· 
of lecUOn 10. ted. 
Amendment 5. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after item S 
ofiectiOD 31. (h), the fnllowing item shall be inserted, namely:-
"(hh) the requisitioning of premiAes, vehicles, vessels or ani-
mals, payment of compensation in connection with such requisi-
tioning, eviction· from requisitioned premises and rel'ease of pre-
mises from requisition;". 10 
~~eo~ S. In section 38 of the principal Act, for the word "Secretary", in 
lectlOD 3 • both the places where it. occurs, the words "Municipal Secret.-y" 
shall be substituted. 
Amendment 
of lCICtion 
11). 
7. In section 113 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), iii clause 
(d), for the words "or sale", the words "sale or supply" shall be IUb- IS 
stituted. 
Amendment 8. Section 119 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
of lCCtiOD section (1) of that section and- . 
lJSI· 
(a) in that sub-section as so re-numbered, in the proviso for 
the words "in this section", the words "in this sub-section" shall 30 
be substituted; . 
(b) after that sub-sectiop as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (2) Where the possession of any land or building, being 
property of the Union, has been delivered in pursuance of as 
section 20 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Reha-
bilitation) Act, 1954 to a displaced person or any association 44 of 19'''' 
of displaced persons, Whether incorporated or not, or to any 
other person (hereafter in this Bub-section and the proviso to 
sub-section (1) of section 120' referred to as the transferee), JQ 
the property taxes specified in section 114 shall be leviable 
and shall be deemed to have been leviable in respect of such 
land or building with effect from the 7th day of April, 1958 
or the date on which possel8ion thereof has been delivered 
to the transferee, whichever is later, .and such property taxes IS 
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to 
sub-section (1) of section 126 or any other provision of this 
Act, be recoverable with effect from t~at day or date, as the 
case may be.... .. 

5 
t. In section 120 of the principal Act, in sub-section 
lowing proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
(1), the fol- Amendment 
of section 
uo. 
"Provided that the property taxes in respect of land or build-
ing. being' property of the Union. possession of which has been 
delivered in pursuance of section 20 of the Displaced Persons 
(CompensatIon and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954, shall be primarily 
leviable upon the transferee.". 
to. In section '124 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3),-
Amendment 
ofaection 
124· 
IO (i) the words "and the assessments of property taxes in 
20 
25 
respect of lands and buildings" shall be omitted; 
(it) for the words "or the assessment is increased", the 
words "or the rateable value of any land or building is in-
creased" shall be substituted; . 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "aisessment or any 
other matter", the words "any other matter" and for the words 
"assessment or other matter". the words "or other matter" shall 
be substituted; • 
(c) in sub-section (6), for the words "rateable' value and 
assessment", the wOO'ds "rateable value" and for the words "rate-
able· values or assessments", the words "rateable values" shall 
be substituted. 
11:. In section 125 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of section 
(a) in clause (a), the word "and" occurring at the end shall 125· 
be omitted; 
(b) clause (b) shall be omitted. 
12. In section 126 of .the. principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the Amen~ment 
proV'iso, for the words "in which the amendment is made", the words ~i:~10n 
"in which the notice under sub-section (2) is given" shall be sub-
30 stituted. 
13. In section 127 of the principal Act, the words "and assess- Amendment 
menta" . wherever they occur shall be omitted of ae ;tion , , . 131· 
14. In section 137 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, after Ame~ent 
clause (c), the following clause shall be insEn"ted, namely:- ~~;~cuon 
3S II (d) a .cow kept for milking for domestic use if the cow is 
the only cow kept by the owner or the person having possession 
or control thereof for' such milking and is registered in accord-
ance with bye-laws made in this behalf, so, however, that where 

more cows than one are kept by several such owners or persons 
constituting a family, the tax under this section mall be levied 
in respect of all such cows.". 
Su~stitution 15. For section 164 of the principal Act, the following sectl'on shall of new scc-
tionfor sec- be SUbStituted, namely: - I 5 
tion 164. 
Remission or 
refund of tax. 
• 
"164. (1) If any building together with land appurtenant 
thereto has remained vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty 
or more consecutive days, the Commissionet shall remit or 
refund, as the case may be, two-thirds.of such portion of the 
scavenging tax, the fire tax and the general tax assessed on the 10 
rateable value thereof, as may be proportionate to the number 
of days during which the said building together with the land 
appurtenant thereto has remained vacant and unproductive of 
rent, 
(2) H any land, not being land appurtenant toa building, IS 
has remained vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more 
consecutive days, the Commissioner shall remit or refund, as the 
case may be, one-half of such portion of the scavenging tax, the 
fire tax and the general tax assessed on the rateable value thereof, 
as may be proportionate to the number of days during which the 20 
said land has remained vacant. and unproductive of rent. 
(3) If any land whether appurtenant to a building or not, or 
any building has remained vacant and unproductive of rent for 
sixty or more consecutive days, the Commissioner shall remit or 
refund, as the case may be, such portion of the W1lter tax assessed 25 
on the rateable value thereof IQS may be proportionate to the num-
ber of days during which the said land or building has remained 
vacant and unproductive of rent: 
Provided that no remission or refund of the water tax shall 
be allowed unless an application in such form as may be pres- 30 
cribed by bye-laws made in this behalf has been made to the 
Commissioner to stop th~ supply of water to such land or build-
ing or unless the Commissioner is satisfied that having regard to 
the circums1:l!inces of any case such remission or refund shou1-l 
be allowed.", ',"''7'135 
Substitution 16. For section 343 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
~i~~e;:'rs~~_ be substituted, namely: ~ 
tion 343· 
Order of 
demolition 
and stoppage 
of buildings 
and works in 
certain cases 
aftd appeal. 
"343. (1) Where the erection of any building or execution of 
any work has been commenced, or is being carried on, or has 
been completed without or contrary to the sanction referred to 40 
in section 336 or in contravention of 8IW condition subject to 
which ,uch sanctio1\ hae ~n accorded or in contraventi01\ of 

any of the provisions of this Act or bye-laws made thereunder, 
the Commissioner may, in addition to any other action that may 
be taken under this Act, make an order directing that such erec-
tion or work shall be demolished by the person at whose instance 
5 the erection or work has been commenced or is being carried on 
or has been completed, within such period, (not being less than 
five deys and more than fifteen days from the date on which a 
copy of the order of demolition with a brief statement of the 
reasons therefor has been delivered to that person) as may be 
10 specified in the order of demolition: 
15 
20 
30 
35 
PrDvided that no order of demolition shell be made unless 
the person has been given by means of a notice served in such 
manner as the Commissioner may think fit, a reasonable oppor-
tunity of shOWing cause why such order shall not be ~ade: 
Provided further that where the erection or 'work hils not 
been completed, the Commissioner may by the same order or by 
a separate order, whether made at the time of the issue of the 
notire under the first proviso or at any other time, direct the 
person to stop the erection or work until the expiry of the period 
within which an appeal against the order of demolition, if mode, 
may be preferred under sub-section (2). 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Commissioner 
made under sub-section (1) may prefer an appeal against the 
order to the court of the district judge of Delhi within ,the perjod 
specified in the order for the demolition of the erection or work 
to which it relates 1 
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under sub-seotion (2) 
against an order of demolition, the court of the district judge 
may stay the enforcement of that order on such terms, if any, and 
for such period, as it may think fit: 
Provided tha( where the erection of any building or execution 
of any work has not been completed at the time of the making 
of the order of demolition, no order staying the enforcement of 
the order of demolition shall be made by the court of the district 
judge unless secUrity, sufficient in the opinion of the court, has 
been given by the appellant for not proceeding with such erection 
or work pending the disposal of the appeal. 
(4) Save as provided in this section, no court shall enter-
tain any suit, application or other proceeding for injunction or 
other relief against the Commissioner to restrain him from taking 
any action or making any order in pursuance of the provisions 
of this sectiOft. 1 

Amendment 
of section 
344· 
Amendment 
of section 
460. 
Amendment 
of section 
479. 
Amendment 
of section 
4111. 
8 
(5) Every order made by the court of the district judge on 
appeal and subject only to such order, the order of demolition 
made by the Commis~ioner shall be final· and conclusive. ' 
(6) Where no appeal has been preferred against an order of 
demolition mede by the Commissioner under sub-section (1) or S 
wh~re an order of demolition made by the Commissioner under 
, that sub-section has been confirmed on appeal, whether with or 
without variation, the person against whom the order has been 
made shall comply with the order within the period specified 
therein, or as the case may be, within the period, if any, ,fixed by 10 
the court of the district judge on appeal and on th~ failure of 
the person to comply with the order within such period, the 
Commissioner may himself cause the erection or the work to 
which the order relatt:!s to be demolished and the expen5eS of 
such demolition shall be recoverable from such person as an IS 
atrear of tax under this Act.". 
17. In section 344 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 
words "If such order is not complied with forthwith", the words, 
figure,,; and brackets "If an order made by the Commissioner under 
section 343 or under sub-section (1) of this section directing any 2.0 
person to stop the erection of any building or execution of any work 
is not complied with," shall be substituted. 
18. In 'section 460 of the principal Act, in clause (a), after the 
word "applications", in both the places where it occurs, the word.s 
lIelection petitions," shall be inserted. 
19. In section 479 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the 
follOWing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 
soon as may be alter it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for 'a total period of'tilirty days which may 30 
be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if 
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the ses-
sion immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be mad.e, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 35 
modified fo'rm or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule.". 
20. In s(~ction 48l (If the principal Act. in sub-section (1), under 40 
the heading "D. Bye-la ,:'8 relating to transport services", in item (1), 

'1 
.fter the words lithe issue of passes", the worda lito the councillors 
and aldermen and" shall be inserted and shall be deemed always to 
have been inserted: 
Zl. In the Sixth Schedule to the principal Act, in note 3, for the Amendment 
• figures "336" the figures "337" shall be substituted of .Sixth ,J, • Scpedulc. 
10 
1.5 
22. In the Tenth Schedule to the principal Act, under the heading Amendment 
"Class VIII.-Metals and articles made of metals", in item 9, for the S~~d'::rc. 
word "betal", the word "metal" shall be substituted. 
23. In the Twelfth Schedule to the principal Act,-- Amcftdmen 
ofTweinh 
(a) against section 236; sub-section (2), in the third column, Schedule. 
the letters and figures "Rs. 100" shall be inserted and the existing • 
entry in the fourth column shall be omitted; 
(b) against section 241, in the third column, the letters and 
figures "Rs. 50" shall be inserted and the existing. entry in the 
fourth column shall be omitted; and 
(c) against section 343, in the seCC?nd column, the words "or 
erection of buildings in contravention of order" shall be added at 
the end. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Municipal Corporation of Delhi has recommended that muiti .. 
member wards for election of councillors should be replaced . by 
single-member wards. It is proposed to amend suimbly section 5 of 
the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 to give effect to this recom-
mendation. This opportunity has been availed of to propose certain 
other amendments in the Act which have been found necessary in 
the light of the expel1ience gained in the working of the Act. 
The notes on clauses explain briefly the reasons for the proposed 
amendments 1 i 
LAL BAHADUR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 5th August, 1961. 
• 

CZatLSe 3.-The clause seeks to give effect to the proposal to divide 
Delhi into single-member wards for the purposes of election of 
councillors. 
CZatLSe 5.-The proposed amendment seeks to empower specifi-
cally the Central Governmtmt to make rules relating to the tem-
porary requisition of premises, vehicles, etc., in connection with the 
municipal elections. 
Clause 7.-The proposed amendment is .intended to make it cletfr 
that the tax on the sale of electricity uhder section 113 (2) (d) of 
the Act is leviable also on electricity supplied in bulk under sec-
tions 284 and 285 of the Act to the New Delhi Municipal Committee 
and the Military Engineering Services, Delhi Cantonment. 
Clause 8.-Under the agreements executed by the transferees of 
properties included in the compensation pool under the Displaced 
P.ersons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act. 1954, possession 
thereof has been delivered to the transferees but the title will be 
transferred retrospectively only after the last instalment of the 
consideration has been paid and a conveyance is execut~. As such 
properties r~main Union properties pending the transfer of title, it 
has been held by court that the properties are exempt from property 
taxes by virtue of section 119 of the Act although· the transferees 
had undertaken to pay such taxes. Section li9 is proposed to be 
amended suitably in order to overcome this difficulty. 
Clause IO.-As property taxes are assessed on a percentage of 
the rateable value of lands and buildings, mention of the specific 
amount of assessment in addition to the rateable value thereof in 
the assessment list is considered unnecessary. Besides, it entails 
delay in publishing the assessment list and the collection cf property 
taxes. It is accordingly proposed to omit the requirement specify-
ing the amount of tax in the assessment list. 
Clause 12.-At present if an amendment of the assessment list 
Is not completed in the year in which the notice of the proposal to 
make the amendment has been issued by the CommiSSioner, the 
liability for the property taxes according to the amended list accrues 
onlv after the commencement of the year in which the amendmeut 
is ~ade. There does not appear any reasonable justificetion as ~o why 
9 

1b 
the liability to pay the property taxes in such a case should not 
accrue in the year in which the notice of the proposal is 
issued by -the Commissioner. This is sought to be done by 
the amendment proposed in the proviso' to section 126 (1). 
The amendment proposed will not take the assessee by surprise or 
in genuine cases cauSe any hardship to him as he has already been 
served with the notice of the proposal. 
Clause 14.-This amendment has been proposed in view of the 
recommendation of the Corporation that one ·cow kept for domestic 
use should be exempt from tax on animals leviable under section 
136 of the Act I 
Clause I5.-For the stabilisation of land values in Delhi, it is 
necessary to impel owners of vacant building sites to build on the 
plots instead of keeping them vacant for specUlative purposes. In 
view of the shortage of residential and commercial accommodation, 
it is also necessary to ensure that the owners do not keep their 
buildings vacant 'longer than necessary. Hence it is proposed to 
limit the refund of property taxes (other than water tax) on vacant 
lands to fifty per cent. and on vacant buildings and lands appurten-
ant thereto to 66 i per cent. 
Clause I6.-There has been a 'steep increase in unauthorised 
constructions in Delhi which, besides being a challenee to the law-
ful authority, hamper the planned development of the capital. In 
order to check any further unauthorised constructions it is proposed 
to arm the Commissioner with some additional powers by making 
suitable amendments in section 343 of the Act as proposed in this 
clause. 
Clause 18.-For the expeditious dispcsal of election petitions, it 
is proposed to enable the district judge to delegate to an additional 
distri~t judge the power to hear such petitions. 
Clause 20.-As recommended by the Corporation the proposed 
amendment seeks to empower the Corporation to make bye-laws 
providing for the issue of passes to the councillors and aldermen. 
Clauses 2, 4, 6, 9, 11, 13, 17, 19, 21, 22 and 23.-The amendments 
proposed in these cl~uses are either consequential or of a clarifiea-
tory nature. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under section 5 of the Act as prol?osed to be substituted by 
clause 3 of the Bill, the Central Government has to make a fresh 
order delimiting the single-member wards and reserving the re. 
quisite number of seats for the Scheduled Castes. The delimitation 
of single-member wards will necessitate the appointment of some 
additional clerical staff for a shQrt :Period of about two months and 
will also involve some expenditure of an incidental nature. The 
total expenditure on this account to be met out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India, would be about Rs. 2,150. 
11 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING D~LEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill which seeks to amend section 31 of the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 19~7, confers on the Central Govern-
ment specifically the power to make rules relatIng to the temporary 
requisition of premises, vehicles, etc., payment of compensation 
therefor, eviction from requisitioned premises and release of pre-
mises from requisition, in connection with the municipal elections. 
The amendment of section 481 (1) of the Act as prop~ in clause 20 
of the Bill seeks to enlarge the powers of the Corporation to make 
bylaws for the issue of passes to councillors and aldermen also. 
These are matters of details and the delegation to legislative power 
is of a nornuil character. 
12 

r ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM TUE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT, 1957 
(66 of 1957) 
• • ,., • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherw~se requires.-
• • • • 
(48) "regulation" means a regUlation made under this Act. 
by notification in the Official Gazette; 
,., ,., • ,., 
JA-flnitionl • 
5. (1) For the purposes of election of councillors Delhi shall be Delimita-
divided into multi-member wards. tion of wards. 
(2) The Central Governm~nt shall. by order in the Official 
Gazette, determine--
(a) the number of wards; 
(b) the extent of each ward: 
(c) the number of seat~ allotted td each ward: and 
(d) the number of seats, if any, reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes in each ward. • 
• • • ,., 
10. (1) • ,., ,., ,., 
(2) In every ward an elector shall have as many votes as there 
are councillors to be elected from that ward but no elector shall at 
any election give more than one vote to anyone candidate. 
• • ,., • 
Right to 
vote. 
38. (1) The Mayor may. by writing under his hand addressed to Resignation 
the Deputy Mayor and delivered to the Secretary. resign his office. OfdMaD' yor • an eputy 
(2) The Deputy Mayor may, by writing under his hand address- Muyor. 
ed to the Mayor and delivered to the Secretary, resign his office . 
• • • • .. 
13 

14 
Taxes to be 113. (1) • • • • 
imposed by . 
the Corpora- (2) In addition to the taxes specified in sub-section (1)", the Cor-
~~~ &~er poration may, for the purposes of this Act, levy any of the follow· 
ing taxes, namely:-
Taxation of. 
Union pro-
perties. 
Assessment 
list. 
• * • • 
(d) a tax on the consumption or sale .of 'electricity; 
• • • • 
119. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing pro-
visions of this Chapter, lands and buildings being properties of the 
Union shall be exempt from the property taxes specified in section 
114: 
Provided that nothing in th.is section shall prevent the Corpora-
tion from levying any of the said taxes on such lands and buildings 
to which immediately before the. 26th January, 1950, they were 
liable or treated as liable, so long as that tax continues to be levied 
by the Corporation on other lands and buildings. 
• • • • 
124. • • * • 
(3) The Commissioner shall, at the same time, give public notice 
of a date. not less than one month thereafter, when he will proceed 
to consider the rateable v.alues of lands and buildings and the assess-
ments of property taxes in respect of lands and buildings, entered 
in the assessment list, and in all cases in which any land or building 
is for the first time assessed, or the assessment is increased, he shall 
also give written notic' thereof to the owner or to any lessee or 
occupier of the land or building. 
(4) Any objection to a rateable value or assessment or any other 
matter as entered in the assessment list shall be made in writing to 
the Commissioner before the date fixed in the notice and shall state 
in what respect the rateable value, assessment or other matter is 
disputed, and all objections so made shall be recorded in a register 
to be kept for the purpose. 
* • • • 
(6) When all objections have been disposed of, and the revision 
of the rateable value and assessment has been completed, the 
assessment list shall be authenticated by the signature of the Com-
missioner or, as the case may be, the officer authorised by him in 
this behalf, who shall c;ertify that except in the cases, if any, in 
which amendment:; have been made as shown therein no valid 

15 
objection has been made to the rateable values or assessments or 
any other matters entered in the said list . 
• • • • • 
125. Subject to such alterations as may thereafter be made in Evidential· 
the aSsessment list under section 126 and to the result of any appeal ::~~s~m~~t 
made under the provisions of this Act, the entries in the assessment ilst. 
list authenticated and deposited as provided in seCtion 124 shall be 
accepted as conclusive evidence-
(a) for the purpose of assessing any tax levied under this 
Act, of the r.ateable value of all lands and buildings to which 
such entries respectively relate; and 
(b) for the purposes of any tax levied on lands or buildings, 
of .the amount of each such tax leviable thereon during the year 
to which such list relates. 
126. (1) The Commissioner may, at any time, amend the assess- Amendment . . ot assess-
ment hst, ment list . 
• • • • • 
Provided that no person shall by reason of any such amendment 
become liable to pay any tax or increase of tax in respect of any 
period prior to the commencement of the year in which the amend-
ment is made1 
.. .. .. .. 
127. It shall be in the discretion of the Commissioner to prepare Preparation 
for the whole or any part of Delhi a new assessment list every year ~:9::':n~s­
or to adopt the rateable values and assessments contained in the list list. 
for any year, with such alterations as may in particular cases be 
deemed necessary, as the rateable values and assessments for the 
year following, giving the same public notice as well as individual 
notices, to persons affected by such alterations, of the rateable values 
and asseSsments ·as it a new assessment list had been prepared . 
• • • • • 
164. If any land or building has remained vacant and unproduc- Rem'ission or 
tive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days, the Commissioner refund of 
shall remit or refund, as the case may be, such portion of any tax tax. 
assessed on the rateable value thereof as may be proportionate to 
the number of days during which the said land or building has re-
mained vacant and unproductive of rent: 
PrOvided that no remission or refund of the water tax shall be 
allowed under this section unless an application in 8uch form as may 
be prescribed by bye-laws made in thia behalf has been made to the 

16 
Commissioner to stop the supply of water to such land or building 
or unless the Commissioner is satisfied that having regard to the 
circuffi.."ances of any case such remission or refund should be allowed . 
• * • • • • 
Order of 343. Where the erection of any building or execution of any work 
dfemb O.llidt~on has been commenced, oris being carried on, or has been completed o UI mgs 
and works in without or contrary to the sanction referred to in section 336 or in 
certain case~. contravention of any condition subject to which such sanction has 
Order of 
sto,l?pqe of 
bUIldings or 
been accorded or in contravention of any of the provisions of this 
Act or bye-laws made thereunder, the Commissioner may, in addition 
to any other action that may be taken under this Act, make an order 
directing that such erection or work shall be demolished within such 
period not exceeding thirty days as may be specified in the Qrder, by 
the person at whose instance the erection or work has been commenc-
ed or is being carried on or has been completed, and on the failure 
of that person to comply with thE! order, the Commissioner may him-
self cause the erection or the work to be demolished and the expenses 
of such demolition shall be recoverable from such person as an 
arrear of tax under this Act:, 
Provided that no such order shall pe made unless the person has 
. been given an opportunity of being beard. 
344. (1)· • • • • 
wor~ in (2) If such order is not ·cm;nplied with forthwith, the Commissioner 
certain cases, 11 h' 
Power of the 
court or the 
district judge 
to delepte 
certain 
powers and 
to make 
r,'.ues,: 
may reqUire any police officer to remove such person and a IS 
assistants and workmen from the premises within such time as may 
be specified in the reqUisition and such poliee officer shall comply 
with the requiSition accordingly. 
• • • 
460. The court of the district judge of Delhi may-. 
(a) delegate, either generally or specially, to the court of 
an additional district judge, power to receive applications, appeals 
and references under this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-
law made thereunder, and· to hear and d~ermine such applica-
tions, appeals and references; 
• • • • 

-
1'1 
479. (1)· • • • • • Supplcal~~ 
tal plOYi-
(2) All rules made under this Act . shall be laid for not less than .io~ res-
thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after =~ 
they are made and shall be subject to such modificatioDs as Parlia-
ment may make during the session in which they are so laid or the 
session immediately followtng . 
• * • • 
'II. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act the Corporation Po,:r~o 
may, in add.ttion to any bye-laws which it is empowered to make by =:.. ye-
any other provision of this Act, make bye-laws to provide far all or 
any of the following matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
D. Bye-laws relating to transport service, 
(1) the issue of passes to the employees employed in connec-
tion with the affairs of the Delhi Transport Undertaking and the 
conditions subject to which such passes may be issued; 
• • • • • • 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 149) 
TAX ON Bt1ILDING APPLICATIO:'S 
• • • • • 
N.B. 3.-In cases where an application is deemed to have been 
sanctioned under the provisions of section 336 the tax shall become 
payable in the· same manner as in cases where an application is 
sanctioneciJ , 
• 
• 
• • • 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 178 (1) ] 
RATES C1I'TERMINAL TAXES ON GOODS 
• • • 
• 
• 

18 
Class VhI.-Metall and articles ~e of metals 
9. Stoppers made of betel 
• • • • 
- THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE 
• 
Section 236 sub-
lec:tion (z) 
Section 341 
• 
(See section 461) 
PENALTIES 
• • • 
Construction of latrines, etc •• in a position 
where pipes may be injured or Wlter 
therein pOlluted. 
Injury to, or interference with free flow of 
contentl of municipal drain or drains 
communicating with municipal drain. 
• ... ... 
• 
• 
... 
0'58 
RI. 100 
RI. SO 
Section 343 Failure to demolish buildinas erected Rs. 1,000 Rs. 25 
without sanction . 
• 

LOK SABHA 
A" 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 11 7 
of the ,Constitution of India, r\!commended to Lok 
Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary • 
• 
(Shri Lal Bahadur Shastn", 
Minister 01 Home Affairs.) 