8lt1 No. 12 of ttl , 
THE MINES AND MINERALS 
(REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
.THE MINES AND MINERALS (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) BiLL, 1957 
(As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
J. Page,-
i.n the marginal heading to Clause 5, for ''minin" 
~ ''mining''. -
2. Page 8, .. 
in the marginal heading ~o Clause 14. ~ "Srat" 
read "State". -
3. Page 16, -
in line 40, !2!:.. "ruee s" ~ ''rupees". 
NEW DELHI, 
29th July, 1957. 

THE MINP:S AND MIN:ERALS (RBGULATION AND 
DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 1957· 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSU 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. \ ."''''''''' ' . [ 
2. Declaration as to expediency of Union control. 
3. Definitions. 
GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON UNDERTAKING PROSPBCTING AND MlNINO 
OPERATIONS 
4. Prospecting or mining operations to be under licence or lease. 
5. Restrictions on the grant of prospecting licences or mining 
leases. 
6. Maximum area for which a prospecting licence or mining lease ) 
may be granted. 
7. Maximum period for which prospecting licences or mining lea-
ses may be granted. 
8. Renewal of prospecting licences and mining leases. 
9. Royalties in respect of mining leases. 
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING PROSPECTING LICENCES OR MINING LEASES IN 
RESPECT OF LAND IN WHICH THE MINERALS VEST IN THE GoVERNMENT 
10. Application for prospecting licences or mining leases. 
11. Preferential right of cert~in persons. 
12. Register of prospecting licences and mining leases. 
RULES FOR REGULATING THE: GRANT OFl'ROSPECTING LICENCES AND 
MINING LEASES 
13. Power of Central Government to make rules in respect of 
minerals other than minor minerals. 
14. Power of State Governments to make rules in respect of minor 
minerals. 
15. Power to make rules for modification of mining lease granted 
before 25th October, 1949. 

ii 
SPJ:CIAL powns OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO UNDERTAKE 
PROSPECTING OR MINING OPERATIONS IN CERTAIN CASES 
18. Special powers of Central Government to undertake pros-
pecting or mining operations in oertabl lands. 
~ OP 1IiIDn:ItALS 
17. Ilirleral development. 
MrsCZLL~UI 
1 •. Protpeetin, lieene81 ..a JIWUng Ie_ to 1M 'Yoid if ill CGJltra-
vention of Act. 
1 •. Aet ant! rules to apply to all rll1ewall of prospeetin, liec-. 
aDd miniag leMu'. 
!G. Pealties. 
11. Cognizance of offences. 
It. Offene. by companies . 
•• JIbw .. at .my aDd inspeetiOll. 
14. Recovery of certain sums as arrears of led reveftue. 
15. Delegation of powers. 
~.. Proteetion. of action hken ift good faith. 
!T. Rules to be laid before Parli .... t and eeriabl ru1ee to be ap-
proved by Parliament. 
28. BelaxaUon of the provision.ll of thia Act and rules made ther .. 
under in special cases. 
D. Act binding upon the Government. 
30. Amendments to Act 53 of 1948. 
31. Validation of certain acts and indemnity. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.-SPECIFIED MINERALS· 
THE SECOND ScHEDULE.-RATES OF ROYALTY. 
THE THnm SCHEDULE.-AMENDMENTS TO THE MINES AND 
MnmtALS (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1948. 

Bin No. 49 of 1951 
THE MINES AND MINliRALS .(REGULATION AND 
DEVELOPMENT) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
lULL 
to provide for the regulation of mines and the development of 
minerals under the control of the Union. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the RepubUc 
of India as follows:-
PRELIMINARY 
. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Regu- ~~f:~tti~~d 
s lation and Development) Act, 1957. com-
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
mence-
ment. 
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public -interest :qec1ara-
10 that the Union shoUld take under its control the regulation of mines ~~~e~~ to 
and the development of minerals to the extent hereino:3fter provided. en~y of Union 
control. 
3. In this Act, unless the context o~herwise requires,-
(a) "minerals" includes all minerals except mineral oils 
aad minor minerals; 
(b) "mineral oils" includes natural ias and petroleum; 
Defini-
tions. 

Prospect-
in, .or 
uumn~ 
operations 
to be 
under licence or 
lease. 
2 
(c) "mining lease" means a lerase granted for the purpose 
of undertaking mining operations, and includes a sub-lease 
l1'anted for'such purpose; 
(d) "mining opeP8.tions" means any operations undertaken 
for the purpose of winning any mineral; 5 
( e) "minor minerals" means building stones, gravel, ordi-
nary clay, ordinary sand and any, other mineral which the 
Central Government m'ay, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
.declare to be a minor mineral; 
(f> "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 10 
this Act; 
(g) "prospecting licence" means a licence granted for the 
purpose of undertaking prospecting operations; 
(h) "prospecting operations" means any operations under-
taken for the purpose of exploring, locating or proving mineral IS 
deposits; and 
- (i) the expressions, "mine" and "owner", have the meanings 
assigned to them in the Mines Act, 1952. 35 of J95:l., 
GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON UNDF.RTAKING PROSPECTING AND MINING 
OPERATIONS 20 
4. (1) No person shall undertake any prospecting or mining oper-
ations in any area. except under and in accordance with the terms 
and conditions of a prospectin~ licence or, as the case may be, a min-
ing lease, granted under this Act and the rules made thereunder. 
(2) No prospecting licence or mining lease shall be granted other- 2S 
wise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder. 
ff~~~ri~~ 5. (1) No prospecting licence or mining lease shall be granted t~ 
the gran' any person unless he holds a certificate of approval in the ,prescribed 
of pros- form from the State Government and satisfies such other conditions 30 
"lecting . licences or as may be prescrIbed. 
"Yl inir. f. 
leases. EXJllanation.-For the purposes of this Bub-section, a per/Jon shall 
be deemed to hold a certificate of approval notwithstanding that at 
the relevant time his certificate of approval has expired if anappJ,l-
cation for its renewal is pending at that time. '·35 
(2) Except with the previous approval of the Central Govern-
ment, no prospecting licence or min\ng lease shall be granted-
(a) as respects any mineral specified in the First Schedule, 
or 
(b) to any person who i~ not an Indian national. 

(O( I9S6. 
10 
3 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall 
be deemed to be an Indian national-
(a) in the case (>f a public company as defined in the Com-
panies Act, 1956, only if a majority of the directors of the com-
pany are citizens of India and not less than ftfty-one .per cent. 
of the share capital thereof is held by persons who are either citi-
zens of India or companies as defined. in the said Act; 
(b) in the case of a private company as defined. in the said 
Act, only if all the members of the company are citizens of 
India; 
(c) in the case of a firm or other association of individuals, 
only if all the partners of the firm or members of the association 
are citizens of India; and 
(d) in the case of an individual, only if he is a citizen of 
IS India. 
6. (1) No person shall acquire in anyone State in respect of Maximum 
any mineral or prescribed group of associated minerals- ' 8rhie!l hfor 
W C 8 
(a) one or more prospecting licences covering a total area r~;sfi:~ce 
of more than fifty square miles; or or mining lease 
20 (b) one or more mining leases covering a total area 
more than ten square miles: . 
of may be granted. 
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that in 
the interests of mineral development it is necessary so to do, the 
Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded, permit any 
2S person to acquire one or more prospecting licences. or mining leases 
for an area 1n excess of the aforesaid maximum. 
(2) For the purposes of this section. a person acquiring a pros-
pecting licence or mining lease by, or in the name of, another person ',' 
shall be deemed to be acquiring it himself. , ::.~.;+f;'~;'<.. 
30 7. (1) The maximum period for which a prospecting licence may M~imum 
be granted shall be- per~od fer . . ~~ 
prospect-(a) in the case of mica, one year; ~. ing licenc-
. ~;i~I:lf:~~~ es or 
(b) in the case of any other ~ner~,* years. ~:~g 
(2) The maximum period for whic'a m1hfng'ieaseinay b~ grant- =~t!i 
3S ed shall be- . , ., 
(a) in the ~:'of coal, iron ore or bauxite for manufacture 
of aluminium, • years; 
-(b) in the case of any other mineral, twenty years. -

" .Renewal a. (1) A prospec:ting licence may be renewed for one or mote 
of cR::- periods, each not exceeding one year at a time, so however that the 
trcednce!l total period for which the licence is granted and renewed shall not an nun-ina leases. exceed- I 
(a) in the case of mioo, two years; and 
(b) in the case ~f any other mineral, four years. 
(2) A mining lease may be renewed, in the case of coal, iron 
ore or bauxite lor manufacture of aluminium, for one pertod not 
exceeding thirty years or the duration of the original lease, which-
ever is less: . 
Provided that if the original lease was for not more than twenty 
years, the lease may be renewed for a second period not exceeding 
the duration of the original lease. 
s 
10 
(3) A mining lease may be renewed, in the case of any mineral 
other than a mineral specified in sub-section (2), for one period IS 
not exceeding twenty y€.Qrs or the duration of the original lease, 
whichever is l~. I .: .: .I·~,!! d1j 
~OY:~!:ct 9. (1) The holder of a mining lease shall pay royalty in res-
of mining pect of any mineral mined by bim at the rate specified for the time 
leases. being in the Second Schedule in respect of that mineral. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to enhance or reduce the 
rate at which royalty shall be payable in respect of any mineral with 
effect from such date as may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that the Central Government shall J;1ot--
(a) fix the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral so as to 
exceed twenty per cent. of the sale price of the mineral at the 
pit's head, or 
(b) alter the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral More 
20 
than once during any period of two years. 30 

PaOCEDUltB POR OBTAINING PROSPECTING LICENCES OR MINING LEASES IN 
USPECT OF LAND IN WHICH THE MINERALS V1!'ST IN THE GOVERN~ 
MENT 
10. (1) An application for a prospecting licence or Q mining lease Applica-
5 in respect of any land in which the m.l'1terals vest in the Government;~~ f~t_ 
shall be made to the State Government in the prescribed form and mg fk:enc-
Ihall be accompanied by the prescribed fee. :i~~ 
leases. 
(2) Where any applicalion is received under sub-section (1), there 
ahall be sent to the applicant, as soon as may be, an acknowledge-
10 ment of its receipt in the prescribed form. 
(3) On receipt of an application under this section, the State 
Government may, having regard to the provisions of this Act and 
any rules made thereunder, grant or refuse to grant the licence or 
leue. 
IS 11. (1) Where a prospecting licel\ce has been granted in respect Pre,fer-
of any land, the licensee shall have a preferential right for obtaining ~it~~l of 
• mining lease in respect of that land over any other person: certain 
Provided that the State GoVernment is satisfied that the licensee 
has not committed any breach of the terms and conditions of the 
20 prospecting licence and is otherwise a fit person for being granted the 
mining lease. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), where two or 
more persons have applied for a prospecting . licence or a mining lease 
in respect of the same land, the applicant whose application was· 
25 received earlier shall have a preferential right for the grant of the 
licence or lease, as the case may be, over an applicant whose applica-
tion was received later: 
Provided that where any such applications are received on the 
same day, the State Government, after taking into consideration the 
30 matters specified in sub-section (3) and obtaining the previous appro-
'Val of the Central Government, may grant the prospecting licence or 
mining lease, as the case may be, to such one of the applicants as 
it may deem fit. 
(3) The matters referred to in sub-section (2) are the follow-
35 ing:-
(a) any special knowledge of, or experience in, prosf>ectlng 
operations or mining operations, as the 'case may be, possessed 
by .the eppHcant; I 
(b) the ftnancial resources of the applIcant; 
persons. 

, 
(c) the nature and quality of the technical It aft employed 
• to be employed by the applicant; 
(d) web other maUert u may be preteribed. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything cOIltailled in 1101b-aectiOD (I) but 
~bject to the provisions of .ub-section (1), ~ State GovernmentS 
ma,. for any special reasons to be recorded and with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, grant a prospecting licence or 
ambling lease to an applicant whose application was received later in 
preference to an applicant whose application was received earUer. 
&. (1) The State Government shall cause to be maintained in 10 
b prelCTibed form-
(CI) a register of appUcations for prospecting Ucences; 
(b) a register of prospecting licensees; 
(c) a register of applications for mining leuee; and 
(d) • register of mining lessees; 15 
ia. eaeh of which ahall be entered IUch particulan u may be pr.-
erlbed. 
(!) Every such register shall be open to inspection by an,. per-
IOD holding a certi1lcate of approval from the State Government 
or by aD authorised agent of such person, on payment of .ucb fee 30 
.. the State Government ImlY fix. 
BtJ'laI roa uetn.ATnfG THII GRAHT 01' PROSPECTING LICUCD AD 
MDl'DfO 1&\81:8 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the om· 
eia1 Gazette, make rules for regulating the grant of prospecting UeeD· 2S 
ees . and mining leases in respect of minerals other than minor 
m1nerall and for purposes connected therewith. 
(J> In partlcu1&r, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such ruIN may provide tor all or any of the tolloW'· 
iD, matters, namely: - )0 
(4) the penon by whom, and the manner in which, appltee-
tiona tor prospeettng licences or mining leases in respect of land 
in which the mineral. vest in the Government may be made and 
the teee to be paid therefor; 
(b) the form of aelmowlld1ement of the reeetpt of 0,. .... II 
qpUeatloD; 
(e) the matter. which may be conlldered Where appUeaUeral 
fa r.peet of t1w same land are received on the same day; 

7 
(d) the penon. to whom certiAcatea of approval may 1M 
aranteli, ille form of IUch certificate. and the f_ payable fflr 
th. arant. or renewal thereot; 
(e) ill. authority by which PIWpeCtinI Ucenc. cw IDtn' .. 
1 .... in respect of land in which the minerall ••• &D tM Ge.· 
enunent may be aranta<i; 
(f) the procedure for the acquiaition of • p~ UcIace 
... mining leue in respect of any land in wbtch Uae mtDerallf 
y., in a peraon other than the Government; 
10 (g) the terma on which. and the conditiona tubjeet tilt wbicIa, 
• prospecting licence or a min.ina leue may be i1'&I1Wd QI' 
renewed; 
(h) the tacilitie. to be afforded by holden of minin, I_ 
to persona deputed by the Government tor the purpoee of unde-
IS taking research or trainini in mattei'll :relatilli to mJnjr~ 
operationa; 
10 
3' 
(i) the fixing and collection of dead rent, ftnea. fea et 
other charges and the collection of roy&lttee in respect 01-. 
(i) prOlpecting licenc8l, 
(ii) minin,leuel J 
(iii) minerala mined, quarried, uC8.ated or colleeted.; 
(;) the manner in which righta of third parti_ may be pro. 
tected (whether by payment of compensation or otherwiH) ta 
cues where any luch party may be prejudiclall1 aftected br 
Huon ot any pr~pectini or mining operationa; 
(k) the grouping ot U60C'iated roinerall for the purpotlllt 
of section 6; 
(I) the manner in which and the conditions subject ~ wbtela 
• prospecting licence or a minini leue may b. tranaterred; 
(m) the construction, maintenance and use of road&, po •• 
transmission lines, tramwaya, railwaYJ, aerial ropewaya, ptpeUaw 
and the making of pussges tor water for minini p~ _ 
any land comprised in • minini lea •• ; 
(ft) the torm ot reaDten to be maintained under tbiI Aet; 
(0) the disposal or discharie of any tai1in8l, Iltm ... ~ 
wute products arising from any minine or metalluriical opera-
tiona carrled out In a mine; 
(p) the reporta and statement. to be submitted by MldMrt 
of prospecting licen(:as or owners of mines and the authority 118 
which such reports and statements shall be submitted; and 

Pow~r of 
Srat Gov-
ernments 
to make 
rules in 
respect of 
minor 
minerals. 
Power to 
make 
ruies for 
modifica-
tion of 
mining 
lease 
granted 
before 
25Ut 
October, 
~ 9"11. 
Special 
powers of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
undertake prospect-
injI .or 
mmlnl 
o(lera-
lions in 
certain 
lands. 
i 
(q) the authority by which and the period within which 
applications for revision of any order passed by a State Govern-
ment or other authority in exercise of any power conferred. by or 
under this Act, may be made and the manner in which such 
applications shall be disposed of. 5 
. -
14. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for regulating the grant of prospecting 
lieences and mining leases in respect of minor minerals and for 
pUrposes connected therewith. 
(2) Until rules are Inlde under sub-section (1), any ruleS made 10 
by a State Government regulating the grant of prospecting licencea 
and mining leases in respect of minor minerals which are in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue 
in .force. 
- ·15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftl- IS 
cial Gazette, make rules· for the purpose of modifying· or alteriAg the 
terms and conditions of any mining lease granted prior to the 25th 
duy of October, 1949, so as to bring such lease into conlormity with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made under scetions 13 
and 17. 20 
(2) The rules made under sub-:.;ection (1) shall provide--
(a) for giving previous notice of the modification or altera-
,tion proposed to be made thereunder to the lessee, and where the 
lessor is not the Central Government, also to the lessor and for 
affordin~ him an opporlunity of showing cause against the 25 
proposal; . 
(b) ror the payment of compensation ~ the party who may 
be benefited by the proposed modification or alteration to the 
party whose rights under the, existing lease would thereby be 
adversely affected; 30 
(c) for the principles on which, the manner in which and 
the· authority by which the said compensation shall be 
determined. 
SPECIAL POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO UNDERTAKE PROSPJCCTIlIfO 
OR M.INING OPERA..TIONS IN CERTAIN CASES 
16. (1) The provisions of this section shall apply only in respect 
of l~in which the minerals vest in the Government of a State. 
35 
. (Z:)TJae CeDtral GovernmeDt, after coneu1tati. with the State 
GQ'f.etanient, may uDdertake prospecting OI'miniac"6peratiODS m·any 
area not already held under any prosp.eting Iieenee 01'. miDing lease, 40 
.and· where it proposes to do so, it shall, by Dotification in the OfIicial 
. GraSette,-· 
(a) . specify the boundaries of such area; - . 

9 
(b) state whether prospeetDg or mining OperatioDS will be 
carried out in the area; and 
(c) specify the mineraI or minerals in respect of which such 
operations will be carried out. 
, (3) Where, in exercise of the powers conferred by 8ub-section (Z), 
10 
IS 
the Central Government undertakes prospecting or miNng operatiou 
Ia any area, tlte terms and conditions subject to wltich the prospect.. 
.. or mining operations may be carried on by tlaeCeDtnl Gevem-
--.t ahaIl-
(a) as respects prospecting fee, royalty, surface reat or dead 
rent, be the same as would be appUcable under tIUs Act or aD1' 
rulea made thereunder, if sucll prospecting or mining operadDm 
,... carried OIl by a private penon under a prospectiDa' IietaGe 
or • mining leaN, as the cae may be; 
(b) 88 respects any other matter, be such, as may be .....-
upon between the Central Govermnent and the State Gov .. 
_.t. 
(4) The Central Government, with a view to enabling it to exer-
d8e the powers conferred on it by sub-section (2) may, after COB-
20 lultation with the State Government, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare that no prospectin~ licence or mining lease ahall be 
eran\ed in respect of any land specified in the notification. 
DJ:VELOPMENT OF MINERALS 
17. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to take Mineral 
f h . deye lop-25 all such steps as may be necessary or t e conservation and deve1o~ ment. 
ment of minerals in India, and for that purpose the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such rules u 
it thinks fit. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
30 foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
me matters, namely:-
3S 
(a) the opening of new mines and the regulation 01 minfa, 
operations in any areaj 
(b) the regvIation of the excavation or collection of mineraJa 
from any miile; 
(c) the measures to be taken by owners of min •. for the 
purpose of beneficiation of ores, including the provision of suitable 
eontrivances for such purpose; 
(d) the development at mineral resources in anyaIW.j 

I. 
(e) the notifteation of all new borings and shatt sinkings and 
the preservation 01 bore-hole records. and speeimelll of cot:el of 
all new bore-holel; 
(I) the regulation of the arrangements for the storage of 
minerals and the stocks thereof that may be kept by any pel'lOD; S 
(g) the submission of samples 01 minerals from any mine by 
the owner thereof and the manner in which and the authority to 
which such samples shall be submitted; and the taking of. 
eample! of any minerals from any mine by the State Governme.n~ 
or any other authority specified by it in that behalf; and 10 
(h) the submission by owners of mines of such Ipecial or 
periodical returns and reports as may be specified. and the form 
in which and the authority to which such returna aDd re~11I 
shall be submitted. 
~ro~et- 18. Any prospecting licence or mining lease granted, renewed 
:' allc;nc- or acquired in contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rul. 
lmi:Un Kt or orders made thereunder shall be void and of no etfect. eases 0 
: -:~tt:- ExpZanation.-Where a person has acquired more than one pro.-
vention ot pecting licence or mining lease in any State and the aggregate area ao 
Act. covered by such licences or leases, as· the case may be, exceeds the 
maximum area permissible under section 6, only that prospecting 
licence or mining lease the acquisition of which has resulted in lUeb 
maximum area being exceeded shall be deemed to be void. 
Act and 
rales to 
:~PIY to 
renewals 
ot peol!-
}lectmf 
licences 
and 
minln& 
leases. 
Penalties. 
19. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder :as 
shall apply in relation to the renewal after the commencement of thJa 
Act of any prospecting licence or mining lease granted before such 
commencement as they apply in relation to the renewal of a prOl-
pecting licence or mining lease granted after such commencement. 
It. (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) 30 
of section 4 shall be punishable with imprisonment which may ex-
tend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees. or with both. 
(2) Any rule made under any provision of this Act may provide 
that any contravention thereof shall be punishable with imprison- 3S 
ment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case ot • 
continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to 

II 
one hundred rupees for every day during which such contravention 
continues after conviction for the first such contravention. 
11. No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable CO&Dtzi 
under this Act or any rules made thereunder except upon complaint ~:c~. 
S in writing made by a person authorised in th~ behalf by the Central 
Government or the State Government. 
U. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act or ~~=. 
any rules made ther~under is a company, every person who at the paniel 
time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsi-
10 ble to the company for the conduct of the busiDess of the company, 
Ihall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the 
IS offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(Z) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of any director, manager, secretary or other officer 
~ of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
thall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
E.rpZanotion.-For the purposes of this section,-
(0) "company" means any body corporate and includes a 
at ftrm or other association of individuals; 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the 
firm. 
n. (1) For the purpose of ascertaining the position of the work- Power 01 
.. ing, actual or prospective, of any mine or abandoned mine or for any rgst~c_ and 
10 other purpose connected with this Act or the rules made thereunder, tion. 
any person authorised, by the Central Government in this behalf, by 
aeneral or special order, may-
(0) enter and inspect any mine; 
(b) survey and take measurements in any such mine; 
.5 (c) weigh, measure or take measurements of the stocks ot 
minerals lying at any mine; 
(d) examine any document, book, register, or record in the 
possession or power of any person having the control ot, or con-
. nected with, any mine and place marks ot identification thereon, 

and take extracts from or make copies of web document. book, 
register or record; , 
(e) order the production of any such document, book, 
register, record, as is referred to in clause (d); and 
(1) exam;ne any person having the control of, or conneeted S 
witli, any mine. 
(2) Every person authorised by the Central Government under 
Bub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a public servant within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, and every person to 
whom an order or summons is issued by virtue of the powers con- 10 
ferred by clause (e) or clause (f) of that sub-section shall be legally 
bound to comply with such order or summons, as the case may be. 
Recovery 24. AIly rent, royalty, tax, fee or other sum due to the Govern-
~e~n ment under this Act or the rules made thereunder or under the terms 
arrears ot and conditions of any prospecting licence or mining lease may, on • IS 
mnd certificate of such officer as may be specified by the State Govern-revenue. 
Delega-
tion (\f 
l:\owers. 
ment in this behalf, by general or special order, be recovered in the 
same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under thiJ ~ 
Act may, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, 
if any, as may be specified in the notification be exercisable also by-
, (a) such officer or authority ,ubordinate to the Central Gov-
ernment; or 
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority .u~ is 
ordinate to a State Government; 
u may be specified in the notification. 
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act may, 
in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, at ~o 
may be specified. in the notification, be exercisable also by NCh oftlcer 
or authority subordinate to the State Government as may be 8peclft-
ed in the notification. 
(3) AIly rules made by the Central Government under this Act 
may confer powers and impose duties or authorise the conferring 3$ 
of powers and imposition of duties upon any State Government or 
any officer or authority subord.inat~ thereto. 
Protection Ie. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie againat 
of action any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
~':'iin in be done under this Act. 40 
faith. 

151 of 1148. 
I) 
17. (1) A1l rules made under this Act by the Central Government Rules to 
Ihall be laid for not less than thirty days before each House of g~f~~~d 
Parliament as soon as may be after they are made and shall be sub- Parlin-
ject to such modifications as Parliament may make during the ses- ~~g:in and 
S sion in which they are so laid or the 'session immediately following. rules to - be approv-
ed by 
Parlia. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the rule-making ment. 
power vested in the Central Government, no rules made with 
reference to clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 15 shall come 
into force until they have been approved, whether with or Without 
10 modifications, by each House of Parliament. 
28. If the Central Government is of opinion that it is expedient Relaxa. 
in the public interest so to do, it may, by order, in writing giving ttJh'on pOf . . e rovI-reasons for such opmion, direct that all or any of the provisions of sions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder shall not apply or shall apply ~~iJ ~\es 
15 only with'such modifications or subject to such conditions, restrictiona made 
or limitations as may be specified in the order, to, or in relation to, ~~~:; in 
the granting of any prospecting licence or mining lease or the special 
working of any mine. C'3ses. 
29. Save as otherwise provided in this Act the provisions of this Act bjnd· 
20 Act shall apply to mining or prospecting operations undertaken by l~= ~n 
the Government. ernm"!nt. 
30. The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, Amend-
1948 shall be amended in the manner specified in the Third Sc:hedule. ..rcinra ~ 
1948. 
31. All acts of executive authority done, proceedings taken and Valida. 
2S sentences passed under the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and tion of 
53 of 1948. Development) Act, 1948, with respect to the regulation of ~~~~d 
mines and the development of minerals during the period il?dem-
commencing on the 26th day of January, 1950, and ending with the lllty. 
date of commencement of this Act by the Gove~t or by any 
30 officer of the Government or by any other authority, in the belief or 
purported belief that the acts, proceedings or sentences were being 
done, taken or passed under the said Act, shall be as valid and 
operative as if they had been done, taken or passed in accordance 
with law, and no ·suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained 
35 or continued against any person whatsoever, on the ground that any 
such acts, proceedings or sentences were not done, taken or passed 
in accordance with law. 

14 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 5 (2) (a)] 
1. Apatite and phosphatic ores. 
2. Beryl. 
3. Chrome ore. 
4. Coal and lignite. 
5. Columbite, samarskite and other minerals of the "rare Hl·t.hl" 
group. 
6. Copper. 
7. Gold. 
8. Gypsum. 
9. Iron ore. 
10. Lead. 
11. Manganese ore. 
12. Molybdenum. 
13. Nickel ores. 
14. Platinum and other precious metals and their ores. 
15. Pitchblende and other uranium ores. 
16. Precious stones. 
17. Rutile. 
18.· Silver. 
19. Sulphur and ita ores. 
20. Tin. 
S 
10 
IS 
20 
21. Tungsten ores. 2S 
22. Uraniferous allanite, monazite and other thorium minerals. 
23. Uranium bearing tailings left over from ores after· extraction 
of copper and gold, ilmenite and. other titanium ores. 
24. Vanadium ores. 
25. Zinc. 30 
26. Zircon. 

I. Coal 
2. Mica-
IS 
THIl SECOWD SCHEDULB 
(S,e section 9) 
RATHS OF roYALTY 
Five per cent. of f.o.r. price 
subject to a minimwn of fifty 
nayt paise per ton. 
Either 
(a) Crude mica One rupee per maund. 
10 (b) Trimmed mica, all qualities Three rupees per maund. 
other than heavy stained, 
dense stained and spotted. 
(c) Trimmed mica other than Onerupeo and fifty naye paise per 
that specified in item (6). maund. 
IS (fI) Waste and scrap mica . Twelve naye paise per maund. 
30 
Or 
Six-and-a-quarter per cent. of the sale price of mica at the pit's mouth, 
at the option of the lessor. 
Gold, silver, platinum and other 
precillus metals and their ores, 
copper, lead and zinc ores . 
.f. Iron-
(0) Used for extraction of 
iron within the country. 
(b) Used for other Purrx>ses . 
s. Precious stones' 
Six-and-a-quarter per cent. of the 
sale price at the pit's mouth. 
Five per cent. of the sale price 
at the pit's mouth subject to 
a minimum of fifty naye pa#' 
per ton. 
Five per cent. of the sale price 
at the pit's mouth subject to 
a minimum of one rupee per 
ton. 
Twenty per cent. of the sale 
price at pit's mouth. 
&plana£ion.-For the purpose of this item, "price" means the price 
3S of "raw, uncut stone", that is to say, stone from which adhering rock, 
soil and mud have been removed by washing or any other simple means, 
but which haa not been sut>;ected to any other process. 

•• Manganese-
Ca) Manganese dioxide 
Cb) Manganese ore-
Fifteen per cent. of the sale price 
at the pit's mouth subject to 
a minimwn of three rupees per 
ton. 
5 
C-) High grade (Forty-five Twelve-and-a-half per cent. of the 
per ceRt. Mn. and over). sale price at the pit's mouth 
(iO Low grade (below 
7. Chromite-
Fony-five per cent. 
Mn.). 
subject to a minimum of 
two rupees per ton. 
Ten per cent. of the sale price 10 
at the pit's mouth subject to. 
minimum of one rupee per ton. 
(a) Forty-five per 
and above. 
cent. CrlO Ii Ten per cent. of the sale price 
at the pit'. mouth subject to 15 
a minimwn of two rupees 
and twenty-five naye paise per 
ton. 
(b) Less than Forty-five per Seven-and-a-half per cent. of the 
cent. CrIO.. sale price at the pit's mouth 20 
subject to a minimum of one 
rupee and twel ye naye paise per 
ton . 
. 8. Limestone 
9. Dolomite 
10. Graphite 
I I. China Clay 
12. Kyanite . 
13. Oil Shale 
140 {"typaum • 
I S. All other minerala not here in 
before specified 
Five per cent. of the sale price 
at the pit's mouth subject to 25 
a minimum of thirty-seven Mye 
plliu per ton. 
Five per cent. of the sale price 
at the pit's mouth subject to 
a minimum of twenty-five naye 30 
paise per ton. 
Ten per cent. of the sale priCe 
at the pit's mouth. 
Seven-and-a-half per cent. of 
the sale price at the pit'. 35 
mouth. 
Ten per cent. of the sale price 
at the pit's mouth subject 
to a minimum of five rll e es 
per ton. 40 
Such royalty as may be fixed by 
agreement between the licensee/ 
lessee and the State Govern-
ment. 
TweIve-and-a-half per cent. of 45 
the sale price at the pit's 
mouth .ubject to a minimum 
of one rupee per ton. 
Five per cent. of the sale price 
at the pit'. mouth. So 

17 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 30) 
AMENDMENTS TO TIlE MINES AND MINERALS (REGULATION 
AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1948 
5 1. In the long title, omit the words "mines and", and for the word 
"minerals", substitute "mineral oil resources". 
2. In the preamble, omit th~ words "mines and" and the words 
"to the extent hereinafter specified", and for the word "minerals". 
substitute "mineral oil resources". 
10 3. In section 1,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "Mines and Minerals", 
substitute "Oilfields"; and 
(U) in sub-section (2), omit the words "except the State of 
Jammu and Kaslu:nir". 
IS 4. Omit section 2. 
5. In section 3, in clauses (c) and (d), for the word "minerals", 
substitute "mineral oils". 
6. In section 5,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the word "mineral" substitute 
"mineral oil"; and 
(ii) in sub-section (2), in clause (d), for the word "mine-
rals", substitute "mineral oils". 
7. In section 6,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the word "mineralS", substitute 
;zs "mineral oils"; 
30 
(ii) in sub-section (2), omit clauses (a) and (b) and in 
clause (c), for. the words "mineral resources", substitute "mine-
ral oil resources"; and 
(iii) in clauses (h) and (i), for the word "minerals", substi-
tute "mineral oils". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The differentiation made between petroleum and other minerals 
in items 53 and 54 of the Union List has rendered separate enact-
ments for the two necessary. The present Bill deals only with 
minerals other than petroleum. At present both are dealt with 
under the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 
1948 (53 of 1948). 
Opportunity has been taken of putting forward this legislation 
to make some necessary changes in the provisions of the existing 
Act dictated by experience. These changes refer to-
(i) the prescription of a maximum limit of 50 square miles 
for a prospecting licence [Clause 6 (1) ]; 
(ii)the grant of a second renewal to the holder of a mining 
lease for iron ore and bauxite under certain circwmtancea 
[Clause 8 (2)]; 
(iii) the authorisation of the Central Government to under-
take prospecting and mining operations in any land after prior 
consultation with the State Government (Clause 16); 
(iv) the promulgation of rules for the beneficiation of low 
grade ores [Clause 17 (2) (c)]; 
(v) the recovery of royalty, dead rent and other sums due 
to Government in the aame manner as arrears of land revenue 
(Clause 24); and 
(vi) the delegation of certain powers to State Governments 
and by State Governments to their subordinate authorities 
(Clause 25). 
A number of provisions hitherto dealt wi~ under the rule mak-
ing powers of the Central Government have been transferred to the 
Act in order to restrict the scope of subsidiary legislation. These 
provisions are:-
(i) no concession shan be gr~ted to a person not in posses-
sion of a certificate of approval [Clause 5(1)]; 
(ii) the maximum period for which a prospecting licence 
or a mining lease may be granted (Clauses 7 and 8): 
18 

19 
(iii) the power to prescribe rates of royalty for various 
minerals [Clause 9 and Schedule II]; 
(iv) applications for prospecting licences and mining leases 
to be made in prescribed forms [Clause 10 (1)]; 
(v) the priorities to be observed in the grant of prospect-
ing licences and mining leases [Clause 11 (2) ]; and 
(vi) the power to make rules for regulating the grant of 
mineral concessions (Clause 13). 
NEW DELHI; 
The 22nd June, 1957. K. D. MALA VIYA. 
-

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 16 (2) of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
undertake prospecting or mining operations in any area not already 
held under a prospecting licence or mining lease. Under clause 
16 (3) of the Bill, the prospecting o:r mining operations in any area 
undertaken by the Central Government will be subject to the pay-
ment of the same prospecting fee, royalty, surface rent or de~~ rent 
as applicable in the case of prospecting or mining operation carried 
on by a private person. It is not possible to say at this stage what 
will be the extent of the prospecting or mining operations that may 
be undertaken by the Central Government since this is yet to be 
decided. For this reason, it is not possible to give any idea of the 
amount of expenditure that may be incurred by the Central Govern-
ment on prospecting or mining operations undertaken by them. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING .DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 13, 14, 15 and 17 of the Bill empower the Central Govern-
ment to make rules in respect of certaiD. mattera. 
2. Clause 13 empowers the Central Government to make rules 
for regulating the grant of prospecting licences and mining leases 
and tor purposes connected therewith. The corresponding provision 
in the existing Act of 1948 is contained in section 5 of that Act. It 
would appear by ~ompariBon of the two provisions, that the rula-
makin2 povyel' in ;he new Bill is very much re:.tricted. Certain 
important matters on which rules could be m~de under section 5 of 
the Act of 1948 have now been incorporated in the Bill itself. Some 
of these matters are the following:-
(1) persons who are qualified to apply for a prospecting 
licence or a mining lease (Clause 5); 
(2) the maximum area for which a prospecting licence or 
a mining lease may be granted (Clause 6); 
(3) the maximum period for which a prospecting licence 
or a mining lease may be granted (Clause 7); 
(4) the period for which a prospecting licence or mininJ 
le;lSe may be renewed. (Clause 8); 
(5) the royalties payable for mining leases (Clause 9); 
(6) the procedure for obtaining prospecting licences or 
mining leases in respect of land in which the mineral vests in 
the Government (Clauses 10 and 11); 
... (7) the maintenance of register of applicants for prospect-
ing licences and mining leases and the register of prospectin, 
licences and mining leases (Clause 12). 
It would thus appear that the rule-making power under clause 13 
has now been restricted mosUy to procedural matters. 
3. Clause 14 retains the existing power of State Governments to 
make rules in respect of minor minerals. 
4. €lause 15 empowers the Central Government to make rules 
for the purpose of modifying or altering the terms and conditions 
of mining leases granted before the 25th October, 194~the date OD 
which the Mineral Concession Rules, 1949, came into force. The 
21 

22 
clause corresponds to section 7 of the existing Act of 1948. Rules 
under section 7 of the existing Act have been made and have re-
ceived the approval of the House of the People. Clause 15 has been 
inserted in the Bill in order to enable the Central Government to 
make any amendment in the rules which may hereafter become 
necessary. 
"' 5. Clause 17 empowers the Central Government to make rules 
en certain technical matters. It is not feasible to incorporate the 
provisions on which rules can be made under this clause in the Bill 
itself. Technical matters are generally regulated by rules. 
6. The Bill also empowers the Central Government to issue noti-
fications and orders in respect of certain matters, namely:- -
(i) declaration of 8 mineral as 8 minor mineral [Clause 
3(e)]; , 
(ii) permitting the grant of a prospecting licence 'or a mining 
lease for an area exceeding the maximum area [proviso to 
clause 6(1)]; 
(iii) enhancing or reducing the rates of royalty payable ~ 
respect of any mineral [Clause 9(2)]. . 
The power under item (i) is of a minor character. The powers 
under items (ii) and (iii) are intended to provide for a certain 
amount o,f flexibility in these matters. If these provisions are made 
too rigid the administration of the Act may become somewhat diftl-
cult. These powers will be exercised in exceptional cases and only: 
when the public interest or the interests of the development of 
minerals so require. I 

Short title, 
extent and 
:ommence-
ment. 
D(c1aration 
as to expedi-
ency of 
control by 
Central 
I5ovemment. 
Definition •. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE MINES AND MINERALS (REGUUTION 
AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1948 (53 OJ' 1948) 
An Act to provide for the regulation of mines and oilfields and for 
the development of minerals 
WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest to provide for the 
regulation of mines and oilfields· and for the development of mine-
rals to the extent hereinafter specified; 
It is hereby enacted as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Regula-
tion and Development) Act, 1948. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
• • • • • • • 
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
that the Central Government should take under its control the 
regulation of mines and oilfields and the development of minerals 
to the extent hereinafter provided. 
3. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
• • • • • • • 
(c) "minerals" include natural gas and petroleum; 
(d) "mining lease" means a lease granted "for the purpose 
of searching for, winning, working, getting, making merchant-
able, carrying away or disposing of minerals or for purposes 
connected therewith, and includes an exploring or a prospecting 
licence; 
• • • • • • • 
P~~crrulto 5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi-m ... c eau . 1 G ' ~8pects min- CIa azette, make rules for regulating the grant of mining leases or 
IllIle.sel. for prohibiting the grant of such leases in respect of any mineral or 
in any area. 
23 

24 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
• '" '" '" '" • 
(d) the fixing of the maximum and minimum rent payable 
by a iessee, wnether the mine is worked or not. 
,6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi- Power to 
cial Gazette, make rules for the conservation and development of ~~~~~~: 
minerals. mineral 
dcvelopmem. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera1i~y of the 
foregoing power, SU~!l rules may provide for &ll or any of the follow-
Ing matters, namely:- .. 
(a) the regulatlon or prohibition of the mining, quarrying 
or digging for or the excavating or collecting of minerals from 
any mine or in any area; 
(b) the manner in which and the persons by whom any 
mineral or any area as respects which the grant of mining 
leases is prohibited may be developed or worked; 
, .. '" *. • • 
(d) the regulation of the drllling, redrilling, deepening, 
shutting down, plugging and abandoning of oil wells in an oil-
field and for the limitation or prohibition of such operations and 
for the taking of remedial measures to prevent waste of or 
damage to oil; 
• • • • • • • 
(h) the regulation of the arrangements for the storage of 
minerals and the stocks thereof that may be kept by any person; 
(i) the levy and collection of royalties, fees or taxes in res-
pect of minerals mined, quarried, excavated or collected; 
• '" • '" '" • • 
GMGIPND-t I M of Law-LS 1-23-7-57-1600 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of mines and the development 
of minerals under the control of the Union. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri K. D. Mai(wiya, 
M ;nister of Mines and Oil. 