Ss

As Passeb By Lok Sabiia

ON 301H JuLy, 1996

Bill No. 49-C of 1996
—————__——

THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)

BILL, 1996
A
BILL

further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the

Representation of the People Act, 1951

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—

CHAPTER |

PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act. — Shorttitle and

1996.

(2) It shall co
notification in the Offi

conimence-
ment.

९ into force on such date as the Central Government may, by

al Gazette, appoint.

-_



2:
' CHAPTER II

AMENDMENT OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE Act, |

| Amendment of 2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1950, in section 32, in sub-section (1), for 43 of 1950,

| section 32. the words “with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees”, the words “with imprison-
ment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years 5
and with fine” shall be substituted,

CHAPTER III
AMENDMENT OF THE REPRESENTATION oF THE PEOPLE Act, 195]

Amendment of 3. In the Representation of the People Act, 195] (hereafter in this Chapter referred 43 of 1951.
sechon.s: to as the 1951-Act), in section 8, in sub-section Ca 10

(4) in clause (), the word “or” shall be added at the end;
(6) after clause (/), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(k) section 2 (offence of insulting the Indian National Flag or the

Constitution of India) On §egtion 3 (offence of Preventing singing of National

Anthem) of the Prevention -of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971;”, 5 69 of 1971,

Insertion of 4. After section 20A of the 1951-Act, the following Section shall be inserted,
ew section
208. namely:—
Observers. 208, (1) The Election Commission may nominate an Observer who shall be an
officer of Government to watch the conduct of election or elections in a constituency
or a group of constituencies and to perform such other functions as may be entrusted 20
to him by the Election Commission.
(2) The Observer nominated under sub-section (/) shall have the power to direct the
returning officer for the Constituency or for any of the constituenci
nominated, to Stop the counting of Votes at any time before the de
Not to declare the result if in the opinion of the Observer booth capturin,
a large number of polling stations or at places fixed for the poll or cou
ballot papers used at a polling station or at aplace fixed for the Poll are
of the Custody of the returning officer or are accidentally or Intentional,
are damaged or tampered with to such an extent that the result of th
Station or place cannot be ascertained,
(3) Where an Observer has directed the Teturning officer under this section to stop
Counting of votes or not to declare the tesult, the Observer shall forthwith report the
व matter to the Election Commission and thereupon the Election Commission shall. after
taking all material circumstances into account, issue appropriate directions under sec-
tion 58A or section 644 Or section 66, 35

#फ्राक्ाव1०0,-- For the purposes Of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), “Observer”
shall include a Regional Commissioner or any such officer of the Election Commission as
has been assigned under this section the duty of watching the conduct of election or elec-
tions ina Constituency or grour of constituencies by the Commission.’, 40



1), for 43 of 1950,
rison-

years 5
[ 43 of 1951
10
Ie
॥
15 69 of 197),
20

3

5. In section 30 of the 1951-Act,

, in clause (d), for the w
words “fourteenth day” shall be substitu

‘ords “twentieth day,” the
ted.

Amendmeat of
Section 30.

6. In section 33 of the 1951 Act,— Amendment of
section 33.

(a) in sub-section (0, for the Provisos, the following provisos shall be substi-
5 tuted, namely;—

“Provided that a candidate not set up by a recognised political Party, shall not be
deemed to be duly nominated for

r election from a Constituency unless the nomination Paper
is subscribed by ten Proposers being electors of the Constituency:

Provided further that nO nomination paper shall be delivered to the returning officer
10 on a day which is a public holiday:

Provided also that in the case of alocal authorities’ Constituency, Sraduates' constitu-
ency or teachers’ Constituency, the Teference to “an elector of the Constituency as Proposer”
Shall be construed as a Teferenci

€ to ten per cent, of the electors of the Constituency or ten
such electors, whichever is less, as Proposers”;

1S (0) after sub-sectin (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—

(7) Notwithstandin 8 anything contained in sub-section (6) or in any other provisions
Of this Act, a person shall not be nom:

inated as a candidate for election,—

20 constituencies;

(8) in the case of 4 general election to the Legislative Assembly of a State (whether
or not held simultaneously from all Assembly Constituencies), from more than two Assem-
bly constituencies in that State;

(c)in the case ofa biennial e]

25 Council, from more than two

lection to the Legislative Council of a St;

ate having such
Council Constituencies in the State;

(d) in the case of a bienn:

ial election to the Council of States for
Seats allotted to a State, for filli

filling two or more
ing more than two such seats;

(¢) in the case of bye-election:
mentary constituencies which are
30 tary constituencies;

's to the House of the People from two or more Parlia-
held simultaneous] ly,

from more than two such Parliamen-



2

Sse of byv-elections to the Legislative Assembly of a State from two or
‘mbly constituencies which are held simultaneously, from more than two such

Assembly constituencies;

(g/ in the case of bye-clections to the Council of States for filling two or more seats
allotted to a State. which are held simultaneously, for filling more than two such seats;

(h) in the case of bye-clections to the Legislative Council of a State having such
Council trom two Or more Council constituencies which are held simultaneously, from more
than two such Council Constituencies.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, two or more bye-clections shall
be deemed to be held simultaneously where the Notification calling such bye-clections are
issued by the Election Commission under section 147, 149, 150 or, as the case may be. 151]
on the same date,

Amendment of 7. In section 34 of the 1951-Act, for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall
section 34, be substituted namely:—

(7) A candidate Shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for election from a con-

stituency unless he deposits or causes to be deposited. —

(4) in the case of an election from a Parliamentary constituency, a sum of ten thou-
sand rupees or where the candidate is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Schedulted Tribe,
sum of five thousand Tupees; and

(b) in the case of an election trom an Assembly or Council Constituency, a sum of
a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled

Provided that where a candidate has been nominated by more than one nomination
Paper for election in the Same constituency, not more than one deposit shall be required of
him under this sub- section,,

Amendment of 8. In section 38 of the 1951-Act, for sub-section (2).the tollowing sub-sections shall
te oe Substituted, namely:

(2) for the Purpose of listing the names under sub-section (J), the candidates shall be
classified as follows, namely;—

(i) candidates Of recognised Political parties;
(ti) candidates of registered Political parties other than those mentioned in clause ७);
(tii) other candidates,

(3) The Categories mentioned in sub-section (2) shall be arranged in the order speci-
fied therein and the names of candidates in each Category shall be arranged 1n alphabetical
order and the addresses of the contesting candidates as &lven in the nomination Papers to-
gether with such other particulars as may be prescribed,,

5

10

15

20

30

35



B

9. For section 52 ofthe 1951-Act, the following section Shall be substituted amely:— Substitution of
hew secuon for

section 52
"S52. (1) Ifa Candidate set up by a recognised Political party, — Death of candi-
date of a recog-

है रे है & हे hised political
(4) dies at any time after 11.00 AM. on the last date for making Nominations Party before

and his nomination is found valid on Scrutiny under section 36; or. poll.

and in cither case, report of his death is received at any ume before the Publi>
Cation of the list of contesting Candidates under section 38; or

(c) dies as a Contesting candidate and a report Of his death is received before
10 the commencement of the poll,

Provided that no order for adjourning a poll should be Made in a case Teferred to in
15 clause (a) except after the Scrutiny of all the nominations including the nomination of the
deceased candidate.

(2) The Election Commission shall, on reccipt of a report from the returning officer
under sub-section (2), call upon the Tecognised political Party, whose candidate has died, to
nominate another candidate for the said Poll within seven days of issue of such notice to

20 such Tecognised political Party and the Provisions of sections 30 to 37 Shall, so far as may
be, apply in relation to such nomination as they would apply to other nominations:

Provided that no Person who has given a notice of withdrawal of his candidature
under sub-section (2) of section 37 before the adjournment Of the poll shall be ineligible tor
being nominated as a candidate for the election बोल such adjournment,

25 (3) Where a list of contesting Candidates had been Published under Section 38 before
the adjournment of the poll under sub-section (J), the returning officer shall again prepare
and publish a fresh list of contesting Candidates under that section so as to include the name

Of the candidate who has been validly Nominated under sub-. ection (2),

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, Sections 33 and 38, “recognised po-
30 litical Party" means a Political Party recognised by the Election Commission under the
Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968,',

10. For section 126 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall be Substituted, Substitution of
namely:—

new section for
section 126.



E of 126 (1) No Person shal]—
Public meetings
during period of ek ५ : a
forty-eight (a) con vene, hold, attend Join or address any public meetin, 18 OF procession in
hours ending connection with an election; or

with four fixed

for conclusion

‘poll.

(6) display to the Public any election matter by means of cinematograph,
i television or other similar apparatus; or

in any Polling area during the Period of forty-eight hours ending with the hour
for the Conclusion of the Poll

fixed
for any election in that Polling area,

(2) Any person who contra

able with impri

venes the Provisions of sub.
‘isonment for a term

“Section (7) shal} be punish-
which may extend to two

years, or with fine, or with both.

(3) In this Section,

the expressio;
Calculated to influence or

n "election matter"
affect the resu

Means any matter intended or
Ut of an election.’,

Amendment of 11. In section 127 Of the 195] “Act — 15
Section 127,
(@) in sub-section (7), for the words “three Months or with fine which may
extend to one thousand Tupees”, the words “six months or with fine which May extend
to two thousand Tupees” shall be Substituted:
(0) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shal] be inserted, namely;—
“(IA) An offence Punishable under sub-secction (2) shall be Cognizable.”, 20
Substitution of 12. For section 133 of the 1951-Act, the following Section shall be Substituted.
Rew section for namely: —
section 133,

Penalty for ille- “133, If any person is Builty of any such Corrupt practice as is specified in
gal hiring or Clause (5) of Section 123 at or in Connection with an election, he shall be punishable
Procuring of with imprisonment which may extend to three months and with fine.” 25
conveyance at
elections,
गज 13. After section 134A of the 1951

section 1348. namely:

se\ct, the following Section shall be inserted,

Prohibition of

“1348, (1) No Person, other than the Teturning Officer, the Presiding Officer,
going ened to any police officer and any other Person appointed 10 maintain Peace and order, at a
orneara polling Polling Station who is on duty at the Polling Station, Shall,
aes with arms, as defin

on a polling day, go armed 30
ed in the Arms Act, 1959, of any kind wj

‘ithin the neighbourhood of
| 4 polling station,

54 of |


I;

(2) If any person Contravenes the provisions of sub-section (/), he shall be pun-
ishable with imprisonment for a term which May extend to two years, or with fine, or

11959.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Arms Act, 1959, where aperson
5 is convicted of an offence under this Section, the arms as defined in the said Act found
in his possession shall be liable to confiscation and the licence grarited in telation to

such arms shall be deemed to have been revoked under section 17 of that Act.

(4) An offence punishable under sub-section (2) shall be cognizable.”

14. In section 135 of the 1951-40, in sub-section (/), for the word “fraudulently”, the
10 word “unauthorisedly” shall be substituted,

15. Section 135A of the 1951-Act shall be Tenumbered as sub-section (7) thereof
and,—

(d) in sub-section (J) as so renumbered,—.

(a) for the portion beginning with the words “shall not be less than six months”
15 and ending with the words “extend to three years and with fine” the following shall be
substituted, namely:—

“shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with
fine, and where such offence 15 committed by a person in the service of the Govern-
ment, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than

20 three years but which may extend to five years and with fine;”

(b) in the Explanation, —

(A) for the words “this section”, occurring in the Opening portion, the words,
figures and letter “this sub-section and section 20B” shall be substituted;

(B) in clause (b), for the words “prevent others trom voting”, the words “prevent
25 others from free exercise of their right to vote” shall be substituted;

(©) in clause (c), for the word “threatening”, the words “coercing or intimidat-
ing or threatening directly or indirectly”, shall be substituted;

(@) after sub-section (7) as so renumbered and the Explanation thereto, the fol-
lowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-—

30 “(2) An offence punishable under sub-section (2), shall be cognizable”.

16. After section 135A of the 1951-Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—

“13SB. (1) Every person employed in any business, trade, industrial undertak-

ing or any other establishment and entitled to vote at an election to the House of the

35 People or the Legislative Assembly of a State shall, on the day of poll, be granted a
holiday.

Amendment of
section 135.

Amendment of
section 135A.

Insertion of new
sections 135B
and 1350.

Grant of paid
holiday to em-
ployees on the
day of poll



=

(2) No deduction or abatement of the wages of any such person shall be made on
account of a holiday having been éranted in accordance with ub-section (/) and if such
person is employed on the basis that he would not ordinarily receive wages for sucha day, he
shall nonetheless be paid for such day the wages he would have drawn had not a holiday
been granted to him on that day. 5

(3) Ifan employer contravenes the Provisions of sub-section (/) or sub-section (2),
then such employer shall be punishable with fine which May extend to five hundred rupees,

(4) This section shall not apply to any elector whose absence may cause danger or
‘substantial loss in respect of the employment in which he is engaged,

Liquor not to be 135C. (1) No. spirituous, fermented or intoxicating liquors or other substances of a 10
sold given or like nature shall be sold, given or distributed ata hotel, cating house, tavern, shop or any
distributed on other place, public or Private, within a Polling area during the Period of forty-e

P ght hours
ling day. pas pees हू ० ही
83 ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of the Poll for any election in that polling area,

(2) Any person who Contravenes the provisions of sub-section (/), shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, which may 15
extend to two thousand Tupees, or with both,

(3) Where a Person is convicted of an offence under this Section. the spirituous. fer-
ented or intoxicating liquors or other substances of a like nature found in this possession
shall be liable to Confiscation and the same shall be disposed of in such manner as may be
Prescribed.". Zu

Insertion of new 17. After section 15] of the 1951-Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
section 151A,

Time limit for “1514. Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 147, section. 149, sec-
filling vacan- tion 150 and section 151, a bye-election for filling any vacancy referred to in any of
cies referred to the said sections shall be held within a period ot six Months from the date of the

in sections 147, acaney: 25
149, 150 and occurrence of the vacancy:

151,

Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply it—

(a) the remainder of the term of a member in relation to a vacancy is less than
one year; or

(0) The Election Commission in Consultation with the Central Government cer-
tifies that it is difficult to hold the bye-election within the said Period,” 30



LOK SABHA

A
yy BILL

farther to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and Representation of the
People Act, 1951, हुँ

(As Passed by Lok Sabha)