As D1'l'RODl1CID mLoK SABRA OK 
2" NOV 1963 
BUI No. 42 of 1963 
THE CENTRAL' BOARDS OF REVENUE BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of separate Boards of Revenue fOT 
. Direct Taxes and for Excise and Customs and to amend certain 
enactments tOT the purpose of conferring powers and imposing 
duties on the said Boards. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central B:Jards of Revenue Act, Short title 
1983. and com· 
mence-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern. ment. 
10 
4 of leu. 
34 of IDU. IS 
27 of 11157. 
29 of 1957. 
1801 1858. 
43 of 1961. 
140! 1983. &0 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
·2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- DeftnltiODI. 
(a) "Board" me~ns the Central Board of Direct Taxes or the 
Central Board of Exc1se and Customs constituted under section 3; 
(b) "Central Board of Revenue" means the Central Board 
of Revenue constituted under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 
1924; 
(c) "direct tax" means-
(1) any duty ,leviable or tax chargeable under-
(i) the Estate Duty Act, 1963; 
(ii) the Wealth-tax Act, 1957; 
(iii) the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957; 
(iv) the Gift-tax Act, 1958; 
(v) the Income-tax Act, 1961; 
(vi) the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963; and 

Constitu-
tion of 
separate 
Central 
Boards for 
Dirld 
Taxes and 
for Excise 
and 
Customs. 
1 
Procedure 
of the 
Board. 
Amend-
ment of 
certain 
enact-
meats. 
(2) any other duty or tax which, having regard to iti 
nature or incidence, may be declared by the Central Govern-
ment, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a direct 
tax. 
3. (1) The Central Governmellt shall t in place of the Central , 
Board of Revenue, constitute two separate Boards of Revenue to be 
called the Central Board of Direct Taxes and the Celltra! Board of 
Excise and Customs, and each such Board shall, subject to the control 
of the Cen.tral Government, exercise such powers and perform such 
duties t as may be entrusted to that BOard by the Central Government 10 
or by or under any law/ 
(2) Each Board shall consist of such number of persona not 
exceeding five as the Central Government may think fit to appoint. 
4. (1) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of 
regulating the transaction of business by each Board and every order IS 
made or act done in accordance with such rules shall be deemed to be 
the order or act, as the case may be, of the Board. 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon. as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised ao 
in one S'ession or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session inunediately follow-
ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 2S 
as the case may be, so however, that any modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
5. (1) In the Estate Duty Act, 1953, the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the 34 of 1963. 
Expenditure-tax Act, 1957, the Gift-tax Act, 1958, the Income-tax 30 27 of 1957. 
Act, 1961 and the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963, for the words and 29 of 1957. 
figures "Central Board of Revenue constituted under the Central 18 of 1958. 
Boal'd of Revenue Act, 1924" or "Central Board of Revenue" 43 of 1961. 
wherever they occur, the words and figures UCentral Board of Direct 14 ~f i:::' 
Taxes constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963" 3S 0 . 
shall be substituted. 
(2) In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and the CustomJ 
Act, 1962, for the words and figures UCentral Board of Revenue 
constituted under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924" or uCen_ 
tral Board of Reo/enue" wherever they occur, the words and figures 40 
"Central Board of Excise and Customs constituted under the Central 
Boards of Revenue Act, 1963" shall be substituted. 
1 of 1944. 
520f'1962. 
, of 1924. 

3' 
(3) The functions entrusted to·the. Central Board of Revenue by 
or under any other enactment shaU,-
(4) if such functions rela:t~ to metters connected with direct 
taxes, be discharged by the Central Board of Direct Taxes; and 
, (b) if such functions'relate~toany other matter, unless they 
are entrusted by the Central Government to the Central Board 
of Direct Taxes, be discharged' by the Central Board of Exclle 
and Customs. . :' .. " ',' 
6. (1) Every proceeding pendiilg at the commencement of thie Transfer 
10 Act before the Central Board of' Revenue shall- of certain , proceed-
(a) if it is a proceeding relating to direct taxes, stand lnp. 
transferred to the Central Board of Direct Taxes; and 
(b) in any other case, stand transferred to the Central Board 
of Excise and Customs. 
I' (2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding stands 
transferred to the Central Board of Direct Taxes or to the Central 
Board of Excise and Customs, it shall be referred to the Central 
Government whose decision thereon ,shall be final. 
(3) In any legal proceeding. pending at the commencement of 
20 this Act to which the Central Board of Revenue is a party,-
(4) it it is a proceeding" relating to direct taxes, the Central 
Board of Direct TaXes shan be deemed to be substituted for the 
Central Board of Revenue in such proceeding; and 
(b) if it is a proceeding relating to any other matter, the 
2, Central Board of Excise and Customs shall be deemed to be 
substituted for the Central Board of Revenue in such proceeding. 
'1. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of Power to 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the remove 
Oftlcial Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the pur- di1ftcWties. 
30 poses of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty. 
(Z) An order under sub-.eetlon (1) may be made so as to 
have retrospective effect from a.da.ie ;not earlier than the date of the 
commencement of thia Act. ' 
'Of lnf. 35 8. (1) The untraI Board of Revenue Act, 1924, is hereby repealed. ~a1and 
laVID,. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect any appoint-
ment, assessment, order (including quasi-judicial order) or rule 
made, or exemption, approval or recognition granted, or any notice, 
notification, direction or instruction issued, or any duty levied, or 
40 penalty or fine imposed, or confiscation adjudged, or any form 

4 
prescribed, or any other thing done or action taken by the Central 
Board of Revenue under any law and any such appointment. auesa-
ment, order, rule, exemption, approval, recognition, notice. notiftea-
tion, direction, instruction, duty, penalty, fine, confiscation, form, 
thing or action shall be deemed to have been made, granted, issued, 
levied, imposed, adjudged, prescribed, done or taken by the Central 
Board of Direct Taxes, or as the case may be, by the Central Board 
o£·]'.xcise aJld Customs·and shall continue to be in force·unless and 
until it is revised, withdrawn or superseded by the couceme4 Board. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to replace the Central Board ot Revenue 
Act, 1924, by this law which provides for the constitution ot two 
Boards named, respectively, as the Central Board of Direct Taxes and 
the Central Board of Excise and Customs. Owing to the very con-
siderable expansion of the Union revenue administration since 1924, 
substantial strengthening of the Board of Revenue at the Centre as 
well as ita functional bifurcation has become a matter of urgent 
necessity. Such separation has also been recommended by the DIrect 
Taxes Administration Enquiry Committee and more recently, by the 
Central ~cise Re-organisation Cbmmittee. This Bill seeks to give 
effect to those recommendations which have since been accepted by 
Government. 
/ 
NBWDam; 
The 20th Nove1ft.ber, 19M; 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI . 
• 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 11' 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OP" INDIA 
[Copy of letter dated the 22nd November, 1963 from. ShTi T. T. 
KrilhMm4Cha.ri. Mflnister of FiM~e to the Secretary, Lok Sabha]. 
The President havinl been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Central Boards of Revenue Bill, 1963 to provide tor the 
constitution of separate Boards of RevenUe for Direct Taxes and 
for Central Excise and Customs and to ameJ1cl certain enaetmenta 
for the purpose of conferring powers and imposing duties on tlae 
Central Boards, recommends under clauses (a) and (3) of article 117 
of the CoJlltitution of India the introduction in aDd consider.tim by 
the Lot Sabha of the Bill. 
• • • • 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Central Board. of Revenue as at present constituted under the 
Central Board of Revenue Aet, 1924, consists of the following:-
(1) Chairman 
(2) Vice-Chairman 
(2) ~embers--4 
The two new Boards to be constituted will each consist of not more 
than five ~embers including the Chairman/Vice-Chairman. Even if 
all the posts are filled, the extra expenditure involved on that account 
will not exceed Rs. 2,00,000 per annwn as detailed below:-
1. OfJicers 
Average cost of emoluments of Chairmanl 
Vice-Chairman 
Average coSt of emoluments of 3 Membors 
II. Other Staff and incidentals 
Total 
or say 
RI. 33,000 
Rs. 81,000 
Rs.85,000 
RI. 1,99.000 
RI. 2,00,000 
It is not intended that all these extna posts should be created 
immediately. 
.. 

MEMORANDuM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for the purpose of regulating the transaction of ;business of the 
two Boards proposed to be constituted under the Bill. The matten 
with respect to which rules are to be made are matters of a routine 
nature or of detail and the deleaation of legislative power is of a 
normal character. 
7 

~ nON THE EsTATE DtrrY Aer, 1953 (34 OF 1953) 
• • • • 
Z. In thm Act, unlees the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • 
(2) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue eonstituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; , of 1m. 
• • • • 
ExTaACT FROM THJ: WEALTH-TAX Act, 1957 (27 OF 1957) 
• • • • 
Dt8DitlOD •. Z. In this Act, unless the context etherwise requires,-
• • • • 
(/) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue constituted 
undet" the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; • of 18M. 
• • • • 
Ex'I'aAcT FROM THB EXPENDlTU1l&-TAX Aer, 1957 (29 OF 185'1) 
• • • • 
DtftDitlon •. Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requlres,-
• • • • 
(e) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue constituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; • of 1124. 
• • • • 
ErraACT noM TBJD GII'T-TAX ACT, 1958 (18 OF 1958) 
• • • • 
2. In thY Act, unless the context otherwise requires,";;'" 
• • • • 
(,,) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue constituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; , 01 1_. 
• • • • 

4011924. 
4 of 1924. 
9 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 (43 OF 1961) 
... ... ... ... 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
... .. ... ... 
(12) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue constitut-
ed under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; 
. . . ... 
Definitions. 
118. There shall be the following classes of Income-tax authorities Income-tax 
for the purposes of this Act, namely:- authorities. 
(4) the Central Board of Revenue, 
... ... ... • 
EXTRACT FROM THE SUPER PRoFITS TAX ACT, 1963 (14 OF 1963) 
· ... ... ... 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
... . ... ... 
(4) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue constituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT ACT, 1944 (1 OF 1944) 
· . ... ... 
Definitions. 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or Definitions. 
context,-
... ... • ... 
(b) "Central Excise officer" means any officer of the Central 
Excise Department, or any person (including an officer of the 
State Government) invested by the Central Board of Revenue 
with any of the powers of a Central Excise officer under this Act; 
. ... ... ... 
11. In respect of duty and any other sums of any kind payable to Recovery 
the Central Government under any of the provisions of this Act or of of sums 
the rules made thereunder, the officer empowered by the Central due to 
Board of Revenue to levy such duty or require the payment of such Govem-
sums may deduct the amount so payable from any money owing to Mento 
the person from whom such sums may be recoverable or due which 
may be in his hands or under his disposal ar control, or may recover 
the amount by attachment and sale of excisable goods belonging to 
such person; and if the amount payable is not so recovered, he may 
prepare a certificate signed by him specifying the amount due from the 
person liable to pay the same and send it to the Collector of the dis-
trict in which such person resides or conducts his business and the 
said Collector, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover 
from the !'laid person the amount specified therein as if it were en 
arrear of land revenue. 
• • • • 

10 
Exceptions. 25. Nothing in section 24 applies to-
(a) any excisable goods covered by a permit granted under 
rules made under this Act; 
(b) any excisable goods covered by a pass granted by any 
officer whom the Central Board of Revenue may appoint in this 
behalf; 
(c) such amount of excisable goods carried on board any 
vessel for consumption by her crew or by the passengers or ani-
mals (if any) on board as the Central Board of Revenue may 
from time to time exempt from the operation of section 24. 
Power of 26. When any officer empowered by the Central Board of Revenue. 
stoppage, to act under this section has reason to believe, from personal know-
search and. ledge or from information taken down in writing, that any excisable 
arrest. goods are being carried, or have within the previous twenty-four hours 
been carried, in any vessel so as to render the owner or master of such 
vessel liable to the penalties imposed by section 24, he IIWly require 
such vessel to be brought-to and thereupon may-
(a) enter and search the vessel; 
(b) require the master of the vessel to produce any docu-
ments in his possession relating to the vessel or the cargo thereof; 
(c) seize the vessel if the officer has reason to believe it liable 
to confiscation under this Act, and cause it to be brought with 
its crew and cargo into any port in India; and 
(d) where any exciS81ble goods are found on board the vesael 
search and arrest without a warrant any person on board the 
vessel whom he has reason to believe to be punishable under 
section 24. 
• • • • 
Rights of 32. Every proprietor of a private salt-work, other than a private 
ordinary salt factory, to which section 31 applies, of which, under the provisions 
proprietors of section 17 of the Bombay Salt Act, 1890, the proprietor was entitled Bom. n Oi 
of existing on application to a licence to manufacture or to excavate or collect 1890. 
salt-works. natural salt at such factory, shall continue to be entitled, on applica-
tion mede in accordance with the rules made under this Act, to a 
licence for such purpose and to the annual renewal thereof, unless on 
a breach of the provisions of this Act his licence has been cancelled by 
an officer duly empowered by the Central Government in this behalf: 
Provided that the Collector of Central Excise may at any time 
withdraw or withhold a licence from the proprietor of any such salt 
factory, if no salt has been manufactured, excavated or collected in 
such salt factory for the three years ending on the thirtieth day of 

II 
.June last preceding the date of his order, or, with the previous sanc-
tion of .the Central Board of Revenue, if such salt factory has not pro-
duced, on an average, during the said three years, at least five thou-
sand maunds of salt per annum. 
CHAPTER VI 
ADJUDICATION OF CONFISCATIONS AND PENALTIES 
33. Where by the rules made under this Act anything is liable to Power of 
confiscation or any person is liable to a penalty, such confiscation or adjudica-
penalty may be adjudged- tion. 
(a) without limit, by a Collector of Central Excise; 
(b) up to confiscation of goods not exceeding five hundred 
rupees in value and imposition of penalty not exceeding two 
hlmdred . and fifty rupeeS, by an Assistant Collector of Central 
Excise: 
Provided that the Central Board of Revenue may, in the case of 
any officer performing the duties of an Assistant Collector of Central 
Excise, reduce the limits indicated in clause (b) of this section, and 
may confer on any officer the powers indicated in clause (a) or (b) 
of this section. 
• • • • 
35. (1) Any person deeming himself aggrieved by any decision or Appeals. 
order passed by a Central Excise officer under this Act or the rules 
made thereunder may, within three months from the date of such 
decision or order, appeal therefrom to the Central Board of Revenue, 
or, in such cases as the Central Government directs, to any Central 
Excise officer ~ot inferior in rank to an Assistant Collector of Central 
Excise and empowered in that behalf by the Central Government. 
Such authority or officer may thereupon make such further inquiry 
and pass such order as he thinks fit, confirming, altering or annulling 
the decision or order appealed against: . 
Provided that no such order in appeal shall have the effect of 
subjecting any person to any greater confiscation or penalty than has 
been adjudged against him in the original decision or order . 
• • • • 
36. The Central Government may, on the application of any persOl. Revision 
aggrieved by any decision or order passed under this Act or the rules by Cen-
made thereunder-by any Central Excise officer or by the Central tral Gov-
Board of Revenue, and from which no appeal lies, reserve or modify ~rnment. 
such decision or order. 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
make 
rules. 
Definiticma. 
CHAPTER VII 
SUPPI..EMENTAL Pl\oVISIONS 
37. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality ~f the 
foregoing power, such rules may-
• • • • 
(zz) authorise the Central Board of Revenue or Collectors 
of Central Excise appointed for the purposes of this Act to pro-
vide, by written instructions, for supplemental matters arising 
out of any rule made by the 'Central Government under this 
section. 
• • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962 (52 OF 1962) 
• • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • 
(6) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue constituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; , ot 1924. 
• • • • 

LOI{ SABHA 
• 
A 
BIlL· 
to provide for the constitution of separate Boards of 
Revenue for Direct Taxes and for Excise and Customs 
and to amend certain enaCUDents for the purpose of 
conferring powers and imposing duties on the said 
Boards. 
--
(Shf'i T. T. Kf'ishnamachaf'i, 
Mi"ister oj Finance.) 