~bl !to. 4' 011'5$ 
THE ALL-INDIA IN STITUTE 
OF 
MEDICAL SCIENCES BILL, 1955 
(As INTllODUCID IN LOl( SABRA) 

nUl No. 12 of 1,55 
THE ALL-INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES 
BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN· LoR:. SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide fOT tJhe establishment of an All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the All-India Institute of Medical Short title 
. and COIDJDeDoo 
SCIenCeS Act, 1955. cement. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) 'Fund' means the fund of the Institute referred to in 
section 17; 
10 (b) 'Governing Body' means the Governing Body of the 
Institute; 
(c) 'Institute' means the All·lndia Institute of Medical Sciences 
established under section 3; 
(d) 'member' means a member of the Institute; 
IS (e) 'regulation' means a regulation made by the Institute; 
(f) 'rule' means a rule made by the Central Government. 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Ollcial Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there 
shall be established for the purposes of this Act an institution to 
20 be called the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences. 
Definitions. 
Batablish-
ment and in-
corporation 
of the Institute. 

2 
(2) The Institute shall be a body corporate by the name afore· 
said having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, 
and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
Composition 4. The Institute shall consist of the following members, S 
of the Insti· namely:-tute. 
(a) the Vice-Chancellor of the Delhi University, ex.officio; 
(b) the Director-General of Health Services, Government of 
India, ex-officio; 
(c) the Director of the Institute, ex-ojJicio; 10 
(d) two representatives of the CentraL Government to be 
nominated 'by that Government, one from the Ministry of 
Finance and one from the Ministry of Education; 
(e) five persons of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist 
representing the Indian Science Congress Association, to IS 
be nominated by the Central Government; 
(f) four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian 
Universiti~s to be nominated by the Central Government 
in the manner prescribed by rules; and 
(g) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be 20 
elected from among themselves by the members of the 
House of the People and one from among themselves by 
the members of the Council of States. 
:?r("th~r~~~~_ . 5. It is hereby declared that the Institute shall be an institution 
tute as an of national importance. 2S 
institution "C 
national 
importance. 
Term of 
office of, and 
vacancies 
amoili. 
members. 
6. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of 
office of a member shall be five years from the date of his nomina-
tion or election: 
Provided that the term of office of a member elected under clause 
(g) of section 4 shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to be a 30 
member of the House from which he was elected. 
(2) The term of office of an ex.o1Jicio member shall continue so 
long as he holds the office in virtue of which he is such a member. 
(3) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill 
a casual vacancy shall ~ontinue for the remainder of the term of 3' 
the member in whose place he is nominated or elected. 
(4) An out-going member shall, unless the Central Government 
otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated 
or elected as a member in his place. 

3 
(5) An out-going member shall be eligible for l'c-nominatiod'" 01' 
re-election. 
(6) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Central Government but he shall continue in office 
5 until his resignation is accepted by that Government. 
(7) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such 
as may be prescribed by rules. 
7. (1) There shall be a President of the Institute who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government from among the members 
10 other than the Director of the Institute. 
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such 
functions as are laid down in this Act or as may be prescribed by 
rules or regulations. 
8. The President and members shall receive such allowances, if 
IS any, from the Institute as may be prescribed by rules. 
9. It is hereby declared that the office of President or member shall 
not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a member 
of either House of Parliament. 
10. The Institute shall hold its first meeting at such time and 
20 place as may be appointed by the Central Government and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of busi-
ness at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government; 
and thereafter the Institute shall meet at such times and places and 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of busi-
25 ness at its meetings as may be prescribed by regulations. 
11. (1) There shall be a Governing Body of the Institute which 
shall be constituted by the Institute from among its members in 
such manner as may be prescribed by regulations. 
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of the 
30 Institute and shall exercise such powers and discharge such func-
tions as the Institute may, by, regulations made in this behalf, confer 
or impose upon it. 
(3) The President of the Institute shall be the Chairman of the 
Governing Body and as Chairman thereof shall exercise such powers 
53 and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by regulations. 
(4) The procedure to be followed in the exercise of its powers 
and discharge of its functions by the Governing Body, and the 
term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the 
President of 
the IDlti-
tute. 
Allowance. of 
President 
andmem-
bers. 
Office of 
President or 
member not 
to disqualify 
for member-
ship of Par-
lialnCnt. 
Meetinas of 
the Inlritu-
teo 
Governinl 
Body and 
other Com-
mittees of 
the !nsritut. 

Staff of tl-e 
Institute. 
4 
m=bers of the· Governing Body shall 'be such as may· b:! prescribed 
by regulations. 
(5) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed 
by rules, the Institute may constitute as many standing committees and 
as many ad hoc committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power S 
or discharging any function of the Institute or for inquiring iI~to, Qr 
reporting or advising upon, any matter which the Institute may 
refer. to them. 
(6) A standing committee shall consist exclusively of members 
of the Institute; but an ad hoc committee may include p~rsons who 10 
are not members of the Institute but the number of such persons 
shall not exceed one-half of its total membership. 
(7) The Chairman and members of the GovemingBody and the 
Chairman and mem'bers of a standing committee or an ad hoc com-
mittee shall receive such allowances, if any, as may be prescribed IS 
by regulations. 
12. (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Institute 
who shall be designated as the Director of the Institute and shall, 
subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government 
in this behalf, be appointed by the Institute: ao 
PTovided that the first Director of the Institute shall be appointed 
by the Central Government. 
(2) The Director shall act as the Secretary to the Institute as 
well as the Governing Body. 
(3) The Director sl1all e.xercise such powers and discharge such 2S 
functions as may be prescribed by regulations or as may :be dele-
gated to him by the Institute or the President of the ,Institute or 
by the Governing Body or the Chairman of the Governing Body. 
(4) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf, the Institute may appoint such number of 30 
other officers and employees as may be necessary for the (xercise 
of its powers and discharge of its functions and may determine the 
designations and grades of such oth.er officers and employees. 
(5) The Director and other officers and employees of the Institute 
shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be qoverned 35 
by such conditions of service in respect of leave, pensio~, provi-
'" dent fund and other matters as may be prescribecl by r'!""'ulations 
made in this behalf. 
Location U. The Institute shall be located in New Delhi. of Lhe Institute. 

6 
14. The objects of the Institute shall be-
(a) to develop patterns of teaching in undergrilduate and post-
graduate medical education in all its branches so as to 
demonstrate a high standard of medical education to all 
medical colleges and other allied institutions in India;. 
(b) to bring together in one place educational facilities of the 
highest order for the training of personnel in all im-
portant branches of health activity; and 
(c) to attain self-sufficiency in postgraduate medical education. 
10 15. With a view to the promotion of the objects specified in 
section 14, the Instit,:te may-
(a) provide for undergraduate and postgraduate teaching in 
the science of modern medicine and other allied sciences, 
including physical and biological sciences; 
IS (b) provide facilities for research in the various branches of 
20 
3S 
such sciences; 
(c) provide for the teaching of humanities in the undergraduate 
courses; 
(d) conduct experiments in new methods of medical educa-
tion, both undergraduate and postgraduate, in order to 
arrive at satisfactory standards of such education; 
(e) prescribe courses and curricula for both undergraduate and 
postgraduate studies; 
<f) notwithsJanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, establish and maintain-
(i) one or more medical colleges with different depart-
ments, including a department of preventive and 
social medicine, sufficiently staffed and equipped to 
~undertake not only undergraduate medical education 
but also postgraduate mec»cal education in different 
subjects; 
(ii) one or more well-equipped hospitals; 
(iii) a dental college with such institutional facilities for 
the practice of dentistry and for the practical train-
ing of students as may be necessary; 
(iv) a nursing college sufficiently staffed and equipped 
for the training of nurses; 
(v) rural and urban health organisations which will form 
centres for the field training of the medical, dental and 
Objects of 
the Institute. 
Functions of 
the Institute 
• 

, 
nursing students of the Institut, as well as for research 
into community health problems; and 
(vi) other institutions for the training of different types of 
health workers, such as, physiotherapists, occupational 
therapists and medical technicians of various kinds; S 
(g) train teachers for the different medical colleges in. India; 
(h) hold examinations and grant such degrees, diplomas and 
other academic distinctions and titles in undergraduate and 
postgraduate medical education as may be laid down in. 
the regulations; 10 
(i) institute, and appoint persons to, professorships, reader-
ships, lecturerships and posts of any description in accord-
ance with regulations; 
(j) receive grants from the Government and gifts, donations, 
benefactions, bequests and transfers of properties, both IS 
movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testa-
tors or transferors, as the case may be; 
(k) deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the 
Institute in any manner which is considered necessary for 
promoting the objects specified in section 14; 2(). 
(1) demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be 
prescribed by regulations; 
(m) do all such other acts and things as may be necessary to 
further the dbjects specified in section 14. 
Payment to' 16. The Central Government may, under appropriation made by 2S 
the Institute. Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each 
financial year such sums of money and in such manner as may be 
considered necessary by that Government for the exercise of its 
powers and discharge of its functic:ms under this Act. 
Fund of the 17. (1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be 3(). 
Institute. credited-
(a) all moneys provid!d by the Central Government; 
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute; 
(c) all moneys r~ceived by the Institute by way of grants, 
gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; and 3S 
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner 
or from any other source. 
(2) All moneys credited to ~ Fund shall be deposited in such 
banks or invested in such'manner as the Institute may, with the 
approval of the Cent~ Government, decide. 40 

i 
(S) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of 
the Institute including expenses incurred in the exercise of its 
powers and discharge of its functions under section 15. 
18. The Institute shall prepare in such form and at such time Budfn! .of 
S every year as may be prescribed by rules a budget in respect of the nsUtute. 
the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and 
expenditure of ' the Institute and shall forward to the Central Gov-
ernment such number of copies thereof as may be prescribed by 
rules. 
10 19. (1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other Accounts 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts includ- and audit. 
ing the balance-sheet in such form as the Central Government may 
15 
by rules prescribe in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Com- ' 
ptroller and Auditor-General 'of India and any expenditure incurred 
by him in connection with such audit 'shall be payable by the Insti-
tute to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any per-
20 son appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts 
of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-Gene-
ral of India has in connection with the audit of the Government 
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the pro-
25 duction of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents 
and papers and to inspect the offices of the Institute as well as of 
the institutions established and maintained by it. 
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him 
30 in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be for-
warded annually to the Central Government and that Government 
shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
• 
20. The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its acti- Annual re-
vities during that year and submit the report to the Central Govern- port. 
35 ment in such form and on or before such date as may be prescribed 
by rules. 
21. (1) The Institute shall constitute fOr the benefit of its officers, Pension and 
teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to sueb J::didcDt 
conditions as may be prescribed by regulations, such pension and 8. 
40 6rovident funds as it may deem fit. 

8 
(2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been consti-
tuted, the Central Government may declare that the provisions of 
the Provident Funds Act, 1925, shall apply to such fund as if it XIX of 192$ 
were a Government provident fund. 
Authcntica- %2. All orders and decisions of the Institute shall be authenticat- S 
tion of the ed by the signature of the President or any other member authorised 
:::,sme:sd by the Institute in this behalf and all other instru~ents shall be 
of the authenticated by the signature of the Director or any other officer 
Institute. of the Institute authorised in like manner in this behalf. 
10 Acta and 23. No act done or proceeding taken by the Institute, Governing 
:~:is Body or any standing or ad hoc committee under this Act shall be 
invalidate~ questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, 
~i/acanaes> or defect in the constitution of, the Institute, Governing Body or 
such staoding or ad hoc committee. 
Recoanition 24. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical IS 
o!.-amedi~ Council Act, 1933, the medical degrees and diplomas granted by the XXVII of 
:r..nted"b';a Institute under this Act shall Pe -recognised medical qualifications 1933 
the' Institute. for the purposes of that Act and shall be deemed to be included in 
the First Schedule to that Act. . 
Grant of 25, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 20 
medical ~- the time being in force, the Institute shall have power to grant me-
Fa:";, ett dical degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles 
bIy ~e 'under this Act. Deutute. 
COntrol by 26. The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued 
Central Go- to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient 25 
vemmcnt. administration of this Act. • 
Disputes be- 27. If, in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and 
r::ti~t~::d discharge of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any dis· 
the Central pute arises between the Institute and the Central Government, the 
Government. decision of the Central Government on such dispute shall be final. 30 
Returns and 28. The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such 
information. reports, returns and other information as that Government may 
require from time to time. 
Power to 29. (1) The Central Government, after consultation with the In· 
mate rules. Btitute, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to 35 
carry out the purposes of this Act: 
Provided that consultation with the Institute shall not be neces-
sary on the first occasion of the making of rules llnder this section, 
but the Central Government shall take into consideration any sug-
gestions which the Institute may make in relation to the amendme~ 40 
of such rules after they are made. 

10 
TO 
9 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power. such rules may provide for all or any of the fol-
lowing matters, namely:-
(a) the manner of nomination of members under clause (f) 
of section 4: 
(b) the control and restrictions in relation to the constitution 
of standing and ad hoC-committees under sub-section (5) 
of section 11 ; . 
(c) the conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed 
by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, members 
of the Institute: 
(d) powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by 
. the President of the Institute: 
(e) allowances, if any, to be paid to the President and mem-
bers of the Institute: 
(f) number of officers and employees that may be appointed 
by the Institute and the manner of such appointment; 
(g) the form in which and the time at which the budget and 
reports shall be prepared by the Institute and the number 
of copies thereof to be forwarded to the Central Govern-
ment; 
(h) the form and manner in which returns and information 
are to be furnished by the Institute to the Central Gov-
ment; 
(i) any other matter which has to be or may be })rescribed 
by 1'\1les. 
(3) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as may be 
after they are made, be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
30. (1) The Institute may, with the previous approval of the Power to 
Central Government, make regulations consistent 'with this Act and make reItU 
30 the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act, and i.muns. 
without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations 
may provide for-
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings other than the 
first meeting, of the Institute, the time and place where 
35 such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at 
such meetings and the number of members necessary to 
form a quorum: 
(b) the manner of constituting the Governing Body and 
standing and ad hoc committees, the term of office of, and 
40 the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of, 
the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc committees: 

10 
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged 
by the President of the Instit4te and the Chairman of the 
Governing Body; . 
(d) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the Chairman and 
the members of the Gov'~ning Body and of standing and 5 
ad hoc committees; { , 
(e) the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body and 
standing and ad hoc committees in the conduct of their 
business, exerdse of their powers and discharge of their 
functions; io 
(f) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances and other con-
ditions of service of the Director and other officers and 
employees of the Institutf> including teachers appointed 
by the Ijl~titute; 
(g) the po~ts and duties of the Chairman of the Governing 15 
Body; 
(h) the powers and duties of the Director and other officers 
and employee~ of the Institute; 
(i) the management of the properties of the Institute; 
(j) the degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and 20 
titles which may be granted by the Institute; 
(k) the professorships, readerships, lecturership's and other 
posts which may be instituted and persons who may be 
appointed to such professorships, readerships, lecturer-
ships and other posts; 2S 
(l) the fees and other charges which may be demanded and 
received by the Institute; 
(m) the manner in which and the conditions subject to 
which pension and provident funds may be constituted 
for the ·benefit of officers, teachers and other employees 30 
of the Institute; 
(n) any other matter for which under this Act proviSions 
may be made by regUlations. 
(2) Until the Institute is established under this Act, any regula-
tion which may be made under sub-section (1) may be made by the 3~ 
Central Government; and any regulation so made may be altered 
or rescinded by the Institute in exercise of· its powers under suh-
section (1). 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
For improving professional l'''1npetence among medical practi-
tioners, it is neces~ry to place ~1 nigh standard of medical educa-
tion, both postgraduate and undergraduate, before all medical 
colleges and other allied institutions in the country. Similarly, for 
the promotion of medical research, it is necessary that the country 
should attain self-sufficiency in postgraduate medical education 
These objectives are hardly capable of realisation unless facilities 
of a very high orger for both undergraduate and postgraduate 
medical education and research are provided by a central authority in 
one place. The Bill seeks to achieve these ends by the establish-
ment 'in New Delhi of an institution under the naT""O of the All-India 
Institute of Medical Sciences. The Institute will- ..Ievelop patterns 
of teaching in undergraduate and postgraduate medical educatiun 
in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical 
education to all medical colleges and other allied institutions, will 
provide facilities of a high order for training of personnel in all 
important branches of health activities and also for medical re-
search in its various aspects. The Institute will have the power to 
grant medical degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions 
which would be recognised medical degrees for the purpose of the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1933. 
AMRIT KAUR 
NEW DELHI; 
The 3rd September. 1955. 
11 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
. The Bill contemplates the establishment of an All-India Institute 
of Medical Sciences as a body corporate. The Institute will establish 
and maintain one or more medical colleges, one or more well-equip-
ped hospitals, a dental college, a nursing college, rural and urban 
health organisations and other institutions for the training of differ-
ent types of health workers. Finances required by the institutions 
for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions shall be 
payable by th~ Central Government in the shape of grants-in-aid 
each year. At this stage it is not possible to frame an accurate esti-
mate of the manpower, the equipment, etc., needed to enable the In· 
stitute to exercise all the powers and discharge all its functions 
under the provisions of the Bill. The exact amount which will be 
needed by the Institute for these purposes can be properly determined 
only after the various constituents of the Institute are established. 
2. For the year 1955-56, the following amounts have been provided 
in the Demands indicated below:-
Demand No. 47-Medical Services for equip-
ment and meeting recurring ex-
penses. Rs. 42·68 lakhs. 
Demand No. 136--New Delhi Capital Outlay 
for construction works. Rs. 27·00 lakhs. 
Rs. 69'68 lakhs. 
3. Funds to be made available in respect of subsequent years will 
vary and will be determined from time to time. 
4. The Institute has been empowered to receive grants, gifts, do-
nations, benefactions, bequests or transfers from private bodies or 
individuals· 
5. All moneys placed at the disposal of the Institute will consti-
tute the "Fund" of the Institute. Un-utilised amounts in the "Fund" 
of the Institute at the end of the year will not lapse, but shall be 
taken into account in making funds available to the Institute in res-
pect of the subsequent year. 
12 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make. 
after consultation with the Institute, rules by notification in the om-
cia! Gazette to carry out the pUfPoses of the Act. The matters in 
respect of which such rules may be made are specified therein. 
These matters relate to the manner of nomination of representa-
tives of the medical faculties of the Indian Universities as members 
of the Institute; control and restrictions in relation to the constitu-
tion of standing and ad hoc committees; terms and conditions of ser-
vice of members of the Institute; po~ers and functions of the Presi-
dent of the Institute; allowances of the President and members of 
the Institute; number of officers and employees that may be appoint-
ed by the Institute and the manner of such appointment, etc. It is 
not possible at this stage to provide for these matters specifically in 
the Act. The Bill, however, prescribes that all such rules shall, as 
soon as may be, after they are made, be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament· 
2. Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Institute to make, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, regulations consistent 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. The 
matters in respect of which such regulations may be made are spe-
cified therein. These matters relate to the procedure for conducting 
business at meetings other than the first meeting of the Institute; the 
manner of constituting the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc 
committees; powers and functions of the President of the Institute 
and Chainnan of the Governing Body; the allowances of the Chairman 
and the members of the Governing Body and ot standing and ad hoc 
committees; the terms and conditions of service of the Director and 
other offtcers of the Institute, etc. The Institute has also been em-
powered to make regulations prescribing the degrees, diplomas and 
other academic distinctions and titles in undergraduate and post· 
graduate medical education that it will grant. Such regulations can 
only be made later. 
3, The delegated'legislation is of. a character normal to such Acts . 
. l 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
\.' . .. ~ 
to provide for the establishmcot of an All .. lndJa Institute of 
Medical Sciences. ; : . 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of 1II1icie rt7 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lot Sabha 
the, consideration of the Bill. 
GIPD-LAD-9 Sl LS-16-9-SS-I,7S0 
" . 
M. N.KAUI .. , 
8saettJrjl. 
(Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, 
Minister of Health) 