As mNTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ow

4-APR 1990

Pa NTL fi

Jo ot Bill No. 49 of 1990
————
THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTY-FIFTH. AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990,

A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amend-
ment) Act, 1990. fe. ४

2. In article 356 of the Constitution —
(a) in clause (4), after the second proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely: —

‘Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation issued
under clause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to
the State of Punjab, the reference in the first proviso to this
clause to “three years” shall be construed as a reference to
“three years and six months”’; y

(b) in clause (5), the following proviso shall be inserted at the
end, namely: — ! ¢

“Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the
Proclamation issued under clause (1) on the 11th day of May,
1987 with respect to the State of Punjab.”.

Short
title.

Amend-
ment of
article
356.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Under clause (4) of article 356 of the Constitution, no Proclamation
issued under that article and approved by both the Houses of Parliament
shall remain in force for more than three years. However, under clause
(5) of the said article a resolution approving the continuance in force
of a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of that article beyond a period
of one year cannot be passed by either House of Parliament unless the
two conditions relating to a Proclamation of Emergency being in opera-
tion in the whole or any part of the State and the certificate by the Elec-
tion Commission that the continuation of the Proclamation issued under
clause (1) is necessary on account of difficulties in holding general
elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State as specified in that
clause are met. The three year period in the case of Proclamation
issued on 11th May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab would be
ever on 10th May, 1990 and the said two conditions are also not fulfil-
led. The prevailing circumstances in the State do not hold out good
prospects for free and peaceful elections to the State Legislative As-
sembly. The representatives of various political parties who attended
the All-Party Meeting convened by the Governor of Punjab at Chandi-
garh recently were also of the view that congenial conditions should be
created first before holding the elections to the State Legislative As-
sembly. Clauses (4) and (5) of article 356 of the Constitution are.
therefore, proposed to be amended so as to facilitate the extension of
the said Proclamation up to a total period of three years and six months
in relation to the State of Punjab.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deir;
The 2nd April, 1990. MUFTI MOHAMMED SAYEED.


ANNEXURE

Extract FRoM THE Constrrution or Inpia ० है

* * * * *

356. (1) If the President, on zeceipt of a-report-from the - Governor
छा a State or otherwise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in
which the government of the State cannot be carried on in accordance
avith the provisions of this Constitution, the President may by, Procla-
smation—

(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Gov-
ernment of the State and all or any of the powers vested» in or
exercisable by the Governor or any body or authority in the State
other than the Legislature of the State;

(0) declare thal the powers uf the Legislature of/the State shall
be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament;

(c) make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear
to the President to be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the
objects of the Proclamation, including provisions for suspending in
whole or in part the operation of any provisions of this Constitution
relating to any body or authority in the State:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall authorise the President to
assume to himself any of the powers vested in or exercisable by a High
Court, or to suspend in whole or in part the operation of any provision
-of this Constitution relating to High Courts.

(2) Any such Proclamation may be revoked or varied by a subse-
quent Proclamation.

(3) Every Proclamation under this article shall be laid before each
House of Parliament and shall, except where it is a Proclamation revok-
ing a previous Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of two
months unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved
by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament:

Provided that if any such Proclamation (mot being a' Proclamation
revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued at a time when the House
of the People is dissolved or the dissolution of the House of the People
takes place during the period of two months referred to in this clause.
and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by the
Council of States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation
thas been passed by the House of the People before the expiration of
that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of
thirty days from the date on which the House of the People first sits after
its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty
days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by
“the House of the People.

Previn
sions in
case of
failure of
constitu-
tional ma-
chinery

in States,


4

(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to ope-
rate on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of issue
ef the Proclamation:

Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the conti-
6 in force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of
Parliament, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force
for a further period of six months from the date on which under this
clause it would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no such Procla-
mation shall in any case remain in force for more than three years:

Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People
takes place duritig any such period of six months and a resolution approv--
ing the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by
the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to the continuance
in force of suéh Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People
during the said period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the
expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the People
first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said
period of thirty days a resolution approving the continuance in force of
the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), a resolution
with respect to the continuance in force of a Proclamation approved
under clause (3). for any period beyond the expiration of one year from
the date of: issue of such Proclamation shall not be passed by either
House of Parliament, unless—

(a) a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, in the whole
of India or, as the case may be, in the whole or any part of the
State, at the time of the passing of such resolution, and

(b) the Election Commission certifies that the continuance in
force of the Proclamation approved under clause (3) during the
period specified in such resolution is necessary on account of diffi-
culties in holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly of
the State concerned.

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed, Minister of Home Affairs)