8W No. " of Jm 
THE RAJASTHAN AND MADHYA 
PRADESH (TRANSFER OF TERRI-
TORIES) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODlJCiD IN Lox SAMBA 
ON 3RD AUGUST, 1959) 

Bib No. 19 of 19S9 
THE RAJASTHAN ANn MADHYA PRADESH (TRANS" 
FER OF TERRITORIES) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the transfer of certain territories from. the StGte of 
Rajasthan to the State of Madhya Pradesh and for matters connected 
therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh Shat~. 
(Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959. 
S 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- DdAkion .. 
(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of October, 1959; 
(b) "assembly constituency", "council constituency" and 
"parliwnentary constituency" have the same meanings as in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950; 
10 (c) "sitting member", in relation to either HOUle of Parlia-
ment or of the Legislature of a State, means a person who, 
immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that 
House; 
(d) "transferred territories" means the territories specified 
IS in the First Schedule and transferred from the State of Rajas-
than to the State of Madhya Pradesh by section 3. 
3. (1) AP. from the appointed day, there shall be added to the Trar.afcr of 
State of Madhya Pradesh the territories specified in the First tef: rrito~~,' . rom n8 .a-Sehedule which shall thereupon cease to fonn part of the State of than to 
20 Rajasthan. ~~::. 

1 
(~) The transferred territories shall be included in, and fonn 
part of, Bhanpura pargana of Mandsaur district in the State of 
Madhya Pradesh. 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall be deemed to affect the 
power of the State Government to alter after the appointed day the ~ 
name, extent or boundaries of any district in the State of Madhya 
Pmdesh. 
Amendm~t 4. As from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to 
S~b~~l;lf: Constitution, under the heading "I. THE STATES",-
the 
the Consti-
tution. (a) in the entry against "6. Madhya Pradesh", after the 10 
words and figures "States Reorganisation Act, 1956", the words, 
brackets and figures "and the First Schedule to the Rajasthan 
and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959" shall 
be inserted; 
(b) in the entry against "11. Rajasthan", after the words 15 
and figures "States Reorganisation Act, 1956", the words, 
brackets and figures "but excluding the territories specified in 
the First Schedule to the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh 
(Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959" shall be inserted. 
Amendments 5. The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Consti- 2.0 
~{o~g~::.- tuencies Order, 1956, and the Delimitation of Council Constituencies 
(Madhya Pradesh) Order, 1957, shall have effect subject to the 
modifications specified in the Second Schedule. 
Provision a. 6. (1) The sitting members of the House of the People repre-
:c:~~ senting Mandsaur constituency in the State of Madhya Pradesh and 2S 
Kotah constituency in the State of Rajallthan shall, notwithstand-
ing the alteration in the extent of those constituencies by virtue of 
the provisions of this Act, continue to be members of the House of 
the People. 
Extension of 
jurisiiction 
of Madhya 
Pradesh 
Hiah Court. 
(2) The sitting members of the Legislative Assemblies of 30 
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan representing Garoth constituency 
and Begun constituency respectively shall, notwithstanding the 
alteration in the 'extent of those constituencies by virtue of the 
provisions of this Act, continue to be membera of the Aid 
Assemblies. 3S 
7. (1) As from the ~ppointed day.-
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh 
shall extend to the transferred territories; and 
(b) the High Court of Rajasthan shall have no jurisdiction 
in respect of the said territories. ",0 

3 
(2) If, immediately before the appointed day, there is any pro-
ceeding relatable to the transferred territories pending in the High 
Court of Rajasthan, then, notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (1), such proceeding shall be heard and disposed of by 
S that High Court. 
(3) Any order made by the High Court of Rajasthan in any 
proceeding with respect to which that High Court exercises juris-
diction by virtue of sub-section (2), shall, for all purposes, have 
effect. not only as an order of the High Court of Rajasthan, but 
10 also ~ an order made by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. 
(4) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the High 
Court of Rajasthan until that Court has disposed of all issues 
between the parties, including any issues with respect to the 
15 taxation of the costs of the proceedings and shall include 
appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, 
applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for 
writs; 
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as 
2.. including references to a Judge or Division Court thereof, and 
references to an order made by a Court or a Judge shall be 
construed as including references to a sentence, judgment or 
decree passed or made by that Court or Judge. 
8. As from the appointed day, any Act passed by the Legislature Approprla-
25 of Madhya Pradesh before that day for the appropriation of any ~~~eyaoffor 
money out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet any expenditure 
expenditure in respect of any part of the. financial year 1959-60!d :::ri:~f!; 
shall have effect also in relation to the transferred territories, and under exist-
it shall be lawful for the State Government to spend any amount ~Jati~tFro-
30 for those territories out of the amount authorised by such Act to be Ac.ts. 
expended for any services in that State. 
9. (1) All land and all stores, articles and other goods in the Asset. and 
transferred territories belonging t9 the Sta~ of Rajasthan shall, liabilitiea. 
as from the appointed day, pass to the State of Madhya Pradesh. 
35 Explanation.-In this sub-section, the expression "land" includes 
immovable property of every kind and any rights in or over such pro-
perty and the expression "goods" does not include coins, bank notee 
and currency notes. 

State Pinan-
cial Corpo-
ations IUd 
Stete Elec-
tricity 
Jouda. 
4 
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising out of • 
contract or otherwise, of the State of Rajasthan in relation to the 
transferred territories shall, as from the appointed day, be the rights, 
liabilities and obligations, respectively, of the State of Madh)'9 
Pradesh. 5 
10. A3 from the appointed day,-
(a) the Financial Corporations constituted under the State 
Financial Corporations Act, 1951, for the States of Rajasthan and 
~adh)'9 PradeSh, and 
(b) the State Electricity Boards constituted under the Electri- 10 
city (Supply) Act, 1948, for the said States, '4 of 1941. 
shall be deemed to have been constituted for tpose Statei"' with their 
areas as altered by the provisions of section 3. 
I!.ztenliOD.f 11. All laws which immediately before the appointed day extend 
la".. to, or are in force in. the Mandsaur district in the State of Madhya IS 
Pradesh but do not extend to, or are not in force in, the transferred 
territories shall, as from that day, extend to, or as the case may be. 
come into force in, the transferred territories; and all laws which, 
immediately before the appointed day, are in force in the transferred 
territories, but not in the Mandsaur district in the State of Madhya 20 
pradesh, shall, on that day, cease to be in force in the transferred 
territories, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before 
that day. 
Explanation.-In this section "law" includes any enactment, ordi-
nance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other 2S 
instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of 
~adhya Pradesh or Rajasthan. 
12. Any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered to en-
force any law extended to the transferred territories by section 11 
may. for the purpose of facilitating its application in relation to the 30 
transferred territories, construe the law in such manner, without 
affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the 
matter before the court, tribunal or authority. 
13. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of 
Rajasthan is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any pro- }S 
perty, rights or liabilities transferred to the State of Madhya Pradesh 
under this Act, that State shall be deemed to be substituted for the 
State of Rajasthan as a party to those proceedings, or added as a party 
thereto, as the case may be, and the proceedings may continue accord-
~ ~ 

5 
U. (1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the appoint- Transfer ef 
ed day before any court (other than a High Court), tribunal, autho- pPCroDdiIlJ ceedlOls. 
rity or oftlcer in any area which on that day falls within the State of 
Rajasthan shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to any part 
5 of the transferred territories, stand transferred to the corresponding 
court, tribunal, authority or officer in the State of Madhya Pradesh. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should 
stand transferred under sub-section (1), it shall be referred to the 
High Court of Rajasthan and the decision of that High Court shall be 
10 tlnal. 
(3) In this section,-
(a) "proceeding" includes any suit, case or appeal; and 
(b) "corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer" in 
Madhya Pradesh means-
IS (i) the court, tribunal, authority or oftlcer in which, or 
before whom, the proceeding would have lain if the proceed-
. ing had been instituted after the appointed day, or 
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or 
oftlcer in that State as may be determined after the appointed. 
day by the Government of Madhya Pradesh, or before the 
appointed. day by the Government of Rajasthan, to be the 
corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer. 
15. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding Effe~ of 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law. f:OO~:~~~t 
. with other 
laws. 
25 US. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to 
Act (including any diftlculty in relation to the transition under section ~ltio;.~ difti-
11 from one law to another law), the President may by order do 
anything not inconsistent with any such provision which appears 
to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty. 
30 17. (1) The Central Government may, by notitl.cation in the Oftlcial Power to 
Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act. make rul ... 
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in ses-
sion for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
35 session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follOWing, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
40 case may be, so however that any such modification or annulment 
. shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. l' . 

6 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[S" scctions 2(d) and 3] 
TluITORIBS TaANSP!IUtJID PROM THI! STATE or RAJASTHAN TO THE STATE or 
MADHYA PRADBSH 
The following territories compriscd within thc villages specified below in Bhensror,. S 
tahsil of Chittor district, namcly:-
---
Nameof Area in 
villqe 
Sheet No. Khasara 
No. 
Bighas Bilwal 
3 4 10 
Dotada 11 361 IZ4 10 
Il 362 814 
13 363 173 5 
J 3 364 ~7l 16 
14 36,5 926 14 J, 
14 366 I~ 16 
14 367 200 
14 368 202 16 
15 369 364 I~ 
t!" 370 239 7 
J. 371 14 18 
TOTAL 3,648 15 
Pipaida S '::0 730 
~. nl 49 25 6 22:1 ~)S 
, ll) ·142 IZ 
TOTAL 1,456 IZ 
B.,kheda 7 uS 10 
7 1I9 248 
8 120 292 I 30 
I 121 138 l 
TOTAL 678 I) 
GUNDToTAL . 5,784 Bigha. 
or 
1,085 AcfCs. 35 

1 
tHE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 5) 
PART I 
Modifications of the First Schedule to the Delimitation.' of Parliti-
, mentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956 
1. In Part "6-MADHYA PRADESH", the Note at the end shall 
be re-numbered as "NOTE I" and the following shall be added thereto, 
namely:-
"NOTE II: -Any reference to Mandsaur district in colu.m.n 3 
10 of this Part shall be taken to mean the area comprised within 
that district on the 1st day of October, 1959.". 
2. In Part "U-RAJASTHAN", the following Note shall be added 
at the end, namely:-
"NoT!::-Any reference in column 3 of this Part to Chittor 
15 district or Bhensrorgarh tahsil, shall be taken to mean the area 
comprised within that district or tahsil on the 1st day of October, 
1959.". 
20 
PART II 
Modificattons of the Second Schedule to the DeIimitatior. of Parlia-
mentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956 
1. In Part "6-MADHYA PRADESH", the Note at the end shall 
be re-numbered as "NOTE I" and the following shall be added thereto, 
namely:- I 
"NOTE:-II Any reference in column 3 of this Part to Bhan-
25 pura pargana of Mandsaur district shall be taken to mean the 
area comprised within that pargana on the 1st day of October, 
1959 .... 
35 
Z. In Part "n-RAJASTHAN", the following Note shall be added 
at the end, namely:-
"NOTE:-Any reference in column 3 of this Part to Bhensror-
garh tahsil of Chittor district shall be taken to mean the area 
comprised within that tahiil on the 1st day of October, 1959.". 
PART III 
Modification of the Delimitation of Council Constituencies 
(Madhya Pradesh) Order, 1957 
After the Table, the following Note shall be inserted, namely:-
"NOTE:-Any reference in column 2 of this Table to Indore 
Division shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that 
Division on the 1st day of October, 1959.". 

-" - ' ... ';.-
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The present site of the Gandhi Sagar Dam on the river Chambal 
lies partly in the State of Rajasthan and partly in the State of 
Madhya PradE!$h. The construction camp, a part of the dam site and 
some of the works at the site lie in Rajasthan territory although 
the works are being executed by the Madhya Pradesh Government. 
Both the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh Governments have agreed 
that in the interest of proper and smooth execution of this project, 
an area of 3,085 acres of land on the dam site may be transferred 
from the State of Rajasthan to the State of Madhya Pradesh. The 
Bill seeks to give effect to this transfer. 
2. The Bill makes the necessary supplemenal and incidental 
provisions releting to representation in the Legislatures, transfer 
of jurisdiction to the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, authorisation 
of expenditure. transfer of assets and liabilities to Madhya Pradesh 
and certain other matters. 
3. As required by the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution, the 
Bill was referred to the Legislatures of the States of Rajasthan and 
Madhya Pradesh by the President for expression of their views on 
the Bill. Both the State Legislatures have agreed to the principles 
and proposals contained in the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th July. 19~9. 
I 
GOVIND BALLABH PANT. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules generally to give effect to the provisions of the Bill when 
enacted. The rules, if any, will be confined to matters of procedure 
and other matters of minor detail relating to the enforcement of 
the provisions regarding transfer of territories. The delegation of 
legislative power is thus of a normal type. 

• 
Nam' 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION 
• • 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles 1 and 4] 
I. THE STATES 
• 
Territori,! 
.------------------------------------------------------------------• • 
6. Madhya Pradesh 
• • 
II. Rajasthan 
• • 
• • 
The territories specified in sub-section (1) 
of section 9 of the States ReorganisatiOll. 
Act, 1956. 
• • 
The territories specified in section JO eX" 
the States Reorpnisation Act, J956. 
• • 
10 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the transfer of certain territories from the State 
of Rajasthan to the State of Madhya Pradesh and for 
matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of proviso to article 3 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri G()f)ind Ballabh Pant, Minister oj Home Affairs) 