48 of 1956. 
:.~ As INTRODUCED IN tOE &suA. Ol'f 
., 6 J ... ,JV J • :' • 
I"" I 
Bill No. 49 of 1877 
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A. 
BILL 
to amend the National Highways Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the National Highways (Amendment) Act, Short 
1977. title. 
" 
5 2. In section 7 of the National Highways Act, 1956 (hereinafter refer- Amend-
red to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),- ment of 
10 
(i) after the words_"the use of ferries,", the words, figure" aDd 
letters "permanent bridges the cost of construction of each of. which 
is more than rupees twenty-five Iakhs and which are opeaed to 
traftlc on or after tbe lst day 01 April 1976," shall be iDaertecl; , 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that 
it is necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, by liJre noti-
fication, specify any bridge in relation to the use of which fees 
15 shall not be leviable under this sub-section.". 
3. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(i) for clause (b) of sub-section (2), the following clause shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(b) the rates at which fees for services rendered in relation 
to the use of ferries, permanent bridges, temporary bridges and, 
eectioD 
'I. 
Amend-
mentot 
aectJon 
t. 
" 
J 

Amen4-
mem of 
sectioD 
10. 
tunnels on any national highway may be levied, and the lnlDDr 
in which such fees shall be collected, under section 7;"; 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the followins sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon 5 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 10 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modifted form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 15 
under that rule." . 
.t. In section 10 of the principal Act, the portion beginning with the 
words and ftgure "and all rules made under section 9" and ending with 
the words "or the session immediately following" shall be omitted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJEcts ANb REASONS 
,. 
Section 7 of the National Highways Act, 1956, empowers the Central 
Government to levy fees for services -or beRefits rendered in relation to 
the use of ferries, temporary bridges and tunnels on national highways. 
1.'his ~~ction does not enable the levying of such fees on permanent 
bridges. With a view to facilitating the raising of additional resources 
fur the development of national highways, it is proposed to amend the 
said section 7 so as to enable such fees being levied on permanent· bridges 
costin.g more than rupees 25 lakhs and opened to traftic on I)r after 1st 
April, 1976. It is also proposed to include an enabling provision to 
exempt any bridge from the payment of fees if it is considered necessary 
in the public interest. 
2.. Opportunity is also being availed of to make some consequential 
amendments in the Act. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieVE the above. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 6th June, 1977. MORARJI DESAI. 

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 7 of the National Highways 
Act, 1956 so as to empower the Central Government to levy fees on per-
manent bridges also on national highways. It is proposed to levy fees 
on all permanent bridges costing more than Rs. 25 lakhs and opened to 
traffic on or after 1st April, 197\ The collection of fees would necessitate 
the construction of fee collection booths, includini barracks type staff 
accommodation, improvement of roads, etc., near such fee collection 
booths. Though the cost or. this account will be recovered from road 
users as investment forming part of the cost of the bridge, this will 
involve a non-recurring expenditure of ab-Jut Rs. 5 lakhs per booth. 
Some staff will also have to be employed for the purpose of collection of 
fees. The recurring expenditure on the employment of staff and' other 
incidental matters would be of the order of about Rs. 52 lakhs in the 
beginning for all the bridges to be covered by the proposed levy which 
works out to about Rs. 75,000 to Rs. 1 lakh per bridge on an average. 

Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to amend clause (b) of sub-section (I) 
of section 9 of the National Highways Act, 1956, so as to enable the Cen-
tral Government to make rules to provide for the rates at which fees for 
services rendered in relation to permanent bridges costing more than 
rupees 25 lakhs and opened to traftlc on or after 1st April, 1976 on any 
national highway may be levied and the manner in which such fees shall 
be collected. 
2. The matters in relation to which the power to make rules is pro-
pOled to be conferred on the Central Government are matters of proce-
dure and detail. The delegation of the legislative power is, therefore, of 
a normal character. 
. . 
6 

F~es for 
8ervices or 
benefits 
rendered 
on nation 
a1 high-
ways. 
Power to 
make 
rul. 
Laying of 
notifica-
tiona, 
rules, etc., 
before 
Parlia.. 
ment. 
~NExURt 
EXTRACTS FROM THE NA.'lIOJlfAl. HIGilwAYS Ae:r, 195~ 
(48 OF 1956) 
... ... ... ... ... 
7.(1) Tbe;,C8IlualGovemmeet liUy,:by ~tiicatioD in tbe Official 
Gazette" levy: ,b."at, suchratea .asmay ,be laid 'Cipwn by rules made in 
thi. behalf.kAr .,ryiees,or benefits rendt're4 10 relation" to the use of 
f~rrjes, temporary bridges and tunnels on national highways. 
... ... ... ... ... 
t. (1) ... ... ... ... ... 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
• ... ... ... • 
(b) the rates at which fees for services rendered in relation to 
the use of ferries, temporary bridges and tunnels on any national 
highway may be levied and the manner in which such fees shall be 
collected; 
... • ... • ... 
10. All notifications or agreements issued or entered into under this 
Act shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be 
after they are iSllued or entered into and all rules made under section 9 
shall be laid for not less than thirty days before both Houses of Parliament 
as soon as may be after they are made, and shall be subject to such modi-
fications as Parliament may make during the sesslon in which they are 
80 laid or the session immediately following. 
... ... ... • • 
-
• 
-.. 
,. 
, I 

, I 
~OK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the National Highways Act, 1956. 
(Sh7'i MoraTji R. Desai, 
Prime Ministe'l',) 