As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA oN 
... 7 ~ a,"~ '994 
Bill No. 49 of 1884 
THE BANKING SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 19M 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY " 1 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
BANKING SERVICE COMMISSION 
3. Establishment of the Commission. 
4. Appointment and terms of office of Chairman and members. 
5. Prohibition as to holding offices by Chairman or member on 
ceasing to be such Chairman or member. 
6. Removal and suspension of Chairman or the members from 
office in certain circumstances. 
7. Power of Commission to constitute committees. 
8. Secretary and other staff of the Commission. 
9. Authentication of orders ~nd other instruments of the Com-
mission. 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
10. Duty of Commission to hold competitive examhations or make 
selections for appointment to posts in public sector banks. 
11. Calling for applications and conduct of examinations or 
selections. 
12. Duty of public sector banks to communicate to the Commission 
of number of vacanr:ies. 
13. Cases in which Commission may not be consulted. 
14. Duty of Commission to make recommendation, 
15. Communicated vacancies to be filled only on the rec()mmenda-
tion of the Commission. 
16. Power of Central Government to entrust other advisory functions 
to the Commission. 
17. Reservation of posts for candidates belonging to Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes and other categories of persons. 
18. Fund of the Commission. . 
19. Payment to the Commission. 
20. Budget of the Commission. 
21. Accounts and audit. 
22. Annual report. ... 

CLAUSES 
(ii) 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
23. Obligation as to secrecy . 
. 24. Chairman, members, etc., to be public servants. 
25. Certain defects not to invalidate acts or proceedings. 
26. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
27. Commission not liable to be taxed. 
28. Delegation of powers. 
29. Amendment of Act 14 of 1947. 
30. Returns and information. 
31. Power to make rules. 
32. Power to make regulations. 
33. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
34. Power to remove difficulty. 

CORRIGPt_ 
t4 
,co" 
'\, 
THE 
BANKING 
sm 
VICE 
(x)MMISSIo~1 
BILL, 
""1~e4 
(To 
.'reJAs 
introduced 
iD,Jl4K' 
:Sabha) 
1 • 
Page 
8, 
line 
14,-
!cu.:. 
"or" 
~ 
h", 
f" 
2. 
Page 
9, 
line 
23,-
!Q.I. 
"from" 
~ 
"f~rm" 
-
3. 
Page 
9, 
line 
2h,-
!Ql: 
".t"orwardeed" 
NBW 
DElliI; 
May 
4 
1ge~ 
Vciisakha 
1 , 
1906 
(Saka) 
~ 
"rorwar~ed 
11 
... ... 

10 
IOof 1949, 
15 
Bill No. 49 of 1984 
'-... 5 
THE BANKING SERVICE COMMISSION BILL, 1004 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a Commission for the 'recruitment 
and selection of o~ers for appointment to services and poBts! in. 
public sector banks and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER T 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking Service Commission Act, 
1984. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Centr..al. Government 
lllay, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appoInted for 
different provisions or this Act. 
1. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "banking company" has the meaning assigned to it in the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949; 
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Commission,; 
(r) "Commission" means the Banking Service~ Commission, 
established under sub-section (1) of section '3; 
(el) "grade", in relation to a public sector bank, means a grade 
for officers as specified in the rules or. as the case may be, the 
regulations of th~ b~nki 
Short 
title 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Defini-
tions. 

Establish-
mentof 
the Com-
miaion. 
Appoint-
mentand 
terms of 
office of 
Cnairman 
and 
members. 
(e) "junior management grade", in relation to a public sector 
bank, means the lowest grade of officers in that bank; 
(f) "member" means a member of the Commission but does 
not include the Chairman; 
(g) "notification" means a notification published in the Offtcial 5 
Gazette; 
(h) "officer" means an officer of any grade; 
(i) "'prescribed" !lleans prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(i) "public sector bank" means- 10 
(i) a corresponding new bank. specified in the First Sche-
dule to the Banking' Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970; 5 of 1970. 
(ii) a corresponding new bank specified in the First Sche-
dule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of J 5 
Undertakings) Act, 1980; 40 of 1980. 
(iii) the State Bank of India constituted under the State 
Bank of India Act, 1955; 23 of 1955. 
(iv) a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959; 20 38 of 1959. 
(k) "regulation" means a regulation made under this Act; 
0) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of Indta, constitut-
ed under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 2 of 1934. 
(m) "Secretary" means the Secretary of the Commission; 
(11) "vacancy" includes a newly created post which has not 25 
been filled in. 
CHAPTER II 
BANKING SERVICE COMMISSION 
3. (1) With effect from such date as tlie Central Government may, 
by notification specify in this behalf, there shall be established for the 30 
purposes of thi." .. Act a Commission, to be called the Banking Service 
CommissioD. 
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate baving perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose 
of property and to contract, and may by the said name sue and be sued. 35 
(3) The Head Office of the Commission shall be at Delhi or at such 
other place as the Central Government may, by notification, specify . 
. 
4. (1) The Central Government shall. by notification, appoint 3. 
person to be the Chairman of the Commission and not more than eight 
other persons to be members of the Commission: 
Provided that at least one member shall be fro~ amongst persons 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes. 

1 of 1956. 
1 of 1956. 
15 of 1948. 
18 of 1964. 
28 of 1981. 
~ 
il of 1981. 
31 of 1956. 
... 
62 pi .1 11(13. 
3 
(2) The Chairman and members shall be persons who, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, are men of ability, integrity and standing 
and have special knowledge of, or practical e~l1ience in, financial, 
economic or business administratiQn or in the administration of Gov-
5 ernment or in any other matter which would render such persons 
suitable for appointment as Chairman or ~mber: 
Provided that as nearly as may be one-half of the members shall 
be persons who, on the date of their respective appointments, have had 
such experience for not less than ten years in a banking company or in 
10 any public sector bank or Reserve Bank or in an institution wholly or 
substantially owned by the Reserve Bank or a public financial institu-
tion. 
!:IO 
25 
30 
35 
Explanation I.-For the purposes of this section and of section 5,.-
(a) each of the foUowing imtitutions shall be deemed to be a 
public financial institution, namely:-
(i) the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of 
India Limited, a company formed and registered und« the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
(ii) the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India 
Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956; 
(iii). the Industrial Finance Corporation of India, establish-
ed under section 3 of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 
1948; 
(iv) the Industrial Development Bank of India, established 
under section 3 of the Industrial Development Bank of India 
Act, 1964; 
(v) the Export-Import Bank of India, established under 
section ::; of the Export-Import Bank of India Act, 1981; 
(vi) the National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Develop-
ment, established under section 3 of the National Bank for 
Agricultural and Rural Development Act, 1981; 
(vii) the Life Insurance Corporation of India, established 
under section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956; 
(viii) the Unit Trust of India, established under section 3 
of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963; 
(ix) any other financial institution which is declared by 
the Central Government, by notification, to be a public financial 
institution; 
40 (b) an institution shall be deemed to be substantially owned by 
the Reserve Bank if, in .the capital of such institution, that Bank 
has not less than forty per cent.· share. 
I~xplanation H.-For the purposes of this section and section 17, the 
expressions "Scheduled Castes" and "Scheduled Tribes" shull have the 
4') meanin.g$ Tespect.ively assigned to them in article 366 of the Constitu-.tion. . . 

Prohibi-
tion as to 
holding 
offices by 
Chairman 
ormem-
ber on 
ceasing 
to be such 
Chairman 
or 
member. 
Removal 
and sus-
pension of 
Chairman 
or the 
members 
from 
office in 
~rtain 
circum-
stances. 
_., 
4 
(3) The Chairman or any member shall hold office for a term of 
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he 
attains the age of Sixty-five years, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that-
(a) the Chairman or any member may, by writing under his 5 
hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office; 
J,b) the Chairman or any member may be removed from his 
office in the manner provided by this Act. 
(4) The other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and 
members shall be such as may be prescribed. 10 
(5) If the office of the Chairman becomes vacant or if the Chair-
man is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or 
any· other cause, such member of the ComDiission as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by order, specify, shall discharge the functions of the 
Chairman up to the date on which a new Chairman is appointed or, as 15 
the case may be, the Chairman resumes his duties. 
5. A person who holds office as Chairman or member shall, on his 
ceasing to hold such office by reason of the expiration of his term or 
otherwise, be ineligible for re-appointment in the .commi.ssi.on or for 
employment under the Government of India or of any State or in the 20 
Reserve Bank or in any institution wholly or substantially owned by the 
Reserve Bank or in any public sector bank or any banking company 
or in a public financial institution: 
Provided tha.t a member to whom this section applies, shall be 
eligible for appointment as Chairman, but shall not be eligible for any 25 
other employment. 
6. (1) The Central Government may remove from office the Chair-
man or any member, who--
(a) is adjudged an insolvent, or 
(b) is convict~d of an offence involving moral turpitude, or 
(e) is, in the opinion of the Central Government, unfit to con-
tinue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or body, or 
, 
(d) engages, during the term of office, in any paid employment 
outside the duties of his office, or 
30 
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to 35 
affect prejudicially his functioning as the Chairman or a member, 
or 
(f) has so abusefl his position as to render his continuance in 
office undesirable. 
(2) Notwith&tanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 40 
Chairman or any member shall not be removed from office on the 
ground specified in (~lause (d) or clause (e) or clause (f) of tha,t sub-
section unless the matter has been referred to an Inquiry Officer 

1 of 1172. 
Appointed under sub-section (3) and such officer has, after an inquiry, 
held in accordance with such procedure as the Central Government may 
specify in this behalf, reported that the member ought, on such 
grounds, to be removed. 
5 (3) For the purpose of holding an inquiry under sub-section (2), the 
Central Government may, by order, appoint, as an Inquiry Officer, a 
person who is holding or has held the office of a Judge of the Supreme 
Court or of any High Court. 
(4) The Central Government may suspend from office the Chainnan 
10 or any member in respect of whom a r~ference has been made to an 
Inquiry Officer under sub-section (2), pending such inquiry. 
(5) The terms and conditions of servic~ of any Inquiry Officer 
appointed under sub-section (3) shall be such as the Cantl'al Govern-
ment may, by order, specify. 
15 7. (1) The Commission may, in such manner and subject to such 
conditions and restrictitms as may be prescribed, constitute one or more 
committees con&isting wholly of its members or partly of it~ members 
and partly of other persons and delegate to any committee so constitut-
ed such of the functions and powers of the Commission as may be 
20 specified in the rules made by the Central Government: 
Provided that the Commission may constitute any committee either 
with, or without, the Chairman as one of the members of such com-
mittee. 
(2) The sittitlg fee and travelling allowance payable to persons, other 
25 than the Chairman and members for attending any meeting of the com-
mittee, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
8. (1) The Commission may, \Wth the previous sanction of the Cen-
tral Government, appoint a Secretary for the efficient discharge of its 
functions under this Act. 
30 (2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
(3) Subject to such regulations as may be made in this behalf, the 
Commission may appoint such other employees as it may think neces-
sary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act on such 
35 terms and conditions as the Commission may, haVing regard to the terms 
and conditions of service of the comparable posts in the Central Gov-
ernment, determine with the previous sanction of the Cenb'al Govern-
ment. 
9. (1) All orders and instruments issued by the Commission shall 
40 be authenticated by the signature of the Secretary or any other em-
ployee of the Commission authorised by the Chairman in this behalf. 
(2) Orders or instruments issued by the Commission and authentL 
cated in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be 
evidence of the matters rec;orded ther~in and shall be admissible in 
45 evidence notwithstandirig anything contained in the Indian Evide',n,ce 
Act, 1872, or in any other law for the time being in force. 
Power of 
Commis-
sion to 
cOD6titute 
commit-
tees. 
Secretary 
and other 
stat! of 
the Com-
mission. 
Authenti-
cation of 
orders 
and other 
instru-
mentsol 
the Com-
mission. 

Duty of 
Commis-
sion to 
lJold com-
petitive 
exam~na­
tions or 
make 
selections 
for appo-
intment 
to posts in 
public 
sector 
banks. 
Calling 
forappli-
cations 
and con-
duct of 
examina-
tions or 
selec-
tions. 
Duty ot 
public 
sector 
banks to 
communi-
cate to 
the Com-
mission 
otnwn-
berol 
vacancies. 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
10. It shall be the duty of the Commission to conduct ey.sminations 
or to make selections or both for appointments in public sector banks 
for filling vacancies in- 5 
(a) posts of officers required to be filled by direct recruitment; 
(b) posts of officers of and above the rank of Assistant General 
Manager or of its equivalent rank required to be filled by promo-
tion; and 
(c) such other posts as the Central Government may, by noti- J 0 
fication, specify. 
11. (1) The Commission shall call for applications from such category 
of persons and in such manner as may be specified in the regulations 
and conduct examinations or make selections Qr both having regard to 
the requirement of section 17 and the vacancies communicated to it 15 
under section 12: 
Provided that such examinations or selections or both shall be made 
in accordance with the principles specified in the regulations. 
(2) The fee payable on an application under sub-section (1) shall 
be such as may be specified by regulations and such fee shall not exceed 20 
eighty rupees. 
12. (1) It shall be the duty of every public sector bank to communi-
cate to the CommisSion-
(a) twenty-five per cent. of the estimated total number of 
vacancies in the junior management grade in the general category, 25 
• (b) all other vacancies in posts of offtcers required to be filled 
by direct recruitment, 
(c) vacancies in posts of officers of and above the rank of 
Assistant General Manager or of its equivalent rank required to be 
filled by promotion, 30 
~nd such communication shall be sent in respect of all such vacancies 
which <Ire likely to occur during the unexpired portion of the year in 
which this section comes into force, as soon as may be after such com-
mencement and in respect of all such vacancies as are likely to OCCUI 
during each subsequent year, as soon as may be after the commence- 35 
ment of such year: ~ . ¥ 
Provided that in relation to junior management grade in the general 
category, the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is 
necessary so to do in the interests of the public sector banks, by noti-
fication, raise the percentage of vacancies to be communicated to the 
Commission to thirty-three and one-third per cent. 40 
(2) Communications of vacancies referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
be made· in such form and in such manner as may be specifted in the 
regulations. 

ExpLanation.-For the purposes of this section, "junior management 
grade 10 the general category', 10 relatlOn to a pl'blic sector bank, means 
aU. categortes of post'S In the jumor managemem grade as specified in the 
rules or, as the case may be, the regulatlOns of tne bank other than such 
5 cal.egoL',es of posts as ~ntl L:entral Uovernment may, having rtlgard to the 
nature of suCh posts, declare, by notification, to be posts of a technical 
category. 
j _. _ ••. - --,-, 
13. It shall not be necessary to consult the Commission in regard to 
the selection of a person-
10 (a) for appointment to a post in the junior management grade 
on compassionate grounds or oloher special grounds (in pursuance of 
the scheme framed by a public sector bank in (!onsultatJon with the 
Commission and with the previous sanction of the Central Govern-
ment) ; 
15 (b) if the person appointed is not likely to hold the post for a 
period of more than one year, and it is necessary in the interests of 
the public sector bank to make the appointment immediately and 
reference to the Commission will cause undue delay: 
Provided that-
20 (1) such appointment is made in the manner specified by the 
Commission by regulations and is reported to the Commission as 
soon as it is made; 
(ii) if the appointment continues beyond a period of six 
months, a fresh estimate as to the period for which the person 
25 appointed is likely to hold the post shall be made and reported 
to the Commission; and 
(iii) if such estimate indicates that the person appointed is 
likely to hold the post for a period of more than one year from 
the date of appointment, the Commission shall immediately . be 
go consulted in ~gard to the filling of the post. 
14. It shall be the duty of the Commission to make, on the basis of the 
results of examinations conducted or on the basis of the selection ma$ie 
by it or, as the case may be, on the basis of both, recommendations to each 
public sector bank in such manner as may be specified by regulations for 
35 appointments to fill the vacancies communicated to it by such bank under 
section 12. ,. 
15. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
award, settlement or agreement, or in any judgment, decree or order of 
any court or tribunal or other authority or in any other law in force for 
40 the time being, appointments to all the vacancies required to be com-
municated to the Commission under section 12 shall, on or from such date 
as the Commission may notify in respect of each public sector bank, be 
made by such public sector bank only on the recommendation of the 
Commission, except where consultation with the Commission is not neces-
45 sary under this Act, 
(2) If, in any year, the Commission is unable to make recommendation 
for appointment to all the vacancies communicated to it by a public sector 
bank under section 12, or if the public sector bank is unable, in any year, 
Cases in 
which 
Commis-
sion may 
not be 
consulted, 
Duty of 
Commis-
sion to 
make rn-
commen-
dation, 
Commu-
nicated 
vacancies 
to be 
filled only 
on the 
recom-
menda-
tion o!. 
~~~~:.-

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
entrust 
other ad-
visory 
functions 
to the 
Commis-
sion. 
Reserva-
tion of 
posts for 
candidates 
belonging 
to Sche-
duled 
Castes 
and Sche-
duled 
Tribes 
and other 
categories 
of 
persons. 
Fund of 
the Com-
mission. 
Payment 
to the 
Commis-
sion. 
8 
to make appointments on the basis of recommendations made ·W the 
Commission, the vacancies may be carried forward to the subsequent 
year, to be filled in the said manner: 
Provided that the public sector bank may, in consultation with the 
Commission, fill such vacancies temporarily in such manner and for such 5 
period as the Commission may, by regulations, specify. 
16. The Commission shall discharge such functions of an advisory 
nature as the Central Government may, by notification, entrust to it. 
17. The Central Government may, by order, '(ilrect that in relation to 
every public sector bank, reservations in favour Of the Scheduled Castes, 10 
Scheduled Tribes and other categories of persons !!1Ull! be made in such 
mann'!r and to such extent as it may specify: 
Provided that in giving any direction as aforesuct, the Central Gov-
ernment shall have due regard to the reservation OJ: posts made for the 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other c8teJOries of persons in 15 
relation to recruitment to the services of the Government and to the gene-
ral need, and special requirements, of such public IIP.ctor bank. 
18. (1) The Commission shall have its own Fund and all the receipts 
of the Commission shall be credited to the Fund and all payments by the 
Commission shall be made therefrom. 20 
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks 
or invested in such manner as the Commission may, subject to any gene-
ral or special order maje by the Central Government in this behalf, 
decide. 
(3) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for perform-. 2') 
ing its functions uQ,der this Act and such sums shall be treated- as expen-
diture payable out of the Fund of the Commission. 
19. (1) The Central Government may, subject to any rules that may 
be made in this behalf, direct every public sector bank to pay to the 
Commission such fee as it may determine and the aggregate amount of 30 
the fee so determined shall not exceed the expenses incurred by the 
Commission. 
(2) The aggregate amount of fee payable under Bub-section (1) shall 
be apportioned .by the Central Government between different public sec-
tor banks and in making such apportionment in relation to a public 35 
sector bank, the Central Government shall have due regard to the demand 
and time liabilities of that public sector bank. 
(3) For the purpose of meeting the expenditure of the Commission, 
the Central Government may, by general or specW order, direct the 

10 of 1949. 
1 of 1956. 
1 of 1956. 
9 
payment by every public sector bank of an advance of such amount u 
it may specify and the advance so made shall be appropriated or adjusted 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Explancztion.-The expressions "demand liabilities" and "time liabili-
5 ties" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Bank-
ing Regulation A~t, 1949. 
20. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time each 
year as :may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the year next ensuing 
showing the estimated receipts and expenditure, and submit the same 
10 to the Central Government for approval. 
15 
21. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prewe an annual statement of accounts for such 
period, in such form, at such time and in such manner as may be pres-
cribed. 
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall b,! audited by a person who 
is qualified to act as an auditor of a company under section 2261 of the 
Companies Act, 1956, and the auditor shall receive such remuneration 
as the Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, 
fix. -
(3) In conducting the audit, the auditor shall have the same rights and 
duties as are posse!!!!p.d bv an auditor of a comoanv AS jf the Commission 
were a company within the m~aning of the Companies Act. 1956. 
22. The Commission shall prepare once every year. in such from and 
at such time as may be prescribed, an annual- report giving a full' account 
25 of its activities during the pr~vious year. and copies thereof alon!!" with 
copies of its annu~l account.o; and auditor's report shall be forwardeed to 
the Central Government amf that Government shall cause the same to 
be laid before. both Houses of Parliament. 
CHAPrER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
23. The Chairman and members and the SeC'retary or other employees 
of the Commission, and every member of any committe~ constituted 
under sub-section (1) of section 7, shall maintain strictest secrecy regard-
ing the affairs of the Commission and shall not divulge, directly or in-
35 dir"!Ctly. any information of a confidential nature to a member of the 
public unless compelled to do so by any judicial or other authority or 
unless instructed to do so by a superior oftlcer in the discharge of his 
duties. 
24. The Chairman and members and the Secretary or other employees 
40 of the Commission, and every member of any committee constituted 
under 'Sub-section (1) of section 7 shall b~ deemed to be a public servant 
4S of 1860 within the meaning of section 21 of the IJ:l.dian Penal Code. 
25. (1) All acts done by the Chairman and members and the members 
of any committe~ constituted under· sub-section (1) of section 7, acting 
45 in good faith, shall. notwiths~ndlng any defect in their appointment or 
procedure, be valid~ - -- .. -~ ... -\ 
Budgctot 
the Com-
mission. 
Accounts 
and audit. 
Annual 
report. 
Obliga-
tion as to 
secrecy. 
Chail'-
man, 
members, 
etc., to be 
public 
servants. 
Certain 
detects 
not to in-
validate 
acts or 
nroceed-
ings. 

Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Commis-
sion not 
liable to 
be taxed, 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 14 of 
1947. 
Returns 
and infor-
. mation. 
Power to 
make 
Rules. 
19 
(2) No . act or proceeding of the Commission or of any committee 
thereof shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existen-ce of any 
vacancy therein or defect in the constitution of the Commission or the 
committee, as the case may be. 
26. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 5 
Central Government or the Commission or any committee constituted 
under sub-section (1) of section 7 or any member of the Commission or 
of such committee or the Chairman or Secretary or other employee of 
the Commission for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done under this Act or any rule made thereunder. 10 
27. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961, 
or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to income-tax" 
surtax or any other tax on income, profits or gains, the Commission shall 
not be liable to pay any tax or surtax In respect of-
(4) any income, profits or gains accruing or arising out of the 15 
Fund of the Commission or any amount received in that Fund; and 
(b) any income, profits or gains derived, or any amount received, 
by the Commission. 
28. The Commission may, by general or special order. delegate to the 
Chairman, any member, Secretary or any employee of the Commission, 20 
subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified 
therein, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may deem fit. 
29. For the purposes of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the Central 
Government shall be deemed to be the appropriate Government in rela-
tion to an industrial dispute concernin~ the Commission and the deftni- 25 
tion of "appropriate Government" in that Act shaH have effect accord-
ingly. 
30. (1) The Commission shall furnb;h to the Central Government such 
returns or other information with respect to its properties or activities as 
the Central Government may. from time to tjme, require. 30 
(2) The Commission may. for the purpose of enabling it to 'discharge 
its functions under this Act, call upon any public sector bank to give such 
statements or furnish such particulars as the Commission may deem fit 
and every such bank shall comply with the same. 
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 35 
carrying out the provbdons of this Act. 
(2) Tn particular. and witlmut prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following mat-
ters, namely:-
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and 40 
members; • 
(b) the sitting fee and travelling allowanl"e payable to person!!. 
other than the Chairman and members, for I'Itten'ding any meetin~ of 
the committee, under sub-section (2) of section 7; 
(c) the terms and conditions of service of the Secrp.tarv lln'fpr 45 
Bub-section (2) of section 8; 
43 of 1"1. 

II 
(4) the category of persons for whom any vacancy or percentage 
of vacancies in a public sector bank may be reserved by the Central 
Government; 
(e) the procedure for determination of the fee to be paid by 
every public sector bank to the Commission under section 19; 
(I) the form in which and the time within which the Commission 
shall prepare and submit its budget to the Central Government under 
section 20; 
(g) the period for which, the form and manner in which and the 
10 time within which the Commission shall prepare its annual statement 
of accounts under sub-section (1) of section 21; 
(h) the form and manner in which and the date by which the 
Commission s'hall prepare an annual report giving a full account of 
its activities during the previous year and submitting the same to 
15 the Central Government under section 22; 
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
32. (1) The Commission may, with the previous approval of the Cen-
tral Government. by notification, make regulations, not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder. to provide for 
20 all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose 
of giving effeet to the provisions of this Act. 
10 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, name-
ly:-
(a) the matters referred to in sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(b) the manner in which, and the category of persons from whom, 
applications may be called for appearing at examinations. selections 
or t€sts held by the CommiS'Sion under sub-section (1) of section 11; 
(e) the principles in accordance with which candidates shall be 
selected for different posts under the proviso to sub-section (1) of 
section 11; 
(d) the fee payable by candidates intending to appear at exami-
nations, selections or tests conducted by the Commission under sub-
section (2) of section 11; 
(e) the form and manner in which communication of vacancies 
under sub-section (2) of section 12 shall be made; 
(I) the manner in which appointments may be 'm~de to fill any 
vacancy without consulting the Commission; 
(g) the manner in. which and period for which appointments 
may be made to fil1 vacancies in relation to which the Commission 
is unable to make a recommendation; 
(h) the number of places and time at which the CommiS'Sion 
shall conduct examinations or tests for recruitment to different posts; 
(i) generally for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Com-
~ _IAA' 
45 ~~101\. 
Power to 
make re-
gulations. 

Rules and 
regula-
tions to 
be laid 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulty. 
III 
33. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the.! session immediately following the session or the successive 5 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
nile or regulation, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation, a'S the case may b~, should not be made, the rule or regu-
lation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 10 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule or regulation. 
34. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by or.der, do anything, not. inconsistent 
with such provisions, for the purpose of removing the difficulty: 1,1) 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of 
three years from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the 
pre.!sident. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
. ,~ 
While reviewing the then existing alT8ngements for 1he recrultment 
and man-power planning in the public !'tector banks, the Banking Com-
mission had recommended the establishment of an independent common 
recruitment· agency for all the public sector banks on the lines of the 
Union Public Service Commission so that objective, rationaLe and 
impartial selections could be ensured. Government had accepted this 
recommendation of the Banking Commission. Accordingly, >the Banking 
Service Commission Act, 1975 was enacted by Parliament to provide 
for the establishment of a Banking Service Commission. 
2. Before the Commission established under the Banking Service 
Commission Act, 1975 could stallt functioning, the Act was repealed in 
1978. Thereafter, Banking Service Recruitment Boards were established 
by way of an alternative machinery to effect recruitment of officers and 
clerks in the public sector banks. The working of the Recruitment 
Boards for over five years has shown deficiencies such as duplication of 
efforts and wastage of resources on the recruitment of officers from 
different regions. It was, therefore, considered necessary to make some 
modifications in the exislting process for the recruitment of officers in the 
public sector banks so that the.re is economy in expenditure, speedier 
conduct of recruitment and jUdicious placement and improved quality 
of _candidates. The Bill seeks to give effect to this idea for providing for 
the establishment of a body corporate to be called "The Banking Service 
Commissipn ". 
3. The proposed Commission will be responsible for the direct recruit-
ment of officers iR. all the 28 public sector banks by conducting exami-
nations or making selections. 25 per cent. of the vacancies in the junior 
management grade in the general category are to be filled in by direct 
.recruitment. The Bill also seeks to vest in the Commission the power to 
make appointments on promotion to the posts of Assistant General 
Managers and above in the public sector banks. 
4. The proposed Commission will consist of a Chairman and not more 
than eight members of whom not l<:!ss than half shall be persons with 
experience in, or knowledge of, banking and financial institutions. The 
expenii·ture of the Commission is proposed to be met mainly from the 
fees to be paid by the public sector banks on whose behalf the recruit-
ments are to be made by the Commission. The BilJ seeks to exempt the 
Commission from payment of taxes on income, profit and gain. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. Notes on clauses 
explain the various provisions 'of the Bill. 
NEW DEun; 
The 17th April, 1984. PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 

14 otes on ciauses 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to define the various expressions used in 
the Bill. 
Clause 3.-This clause provides for the establishment of the "Banking 
Service Commission" with effect from a date to be notified by the Central 
Govemmen1, as a body corporate with headquarters at Delhi or at such 
other place as the Central Government may, by notification, specify, 
Clause 4.-This clause seeks to provide for the appointment and 
terms of office of the Chairman and members of the Commission. The 
clause lays down the criteria for the selection of the Chairman and 
members and provides that as nearly as one-half of the members shall 
be persons having had experi-ence for not less than ten years in banking 
or related activities. This clause further stipulates that at least one of 
the members shall be from persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or 
the Scheduled Tribes. This clause also provides that the Chairman and 
members will have a tenure of five years or can continue until they 
attain the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier. 
Clause 5.-This clause seeks to provide that the Chairman or a member 
of .the Commission shall be ineligible for future employment under the 
Government of India or in a State Government or in the Reserve Bank 
of India or in any institution wholly or substantially owned by the 
Re-serve Bank of India or in any banking company or any public financial 
institu';ion. This clause also prohibits the Chairman or a member from 
being reappointed for another term, but a member shall be eligible for 
appointment as the Chairman. 
Clause 6.-Thls clause seeks to lay down the procedure for removal 
and suspension of the Chairman and members of the Commission from 
office in cer~ain circumstances. 
Clause 7.-This clause provides for the constitution of one or more 
committees by the Commission and for delegation of such of the func-
tions and powers of the Commission as may be specified in the rules. 
Clause S.-This clause provides for the appointment of a Secretary 
with the previous sanction of the Central Government and other em-
ployees of the Commission and for the determination of thei,r 'terms and 
conditions of office. 
Cla,'use 9.-This clause seeks to lay down the procedure for authenti-
cation of orders and other instrume~s of the Commission. 
Clause to.-This clause seeks to provide that the duty of the Commis-
sion will be to conduct examinations or selections or both for all appoint-
ments to be made to the various grades of officers in the public sector 
banks. It shall also provide for the selection of officers: on promO'1:ion of 
and above the rank . of Assistant General Manager or its equivalent rank 
in the public sector banks. 
14 

I~ 
Clause 11.-This clause 'Seeks ,to provide for the calling for applicatioDa 
and conduct of examinations o.r selections or both f.or recruitment of 
officers in the public sector banks and also -!or the collection of fees from 
candidates. 
Clau.se l2.-This clause makes it obligatory on ~ part of a public 
sector bank to communicate to the Co~iS'Sion 25 per cent. of the esti-
mated total number of vacancies in ,the junior management grade in the 
general category. This clause also makes it obligatory on the part of 
the public sector banks to communicate to ,the Commission all other 
vacancies of officers for which direct recruitment is to be made and the 
vacancies of officers of and above the rank of Assistant General Manager 
for which appointments are to be made; by promotion. This clause further 
empowers the Central Government to raise the above referred percentage 
Df 25 to a maximum of 33-1l3. 
Clause l3.-This clause specifies the cases in regard to which consul-
tation with the Commission shall nOit be necessar,y. 
Clause l4.-This clause lays down that it shall be the duty of the 
Commission to make recommendations to each of ,the public sector banks, 
on the basis of the results of the examinations conducted by it or selec-
tions made by it, for appointments to fill vacancies communicated to it 
by such bank. 
Cbause IS.-This clause provides that notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any award, settlement or agreement, or in any 
judgment, decree or order of any court or tribunal or other authority 
or in any other law in force for the time being, appointments to all the 
vacancies communicated to the Commission shall be made by the public 
sector banks only on the recommendations of the Commission except 
where consultation with the Commission is not necessary. It, however, 
provides for such vacancies to be filled in tempor8,l'ily, after consultation 
with the Commission, for such periods as may be specified by the-
Commission. 
Clause I6.-This clause empowers the Central Government to entrust 
to the Commission such other functions of an advisory nature as it may' 
think fit. • 
0ause 17.-This clause provides for the reservation of posts for 
candidates be!onging to the Scheduled Castes; the Scheduled Tribes and 
other . categories of persons. The clause provides that while giving 
directions to the bank the Central Government shall give due regard"to 
the reservation of poSIts made fOJ' the Scheduled Castes the Scheduled 
Tribes and other categories Of persons in relation to ~itment to the 
services of the Government and to tthe general need in,. and special re-
qui.rements of, the bank concerned. 
~u8e 18.- Thls clause deals with the Fund of theCotnmission. 
Receipts of the Commission shall be credited to the Fund and payments 
would be made therefrom. 
Cla1(sP' 19.-This. clause provides that the Central Government may, 
?y general or s~lal order and subject to anY{ rules 1hat may be made 
In this regard,dlrect every public sector bank to pay to the Commission 
such. fee as it may determine. In determining the fee, due regard will 
be gIven to demand and time liabilities of the bank. 

16 
Cla.u.se 20.-This clause provides that the Commission shall prepare a 
budget in respect of the year next ensuing in such fonn and at such time 
each year as may be prescribed. 
Cla.u.se 21.-fl'hios clause provides for the maintenance of proper 
accounts records and preparation of annual statement of accounts in the 
form and manner as may be prescribed and fOl' the audit of the accounts 
of the Commission. 
C'l4use 22.-This clause lays down that the annual report of the 
Commission along with copies of 1he Commission's annual accounts and 
auditor's report shall be laid before both the Houses of Parliament. 
Clause 23.- This clause provides for the obli~tion of secrecy on the 
part of the Chairman, members, Secretary and other employees of the 
Commission. 
Clause 24.-Thi'S eIeuse declares the Chairman, member, Secretary 
and othe.r employee of the Commission to be a public servant within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 2!>.-This clause provides that the acts done by the Chairman, 
members and members of any of the committees in good faith $hall be 
valid and that defects in the constitution of the Commission or itw com-
mittees shall not invalidate the actions or proceedings of the Commission 
or its committees. 
ClCluse 26.-This clause gives protection to the CODUlliasion, the 
Government, the Chairman, members, Secreta.ry or other employees of 
1he Commission for an)'thing which has been done in good faith. 
ClatJle 27 ......... 1'hia c~UJe. exempli the Commission from the liability to 
pay taxes on income, profits or gaiDs. 
CIou.e 28.-This clause authorises the Commission to delegate i. 
powers to the Chairman, any member, the Secretary or any employee 
of the Conuniaaicm. ' 
Clauae It.-This clause seeks to amend the Industrial Disputes Act to 
make it clear that the appropriate Government in relation to the proposed 
Commission will be the Central Government. 
CLause 30.-This clause lays down that the returns and other informa. 
1ion as required by the Central Government sh$l1 be· furnished by the 
Commiasion. It also provides that the Commission may also call upon 
the pUblic sector banks to give such information a':; the Commission may 
,reem fit to enable it to discharge its duties. 
Clawl! 31.-This clause empowers 1.1e Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the provisions contained in the Act. 
Clou.e 32.-Thiil clause empowers the Commission, with the previous 
4lPpro",al, of t~ Central Govt!rnment, to make regulations to provide for 
aU matters for which provision is necessary or elq>edient for the purpose 
of Q"ivln~ effect .to the provisions of. the Act. 
o Clctuse 33.-Tbis clause provides for 1~eo laying of rules and regulations 
ma~ unc;ler the . Act before each House of ~arlia.ment. . 
.. CI4we 34.~'I'his· chius~ empo~er!! the C~ntral Government to issue 
an order for the P1l.rPo8e Of removing any difficulty in giving effect te 
the nrovisions of the Act. -

.. FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-cl,a~se (1) of clause 3 ()f the Bill provides for the establi'Shment 
of the Banking Service Commission from such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification, specify in ,this behalf. Si~ce the expendi-
ture on the Co~mission will be borne by the public ~ctor banks, the 
establishment of the Commission will not involve any direct expenditure 
from the Con'$olidated Fund of India. However, the exi$ting machinery 
of the Government will not be able to cope witb the additional work 
which will have to be done in the Ministry of Finance (Departmen<t; of 
Economic Affairs, Banking Division) with regard to the establishmea.t 
of the Commission, and appointment Of some staff woq1d be necessary. 
This will involve expenditure from 1he Consolidated Fund of India. It 
is estiroated ,that this will be of the order ot one lakh twenty-dve 
th.w..sa.nd rupees of a recurring nature in a year and twenty-five thouund 
rupees of a non-recurring na1ure. 
2. The Bill. if enacted. is not likely to involve any other expenditure. 
17 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 31 of the Bill empowe,rs the Central Government to make rules 
for matters relating to the terms and conditions of serVice of the 
Chair.man and other members the sitting &!e and travelling allowance 
payable .to persons other than' the Chairman and members far attending 
any meeting of the committees of the CommiS'Sion, the terms and condi-
tions of service of the Secretary, the category of persons for whom any 
vacancy or percentage of vacancies in a public seetar bank may be 
reserved by the Central Government, the procedure for determination of 
the fee to be paid by every public sector bank to the Commission, pre-
paration and submission of the budget of the Commission, its annual 
statement of accounts and annual report and any other matter which is 
to be, or may be, prescri1)ed. 
2. Clause 320 of the Bill empowers the Commission to make, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, re~ations ,to p.rovide 
for methods of appointment, conditions of service, scales of pay, duties 
and conduct of the employees of the Commission, the manner in which 
the category of persons from which application'S .may be called, the 
principles according to which candidates shall be selected, the fees pay-
able by candidates. .the farm and manner in which vacancies shall be 
communicated to the Commission, the manner in which temporary 
appointments may be made and unfilled vacancies may be filled, the 
number of times and places at which the Commission shall conduct 
examinations and generally for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the 
Commission. 
3. The aforesaid matters in respect Qf which power is proposed to be 
confer.red 011 the Central Government to make rules or on the Commission 
to mak~ regulations relate ·to matters of detail and it is hJi,rdly possible 
to prOVIde for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of the legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

1.5 of 1948. 
34 of 1948. 
27 of 1953. 
31 of 19.56. 
61 of 1981 
47 of 1961. 
.52 of 1963. 
37 of 1964. 
42 of 1975. 
21 of 1976. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DIsPUTES ACT, 1~7 
(14 OF 1947) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the.re is anything repugnant in the subject or Defini. 
context,- lions. 
(a) "appropriate Government" means-
(i) in relation to a:ny inHtrstrial dispute concerning any 
induRtry carried on by or under the authority of the Central 
Government, or by a railway company or concerning any such 
controlled industry as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Central Gevernment or in relation to an indusbnal dispute 
concerning 1he Industrial Finance Corporation of India estab-
lished under section 3 of the Industrial Finance Co.rporation 
Act, 1948, or the Employees' State Insurance Corporation estab-
lished under section 3 of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 
1948, or the "Indian Airlines" and "Air-India" Corporations 
established under section 3 of the Air Corporations Act, 1953, 
or the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under 
section 3 of the Life Insurance. Corporation Act, 1956, or the 
National Bank for AgricultUre and Rural Development establish-
ed under section 3 of the National Bank for Agriculture and 
Rural Development Act, 1981, Or the Deposit Insurance Corpora-
tion established under section 3 of the Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration Act, 1961, or the Unit Trust of India established under 
section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, or the Food Cor-
poration of India established under section 3 or a Board 
of Management established for two or more contiguous Sta1es 
under section 16, of the Food Corporations Act, 1964, or the Bank-
ing Service Commission established under section 3 of the Banking 
Service Commission Act, 1975, or a Regional Rural Bank estab-
lished under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, 
or a banking or an insurance company, a mine, an oil-field, a 
Cantonment Board, or a major port, the Central Government 
and ' 
(ii) in relation to any other industrial dispute, the State 
Government; 
• • • • • 
19 

LOK SAaRA 
& 
mu:. 
to provide for the establilhment of a Commission for the recruitment 
aacl selection of o&Ilcers for appointment to services and posts in 
public sector ~ and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
(Shri PNInIIb KumiI1' MukIter;ee, 
Minister of FinClnce.) 