BID No. f9 of l.a,.......r"""" 
THE INDIAN PORTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1952. 
(As IN:TRODUOKD IN THB HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Porta Act, 1908 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. 8lIort UUe.-'fhis Act may be called the Indian Porte (Amendment) 
Act, 1962. 
2. Amactm&Dt of aection It, .Act XV of 1908.-In section 14 of the 
Indian Ports Act, 1908 (hereinafter referred to 08 the principal Ac~,-
(a) in sub-seotion (2) for the words "six months" the words "one 
month" shall be substituted; and 
(b) after sub-section (3). the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
• • (4) Where the sale prooeedsof the property are not 4Jufficient 10 
to meet tho expenses and further sum aforesaid, the owner of 
the veasel at the time the vessel was wrecked, stranded or sunk 
sha.ll b,e liable to pa.y the deficiency to the conservator on demand. 
and if the deficiency be not paid within one month of such demand 
the com:;ervator may recover the deficiency from such owner in 15 
the manner laid down in sub-section (2) of section 57 for recovery 
of expenses Bnd damages or in any other manner according as the 
deficiency does not or does exceed one thousand rupees." 
3. e8Ddm8Dt of I&Ctlon 31, .Act XV of 1908.-In sub-section (1) of 
tcction 81 of the principal Act, for the wOl'ds ., and no vessel of any mea- 20 
surernent less than two hundred tons and exceeding one hundred tons" 
the words "and no mechanically propelled vessel of any measurement less 
than two hundred tons and no other veln;el of any measurement less than 
two hundred tons and exceeding one hundred tons" ~hllll be substitutt'd. 

2 
t:;'fA'rBMEN'f OF OBJECTS AN:D IiEASONS 
Section 14 of the Iudiull Port~ Act, 1908, empowers the conservator 
of Ii port to raise, remove or destroy any vessel wrecked, stranded or BUnk 
within port limits, to sell lIouy property recovered from the wreckage by 
public auction and to make over the sale proceeds to the person entitled 
to the property ttfter deducting the reusonable expenses incurred by the 
conservator and a further sum of twenty per cent. of such openses, Thia 
section does not provide for Iluy remedy where expenditure incurred by the 
conservator may exoeed the sale proceeds of the property reoovered. It is 
considered necessary to remove this lucuna by providing for the recovery of 
the excess amount from the owner of the vessel. It is also proposed to 
reduce to one month the period of six months prescribed in sub-section (2) 
of section 14, during which salvaged property of a. non-perishable nature 
cannot ·be sold by pllb1i(~ auction os this period appears to be too long. 
2. Under section HI of the Indian Ports Act, 1008, vessels of Olore than 
two hundred tOilS mensurement nrc required to have a. pilot of the port on 
board when Oloving within port limits. Vessels between 100 and 200 tons 
measurement cannot I)ly without· a pilot lInless specifically authorised Ie 
","riting to do so by the COI1Sfll'vntor or all officer uuthorised by him in tA1a 
behalf. 'Experience has, however, revealed the necessity for extending the 
latter prt'vision to mechanically propelled vessels of less than 100 tons also. 
The present Dill provides for these amendments to the Indian Poris 
Acfi, 1008. 
LAL DAHADUR. 
Nnw DELHI; 
The ,;Tl1 .Tune, 1952. 

3 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRAOTS FROM 'rifE INDIAN l)Oln'S ACT, 1008 (XV OF 1908) 
.. * ... • • ... 
Section 14 (2) and (8) 
* * * ... * ... 
(2) If IlllJ' property recovered by a. conservator acting under sub-section 
(1) is unclaimed or the persOll claiming it fail.! to pay the reasonable expen-
scg incurred by the conservator under that sub-section and a further sum 
of twenty per cent. of the amount of such expenses, the conservator may 
sdl the property by public auction, if the property is of a. perishable nature, 
forLhwhh, and, if it is not of a perishable' nature, at any time not less than . 
six months after the recovery thereof. 
(3) The expenses a.nd further sum a.foresaid shall .be pa.yable to the 
conservator out of the sale-proceeds of the property, and the balance shall 
be paid to the person entitled to the property recovered, or, if no such 
person appears and claims the balance, shall he held in deposit for pay-
ment, without interest, to any person thereafter establishing his right 
thereto : 
Provided that thtl person inakes his claim within three years from the 
dat,e of the lIale .. ... ... ... ... 
Section 81 (1) 
31. Moving of veBBIll8 without pilot or. permi88ion of ha,bouT-fntHtBT.-
(1) No vessel of the lneasurement of two hundrea tons or upwa.rds shall 
enter, leave or be moved in any port to which this sootion has been special-
ly extended without having a pilot, harbour-master or assistant of the port-
officer or harbour-master on board; 
and no vessel of any measurement less tho.n two hundred tons and 
exceeding ooe hundred tons shall enter, leELvc or be moved in any such 
port without having a pilot, harbour-master or Rssistant of the port-officer 
or harbour master on board, unless authority in writing so to do has been 
obtained from the constrvator or some officer empowered by him to give 
such authority: 
Provided that the Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that in any port specified in slich notification the provisions 
of this sub-soction !;hall not apply to sailing vp!!sels of !lny meELsure.ment not 
tlxceeding 8 measurement so specified. . 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
BILL 
• 
further to amend the Indian Ports. Aot, 1008 
(S",ri Lal Bahad'Ur, 
Minister Jor Transport and RailwaYB) 