As unTRODUCED In Lok Sasya on

\2-3-41,

3

Bill No. 49 of 1991
ee

THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1991

A
BILL

further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of
Parliament Act, 1954.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. This Act may be called the Salary, Allowances and Pension of
Members of Parliament (Second Amendment) Act, 1991.

2. In section 5 of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members
5 of Parliament Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) —
(a) in sub-section (2), after the words “performed by him”, the

words “either alone or along with a companion,” shall be inserted;

(0) after Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:—

“Explanation IIl—For the purposes of sub-section (2), any
journey performed by the companion shall be added in
computing the limit of sixteen journeys specified in the proviso
to that sub-section.”,

10

Short
title.

Amend
ment of
section

5.


Amend-
ment of
section
8A.

2

3. In section 8A of the principal Act—

(०) in sub-section (1) —

@ for the portion beginning with the words “With effect
from the commencement of the Salaries and Allowances of Mem-
bers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1976”, and ending with
the words “whether continuous or not”, the following shall be
substituted, namely:—

“With effect from the commencement of the Salary,

Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliameat (Second

Amendment) Act, 1991, there shall be paid a pension of one

thousand two hundred and fifty rupees per mensem to every

person who has served for a period of five years, whether
continuous or not”;

(+) for the existing provisos, the following provisos shall
be substituted, namely:—

“Provided that with effect from the commencement of
the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parlia-
ment (Second Amendment) Act, 1991, any person who has
served as aforesaid for a period which falls short of five
years by not more than sixty days, shall also be paid a
pension of one thousand two hundred and fifty rupees per
mensem:

Provided further that where any person has served as
aforesaid for a period exceeding five years, there shall be
paid to him an additional pension of one hundred rupees per
mensem for every year in excess of five years subject to the
condition that the maximum pension payable to a member
shall not exceed five thousand rupees per mensem;

Provided also that every person, who has served for any
period as a member of the Provisional Parliament and who
is not entitled to any pension under the foregoing provisions
of this sub-section, shall, with effect from the commence-
ment of the Salary, Allowances and. Pension of Members
of Parliament (Second Amendment) Act, 1991, he entitled
to a pension of one thousand two hundred and fifty rupecs
per mensem.”;

(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be

substituted. namely: —

“(3) Where any person entitled to pension under sub-section
(2) is also entitled to any other pension—

(०) as a member of a State Legislature; or

(6) from the Central Government or any State Gov-
ernment or any corporation or body owned or controlled
or financially aided by the Central Government or any State
Government or any local authority,
under any Iaw or otherwise, such person shall be entitled to
receive the pension under sub-section (1) in addition to such
other pension:

Provided that the agererate of the vention to which such
person is entitled shall not exceed five thousand runees.”.

= 3

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

105 of
1976.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Joint Committee on Salary and Allowances of Members of
Parliament has made several recommendations for increasing the pension
and existing facilities of Members of Parliament and ex-Members of
Parliament. It is proposed to implement the following recommendations
as accepted by the Government of India:—

(i) a Member of Parliament may have a companion while per-
forming air journey; so, however, that the air journey per-
formed by the companion will be computed towards the existing
ceiling of 16 single air journeys;

(ii) increase in minimum pension to Rs. 1250 .00 per mensem to
ex-Members of Parliament and additional pension to Rs. 100.00 per
mensem for each additional year of membership beyond 5 years,
subject to maximum ceiling of Rs. 5000.00 per mensem;

(iit) grant of pension as ex-Member to be in addition to other pen-
sions subject to a maximum ceiling of Rs. 5000.00 per mensem on
all such pensions. :

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

SATYA PRAKASH MALAVIYA.
New ऐश;
The 9th March, 1991.

1


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 8A of the Act, to provide
for increase in the amount of pension for ex-Members of Parliament.

2. The above provisions would involve a recurring expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India to the extent of Rs. 3.45 crores per
annum approximately. ‘

3. The provisions of the Bill will not involve any other expenditure
either recurring or non-recurring.



ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION oF MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT Acr, 1954

(30 oF 1954)

* . * * ct

5. (1) * * * . *

(2) Every member shall be entitled to an amount equal to the fare
by air for each single journey by air [other than a journey referred to
in section 4 or the second proviso to sub-section (1) of this section or
section 6C] performed by him from any place in India to any other
Place in India during his term of office as such member:

Provided that no member shall be entitled to any payment under this
sub-section in respect of any journeys in excess of sixteen performed by
him during any year. ;

* Explanation I.—The provisions of clause (c) of sub-section (1) and
of sub-section (2) of section 4 shall, so far as may be, apply to travelling
allowances payable under this section as they apply to travelling allow-
ances payable under that section.

Explanation Il.—For the purposes of this section, “year” means,—

(i) in the case of a person who is a member at the commence-
74 of 1985. ment of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parlia-
ment (Amendment) Act, 1985, the year beginning with such

cormmencement and each of the subsequent years;

(ii) in the case of a person who becomes a member after such
commencement, the year beginning with the date on which his term
of office as such member commences and each of the subsequent
years. | ||

. . . . . .

8A. (1) With effect from the commencement of the Salaries and
Allowances of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1976, there
shall be paid a pension of five hundred Tupees per mensem to every
Person who has served for a period of five years, whether continuous or
not,— |

105 of 1976,

() as a member of the Council of States; or
(i) as a member of the House of the People; or
5

Travelling
allow-
ances

for inter-
mediate
journeys.

Pension,


6

(iii) partly as a ber of the Council of States and partly
as a member of the House of the People; or |

(iv) as a member of the Provisional Parliament; or
(७) partly as a member of the Provisional Parliament and—

(०) partly as a member of the Council of States and partly
as a member of the House of the People, or

(b) partly as a member of the Council of States or partly
as a member of the House of the People:

Provided that with effect from the commencement of the Salary,
Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act,
1981, any person who has served as aforesaid for a period which falls
short of five years by not more than sixty days, shall also be paid a pen-
sion of five hundred rupees per mensem:

Provided further that where any person has served as aforesaid for
a period exceeding five years, there shall be paid to him an additional
pension of fifty rupees per mensem, for every year in excess of five:

Provided also that every person, who has served for any period as
a member of the Provisional Parliament and who is not entitled to any
pension under the foregoing provisions of this sub-section, shall, with
effect from the commencement of the Salary, Allowances and Pension
of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985, be entitled to a pen-
sion of five hundred rupees per mensem. | ' .

Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this sub-section “Provisional
Parliament” shall include the body which functioned as the Constituent
Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately before the commence-
ment of the Constitution. |

Explanation 2.—Where in any General Election held for the purpose
of constituting a new House of the People, poll could not be taken in any
Parliamentary constituency or any part thereof on the date originally
fixed under clause (d) of section 30 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951 on account of snowfalls or other weather conditions of an ex-
treme nature in such constituency or part thereof or on account of such
constituency or part thereof being inaccessible for any reason, the mem-
ber elected to such House from such constituency shall be deemed, for
the purposes of this sub-section, to have served as member for such
House from the date of publication, under section 73 of the said Act, of
the notification relating to such House.

(3) Where any person entitled to pension under sub-section (1) is
also entitled to any pension from the Central Government or any State
Government or any corporation owned or controlled by the Central
Government or any State Government or any local authority, under any
law or otherwise; then— |

(a) where the amount of pension to which he is entitled under
such law or otherwise, is equal to or in excess of that to which he

21 of 1981,

‘74 of 1985

48 of 1951


7

is entitled under sub-section (1), such person shal! not be entitled to
any pension under that sub-section; and , |

(0) where the amount of pension to which he is entitled under
such law or otherwise, is less than that to which he is entitled under
sub-section (1), such person shall be entitled to pension under that
sub-section only of an amount which falls short of the amount of
pension to which he is otherwise entitled under that sub-section:

Provided that any pension (whether known as Swatantrata Sainik
Samman pension or by any other name) received by such person as a
freedom fighter shall not be taken into account for the purpose of this
sub-section and such person shall be entitled to receive such pension in
addition to the pension to which he is entitled under sub-section (1).

* . * * *


LOK SABHA

a
BILL

further to amend the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of
Parliament Act, 1954. 1

(Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya, Minister of Petroleum and Chemicals and
Parliamentary Affairs)