1
Short title and
commencement.
THE UNIVERSITY OF PATNA  BILL, 2011
By
DR. BHOLA SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish and maintain a teaching and residential University at Patna and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
 follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the University of Patna  Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be established and maintained a teaching and residential University at
Patna (hereinafter referred to as the University) by the Central Government.
3. (1) The President of India shall be the Chancellor of the University.
(2) The Chancellor of the University shall appoint such person as Vice-Chancellor as
he may deem fit and appoint such other Officers as may be required.
Bill No. 49 of  2011
Establishment
of a University
at Patna.
Officers of the
University.
10
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the efficient functioning of the University.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the terms and conditions of service of Officers of the University;
(b) appointment of authorities of the University;
(c) provision of instructions in such branches of learning as the University may,
from time to time, determine and to make provision for research and for the advancement
and dissemination of knowledge;
(d) the institution of Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships,
and other teaching or academic posts required by the University and to appoint persons
to such Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other posts;
(e) creation of administrative, ministerial and other posts and appointments
thereto; and
(f) performance of all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental
or conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the University.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Patna University is one of the oldest Universities of the country. Patna University was
established under an Act of Legislature in 1917. This is the first university in Bihar and
seventh in India. The University is facing acute financial crisis. As the State of Bihar itself is
reeling under acute shortage of resources, it has not been able to help the Patna University.
Sixteen new Central Universities have been established w.e.f. 15.1.2009 in hitherto uncovered
States (except Goa), by an ordinance promulgated by the President of India and Bihar got its
first Central University i.e. Central University of Bihar. But given the unique position and
significance of Patna University, it seems only natural  that the Patna University is converted
into a Central University.
Accordingly, it is proposed to convert Patna University into a Central University.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHOLA SINGH
July 18, 2011.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment and maintenance of the Central
University at Patna. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India in respect of expenses in connection with the proposed University.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees  one hundred crore per annum is
likely to be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved in as much as only the existing
University is converted into a Central University.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill.
As the rules to be made relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish and maintain a teaching and residential University at Patna and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Bhola Singh, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—845LS(S3)—08-08-2011.