1
THE W ASTE MANAGEMENT BILL, 2016
By
SHRI KONDA VISHWESHWAR REDDY, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for the segregation and re-cycle of municipal solid waste; use of re-cyclable
waste in waste-energy plants for generation of energy and transportation of
non-re-cyclable waste into landfills and for matters
connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Waste Management Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 49 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “large manufacturing facility” means any manufacturing facility with an
investment of more than rupees thirty crore;
(c) “municipal authority” means Municipal Corporation, Municipality, Nagar
Palika, Nagar Nigam, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council including Notified Area
Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under the relevant statutes and
entrusted with the responsibility management and handling of municipal solid waste;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) “segregation” means separation of municipal solid wastes into organic,
inorganic, re-cyclable and hazardous wastes;
(f) “waste-energy plants” means plants where waste is treated using different
techniques to produce any form of energy; and
(g) “waste generating unit” means any entity, household or and large
manufacturing facility where waste is generated and which require waste disposal.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of every waste generating unit to segregate waste before its
disposal.
(2) In case of large manufacturing facility the owner or the in-charge of the facility
shall, as the case may be—
(a) ensure that the waste is segregated, re-used and re-cycled at source; and
(b) undertake transportation of re-cyclable waste to waste-energy plants and
the non-re-cyclable waste to the notified landfills,  as the case may be.
(3) The waste generating units shall be liable to pay for the waste generated by them
that is sent to the landfills on the basis of the weight of the waste.
4. It shall be the duty of the Municipal authority to—
(a) ensure collection of segregated waste from the waste generating units;
(b) ensure that the segregated waste collected and transported is not mixed
with any other waste or any material, to the extent that mixing would hamper its
re-use, re-cycle, further treatment or its use in waste to energy plant;
(c) undertake treatment of organic waste through bio-degradation such as
vermin composting, mechanical composting by window method or any other suitable
method as approved by the Central Pollution Control Board or the State Pollution
Control Board, as the case may be; and
(d) transport the non-re-cyclable waste to the notified landfills.
5. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend up to six months and fine which may extend up to ten thousand
rupees.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
Definitions.
Duty of waste
generating
unit and large
manufacturing
facility.
Duty of the
municipal
authority.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite sums.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to make
rules.
5
10

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
A large amount of waste is generated in our country every day. It is estimated that on
an average 0.1 million tonnes of municipal solid waste is generated every day, resulting in
approximately 36.5 million tonnes annually.
The waste in majority is composed of plastics, metals, paper, food, glass, etc. Presently,
majority of the waste is sent to the landfills with only a portion being used in waste-energy
plants or re-cycled or reused. This has an impact on both the environment and the economy.
The huge amount of waste in the landfills causes smouldering releasing large amounts of
harmful methane gas in the air. The landfills not only mar the beauty of a city but can also be
the breeding grounds for diseases. Waste can instead be used as an alternative to the
depleting fossil fuels which would, in turn, help in keeping the environment safe and clean.
The economic impact of effective waste management techniques employed either by
the municipal corporations or by the aid of private organizations, has been observed in
different cities. For example, in Pune, the re-cyclable or reusable goods are sold by the waste
pickers earning them extra income. In Chennai, the waste is used in a biogas plant to generate
electricity. Proper handling and disposal of municipal waste could result in generating
employment and serve as an opportunity for entrepreneurs in the waste-energy sector.
The Bill seeks to ensure that the waste from landfills is recycled, reused or used as
input to waste-energy projects. By making it as a law, the Government can ensure that the
citizens of the country are duty bound to contribute towards cleanliness and also effective
waste management would become a contributing part of the economy.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KONDA VISHWESHWAR REDDY
February 9, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for certain steps to be taken by the municipal authorities
for collection of segregated municipal solid waste, transportation of re-cyclable waste to
waste-energy plants and non-recyclable wastes to the notified landfills. Clause 6 provides
that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore
per annum would be involved form the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the segregation and re-cycle of municipal solid waste; use of re-cyclable
waste in waste-energy plants for generation of energy and transportation of
non-recyclable waste into landfills and for matters
connected therewith.
————
( Dr . Konda Vishweshwar Reddy, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4305LS(S3)—01.03.2016.