As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

27> SUN 1998

Bill No._13 of 1998

DECLARATION OF ASSETS BY MINISTERS, MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT AND CIVIL SERVANTS BILL, 1998
bo By
‘Suri Bact SincH Rawar, M.P.
A
- BILL
provide for declaration and public scrutiny of assets of Ministers, Members of
Parliament and Civit Servants.

_ Br ॥[ enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

is Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

set” includes all properties. both movable and immovable, held by
Fs or by the Members of Parliament or by the Civil Servants or by their
हु) or in benami within the country and/or abroad;

airman” means Chairman of the Council of States;

(ii) “civil servant” means and includes a person appointed to public
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union and who draws a
basic salary of rupees five thousand or more per month;

Shorttitle.

Definitions.


Declaration
of assets by
Ministers and
Members of
Parliament.

Declaration
of assets by
Civil Servants.

Submission of
annual returns

Retums filed by
Ministers and
Members of
Parliament to
be made
available to the
Public.

Retums filed by
Civil servants to
be laid before
Houses of
Parliament.

Announcement
of names of
Ministers and
Members of
Parliament who
fail to submit
returns,

Action against
Civil servants
who fail to
submit returns,

2

(iv) “dependent” includes spouse, parents, sons and unmarried daughters;

(v) “Member of Parliament” means Member of the Council of States or of the
House of the People, as the case may be;

(vi) “Minister” means Cabinet Minister of the Union Government and
includes the Prime Minister, Minister of State and Deputy Minister;

(vii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(viii) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the People.

3. (J) Every Minister shall, within one month of his appointment as such
minister, submit to the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, a return of all the
assets possessed by him and his dependents, in such manner and form, as may be
prescribed:

Provided that where the Minister is not a Member of either House of Parliament,
he shall submit a return of all the assets possessed by him and his dependents to the
Speaker within one month of the swearing in as such Minister under article 75 of the
Constitution of India.

(2) Every Member of Parliament shall within one month of the date of his election
as such member, submit to the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, a return of
all the assets possessed by him and his dependents in such manner and form, as may be
prescribed.

4. Every civil servant shali, within a period of one month from the coming into
force of this Act, furnish the particulars of all the assets possessed by him and his
dependents to the prescribed authority, in such manner and form, as may be prescribed.

5, 1 shall be incumbent on the part of every Minister and every Member of
Parliament to submit a return of the assets held by him and his dependents, within one
month of the beginning of the next financial year, to the Speaker or the Chairman, as the
case, may be.

(2) Every civil servant shall, throughout the term of his office, submit annual re-
turns of the assets held or acquired by him and any of his dependents, within one month of
the beginning of the next financial year to such authority of the Union Government, as
may be prescribed.

6. A copy of the returns filed by Ministers and Members of Parliament shall be
made available to any member of public on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.

7. A copy of the returns filed by civil servants under sub-section (2) of section 5
shall be sumbitted to the President who shall cause the same to be laid before each House
of Parliament.

(2) A copy of all the declarations made by the civil servants under this Act shall be
made available to any member of public on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.

8. The Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, may announce the name of
the Minister or Member of Parliament who fails ta submit the returns according to the
provisions of this Act.

9. Any civil servant who fails to submit the returns according to the provisions of
this Act shall be subject to such action, as may be prescribed.

20

25

30

35


0 (J) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
ide for all or any of the following matters:—

(i) the form in which the declaration of assets shall be furnished;
(ii) the manner in which the declarations shall be scrutinised;

ber of Parliament or by Minister or by a civil servant is false;

i हि (iv) the action to be taken in case of delayed declaration of assets by civil
servants; and

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The last few years have witnessed the increase in political corruption. The involve-
जाला। of names of Ministers and Legislators, not only at the Central level but also at the
State levels, in corruption cases, has not only brought disgrace, discredit and regret to the
esteemed organisations of Parliament, Central Executive, State Legislatures and State
Governments but to make worse of all, has forced people to doubt the integrity and hon-
esty, the basic tenets of the institution of democracy, associated with the political system.
The faith of public in the institution of democracy is on the decline. To restore public faith
in the political system, it is necessary that Ministers and Members of Parliament declare
their assets regularly. Such a step will not only prohibit the misuse of political power but
will also set an example for public morality which can be emulated by others. The Mem-
bers of Parliament are the representatives of the people. They should carry clean image
before the public. Going by the prevailing political culture in India and the moral degen-
racy that has of late set in our public life, there is need for a law that makes periodic
declaration of assets by all Ministers and Members of Parliament compulsory.

The Civil servants have also amassed assets disproportionate to the known sources
of their income. Very often such assets are held in benami or in the name of their family
members. The arm of law does not extend to them in many cases. ‘The departmental
requirement of furnishing returns of property by civil servants is neither adequate nor
effective. In any case, once a person chooses to work as a civil servant, his assets should
be known to the Legislature and through them to the public whom the civil servants are
supposed to serve. The Bill, therefore, provides for annual declaration of assets held or
acquired by Ministers, Members of Parliament and civil scrvants as well as by their
dependents in order to let the people know that their representatives in Parliament and
civil servants do not have assets disproportionate to their known sources of income,

Hence this Bill.

New Detar
March 23, 1998. BACHI SINGH RAWAT.


EMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
2

‘lause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carry-

poses of the Bill. As the rules to be framed will relate to matters of detail
legation of legislative power is of a normal character.