Short title
and com-
mencement.
THE  SPECIAL  FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE  TO  THE  STATE  OF
ARUNACHAL PRADESH  BILL, 2007
By
SHRI KIREN RIJIJU, M.P.
A
BILL
 to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Arunachal Pradesh for the
purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Tribes and other sections of the
 people of the State and for the development and exploitation of its
 natural resources.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Arunachal
Pradesh  Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall  be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Arunachal Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  49  of 2007
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Arunachal
Pradesh.
5

2
be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Tribes and other sections of people or for the
development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
5

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS   AND  REASONS
Arunachal Pradesh is a hill State inhabited predominantly by tribal people of  diverse
culture and lifestyle. It is also a State of strategic importance considering the fact that it
shares long international boundaries with Bhutan, China, Tibet and Myanmar. Considering
its strategic importance, it was administered by the Ministry of External Affairs till 1965 (the
area was known as the North-East Frontier Agency till 1962) and subsequently the Ministry
of Home Affairs, through the Governor of Assam. It was constituted as a Union territory in
1972 and renamed as Arunachal Pradesh. And on 20 February, 1987, it became the 24th State
of the Indian Union.
But even after such long drawn process of administrative changes, the State of
Arunachal Pradesh is still socially and economically backward. The State is plagued by
poverty, unemployment, illiteracy, social inequality, inadequate socio-economic infrastructure,
etc. Measures for proper utilization of natural resources, welfare of tribals and other sections
of the society in the region and initiating new development schemes, are urgently required to
address the problems of the State. The above measures will make the State a strong member
of the union of India and enable it to perform its strategic responsibilities effectively. It is,
therefore, necessary  that the Central Government should provide some special financial
assistance to the State of Arunachal Pradesh for its all-round development including the
welfare of tribals and for the development and balanced exploitation of its vast resources.
Such a step to provide financial assistance to this frontier State would go a long way in
building this nation  more and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIREN  RIJIJU
April 17, 2007
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
 to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Arunachal Pradesh for the
purpose of promoting the welfare of  Scheduled Tribes and other sections of the
 people of the State and for the development and exploitation of its
 natural resources.
————
(Shri Kiren Rijiju, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1616LS(S-5)—25-04-2007.