a

AG ४०

८.०८

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2002

By
‘Suet Priva RANIAN DASMUNSI, M.P.
A
BILL न
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Bg it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2002. Short title,
2. After article 21 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— Insertion of
new article
218.
+210, (7) Every Indian citizen who is a physically challenged person or an old Right to
person shall have the right to social security in the matters such as— Ruta
(i) health care and medical facilities; physically
challenged
(ii) housing facilities; and persons and
: senior
(iii) adequate and nutritious meals. citizens,

(2) Parliament may by law determine the conditions of eligibility, mode of
providing facilities to achieve the objectives contained in clause (1).”.



STATEMENT GF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Indian Constitution enshrines considerable rights accruing to an Indian citizen. The
purpose of this Bill is to invite the attention of all concerned and the State in particular to
provide a dignified and decent livelihood to those who are physically challenged or are
senior citizens and are unable to take care of themselves without help from others.

The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to including certain social
security measures for this deprived section of society as fundamental rights.

New Dewan, PRIYA RANJAN DASMUNSI
May 3, 2002.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill, if enacted envisages expenses be incurred by the State on making
provisions for the housing, medical facilities, meals for the physically challenged persons
and senior citizens. At present, it cannot be estimated as to how many physically challenged
persons and senior citizens are there in the country. However, the Bill will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees sixty thousand per person per annum would be involved. No non-recurring
expenditure will be involved.


¢ LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to'amend the Constitution of India,

(Shri Priya Ranjan Dasmunsi, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1724LS~-03.07.2002.