AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 49  2021
THE AROMA BOARD BILL, 2021
 By
  SHRI SUBRA T PA THAK, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
 PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Declaration as to expediency of Control by the Union.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER I
THE AROMA BOARD
4. Constitution and incorporation of the Board.
5. Secretary and other officers.
6. Advisory Committees.
7. Functions of the Board.
CHAPTER III
CERTIFICA TE FOR EXPORT OF AROMA
8. No person to export aroma without certificate.
9. Grant of certificate.
10. Cancellation, suspension, etc., of certificate.
11. Appeal.
12. Power to permit export without certificate.

CHAPTER IV
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
CLAUSES
13. Power to control price and distribution of aroma.
14. Power to prohibit or control import of aroma.
15. Power of the Central Government to issue directions.
16. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Board.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
17. Grants and loans by the Central Government.
18. Board Fund.
19. Budget.
20. Annual report.
21. Accounts and audit.
22. Annual report and auditor’s report to be laid before Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
23. Penalty for making false returns.
24. Penalties for obstructing an officer or member of the Board in the discharge of his duties and for failure to
produce books and records.
25. Penalty for contravention of order relating to control of price, etc.
26. Penalties for contravention of section 11 or any order made under section 17.
27. Other penalties.
28. Offences by companies.
29. Delegation.
30. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants.
31. Protection of Action taken in good faith.
32. Power to enter.
33. Power to make rules.
34. Power to make regulations.
35. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
36. Power to remove difficulties.
(ii)

     TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 49 of 2021
THE AROMA BOARD BILL, 2021
By
SHRI SUBRAT PATHAK, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of
export of aroma and for the control of aroma industry
 including the control of cultivation of aromatic
plants and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Aroma Board Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union
should take under its control the aroma industry.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “aroma” means a mixture of essential oil, fragrance and flavor derived
from herbs, aromatic plants and chemicals to produce a distinctive, pervasive
and usually a pleasant or savory smell;
(b) “aromatic plants” include plants that provide basic raw materials for
medicines, perfumes, flavors and cosmetics, which the Board may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, declare to be a aromatic plant for the purposes of this Act.
(c) “Board” means the Aroma Board constituted under  sub-section (1) of
section 3;
(d) “certificate” means a certificate granted under section 8;
(e) “dealer” means a dealer in aroma;
(f) “export” and “import” mean, respectively, taking out of or bringing into
India by land, sea and air;
(g) “manufacturer” means a manufacturer of aroma; and
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
CHAPTER II
THE AROMA BOARD
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be called as the Aroma Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, and
shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Kannauj in the State of Uttar
Pradesh.
(4) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exceeding thirty-
two, as may be prescribed, and unless the rules made in this behalf otherwise provide,
the Board shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House
of the People and one by the Council of States;
(c) three members to represent respectively the Ministries of the Central
Government dealing with—
(i) Commerce;
2
.
5
10
.
Definitions.
Declaration as
to expediency
of Control by
the Union.
Constitution
and incorpora-
tion  of the
Board.
15
20
25
30
35

(ii) Agriculture; and
(iii) Finance;
(d) six members to represent farmers cultivating aromatic plants;
(e) eleven members to represent the exporters of aroma;
(f) three members to represent major  aroma producing States;
(g) five members, of which three members or scientists to represent the
Scientific Research Institutes from aroma producing States and two members
or scientists from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR),
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being
chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the
Board, exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be delegated
to him by the Board and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed.
(8) The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice-Chairperson who shall
exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairperson as
may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson.
(9) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by  reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the
Board;
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of
the case.
5. (1) The Board may appoint the Secretary and such other officers and
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions
under this Act.
  (2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board shall be such
as may be determined by regulations.
6. (1) Subject to rules made in this behalf, the Board may, from time to time,
constitute such committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its
functions.
(2) Every committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of such
number of persons as the Board may deem fit.
7. (1) The Board may—
(i)  develop, promote and regulate export of aroma;
(ii)  grant certificate for export of aroma and register brokers therefor;
Secretary and
other officers.
Advisory
Committees.
Functions of
the Board.
5
  10
15
20
25
30
  35
40
3

(iii) undertake programmes and projects for promotion of export of aroma;
(iv) assist and encourage studies and research for improvement of
processing, quality, techniques of grading and packaging of aroma;
(v)  strive towards stabilization of prices of aroma for export;
(vi) evolve suitable quality standards and introduce certification of quality
through “Quality Marking” for aroma for export;
(vii) control quality of aroma for export;
(viii) give licences, subject to such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed, to the manufacturers of aroma for export;
 (ix) market aroma, if it considers necessary, in the interest of promotion of
export;
(x) provide warehousing facilities abroad for aroma;
(xi) collect statistics with regard to aroma for compilation and publication;
(xii) import, with the previous approval of the Central Government,  aroma
for sale; and
(xiii) advise the Central Government on matters relating to import and
export of aroma.
(2) Without prejudice of provisions of sub-section (1), the Board  may also—
(i)  promote co-operative efforts among farmers cultivating aromatic plants;
(ii) provide loans to farmers for sowing, as well as ensuring a Minimum
Support Price (MSP) for farmers cultivating aromatic plants and also facilitating
insurance for the aroma and aromatic plants and ensuring timely storage of
aroma and aromatic plants in godowns and warehouses.
(iii) provide financial assistance for improved methods of research to
create better yielding varieties of  aromatic plants;
(iv) regulate the sale of aroma and stabilization of prices of aroma;
(v) provide training in aroma testing and fixing grade standards of aroma;
(vi) increase the sale of aroma and facilitating advertising and marketing
strategies;
(vii) register and licence brokers (including auctioneers) of aroma and
persons engaged in the business of aroma;
(viii) improve the marketing of aroma;
(ix) collect statistics from growers, dealers and such other persons as may
be prescribed on any matter relating to the aroma industry and publish statistics
so collected or portions thereof or extracts therefrom;
(x) secure better working conditions and the provision and improvement
of amenities and incentives for workers engaged in growing aromatic plants or
working in processing units; and
(xi) undertake, assist or encourage scientific, technological and economic
research.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
4

CHAPTER III
CERTIFICA TE FOR EXPORT OF AROMA
8. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall, after the commencement
of this Act, commence or carry on the business of export of aroma, except under and
in accordance with a certificate:
Provided that a person carrying on the business of export of aroma immediately
before the commencement of this Act, may continue to do so for a period of three
months from such commencement; and if he has made an application for such certificate
within the said period of three months till the disposal of such application.
9. (1) An application for grant of certificate shall be made to the Board in such
form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied
by a receipt evidencing the payment of the prescribed fee.
(2) On receipt of such application, the Board shall—
(a) if the application is not in the prescribed form or does not contain any of
the prescribed particulars, return the application to the applicant; or
(b) if the application is in the prescribed form and contains the prescribed
particulars, grant the certificate subject to such terms and conditions as may be
determined by regulations.
10. (1) The Board may cancel any certificate on any one or more of the following
grounds, namely:—
(a) that the holder of the certificate has violated any of the terms and conditions
of the certificate; and
(b) that in the opinion of the Central Government it is necessary in the interests
of general public to cancel the certificate.
(2) Where the Board, for reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied that
pending consideration of the question of cancelling the certificate on any ground
mentioned in sub-section (1), it is necessary so to do, the Board may, by order in
writing, suspend the operation of the certificate for such period not exceeding forty-
five days as may be specified in the order and require the holder of the certificate to
show cause, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of such order, as to why the
suspension of the certificate should not be extended till the determination of the
question as to whether the registration should be cancelled.
(3) No order of cancellation of registration under this section shall be made
unless the person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard
in respect of the grounds for such cancellation.
11. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 9 may prefer an
appeal to the Central Government within such period as may be prescribed.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period
prescribed therefor:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefore if the appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient
cause for not preferring the appeal within the prescribed period.
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and shall be
accompanied by a copy of order appealed against and by such fees as may be
prescribed.
No person to
export aroma
without
certificate.
Grant of
certificate.
Cancellation or
suspension of
certificate.
Appeal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5

(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(5) The Central Government may confirm, modify or reverse the order appealed
against.
12. The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient, so
to do, in public interest, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be specified therein, permit anybody or other agency to
commence or carry on the business of export of aroma without a certificate.
CHAPTER  IV
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
13. (1) The Central Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, fix
in respect of aroma or aromatic plants of any description specified therein—
(a) the maximum price or the minimum price, or the maximum and minimum
prices, which may be charged by a farmer cultivating aromatic plants or aroma
dealer, wholesale or retail, whether for the Indian market or for export; and
(b) the maximum quantity which may in one transaction be sold to any person.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-
section (1), any order made thereunder may provide—
(a) for requiring persons engaged in the production, supply or distribution of,
or trade and commerce in, aroma to maintain and produce for inspection such
books, accounts and records relating to their business and to furnish such
information relating thereto as may be specified in the order; and
(b) for such other matters, including in particular the entering and search of
premises, vehicles, vessels and aircraft, and the seizure by a person authorised to
make such search, of aroma in respect of which such person has reason to believe
that a contravention of the order has been, is being or is about to be, committed.
14. The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,
make provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise controlling the import of aroma,
either generally or in specified classes of cases.
15. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board
shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it
from time to time:
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy
or not shall be final.
      16. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of opinion—
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying with any direction
issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions
Power to
permit export
without
certificate.
Power to
control price
and distribu-
tion of aroma.
Power to
prohibit or
control import
of aroma.
Power of the
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power to the
Central
Government
to supersede
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
6

and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of
such default the financial position of the Board or the administration of the Board
has deteriorated; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so
to do, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede
the Board for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the
notification.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the
Board,—
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices
as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board, shall until the
Board is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such
person or persons as the Central Government may direct; and
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by
a fresh appointment and in such case any person or persons who vacated their
offices under clause (a) of sub-section (2), shall not be deemed disqualified for
appointment:
          Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of
the period of supersession, take action under this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section
(1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
17. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums of money as it
may consider necessary.
18. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Aroma Board Fund and
there shall be credited thereto—
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government
under section 16;
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of certificates granted under this
Act; and
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be
decided upon by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and
other employees of the Board;
Grants and
loans by the
Central
Government.
Board Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
7

(b) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under
section 6; and
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorized by this Act.
19. The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time each financial year, as
may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated
receipts and expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.
20. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the
previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
21. The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner as
may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed
and the Board shall furnish to the Central Government before such date, as may be
prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with the auditors’ report thereon.
22. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor’s report to
be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
23. Any person who being required by or under this Act to furnish any return fails
to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false
and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
24. Any person who—
(a) obstructs any member authorised by the Chairperson in writing or any
officer or other employee of the Board authorised by it in this behalf or any person
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or by the Board, in the exercise
of any power conferred, or in the discharge of any duty imposed, on him by or
under  this Act; or
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record, fails to
produce such book or record when required to do so by or under  this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
25. (1) If any person contravenes any order made under section 12, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; and the property in respect
of which the order has been contravened or such part thereof as the Court may deem
fit, shall be forfeited to the Central Government.
(2) Any person who attempts to contravene, or abets the contravention of, any
order under section 12 shall be deemed to have contravened that order.
26. If any person contravenes the provisions of section 7 or any order made
under section 13 he shall, without prejudice to any confiscation or penalty to which
he may be liable under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend
to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Budget.
Annual report.
Accounts and
audit
Annual report
and auditors’
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
Penalty for
making false
returns.
Penalties for
obstructing an
officer or
member of the
Board in the
discharge of
his duties and
for failure to
produce books
and records.
Penalty for
contravention
of order
relating to
control of
price, etc.
Penalties for
contravention
of section 7 or
any order
made under
section 13.
40
52 of 1962
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
8

27.Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention
of the provisions of this Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder other than
the provisions, punishment for the contravention whereof has been provided for in
sections 22, 23, 24 and 25, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and
in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to
fifty rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction
for the first such contravention.
28. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
29. The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chair-
person or any other member or to any officer of the Board, subject to such conditions
and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and func-
tions under this Act.
30. All members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be deemed,
when Acting or purporting to Act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code,1860.
31. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, or
the Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the Board or such
committee, or any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other
person authorised by the Government or the Board, for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder.
32. Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person, generally or specially
authorised by the Board in this behalf, may, whenever it is necessary so to do, for any
of the purposes of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or premises
and make any inspection or inquiry or do such other Act or thing as may
be prescribed:
Other
penalties.
Offences by
companies.
Delegation.
Members,
officers and
employees of
the Boards to
be public
servants.
45 of 1860
Protection of
Action taken
in good faith.
Power to
enter.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
9

Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed courtyard
or garden attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the consent of the occupier
thereof) without previously giving such occupier at least twenty-four hours’ notice
in writing of his intention to do so.
33. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the number of members of the Board under sub-section (3)   of section 3;
(b) the salary and allowances payable and other conditions of service of the
members of the Board under sub-section (5) of section 3;
(c) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (6)   of
section 3;
(d) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairperson under sub-section (7) of
section 3;
(e) the constitution of committees under section 5;
(f) the terms and conditions for giving licences to manufacturers of aroma for
export under clause (viii) of sub-section (1) of section 6;
(g) the form of the application and the fees under sub-section (1)   of section 8;
(h) the period of limitation for appeal under sub-section (1)  of section 10;
(i) the form of appeal and the fees payable under sub-section (3)   of section 10;
(j) the procedure for disposal of appeal under sub-section (4)  of section 10;
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.
34.  (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the
rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the salary and allowances payable to,  terms and conditions of service of
the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board under sub-section (2)
of section 4; and
(b) the terms and conditions under which the certificate may be granted under
sub-section (2) of section 8.
35.Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two  or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
Power to make
regulations.
Power to make
rules.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
10

modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule or regulation.
36.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be
necessary for removing the difficulty:
  Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each   House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
11

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has always been a land of olfactory indulgence, where aromatherapy,
incense and ittar have existed since ancient times, where essential oil perfume were
a part of the ancient royal lore. The earliest scents used were the healing scents
introduced through Ayurveda, which recommended the use of aromatic herbs and
fragrant plants for mental well-being, beauty, treatment of ailments, hygiene and
age-control which are well known even today.
This traditional aroma industry in India has seen vast changes in the recent years
with the introduction of technology and wider usage. The Indian aroma industry is
one of the largest in terms of production, consumption and at present, the aroma
market is set to grow and offer innumerable opportunities for new entrants to grow
in this market. India being the leading country in the world with rich diversity in flora
and fauna with its fifteen Geo- climatic zone. India can produce raw materials meant
for aroma industry which have great demand in the world. Considering its close
linkages with grass-root economics, it can reboot Indian economy from groundlevel.
Global aroma industry is worth $24.10 billion and India contributes approximately
$500 million. However, growth rate in India is approximately 11% in the last few
years but is projected to grow exponentially in the upcoming years due to rising
personal care, brand awareness, increasing disposable income, growing demand in
middle class people and affordable price of fragrance in the form of mass perfumes
and deodorants.
Looking into the success of Fragrance and Flavour Development Centre, Kannauj
and its self-sustainability for last six years and increasing demand for its need
across the country and potential, there exists need for opening such kind of centres
in all States. Different geographical locations need different approach for different
products and technology to work with. Worldwide, approximately three hundred
important natural aroma raw materials are in use. Out of these, only fifty per cent. are
cultivated and rest are found in wild habitation. Out of the cultivated raw materials,
there are thirty one for which India is well known globally and there are nearly
twenty one which are grown but not to a level for global significance.
To utilise the inherent natural advantages that our country possesses in the
production of aroma, it is imperative that a nodal agency on the lines of Coir Board,
Rubber Board, etc. be created. The need is to channelize efforts by bringing latest
technology inputs, enhanced value addition and gain significant advantages in
ensuring greater market access in developed nations and brings in significant export
earnings of aroma which can be beneficial for the country in general and the farming
community in particular.
It is necessary in the public interest that the Union Government should take
aroma industry under its control for its regulation and overall development.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for constitution of a Aroma Board for the
development of export of aroma and for the control of aroma industry including the
control of cultivation of aromatic plants.
 Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;    SUBRA T PA THAK
February 12, 2021.
12

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide for constitution of Aroma Board.
Clause 5 provides for appointment of Secretary and other officers and employees to
the Board. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of Advisory Committees by the
Board. Clause 17 provides for the grants and loans by the Central Government. Clause
18 provides for the constitution of a Aroma Board Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum would involve
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to
involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
13

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
             Clause 13  the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue orders to control
price and distribution of aroma. Clause 14 empowers the Central Government to issue
orders to prohibit or control import of aroma. Clause 15 empowers the Central
Government to issue directions. Clause 16 empowers the Central Government to issue
notification to supersede the Board.   Clause 33 empowers the Central Government to
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. Clause 34 empowers the Board may,
with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules generally to carry out
the purposes of this Act.  As the orders, directions, notifications, rules and regulations
will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.
14

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of export of aroma
and for the control of aroma industry including the control of cultivation
of aromatic plants and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Subrat Pathak, M.P.)