1
THE ELECTRICITY (REPEAL) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to repeal the Electricity Act, 2003
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Electricity (Repeal)  Act, 2008.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. The Electricity Act, 2003 is hereby repealed.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 49 of  2008
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Repeal of Act
No. 36 of 2003.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Electricity Act, 2003 was passed with the laudable object of generating clean and
cheaper electricity in sufficient quantity, so that the country would have self-sufficiency in
power generation. It promised that it would help in gradual electrification of all the villages in
India, where electricity still remains a dream. It also promised cheaper and affordable electricity
to the domestic consumers, agriculture and industry.
It was expected that this legislation would help attracting huge investment in the
power sector. It was further promised that it would help to bring down the transmission
losses to the minimum.
But the experience of more than five years of its implementation has proved beyond
doubt that all the objects which this piece of legislation sought to achieve, stand completely
defeated.
India is far away from achieving self-sufficiency in power generation. Power has become
unbearably costly. Transmission losses have increased. Power theft is also on the increase.
It could not achieve the goal of attracting huge investment in power sector. In the name of
getting investment, the multi-national companies have been allowed to enter the field of
power generation resulting in a fiasco and scandal.
In view of the above it is proposed to repeal the Electricity Act, 2003. It is also necessary
that alternate methods and strategies be adopted for achieving the goals for which the
Electricity Act, 2003 was enacted.
In order to avoid any vacuum after the repeal of the Electricity Act, 2003, the date of
commencement of this repealing Act has been left to the Government  to decide. During the
period, the Central Government should take suitable steps to prepare and come forward with
a new legislation.
N
EW DELHI; C. K. CHANDRAPPAN
August 5, 2008.
2

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
to repeal the Electricity Act, 2003
————
(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2865LS(S-5)—08-09-2008.