1
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR SONKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 49 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title &
commencement.

2
2. After section 207 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the following section shall be
inserted, namely—
"207A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every motor vehicle seized
and detained by any police officer or other person authorized in this behalf shall, pending the
final outcome of the Court trying the case, after verification of relevant documents, be
released to the owner or person in-charge of the motor vehicle after payment of the insured
value of the motor vehicle under consideration in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the motor vehicle seized and detained in the case of a road accident or
murder shall be released, subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed by the Court
trying the case.
(2) The owner or person in-charge of the motor vehicle shall, prior to release of the
motor vehicle under sub-section (1), submit an undertaking or guarantee to remit the excess
proceeds, if any, from the sale or auction of the motor vehicle and be punished as per
provisions of this Act if the Court adjudicating the case finds that the rightful ownership
does not vest with the owner or person in-charge of the motor vehicle, as the case may be.".
Insertion of
new section
207A.
Release of
motor vehicle
seized and
detained by
police officer
on payment
of the insured
value.
59 of 1988
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
At present the huge number of motor vehicles seized and detained by the police officer
are being junked and left to perish in police stations. As per the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, for release of the vehicle, it is required to move an application in court
having proper jurisdiction which is cumbersome and takes a long period of time for its
disposal.
Honb'le Supreme Court in the case of General Insurance Council & Ors. Vs. State of
Andhra Pradesh & Ors. on 19 April, 2010 have permitted insurance companies/owners
concerned to take possession of seized vehicles, used in commission of offences, after
getting the release order from the competent court. The Supreme Court while making the
Judgement have stated inter alia—
".....the following further directions with regard to seized vehicles are required to be
given.
(A) Insurer may be permitted to move a separate application for release of the recovered
vehicle as soon as it is informed of such recovery before the Jurisdictional Court. Ordinarily,
release shall be made within a period of 30 days from the date of the application. The
necessary photographs may be taken duly authenticated and certified, and a detailed
panchnama may be prepared before such release.
(B) The photographs so taken may be used as secondary evidence during trial. Hence,
physical production of the vehicle may be dispensed with.
(C) Insurer would submit an undertaking/guarantee to remit the proceeds from the
sale/auction of the vehicle conducted by the Insurance Company in the event that the
Magistrate finally adjudicates that the rightful ownership of the vehicle does not vest with
the insurer. The undertaking/guarantee would be furnished at the time of release of the
vehicle, pursuant to the application for release of the recovered vehicle. Insistence on personal
bonds may be dispensed with looking to the corporate structure of the insurer....
.....It is a matter of common knowledge that as and when vehicles are seized and kept in
various police stations, not only they occupy substantial space of the police stations but
upon being kept in open, are also prone to fast natural decay on account of weather conditions.
Even a good maintained vehicle loses its road worthiness if it is kept stationary in the police
station for more than fifteen days. Apart from the above, it is also a matter of common
knowledge that several valuable and costly parts of the said vehicles are either stolen or are
cannibalised so that the vehicles become unworthy of being driven on road."
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 with a view to enable
the owner or person in-charge of the motor vehicle to get the motor vehicle under
consideration of the Court released after payment of the insured value of the motor vehicle.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD KUMAR SONKAR
February 9, 2018.

MGIPMRND—4152LS(S3)—19-02-2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Sonkar,  M.P.)