AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SaBHA

|
|

2 Dap, 20m

Bill_No. 49 of 2000

THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

By
‘Supt A.P. Jrrenpra REppy, M.P.
A
BILL,
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
| itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (7) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act

(2) It shall come into force at once,

2, Insection 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as
Code), in sub-section (1), in the Table, against sections 497 and 498, for the existing
ies in column (3), the following entries shall be substituted, namely:—

“the wife of the husband or the husband of the woman.”.

3. In the First-Schedule to the Code, in Chapter XX-Offences relating to Marriage,
sections 494 to 498 in column (2), for the words in columns (4) and (5), the following
shall be substituted, namely:—

Column 4 Column 5

“cognisable non-bailable.”.

Short title and
‘commence-

Amendment of
section 320.

Amendment of

Schedule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Women are the weaker section of the society. Majority of them are illiterate, innocent
and poor, They are cheated by menfolk. Husbands marry second time even when their first
wives are alive. But, unfortunately, the law does not provide for stringent punishment for
bigamous marriage.

Womenfolk have to undergo untold hardship whenever cases of bigamy are filed.
‘They have to attend court everyday for hearing which gets postponed due to many reasons.
‘They have to shell out enough money for litigation and also to undergo mental stress,
Sometimes they are not able to attend hearings in courts due to many reasons with the result
that the case is decided ex-parte, i.e. in favour of the erring husband

At present, the punishment provided for bigamy, adultery or fraudulent marriages is
meagre. Such offences are non-cognisable and bailable.

Moreover, there is no provision for compounding of offences by affected persons in
case of offences relating to marriages, For example, in case of adultery, the offence cannot
be compounded by the wife of the erring husband. Such provision is illogical and against
principles of natural justice.

With a view to relieving womenfolk from hardship, mental stress, financial hardship,
unnecessary litigation, it is proposed to make all offences relating to marriages cognisable
and non-bailable. Such a provision already exists in the State of Andhra Pradesh.

It is high time women are emancipated from the clutches of erring menfolk. such a
measure in the millennium will bring relief to women.

New छल A. P. JITENDRA REDDY
February 15, 2000.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(Act No. 2 oF 1974)

* * * * * *

320. (1) The offences punishabie under the sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860) specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may be compounded
by the persons mentioned in the third column of that Table-—

TABLE
Offence Section of the Person by whom offerice may be
Indian Penal compounded
Code applicable
1 2 3
Adultery 497 The husband of the woman.
Enticing or taking away
or detaining with 498 Ditto.
criminal intent
amarried woman.

(Cuarrer XX—Orrences RELATING TO MARRIAGE

494 Marrying again during Imprisonment for Non- Non- Magistrate of the
the lifetime of a husband 7 years and fine Cognizable Bailable first Class
or wife.

495 Same offence with Jmprisonment for Ditto Dito Ditto.
concealment of the 10 years and fine.
former marriage from the

person with whom
subsequent marriage is

contracted.
496. A person with fraudulent Imprisonment for Ditto Dito Dito.
intention going through the 7 years and fine.
ceremony of being married,
knowing that he is not
thereby lawfully married.
497. Adultery Imprisonment for Ditto Ditto Ditto
5 years, or fine,
‘or both.
498 Enticing or taking away or Imprisonment Ditto Ditto Any Magistrate.
detaining with a criminal for 2 years, oF
intent a married woman. fine, or both.

Compounding.
of offences.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

(Shri 4.7 Jitendra Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—4302LS—14.3.2000,