THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI SHRIRANG APPA BARNE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Indian Penal Code, 1860 for section 304A, the following section shall be
substituted namely:—
“304A. Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent
act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years or with fine which shall not be
less than seventy-five thousand rupees or with both:
Provided that if any person by doing any rash or negligent driving causes injury
to another person and rushes that person so injured to a nearby hospital or assists the
person in getting immediate medical attention but, the person so injured subsequently
dies, the punishment shall be reduced and decided on case to case basis.”.
Substitution of
new section for
section 304A.
Bill No. 49 of 2019
Short title and
commencement.
45 of 1860.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In our country over a lakh people die every year as a result of road accidents. This
problem has compounded in the metropolitan cities where violation of traffic rules are blatant.
Rash driving is a regular nuisance and is responsible for fatal accidents which take place
daily. It is sometimes seen that many people especially, young boys drive vehicles without
caring for their own or anybody else's life. Not a single day passes when we do not hear of
some accident on road. After accident of a vehicle, it is a routine feature where the driver of
a vehicle speeds away in such a manner that nobody can even take note of the number of the
vehicle, leaving the injured unattended or to die on the road. The Government is carrying out
awareness campaigns that if the injured is shifted timely to a hospital and the driver or owner
of the vehicle who shifted the injured to the hospital is given some relief, then the life of so
many people could be saved.
There is a considerable anger in public about the rising number of casualties in road
accidents. Presently such offences are tried as general crime under Indian Penal Code, 1860
and punishment provide for such act is not proportionate to the gravity of the offence
committed. In the absence of any stringent legal framework, the persons responsible for rash
and negligent driving are let off easily.
Therefore, it is proposed that section 304A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 may be
amended suitably so that drivers be given some relief in punishment for shifting the injured
to the hospital besides preventing cases of rash and negligent driving.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIRANG  APPA  BARNE
June 4,  2019.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * *
304A. Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not
amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
Causing death
by negligence.
3

MGIPMRND—318LS(S3)—13-06-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Shrirang Appa Barne,  M.P.)