                                                            Bill No. 49 of 2023
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2023
By
ADV. DEAN KURIAKOSE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment)
Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government,
may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),–
(a) after clause (l), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(la) “content” refers to the words, video, audio or any means of
communication created by the users of a social media;”;
(b) existing clause (za) shall be renumbered as clause (zb) and before
the clause (zb) so as renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:–
(za) “online account” refers to the space allotted to a website user
where the content generated by them are displayed and database stored
by the intermediary; and
(c) existing clauses (zg) and (zh) shall be renumbered as (zh) and (zi)
and before the clause (zh) so renumbered, the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:–
“(zg) “social media” means any website that is publicly accessible
with or without creating an online account on it and the content
generated by the user is displayed publicly on this website including
webpages where users can interact with each other in any manner.”.
3. After Section 66F of the principal Act, following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“66G . Any person who creates content on any social media site in the
nature of,–
(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has menacing
character; or
(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose
of causing annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult,
injury, criminal intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will, known to cause
communal distrust and even violence, persistently by making use of
such computer resource or a communication device;
(c) any social media content for the purpose of causing annoyance
or inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient
about the origin of such messages; and
(d) any social media content for the purpose of spreading hateful
content that create resentment against any particular group of people
based on caste, religion, sex, place of birth,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years and with fine.”.
21 of 2000Amendment of
section 2.
5
10
Insertion of
new
section 66G .
Punishment for
spreading
hateful
communal
propaganda
undermining
the fraternity
of India
through social
media, etc.
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Social Media has grown to be a dominant actor in the social and
political lives of our people in the last decade. From just a pastime of sorts,
social media have grown to capture the imagination of the people. Today,
it acts as the primary means of socialisation, communication and interaction
with the larger society. However, unregulated behaviour in the social media
is shown to have large scale impact in the way people perceive and interact
with the world. If the online behaviour is not regulated in such a manner
to uphold the decency, morality and other values as enshrined in the
constitution, it can easily endanger the hard earned liberty in the society.
We have seen examples in this decade itself, when social media was used
to fan communal passion. This has led to real life violence and even loss
of life. The cases of lynching and many instances of communal violence
that our nation saw in the last decade could be attributed to hateful
propaganda being spread through social media platforms. Moreover,
organised entities could be seen to spread stereotypes, creating rift between
communities and foment internecine feud between the people of India. To
curb all those activities, those who spread the poison of communal hatred
through social media should be punished appropriately. Also, the Information
Technology Act of our nation curiously doesn’t include the definition of
“Social Media” or new age technologies that constitute social media. This
bill makes an humble attempt to define these entities and also nudge the
Government to amend the bill in such a manner that all the challenges of
our times are addressed through a revised Information Technology Bill that
is in tune with the spirit of our times.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                                DEAN KURIAKOSE
January 16, 2023.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INFORMA TION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
(ACT NO. 21 OF 2000)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(l) “computer system” means a device or collection of devices,
including input and output support devices and excluding calculators which
are not programmable and capable of being used in conjunction with external
files, which contain computer programmes, electronic instructions, input data
and output data, that performs logic, arithmetic, data storage and retrieval,
communication control and other functions;
* * * * *
(za) “originator” means a person who sends, generates, stores or
transmits any electronic message or causes any electronic message to be
sent, generated, stored or transmitted to any other person but does not
include an intermediary;
* * * * *
(zg) “subscriber” means a person in whose name the Digital
Signature Certificate is issued;
(zh) “verify” in relation to a digital signature, electronic record or
public key, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means
to determine whether—
(a) the initial electronic record was affixed with the digital
signature by the use of private key corresponding to the public key of
the subscriber;
(b) the initial electronic record is retained intact or has been altered
since such electronic record was so affixed with the digital signature.
* * * * *
Definitions.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
————
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .)