Bill No. .. of 1962 
THE ESTATE DUTY (DISTRIBUTION) 
BILL,1962 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOlt SABHA) 

5 
Bm NO.4 of' 1P§2 
THE ESTATE DUTY (DISTRIBUTION) BILL, 1962 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LolC SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
. . 
lIot ,':.-
to pTovide fOT the distribu.tion of the net pToceeda of the lltate duttl 
among the States in pu.Tsuance of the principles of distribution 
formulated and the Tecommendations made by the Finance Com-
misnon in its report, dated the 14th day of December, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parli~ment in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows :-·t: 
1. This Act may be called thea Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, Short title. 
1962. 
2. In this Act,-
(a) "estate duty" means the estate duty levied under the 
Estate Duty Act, 19!53 in respect of property other than agricul-
turalland; 
(b) "State" does not include a Union territory. 
Defiaitioas. 
10 3. (1) During each financial year commencing on and after the Dilltdbution 
1st day of April, 1962, the net proceeds of estate duty levied and 001- ~!.net.,f":: 
lected during that financial year shall, after deducting therefrom a tate dutJ 
sum equal to one per cent. of the said proceeds as being attributable to :ta::! ... to 
Union territories, be distributed among the States in accordance with 
IS the provisions of sub-section (2). 

(2) Out of the total amount falling to be distributed in any finan-
cial year under sub-section (l) - ' 
(0) the amount attributable to immovable property shall be 
distributed among the States in proportion to the gross value of 
the immovable property situated in the respective States as deter- 5 
mined in respect of that financial year; 
(b) the ba1ance shall be distributed among the States as 
follows :-
State Percent.e 
Andhra Pradesh 8'34 10 
Allam 2'7S 
Bihar 10'78 
Gujarat 4'78 
JIIDD11I and Kashmir 0'83 
Kerala ' 3'92 
Madhya Pradesh 7'S1 
IS 
.Madras 7'80 
Maharaabtra , 9'16 
MYIOre s'46 
Orissa ' 4'08 
Punjab, 4'71 
Rajasthan 4'67 
Uttar Pradeah 17'10 
Weat Bengal ' B'u 
(3) For the purposes of this section,- 25 
(0) "amount attributable to immovable property" means an 
amount which bears to the total aJnount distributable in any 
financial year under sub-section (1) the same proportion which 
the gross value of all immovable property situated in the States 
bears to the gross value of all property, movable and immovable, 30 
so situated, as determined in respect of that financial year; 
(b) "gross value", in rel,tion to movable or immovable 
property, means the total value of all movable property or, as the 
case may be, of all immovable property, passing on the death of 
any person as determined by the Con 'troller under the Estate Duty 35 
Act, 1953; 304 of 1953. 
(c) "immovable property" does not include agricultural land. 
Power to 4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
I1IIIIae ruln, Gazette, make rules providing for the manner in which the· gross 
value of property is to be calculated, for the time at which, and the 40 
manner in which, any payments under this Act are to be made, for 
the making of adjustments between one financial year and another 
and for any other incidental or anclllary matters. 

3 
(2) Every rule made uader this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
S the session in which it is so laid or the session immedif,tely following, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment 
10 shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 
S. The Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 1957, shall, as from the 1st" of 1957. 
day of April, 1962, stand repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under article 269(2) of the Constitution, the principles of distribu-
tion among the States of the taxes levied under that article have to 
-be fonnulated by Parliament by' law. Accordingly, this Bill seeks to 
lay down the principles of the distribution of the net proceeds of the 
estate duty on property other than agricultural land, except in so 
far as those proceeds represent the proceeds attributable to Union 
territories, among the States, in .accordance with the reCommenda-
tions made by the Third Finance CommiISion, which have been 
accepted by Government. 
NBWDm.m; MOMaTI DESAI. 
'l'lle 12th March, 1962. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules in respect of certain matters specified therein. They relate to 
the manner in which the gross value of property is to be calculated, 
the time at which and the manner in which any payments under this 
Act are to be made, the making of adjustments between one financial 
year and another and other incidental or ancillary matters. The 
matters in respect of which rules may be made are of a routine and 
administrative character. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is thUi of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
t,) provide for the distribution of the net proceeds of the estate 
duty among the States in pursuance of the principles of 
distribution formulated and the recommendations made by 
the Finance Commission in its report dated the 14th day of 
December, 1961. 6. 
The President has, in pursuance of clau~ (I) of article II7 
and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, 
recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL,: .• 
Secretary. . 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
MInister of Finance.) 