As INTRODUcm IN LoE SAJBA ON 
8UI No. 1 of; Ie 
TIlE LEGAL TENDER (INSCRmED NOTES) BIlL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
eo re,trict the negotiability of currency and other notes inacribed 
with m,esaage, of a political character. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows :-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Legal Tender 
Notes) Act, 1964. 
(Inscribed Short title 
.5 (2) It extends· to the whole of India. 
and 
edeDt . 
Z. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Reserve Bank of::::: 
India Act, 1934, or in the Currency Ordinance, 1940, or in any other me •• ::" 
law for the time being in force, a currency note of the Government of a pon. 
of India, a bank note issued by the Reserve Bank of India, or a tieal chi· 
10 Government of India one-rupee note issued under the Currency raeter 
Ordinance, 1940, which bears written upon it any extrinsic worda or ~~:Op1 
visible representations intended to conveyor capable of conveying tender. 
a message of a political character, shall not be legal tender; and the 
Reserve Bank of India shall not be under any legal obligation to 
IS receive any such note, or to issue rupee coin or other coin or 
currency notes or bank notes in exchange for any sueh note, or to 
refund the value of any such note: 
Provided that the Reserve Bank of India may refund as of pee 
the whole or part of the value of any such Dote. 

i 
3. (1) The Leaai Tender (Inscribed Notes) Ordinance, 1842 11 
hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act as if this Act were in force on the day on , 
which such thing was done or such action was taken. 
Oro. '9 cJt 
I .... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REAs6NS 
The Legal Tender (Inscribed Notes) Ordinance, 1942, which is 
still in force by virtue of section 1 (3) of the India and Bunna 
(Emergency Provisions) Act, 1940, applies at present in the areas 
which prior to 1st November, 1956, were known as Part 'A' and 
Part 'C' States. It is proposed to extend the operation of the 
Ordinance to the whole of India in order to have a uniform law on 
the subject throughout the territory of India. Opportunity has 
been taken to replace the Ordinance by an Act of Parliament. 
NEW DZLID; T. T. KRISHNAMACHARl. 
Th.lOth December, 1963. 
PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OJ' INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.5(68)-C&C/62, dated the 30th January, 1984 
from Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, 
·!.ok Sabha]. 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Legal Tender (Inscribed Notes) Bill, 1964, has recommend-
ed the introduction of the Bill in the !.ok Sabha under article 117 (1) 
of the Constitution. 
3 

Rot. 
beutq 
meua,el 
ofa 
poUtleal 
character 
not to be 
1epl 
~. 
ANNEXURE 
THE LJIlGAL TENDER (INSCRIBED NOTES) OIuJINANca, Ita 
No. LIX OF 1942 
An Ordinance to restrict tbe negotiabilit~,'ofcurreney aDd ether 
notes inscribed with messages of a politicalebaracter. 
Whereas an emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to 
restrict the negotiability of currency and other notes inscribed with 
messages of a political character; 
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powels conferred by section 72 
of the Government of India Act, as set out in the Ninth Schedule to 
the Government of India Act, 1935, the Governor General is pleased ;~ ~e:: 
to make and promulgate the following Ordinance:-
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Legal Tender (Inscribed 
Notes) Ordinance, 1942. 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 
Z. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934, or in the Currency Ordinance, 1940, or in any other II of 1934-
enactment or rule of law, a currency note of the Government of IV of 1940. 
India, a bank note issued by the Reserve Bank of India, or a Govern-
m~t of India one-rupee note issued under the Currency Ordinance, 
1940, which bears written upon it any extrinsic words or visible re-
presentations intended to conveyor capable of conveying a message 
of a political character, shall not be legal tender in all Part A States 
and Part C States of India; and the Reserve Ballk of India shall not 
be under 8Jly legal Gbligation to receive any such note, or to lsaue 
rupee coin or other coin or currency notes or bank notes in· ~chanse 
for any such note, or to refund the value of any such note: 
. ?rovided that the Reserve Bank of India may in its discretion 
refund as of grace the whole or part of the value of any sueb. n~te. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BU..L 
to restrict the negotiability of currency and other notes inscrilr 
ed with messages of a political Character. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnatnacharl, 
Minister of Finance.) 