74 of 1956. 
'.- 1'.0((" ": 
':,:"'J : :', ;':~. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
BW Net 4. IJ63 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
jurtheT to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Short title 
Act 1963. and com-, mence-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date q the Central Govern- ment. 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
10 
Z. In section 8 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956,- Amend-
mentoi 
(i) in sub-section (1) and in sub-section (2A) , for the words section 8. 
"one per cent.", the words "two per cent." shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "seven per cent.", the 
words "ten per cent." shall be substituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (3) ,-
(a) clause (a) shall be omitted; 
(0) in clause (b), the words "in the caSe of goods other 
than declared goods" shall be omitted; ana 
(c) in clause (d), the words, brackets and fetter "clause 
(a) or" shall be omitted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, provides, among other things, for 
the levy of tax on sales in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
The rates of tax on such sales were fixed at the time of the enactment 
of the Act in 1956 and have not undergone any material change since 
then. In view of the present need to tap all available resources, it is 
proposed to revise the rates of tax on these sales. Hence this Bill 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The . 13th ·February. 1963. 

L·I ANNEXURE '-, , 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT, 19t;6 
(74 01',1956) 
• • • 
.1 
8. (1) Every dealer, who in the course of inter-State trade or Rates of tax 
commerce-- on sales in 
, tbecourse 
(a) sells to the G.overnment any goods; or of inter-
, , . State trade 
(b) sells to a regIstered dealer other than the Government or com-
. goods of the description referred to in sub-section (3); merce. 
shall be liable to pay tax under this Act, which shall be one per cent. 
of his turnover. 
(2) The tax payable by any dealer on his turnover in so far as the 
turnover or any part thereof relates to the sale of goods in the course 
of inter-State trade or commerce not falling within sub-section (1)-
(a) in the case of declared goods, shall be calculated at the 
rate applicable to the sale or purchase of such goods inside the 
appropriate State; and 
(b) in the case of goods other than declared goods, shall be 
calculated at the rate of seven per cent. or at the rate applicable 
to the same or purchase of such gOods inside the appropriate 
State, whichever is higher; 
and for the purpose of making any such calculation any such dealer 
shall be deemed to be a dealer liable to pay tax under the sales tax 
law of the appropriate State, notwithstanding that he, in fact, may 
not be so liable under that law. 
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2), if under the sales tax law of the appropriate State 
the sale or purchase, as the case may be, of any goods by a dealer is 
exempt from tax generally or is subject to tax generally at a rate 
which is lower than one per cent. (whether called a tax or fee or by 
any other name), the tax payable under this Act on his turnover in 
so far as the turnover or any part thereof relates to the sale of such 
goods shall be n.il or, as the case may be, shall be calculated at the 
lower rate. 
3 

4 • 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section a sale or pur"! 
chase of goods shall not be deemed to be exempt from tax generally. 
under the sales tax law of the appropriate State if under that law it 
is exempt only in specified circumstances or under specified condi-
tions or in relation to which the tax is levied at specified. stages or 
otherwise than with reference to the turnover of the goods: . 
(3') The goods referred to in clause (b) of sub-section '(1)-
(a) in the case of declared goods are goods of the class or 
classes specified in the certificate of registration of the -registered 
dealer purchasing the goods as being intended for re-sale by 
him; 
(b) in the case of goods other than declared goods are gQ9ds 
of the class or classes specified in the certificate of registration of 
the registered dealer purchasing the goods as being intended 'for 
re-sale by him or subject to any rules made by the Central Gov-
emment in this behalf, for use by him in the manufacture or pro-
cessing of goods for sale or in mining or· in the genel'ation or 
distribution of electricity or any other form of power; 
• • • • • 
(d) are containers or other materials used for the packing of 
.,~y' goods or classes of goods specified in the certificate of regis-
. tration referred -to in clause (a) or clause (b) ot: for the p~cking 
ot' any containers or other ntateriall!i specified in the'certfftcate of 
registration referred to in clause (c). -
.... • • • 

• 
.LOK SABHA 
A 
BU.L 
• 
further to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
The President has, in pursuance c.f clause (I) of anicles 
117 and 274 of the Constitution of India, recommended 
to Lok Sabha the intr0ducrio .. 1 of lhe Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(S,.,i Morarjl Desai, 
~lnhter of PtiuMcs) 