BUl No. , of 1954. 
THE BARSI LIGHT RAILWAY COMPANY (TRANSFER-
RED LIABILITIES) BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEoPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to impose upon the Barsi Light RaHway Company, Limited, an obliga-
tion to make certain payments to the Central Government. 
WHEREAS upon the determination on the 31st d}ly of December, 
1953, of the contract made on the 1st day of August, 1895, and all 
other contracts supplemental thereto between the Secretary of State 
in Council of India and the Barsi Light Railway Company, Limited, 
the Central Government will assume liability for all gratuities, or S 
special contributions to the provident funds, and leave salaries of the 
employees of the said Company taken into employment by the 
Central Government in respect of the period of their service under 
the said Company; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to impose upon the Barsi Light 10 
Railway Co.mpany, Limited, an obligation to make certain payments 
to the Central Government in requital for the assumption of thi! 
liability; 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title and ~ommeD~emeDt.-(l) This Act may be called the IS 
Barsi Light Railway Company (Transferred Liabilities) Act, 1954. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of 
December, 1953. 
2. Deftnltion.-In this Act "the Company" means the Barsi Light 20 
Railway Company, Limited. 

s 
10 
IS 
3. Payment by Company to the Central Government.-The Com-
pany shall pay to the Central Government out of its assets such sum 
as on the 31st day of December, 1953, is sufficient to meet the payment 
of-- . 
(a) all amounts payable as gratuities or as special contribu-
tions to provident funds, as the case may be, which, if the 
Company had continued to exist after the 31st day of December, 
1953, it would have paid on or after that day under the normal 
operation of its rules to its employees then in service if their 
services had been terminated on that day by the abolition of thelr 
appointments; and 
(b) all amounts payable by way of leave salary for such 
periods of leave as, if the Company had continued to exist after 
the 31st day of December, 1953, it would have sanctioned under 
the normal operation of its rules to its employees then in service 
if they had been permitted to proceed on leave on the 1st day 
of January, 1954, with permission to retire on the expiry of that 
leave. ' 
4. Payments to employees out of money paid to Central Govern-
20 ment.--The moneys paid to the Central Government under section 3 
sball be utillsed by the Central Government to effect payment to 
employees of the Company re-employed by the Central Government 
of the amounts referred to In clauses <a> and <b> of section 3 In 
accordance with the principles prescribed In the roles of the Com-
25 pany, or in the rules of the Central Government by wb1ch those 
rules may be replaced. 
5. Repeal of Ordinance 7 of 1953.-The Barsi Light Railway 
Company (Transferred Liabilities) Ordinance. 1953 (7 of 1953) IS 
hereby repealed. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On purchase of the undertaking of the Barsi Light Railway Com-
pany Ltd. on the 1st January, 1954, the staff of the Company was 
also taken over by the Government of India. In' order to secure 
continuity of service of such staff under Government, it was neces-
sary that the Company should pay to Government suitable ~ums to 
represent the accrued liability of the Company in regard to gratuity, 
Special Contri'bution to the Provident Fund and leave salary of the 
staff in respect of the period of service of such staff under the Com-
pany. To remove any legal incompetency on the part of the Com-
pany to make such payments an Ordinance entitled the Barsi Light 
Railway Company (Transferred Liabilities) Ordinance, 1953 was pro-
mulgated on the 31st December, 1953. 
2. The said Ordinance made it obligatory on the Company to pay 
to the Central Government out of the Company's assets such sum as 
would be sufficient to meet the payment of the Company's accrued 
liability referred to above. The present Bill seeks to replace the 
Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 12th February, 19M. O. V. ALAGESAN. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to impose upon the Barsi Light RaUwa} Company, Limited, an 
obligation to make certain payments to the Central Govern-
ment. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to the House 
of the People the introductbn of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri O. V. Alagesan, 
Deputy' Minister for Railway8 and Tranaporl.) 
GtpD -LAI:-Io49 P S-16.2-54-I,790 