, \ 
Bill No. f of 1"0 
THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA 
ON I STH FEllRU ARY, 1960) 

69 of 1951. 
Bill NO.4 or 1960. 
THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic 
of Indie as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Plantations Labour (Amend- Short tltlo and ~om-
ment) Act, 1960. mencement. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 1 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (hereinruter Amend-
referred 'to as the principal Act), for, sub-section (4), the following :~(l~f ItC-
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
10 "(4) It applies to the following plantations, that is to say,-
IS 
20 
(a) to any land used or intended to be used for grow-
ing tea, coffee, rubber or cinchona which admeasures 10.117 
hectares or more and in which thirty or more persons are 
employed or were employed on any day of the preceding 
twelve months; 
(b) to any land used or intended to be used for grow-
• ing any other plant, which admeasures 10.117 hectares or 
more and in which thirty or more persons are employed or 
were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months, 
if, after obtaining the approval of the Central Government, 
the State Government, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, so directs. 
(5) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this 

Amendment 
t4ICCtiOD 2. 
2 
Act shall apply also to any land used or intended to be used for 
growing any plant referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of 
sub-section (4), notwithstanding that-
(a) it admeasures less than 10.117 hectares, or 
(b) the number of persons employed therein is less 5 
than thirty: 
Provided that no such declaration shall be made in respect 
of such land which admeasured less than 10.117 hectares or in 
which less than thirty persons were employed, immediately be-
fore the commencement of this Act.". 10 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(i) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(ee) "family", when used in relation to a worker, 
means- 15 
(i) his or her spouse, and 
(ii) the legitimate and adopted children of the 
worker dependent upon him or her, who have not com-
pleted their eighteenth year; 
and includes, where the worker is a male, his parents 20 
dependent upon him;'; 
(ii) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substitu-
ted, namely:-
'(f) "plantation" means any plantation to which this 
Act, whether wholly or in part, applles and includes offices, 25 
hospitals, dispensaries, schools, and any other premises used 
for any purpose connected with such plantation, but does 
not include any factory on the premises to which the pro-
visions of the Factories Act, 1948, apply;'; '3 of 1948. 
(iii) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substitu- 30 
ted, namely:-
'(h) "qualified medical practitioner" means a person 
holding a qualification granted by an authority specified or 
notified under section 3 of the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 
1916, or specified in the Schedules to the Indian Medical 357 of 1916. 
Council Act, 1956, and includes any person having a certi- 102 of 195'. 
ficate granted under any Provincial or State Medical Coun-
cil Act;'; 
(iv) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substitu-
ted, namely:- 40 
'(k) "worker" means a person employed in a planta-
tion for hire or reward, whether directly or through any 

S 
10 
agency, to do any work, skilled, unskilled, manual or cleri-
cal, but does not include--
(i) a medical officer employed in the plantation; 
(ii) any person employed in the plantation (includ-
ing any member of the medical staff) whose monthly 
wages exceed rupees three hundred; 
(iii) any person employed in the plantation pri-
marily in a managerial capacity, notwithstanding that 
his monthly wages do not exceed rupees three hundred; 
or 
(iv) any person temporarily employed in the planta-
tion in any work relating to the construction, develop-
ment or maintenance of buildings, roads, bridges, drains 
or canals;". 
IS 4. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the Ame1u!ment 
word "workers", the words "and their families" shall be inserted. of letuan 10. 
20 
5. In section 16 of the principal Act, in clause (e), the words Amendment 
"the definition of what constitutes the family of a worker for the of 8ection 16. 
purposes of section 15," shall be omitted. 
6. In section 30 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), after the proviso 
Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
Amendment 
of tIeCdon 3<:'. 
the following 
"Explanation.-For the purposes of calculating leave 
under this sub-section,-
25 (a) any day on which no work or less than half a 
day's work is performed shall not be counted; and 
(b) any day on which half or more than half a 
day's work is performed shall be counted as one day."; 
(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall 
30 be inserted, nmnely:-
" (4) If the employment of a worker who is entitled to 
leave under this section is terminated by the employer before 
he has taken the entire leave to which he is entitled, the 
employer shall pay him the amount payable under section 31 
3S in respect of the leave not taken, and such payment shall be 
made before the expiry of the second working day after such 
termination.". 

Amen~mC:l'lt 7. In section 31 of the principal Act. for sub-section (1). the follow-
of .ccuon 31• ing sub-sections shall be substituted. namely:-
"(1) For the leave allowed to a worker under section 30. he 
shall be paid,-
(a) if employed wholly on Q time-rate basis, at the rate 5 
of minimum daily wage fixed under any law or under the 
terms of any award. agreement or contract of service, and 
(b) in other cases, incl~ding cases where he is, during 
the preceding twelve calendar months, paid partly on Q time-
rate basis and partly on a piece-rate basis, at the rate of the 10 
average daily wtige calculated over the preceding twelve 
calendar months. 
E.rpZanation.-For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section 
(1), the average daily wage shall be computed on the basis of 
his total full-time earnings during the preceding twelve oolendar 15 
months, exclusive of any over-time earnings or bonus, if any, but 
inclusive of dearness allowance. 
(lA) In addition to the wages for the leave period at the 
rates specified in sub-section (1), a worker shall also be paid the 
cash value of food and other concessions, if any, allowed to him 20 
by the employer in addition to his daily wages unless these conces-
sions are continued during the leave period.". 
Amendment 8. In section 42 of the principal Act, after the words "such exemp-
oCaection42· tion", the words and figures "other than an exemption ,from section 
19" shall be inserted. 25 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Plantations Labour Act, 1951, which provides for the welfare 
of labour and regulates the conditions of work in plantations has 
been in operation since the 1st April, 1954. The Act is applicable 
to gardens admeasuring twenty-five acres or more and whereon thirty 
or more persons are employed. Some 'employers are fragmenting 
their plantations into small units with a view to evading their 
liabilities under the Act. The amendments mentioned in the Bill 
are proposed to check fragmentation of plantations and to ensure 
more effective working of the Act. 
2. The reasons for the amendments are, wherever neceuary, 
given in the notes on clauses attached to the Bill. 
NEW DELm; G. L. NANDA. 
The 9th December, 1959. 

N otel on. clause, 
Clause 2.- The revised sub-section (4) of section 1 combines the 
existing provisions of this sub-section and those of clause (f) of 
section 2. The amendment is of a drafting nature. 
Sub-section (5) is being added in section 1 to empower the State 
Governments to apply all or any of the provisions of the Act to 
any plantations less than 10.117 hectares in area or employing less 
than 30 workers, subject to the condition that such of these planta-
tions as were in existence before the commencement of the Act will 
not be brought within its scope. This sub-section thus seeks to 
check the fragmentation of plantations by employers into small 
Wlits and to prevent the establishment of such small Wlits in future 
with a view to by-passing the Act. 
Clause 3.-(i) It is considered necessary to define the term 
'family' for the purposes of the Act. A new clause (ee) is, there-
fore, being added. in section 2. 
(ii) The present definition of the term "plantation" in section 
2 <f) is restricted to land where tea, coffee, etc., are grown and does 
not cover other places such as offices, hospitals, dispens:lries and 
schools where persons are employed in work connected with the 
plantations in one fonn or another. The modified section 2 (f) read 
with the amendments propo~;ed in clause 2 will ensure that the 
benefits Wlder the Act will be available to all workers except 
those employed in factories which come within the purview of the 
Factories Act, 1948. 
(iii) Clause (k) of section 2 is being amended. to clarify that 
members of the medical staff (other than medical officers) whose 
wages are less than Rs. 300 p.m. are covered by the Act, while 
persons who are temporarily employed in any work relating to the 
construction and maintenance of buildings, roads, etc., are not. 
Clause 4.-Employers are already providing medical facilities 
for families of workers. The proposed amendment merely gives 
this a statutory effect. 
Clause 6.-(i) It is not clear whether the expression 'work 
performed' appearing in sub-section (1) of section 30 includes days 
6 

1 
on which less than the normal day's work is performed or on which 
only attendance is put in. The proposed "Explanation" clarifies the 
position in this regard. 
(ii) The existing section 30 does not provide for grant of leave due 
to a worker or wages in lieu of such leave in case his services are 
terminated by the employer. The new sub-section (4) makes 
necessary provision on this account. 
Clause 7.-The period over which the average daily wage should 
be calculated has oot been specified in section 31 (1). This has been 
causing difficulty in the calculation of wages for the leave period. 
The proposed amendment seeks to remove this difficulty. 
Clause 8.-Under section 42, previous approval of the Central 
Government is necessary before State Governments can exempt 
employers from any provision of the Act. Section 19 restricts 
weekly hours of work to 54 for adults. Employers are finding it 
difficult to observe a 54-hour week in a rush period when tea leaves 
have to be plucked while in heavy fiush and coffee berries have to 
be picked before torrential rains can bring down the whole of thE' 
ripening crop. The restriction of weekly hours of work to 54 in 
such cases results in loss of crop to estates and loss of earnings to 
workers paid on piece rates. The proposed amendment empowers 
State Governments to exempt employers from section 19 in suitable 
cases without prior reference to the Central Government, which 
takes time. 

Shan dtle, 
cztent. CCIID-
ldIIQCement 
and appUca-
don. 
DdIDJtJoaa. 
ANNEXURE 
ixTRAC'l'S FROM TID: P1.ANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951 (69 OF 1951) 
• • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 
• • • • (4) It applies in the first instance to all tea, coffee, rubber and 
cinchona plantations, but any State Government may, subject to the 
previous approval of the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, apply it to any other class of plantations within that 
State. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • 
(f) Uplantation" means any land used or intended to be used 
for growing tea, coffee, rubber, or cinchona which admeasures 
twenty-five acres or more and whereon thirty or more persons are 
employed, or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, and in respect of any territory where the provisions of 
this Act have been applied by notification under sub-section (4) 
of section 1 to any other class of plantations, means also any land 
used or intended to be used for growing the plant mentioned in 
such notification and whereon thirty or more persons are employ-
ed, or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months; 
• • • 
(h) uqualified medical practitioner" means a person having a 
certificate granted by an authority Specified in the Schedule to the 
Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916, or in the Schedules to the 7 of 1916. 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1933, and also persons having certi- 27 of 1933. 
ficates granted under the different State (Provincial) Med:ical 
Council Acts; 
• • • 
(k) uworker" means a person employed in a plantation for 
hire or reward, whether directly or through any agency; to do 
any work, skilled, unskilled, manual or clerical. but does not 
include-
(a) a medical officer at the plantation; 
(b) any person whose monthly wages exceed three hund-
red rupees; or ) 
• 

} ", 
.~ 
(c) a person employed:·Di'.ll'p}4}ltation primarily 
managerial capacity n~~~~.~ that his monthly 
do not exceed rupees three hundred;, 
.\ 
,.'- •••• 1 . •• t',,~' . ~ , 
, ' .' ....... , . 
.r 'I.· •• -. .I:{:~R.D~ 
" ~ .' 
PROVISIONS AS TO HEALTH 
t, 
'. • 
in a 
wages 
... 
-.~ 
. ;:J "V • 
':;~"'; ;.c, 
10. (1) In every plantation ther. shall be provided and maintained Medical 
so as to be readily awilable such medical facilities for the workers as fadUde,. 
may be prescribed by the State Government 
• • • 
16. The State Government may make rules for the purpose of :"~~r to 1 
u ..... eru ea giving effect to the provisions of section 15 and, in particular provid- relating to 
ing for- housing. 
• • • 
(e) the allotment to workers and their families of housing 
accommodetion and of suitable strips of vacant land adjoining 
such accommodation for the purpose of maintaining kitchen 
gardens, the definition of what constitutes the family of a worker 
for the purposes of section 15, and for the eviction of workers 
and their familie~ from such accommodation; 
• • • 
30. (1) Every worker shall be allowed leave with wages for a AnnUllleave 
number of days calculated at the rate of- with WI,CI. 
(a) if an adult, one day for every twenty days of work per-
fonned by him, and 
(b) if a young person, one day for every fifteen days of 
work perfonned by him: 
Provided that a period of leave shall be inclusive of any holiday 
which may occur during such periods. 
• • • 
31. (1) For the leave allowed to a worker under section 30 he Wagd dur-
shall be paid at the rate equal to the daily average of his total full- Ing '!odeav~ . ~n . tIme wages exclusive of any overtime earnings and bonus, if any, 
but inclusive of dearness allowance and the cash equivalent of any 
advantage accruing by the concessional supply by the employer 
of foodgrains for the day on which he worked. 
• • • 

Power to 
esempt. 
10 
, CHAP'IZR vm., 
, ;::-' ::'l,)m "1' .I,. ,"J -..' • • ' , ~'.' 
.,0, 'J. .... ISCELLANEOUS 
• • 
!1':_' ~.,~ .... "' ! 
• 
42. The State Goventment Iruly, by order in writing, exempt, 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as it may think to impose, 
any employer or class of employers fr()m all or any of the provisions 
of this Act: 
Provided that no such~xemption shall be granted except with the 
previous approval of the Central Government. 
",'1 
• • • 
~.; 
oJ , • ~' • t I' ,'". : • f", 
.e ;.". j Ii. . .' 
, .: 
j .. 
• '~ 1 :.!' ,; t • 
'.! 
'; " I .; ~ , 
:) 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend The Plantation') Labour Act, 1951. 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, Minister of 
lAbour and Employment.) 