Btll No. <4 of 1956 
THE LIFE INSURANCE (EMER-
GENCY PROVISIONS) BILL, 1956 
(AsINTRODUCED IN LOK SAB:I.\) 

Bill No. 4: of 1956 
THE LIFE INSURANCE (EMERGENCY PROVISIONS) 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the manage-
ment of life insurance busineBS pending naticnalisation thereof. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Life Insurance (Emergency Provi- Short tide. 
sions) Act, 1956. 
S 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(1) "appointed day" means the 19th day of January, 1956; 
(2) "controlled business" means-
(i)in the case of an insurer specified in sub-clause 
(a) (ii) or sub-clause (b) of clause (9) of section 2 of the 
10 Insurance Act and carrying on life insurance business-
(a) all his business, if he carries on no other class 
of insurance business; 
(b) all the business appertaining to his life insur-
ance business, if he carries on some other class of 
IS insurance business also; 
(c) all his business, if his certificate of registration 
under the Insurance Act in respect of general insurance 
business stands wholly cancelled for a period of more 
than six months on the appointed day; 
I 

~ 
(ii) in the case of any other insurer specified in clause 
(9) of section 2 of the Insurance Act and carrying on life 
insurance business-
(a) all his business in India, if he carries on no 
other class of insurance business in India; S 
(b) all the business appertaining to his life insurance 
business in India, if he carries on some other class of 
insurance business also in India; 
(c) all his business in India, if his certificate of 
registration und~r the Insurance Act in respect of 10 
general insurance business in India stands wholly can-
celled for a period of more than six months on the 
appointed day; 
(iii) in the case of a provident society, as defined in 
section 65 of the Insurance Act, all its business; IS 
Explanation.-An insurer is said to carryon no class of 
insurance business other than life insurance business if, in addi-
tion to life insurance business he carries on only capital redemp-
tion business or annuity certain business or both; and the ex-
pression "business appertaining to his life insurance business" 20 
shall be construed accordingly; 
(3)· "Custodian" means the person appointed under section 4 
to take over the management of any controlled business; 
(4,> "Insurance Act" means the Insurance Act, 1938; .. of 1938 
(5) "insurer" means an insurer as defined in the Insurance 2S 
Act who carries on life insurance business in India, and includes 
a provident soci<!ty as defined in section 65 of the Insurance 
A~; 
(6) "notified order" means an Order notified in the Official 
Gazette; 30 
(7) all other words and expressions used herein but not 
defined, and defined in the Insurance Act, shall have the mean-
ings respactively assigned to them in that Act. 
Management 3. (1) On and from the appointed day, the management of the 
b!'.=~ed controlled business of all insurers shall vest in the Central Gov- 3S 
vest in Gov- emment, and, pending the appointment of a Custodian for the con-
:ar:ne!: trolled business of any insurer, the persons in charge of the manage-
ment of m~nt of such business immediately before the appointed day shan, 
Act. em. .and from the appointed day, be in charl'e of .the management of 
tile business for and on behalf of the Central Government; and the 40 
controlled. business of the insurer shall be. carriefl OD by them 
subject to the provisions contained in sl1b-section (3) and (5) and 
to .w:h further directions, if any, as the Central Govemment may 

3 
give· to-1thern . by notice addressed and sent to the principal officer 
of the insurer. 
(2) Any contract, whether express or implied, providing for the 
management of the controlled business of an insurer made before 
5 the appointed day betwe~n the insurer and any person in charge 
of the management of such business immediately before the appoint-
ed day shall be deemed to have terminat~d on the appointed day. 
(3~ No insurer shall, without the previous approval of the person 
I specified by the Central Government in this behalf in resp~ct of 
10 that insurer (hereinafter referred to as the authorised person),-
(4) make any payment or grant any loan in respect of a 
policy of life insurance otherwise than in accordance with the 
normal practice observed by him in respect of such matters 
immediately before the appointed day; 
15 (b) incur any expenditure from the assets appertaining to 
the controlled business otherwise than for the purpose of mak-
ing routine payments of salaries or commissions to employees, 
insurance agents, special agents or chief agents or for the 
purpose of meeting the routine day to day expenditure; 
20 (c) transfer or otherwise dispose of any such assets or 
create any charge, hypothecation, lien or other encumbrance 
thereon; 
(d) invest in any manner any moneys forming part of such 
assets; 
2S (e) acquire any immovable property out of any moneys 
. forming part of such .assets; 
(f) enter into any contract of service or agency, whether 
expressly or by implication, for purposes connected wholly or 
partly with the controlled business or vary the terms and con-
30 ditions of any such contract subsisting on the appoint1!d day; 
(g) enter into any other transaction relating to controlled 
business other than a contract relating to the issue of a new 
policy of life insurance or vary the terms and conditions of 
any agreement relating to any such transaction subsistirtg at the 
3S commencement of this Act. 
(4) The approval of the authorised person may be given either 
generally in relation to certain classes of transactions of ,the insurer 
or specially in r~lation to any of his transactions. 
(5) Every insUTer shall deposit all securities and documents of 
40 title to any assets appertaining to the controlled business in any 
Scheduled Bank in which the il'l~urer had an account Immediately 

4 
before the appointed day or in any branch of the State Bank in the 
place where the head office or the principal office of the insurer 
is situated or, where there is no branch of the State Bank in such 
place, the nearest branch of the State Bank; and no such security 
or document shall be withdrawn from the Scheduled Bank or the , 
State Bank, as the case may be, except with the permission of the 
authorised person: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section :;hall apply 
to any security or document of title kept with approved trustees 
by reason of the provisions contained in sub-section (6) of section 27 10 
of the Insurance Act, or kept in trust with an Official Trustee in 
pursuance of the articles of association of an insurer unless the 
Central Government, by notified order, otherwise directs. 
Explanation.-In this sub-section,-
(a) 'Scheduled Bank' means a bank included for the time IS 
being in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934; :I of 1934. 
(b) 'State Bank' means the State Bank of India constituted 
under the State Bank of India Act, 1955. 13 of 19S5. 
(6) Every insurer shall deliver forthwith at the place and to the ao 
person specified in this behalf by the Central Government in respect 
of that insurer the following documents, namely:-
(i) the minutes book or any other book in India containing 
all resolutions up to the appointed day of the persons in charge 
of the Management of the controlled business before the appoint- :IS 
ed day; 
(ii) the current cheque books relating to 'the ·controlled 
business which are at the head office or the principal office of 
the insurer; 
(iii) all registers or other books containing particulars re- 3t. 
lating to the investment of any moneys appertaining to the con-
trolled business including investments on mortgaged properties 
and all loans granted and advances made otherwise than on 
policies; 
(iv) all brokers' notes or certificates in the possession of the 3' 
insurer in respect of any orders for the investment of any 
moneys appertaining to the controlled business: 
Provid.ed that if any document specifted in this sub-section is 
relevant for the purpose of any business other than the controlled 
business carried on by the insurer, the person specifted in the notified 40 
order shall be bound to return it to the persons in charge of the 
management of such other business with the least possible delay, 

5 
but shall have power to place identification marks on such docu-
ment or to take extracts or copies therefrom. 
(7) Without pr:judice to the generality of the powers conferred 
by sub-section (1) and to the provisions contained in sub-sections (3), 
5 (5) and (6), any directions issued under sub-section (1) may require 
the persons in charge of the management of the controlled business 
of an insurer under this Act to furnish to the Central Government 
or to the authorised person such returns, statements and other infor-
mation relating to the controlled business as may be mentioned in 
10 the direction. 
(8) The persons in charge of the management e' the controlled 
business of an insurer under this Act shall be entitled to such 
remuneration, whether by way of allowance or salary as the Central 
Government may fix; and any such person may, by giving a month's 
15 notice in writing to the Central Government of his intention so to 
de, relinquish charge of the management of the controlled business. 
4. (1) The Central Government may, as soon as it is convenient Power of 
administratively so to do, appoint any person as Custodian for the ~::t~~V­
purpose of taking over the management of the controlled business appoint 
of . Custodians to 20 an msurer. take over 
(2) On the appointment of a Custodian under sub-section (1), 
all persons in charge of the management of the controlled business 
of the insurer for and on behalf of the Central Government im-
mediately before such appointment shall cease to be in charge of 
25 such management and shall be bound to deliver to the Custodian all 
books of account, registers or other documents in their custody 
relating to the controlled business of the insurer. 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-sections (3), (5) and (6) of 
section 3- shall apply to any insurer the management of whose con-
30 trolled business has been taken over by the Custodian, but the 
Central Government may issue such directions to the Custodian as 
to his powers and duties as it deems desirable in the circumstances 
of the case, and the Custodian may apply to the Central Govern-
ment at any time for instructions as to the manner in which he shall 
35 conduct the management of the controlled business of the insurer or 
in relation to any matter arising in the course of such management. 
(4) The Custodian shall re«:eive such remuneration as the Central 
Government may fix; and the Central Government may at any time 
cancel the appointment of any "rson as Custodian and appoiDt 
40 some other person iD his stead. 
management 
of controlled 
business. 

6 
=. of S. The Custodian may, in relation to the controlled. business of 
illltltut!an to any insurer the management of which has been taken over by him, 
~ft8I, exercise all or any of the powers which the Controller of Insurance 
or an Administrator appointed under section 52A of the Insurance 
Act may exercise under section 106 or section 107 of that Act. S 
Comz:-- 6. The amount of compensation payable in respect of the 
=.:~ vesting in the Central Government of the management of the con-
:a=~~ncd trolled business of an insurer shall, for every month during which 
veatina in the management thereof remains vested in the Central Government, 
=~t~OV- be a sum which is equivalent to one-twelfth of the annual average 10 
CompcnM-
don, bow to 
be paid and 
distributed. 
of the share of the surplul' allocated to shareholders as disclosed in 
the abstracts prepared in accordance with Part II of the Fourth 
Schedule to the Insurance Act in respect of the last two actuarial 
investigations relating to the controlled business as at dates earlier 
than the first day of January, 1956: IS 
Provided that, if in respect of the controlled business of an insurer 
no such surplus as is referred to in this sub-section has been allocat-
ed to shareholders either because there are no shareholders or for 
any other reason, the compensation shall be payable at the rate of 
one rupee per month for every two thousand rupees or part thereof 20 
of the premium income of the insurer relating to his controlled 
business during the year 1954. 
7. (1) The amount of compensation payable under section 6 shall 
in the fint iDatance be payable out of the seven and a half Pflr Cellt. 
of the surplus referred to in sub-section (1) of section 49 of the 25 
Insurance Act earned by the insurer durin, the period the IDBnaare-
ment of the controlled business of the insurer vests in the Celltral 
Government, and where such compensation or any part thereof cu-
not be so paid out the Central Government shall make due 
provision for the payment of such compensation or part thereof as 30 
the case may be. 
(2) The compensation payable under section 6 shall be 
distributed among the persons entitled thereto by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made in 
this behalf: 
Provided that in the case of an insurer who is a company the 
Central Government shall have due regard to the wishes of the 
members expressed by them at any general meeting convened for 
the purpose. 
3S 
Pcaalticl. 8. If' any person- 40 
(el' fails to deliver to the Custodian any books of accodDt, 
registen or any other documents in his custody relating to the' 

7 
eoatrolled buainees of en insurer in respect of the maaagement 
of which the Custodian has been appointed; or 
(b) retains any property of such insurer appertaining to the 
controlled business of the insurer; or 
(c) fails to comply with the provisions contained in sub-
section (3) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) of section 3; or 
(d) fails to comply with any directions issued under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (7) of section 3; 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six 
10 months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
9. No proceeding for the winding up of an insurer the manage- Insurer not 
ment of whose controlled business has vested in the Central Govern- ~p bebywountl court. 
ment under this Act or for the appointment of a Receiver in respect 
15 of such business shall lie in any court. 
10. In computing the period of limitation prescribed by any law Exclusion of 
for the time being ill force for any suit or application against any ~c of 
person by an insurer in respect of any matter arising ou«t of his for ~ut­
controlled business, the time during which the . Life Insurance ~i~r~~on. 
20 (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance, 1956 and this Act have been 
in force shall be excluded. 
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding Effect of 
anything inconsistent therewith in any other law or in any instru- onAct th o er ment having effect by virtue of any other law. Jaws. 
25 12. The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that Delegation 
all or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act may also of powcn. 
be exercised by any such person as may be specified in the order. 
13. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie Protection 
against any Custodian or authorised person in respect of anything ~ ~der 
30 which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Gov~rnment or any Custodian or authorised person for any 
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is ill good 
3' faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
14. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to-
(a) any insurer in respect of the management of whose 
aftairs an Administrator has been appointed. under section 52A 
Df the Insurance Act; 
-~o (b) any insurer whose business is being voluntarily wound 
up or is being wound up under the orders of a court; 

Power to 
make rules. 
8 
(c) any insur~r. to. whom the Insurance Act does not apply 
by reason of the provisions con~ained in section 2E thereof; 
(d) any approved superannuation fund as defined in 
clause (a) of section 58N of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922; or 11 of 19%1~ 
(e) any insurance business carried on by the Government. S 
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notified order, make 
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, rules made under sub-section (1) may provide 
for-- 10 
(a) the form and manner in which books of accounts 
appertaining to controlled business shall be maintained by 
insurers; 
(b) the manner in which any compensation payable under 
this Act may be paid to the persons entitled. thereto; 
(c) the circumstances in which the remuneration payable 
to persons in charge of the management of the controlled busi-
ness of an insurer under this Act or to Custodians shall be met 
by the Central Government, whether wholly or in part. 
Repeal of Ordinance 16. (1) The Life Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance, 2.0' 
I of 1956 1956, is hereby repealed. and savings. 
(2) Anything done or any action taken (including any direc-
tions given and orders cmd rules made) under the said Ordinance 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if 
,this Act were in force on the day on which such thing· was done or 2.5' 
action was taken. . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Government have during the last few months been studying the 
problems facing the insurance industry in its role as an effective 
instrument of. mobilising people's so:vings and putting them to use 
in a constructive manner. As a result of such study the present 
management of the industry has been found wanting in several 
respects. 
By the amendment of the Insurance Act, which was effected in 
1950, Government took powers to appoint administrators to manage' 
companies where the interests of the policy holders were in grave 
jeopardy. In the short period that has elapsed since then a number 
of companies had to be put under administrators as investigation 
into their affairs revealed gr('ss mismanagement~ven embezzlement 
-very often resulting in insolvency. It has been observed that with 
a few exceptions, the Indian Life Insurers are virtually controlled 
by individuals who are prone to utilise the funds of these companies 
to subsidise or prop up their investments in other ventures to the! 
detriment of the industry and the policy holder who is its back-bone. 
Tightening up the provisions of the Insurance Act is no remedy since 
it is only of a negative character. Government have therefore decid-
ed to nationalise the Life Insurance business. 
A Bill to give effect to this decision will shortly be placed before 
Parliament. It was essential, however, to save the interests of the 
policy holders from damage, till legislation for this purpose was 
passed and put into effect. It was, therefore, necessary to issue an 
Ordinance styled the Life Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Ordi-
nance, 1956, vesting the management of all Life Insurance business 
in Indie, including the business now managed by foreign insurers, 
in the Government and for appointment of Custodians to manage 
tthe business on behalf of Government. The Ordinance slso provid-
ed for the payment. on a reasonable basis, of compensation to the 
persons entitled thereto in respect of the Government taking over 
the man£gement of the business. 
The present Bill seeks to convert that Ordinance into an Act. 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th February, 1956. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
. Uader clause 7 (1), the Central Government has to make due 
f)J'OViIicm for payment of a part or the whole of the compensation 
kecltuader elause 6 in cases where seven and a half per cent. of 
~e ·8Lirplus e&r'Qed by the concerned insurer during the period his 
~ment vests in the Government is not sufficient to pay the 
compensation, or where there is no such surplus during such period. 
It is not possible to anticipate in what cases payment by Govern-
ment· wm arise and to what extent. It is, therefore, not possible to 
make any atimate of this liability at this stage; but it is not likely 
te· eJlceedRs. "21,000 per month. 
Clauses 3 (8) and 4 (4), read with clause 15 (2) (c), contempla'te 
payment, wholly or in part, by the Government, of the remuneration 
payable to persons in charge of management by virtue of clause 3(1) 
or to Custodians appointed under clause 4. While the circumstances 
in -whichsucb payment has to be made by Government have yet to 
..be prescribed by rules, it is expected that such a contingency will 
arise only in· Ule case of insurers having meagre funds. Though it 
ia.J1Ot .poaeible to make any estimate of the likely liability of Govern-
IReDt Gn this account, it is expected thalt the question of Govern-
ment payment will arise only in a.small number of cases, and that 
the liability will not exceed Rs. 5,000 per month. 
, JO 

MEMORANDUM· REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 15 authorises the Central Government to make rules pro-
viding for the form and manner in which books of accounts are to 
be maintained by insurers in respect of their business the mana~ 
ment of which vests in the Government; regulating the manner in 
which compensation payable under clauses 6 and 7 will 'be paid to 
the persons entitled thereto; and specifying the circumstanees in 
which the Government will bear the whole or a pa~ of the remu-
neration payable to persons in charge of management for and on 
behalf of Government by virtue of clause 3(1) or to Custodians 
appointed in exercise of the powers under clause 4. The rule-male-
iIll power is of a .normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the 
management of life insurance business pending nationalisation 
thereof. 
The Presi~ent has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabhs the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri C. D. Deshmukh» 
Minister of Finance.) 