LOK &A.BHA .. -..-
CORRIGENDA 
to 
• TEE KHUDA BAKHSH ORIENTA.L PUBLIC LIBR.A.RY BILL. 196~ , 
(To be/AA introduced in Lok Sabbs") 
1. Page i1, line 2,-
. 
rafte..r " .li. UD l!r" insert " Jd..1.'ID" 
2. Page 4, lines 18 and 19,-
!.2!: " me et - g" ~ n me et ing" 
3. Page 5. lia.e10,-
afte r " such" 2mll " a" 
4. Page 6, line 21,-
!2.!: "carrving" ~ "carrying"· 
5. Page 9. line 7,-
after It shall" for - " " . " " , 
6. Correct line numbers on pages 2 a.nd 6. 
Magha 20, 1989Saka) 
._ ......... 

/ As INTRODUCED IN LoK SA BHA ON 
J�n, 
Bill No. 4 ol 1p'8 
THE KHUDA BAKHSH ORIENTAL PUBLIC 
cu.,,_ 
LIBRARY BILL, 1968 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSF.S 
CHAPTER I 
PlmLIMINilY 
1. Short title and commencement.
•_'l, ,: i(r n 
2. Declaration of Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library 11 a•
institution of national importance. 
3. Deftnitions.
CHAPTER II 
TRI: KHUDA BAK:HSH ORIENTAL PUBLIC LmRABT BoABD 
4. Establishment and incor.poration of Board.
5. Composition of Board.
8. Term of office.
7. Temporary absence of membel'tl.
8. Duty of Government nominating persons, etc.
9. Meetings of Board.
10. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular
purposes. 
11. Authentication of orders and other i nstruments of Board.
12. Staff of Board. 11 
13. Transfer of serviC'e of existing employees of Board.
14. Location of Ubrary.
CHAPTER III 
PROPERTY, LIABILITIES AND l'UNCTIONS OF THE BoARD 
15. Property and liabilities of Board:.
16. Duties of Board.
17. Powers of Board.

ii 
CHAPI'ER IV 
FmANCI, ACCOUNTIil, AUDIT RBPORTtl 
CLAVDI 
18. Grants by Central Government to Board. 
19. Fund of Board. 
20. Budget. 
21. Accounts and audit. 
22. Returns and reports. 
CHAPTER V 
23. Power of Central Government to issue dir'ectiona'to Board. 
24. Delegation of powers and duties. 
25. Officers and employees of Board to be public servants. 
26. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
27. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
28. Power of Board to make regulations. 

r~ ,~ IJUlNo.4ol l "S 
THE KHUDA BAKHSH ORIENTAL PUBLIC 
LIBRARY BILL, 1968 
A 
BILL 
to declare the Khuda Bakhsh ()1'iental Pu.blic Library at Patn4 to be 
an institu.tion of national importance and to prouide for its admi-
nistration and certain other connected matters. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) Tbfa Act may be called the Khuda Bakhsh Ori'ental Public Short'itl, 
Library Act, 1888. and com-
mence .. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- mel 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

beelara-
tion of 
Khuda 
Bakhah 
Oriental 
Public 
Library 
as an 
institution 
ot nation-
al impor-
tance. 
Deftni. 
tions. 
.tabllsh-
mentand 
incorpora-
tion ot 
Board. 
Composi-
tion of 
Board. 
~ 
Z. It is hereby declared that the Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public 
Library at Patna in the State of Bihar is an institution of national 
importance. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Board" means the Board establish·ed under section 4; S 
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Board; 
(c) "deed of trust" means the deed of trust No. 217 exeeuted 
in the office of the Deputy Registrar of Patna by the late Maulvi 
Khuda Bakhsh Khan Bahadur of Muradpur on the 14th January, 
1891; -
(~) "Fund" means the Fund referred to in section 19; 
(e) "library" means the Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Pu'blie 
Library declared to be an institution of national importance 
under tbia Act; 
10 
(1) "member" means a member of the Board and includes 15 
the Chairman; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescTibed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(h) "State Governm'ent" means the Government of Bihar. 
CHAPl'ER II 
THE K.HuDA BAKHSH OJuEN'rAL PuBLIC LDnwty BoARD 
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be estab-
lished for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be known a. the 
Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library Board. :£5 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate with the name afore-
said, having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, 
subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property and contract, and may, by that name, sue and be sued. 
5. (1) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely:- 30 
(a) the Governor of Bihar, ex otficio. Chairman; 
(b) the Accountant General, Bihar, ex officiO; 

, 
3 
(d) l sterson to be nominated by the Central Governmellt, 
who shall be a member of the family of the late Maulvi Khuda 
Bakhsh Khan Bahadur of Muradpur; 
(d) eight persons, four each to be nominated by the Central 
Government and the State Government, who shall, as far lUI 
possible, be persons having knowledge of, and e~perience in, 
matters relating to the administration of libraries; 
(e) the Director, Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library, ex 
ofJicio Memher-Secretary. 
10 (2) Every nomination under this section shall take effect as 
loon as it is notified by the Central Government in the Ofticial 
Gazette. 
s. (1) The terms of office of nomiRated members shall be sueh as Term of 
rnay be prescriobed. office and 
fresh 
15 (2) Any nominated member may resign his office by giving nomina-
notice in writing to the Central Government, and on such resignation tion in 
being notified by the Central Government in the Ofticlal Gazette, certain 
shall be deemed to have vacated his oftlce. CUeto 
(J) A casual vacancy created by the resignation ot a nominated 
30 member under sub-section (2) or for any other reason may be 
filled by fresh nomination by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, and a member so nominated shall 
hold office for the remaining period for which the member in whoS'e 
place he is nominated would have held oftlce. 
(4) An outgoing member shall be eligible for r'enomination. 
(5) If any nominated member is by infirmity or otherwise 
rendered temporarily incapable of carrying out his duties or is 
abeent on leaV'P or otherwise in circumst8.nces not involving the 
vacation ot his ofB.ce, the Central Government or the State Govern-
30 ment, as the case may be, may nominate another perlOn to act in 
his place during h.ia absence. 
35 
7. No act of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of- Vacancl .. , 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution ot, the :bt~~-
Board, or date acts. 
(b) any defect in the nomination of a person acting as a 
member thereof. or 
(c) any trregularlty in its procedure not affecting the merits 
of the case. 

Duty of 
Govern-
ment 
nominat-
ing per-
lonl, etc. 
8. (1) Before nominating a person to be a member of the Board, 
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case May 
be, shall satisfy itself that the person will have no such financial or 
other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise or per-
formance by him of his functions as a member, and the Central Gov- S 
ernment or the State Government, as the case may 'be, shall also 
satisfy itS'elf from time to time with respect to every member nomi-
nated by it that he has no such interest; and any person who is or 
whom the Central Government or the State G<>vernment, as the case 
may be, proposes to nominate and who has conS'ented to be, a mem- 10 
her shall, whenever requested by the Central Government or the 
State Government so to do, furnish to it such information as that 
Government considers necessary for the performance by it of its 
!uties under this sub-section. 
(2) A nominated member who is in any way, directly or indirect- IS 
ly, interested in a contract made or proposed to be made, by the 
Board shall, as soon as possible, after relevant circumstances have 
;:')me to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at a meet-
, . g of the Board and the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutel 
of the Board and the member shall not take any part after the dis- 20 
closure in any deliberation or decision of the Board with respect to 
that contract. 
Meetinp . 9. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall, 
ot Board. subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at 25 
its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided 
by regulations made under this Act. 
(2) The Chairman or, in his absence, any member chosen by the 
members present from among themselves, shall preside at a meeting 
;)f the Board. 
(3) H any nominated member, being an oftlcer of Government, is 30 
unable to attend: any meetii1g of the Board, he may, with the previous 
approval of the Chairman, authorise any person in writing to do so. 
(4) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be decid'ed by a 
majority of the votes of the members present and voting and in the 35 
case of an equality of votes, the Chairman or, in his absrence, the 
member presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. 
Tempo- 10. (1) The Board may associate with itself in such manner and 
~:r.:~ for such purposes as may be provided by regulations made under this 
of persons Act, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in perform-
with ing any of its functions under this Act. 40 
::::::: (2) A person associated with it by the Board. under sub-section 
purposes. (1) for any purpose shall have the right to take part in the diacuSo-

S 
lions of the BoaTd relating to that purpose, but shall not, by virtue 
of thi. lection, be entitled to vote. 
11. All orders and decisions of the Board shall be aU1.henticated Authenti· 
by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised ::on of 
, by the Board in this behalf, and all other instruments issued by the ande:her 
Board shall be authenticated by the signature of an officer of the instru-
Board authorised in like manner in this behalf. menta 
of Board. 
12. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the Board stat! of 
may, for the purpose of enabling it efficiently to perform its functions Board. 
I. under this Act, appoint such a number of officers and other employees 
as it may think fit. 
(2) The recruitment and conditions of service of such officers and 
employees shall be such as may be provided by regulations made 
under this Act. 
I, 13. Subject to the provisions 0'£ this Act, every person employed Transfer 
in the library immediately before the date of establishment of the of service 
Board shall, on and from such date, become an employee of the of existlni 
Board with such designation as the Board may determine and shall =1~: 
hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same Board. 
'0 remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions as he would 
have held the same on such date if the Board had not been establish-
ed and shall continue to do so unless and' until his employment in 
the :Board is tern\inated Or until such tenure, remuneration and 
terms and conditions ·are du1y altered by the Board: 
~, Provided tha&e tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions 
,0 
'5 
of service of any such person shall not be altered to his disadvantage 
without the previous approval of the Central Government. 
14. The library shall be located at Patna. 
CHAPTER III 
PROPERTY, LIABILITIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD 
15. (1) On ihe establishment of the Board-
Location 
of 
library, 
(i) all properties, funds and dues which are vested in, or Pr~rt~ 
realisable by, the trustees of the library constituted by the deed ~~d U:1-
of trust, in their capacity as such, shall vest in, and be realisable Bo:d. 
by the Board; and 
(U) aU liabilities in relation to the library which are 
enforceable against the said trustees, shall be enforceable only 
againlJt the Board. 

Dutlea of 
Board. 
6 
(2) AU properties, which may. after the establishment of the 
Board, be given. bequeathed or otherwise transferred to the library 
or acquired by the Board. shall vest in the Board. 
16. (1) Subject to the provisions of the deed of trust, it shall be 
the general duty of the Board to manage the library and to plan, 5 
promote, organise and implement programmes for the development 
of the library on modern scientific lines and to perform such other 
functions as the Central Government may, from time to time, 
assign to the Board. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the I. 
foregoing provision, the Board may take such stepa as it thinks 
fit-
(a) for providing for instruction and research in matters 
relating to libraries and for the advancement of learning and 
dissemination of knowledge in such matters; and 
IS 
(b) to do all such other' things as may be necessary for 
the discharge of its functions under this Act. 
Powers 17. (1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Central 
of Board. Government may think fit to impose, the Board' may exercise all 
such powers as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of 
carrving out its duties under this Act. 20 
Grants 
by 
Central 
Govern-
men' to 
Board. 
Fund of 
Board. 
(2) Subjeet to such regulations as may be made by the Board 
in this behalf, the Board may from time to time ~rchase or other-
wise ,acquire such maDuseripts, books, articles or~liDp atl may, in 
the «iphUon of·the Board, be worthy of presenetioD iD the library. 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUMT AND REPORTS 
18. For the purpose of enabling the Board to discharge its fUllr-
tiODS emclently UDder this Ad, the Central Govemment may, after 
due appropriatioD made by Parliament by law ill this behalf. pay to 
the Board in each financial year such sums of money as that Govern- 30 
ment considers nece5.'llll.l'y by way of grant, loan or otherwhle. 
19. (1) The Board shall maintain a Fund to which shall be 
credited-
(a) all moneys paid by the Central Government; 
. (b) such sums of money as the State ·Government may 3' 
pay annually having regard to 'its resolution No. V IL 4055/60E 
120 dated the 26th September. 1962; 

7 
(e) all fees and other charges levied under this Act; 
(d) all moneys received by the Board by way of grant, 
gift, donation, 'benefaction, bequest, subscription, contribution 
or tranafer; 
s (e) all other moneys received by the Board in any other 
manner or from any other source. 
(2) The Board may expend such sums as it thinD fit for per-
forming its functions under this Act and such SUDll shall be treated 
u expenditure payable out of the Fund. 
10 (3) A lum of money not exceeding such amount as may be pro-
vided by regulations made under this Act may be kept in current 
account with any scheduled bank as defined in section 2 of the 
0It'14. Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934:, or any other bank approved by the 
Central Government in this behalf, but any moneys in excess of that 
15 IWD shall be deposited in the Reserve Bank of India or with the 
agents of the Reserve Bank of India or invested in such manner. as 
may be approved by the Central Government. 
ZOo (I) The Board shall, by such date in each year as may be Bud,et. 
specified 'by the Central Goverrunent, submit to it for approval a 
20 budget for the next financial year in the form specified by it, show-
ing the estimated receipts and expenditure, and the sums which 
would be required from the Central Government during that finan-
cial year. 
(2) If any sum granted by the Central Government remains 
2S wholly or partly unspent in any Anancial year, the unspent sum may 
be carried forward to the next financial year and taken into account 
ill determining the sum to be provided by the Central Govemment 
for that year. 
(3) Subject to the provtllDDl of lu1Hection (4), no .um shall be 
30 expended by or on behalf of the Board, unless the expenditure;' 
covered by provision in the budget approved by the Central Gov-
ernment. 
(4) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Central 
Government may think fit to Impose, the Board may .anetion any 
35 reappropriaUon from. one head of expend.lture to another M' from • 
provision made for one purpose to that for mother purpose. 
21. <n The Board aban maintain proper accoun" and otbtr rele- .... u 
ftIlt 1'8OO1'dI·1IId -pnpar.e M.anDU81 .It.mep.t of aCCOUJ1ts mcludin • ~. 
the balance sheet In such form .. JIlI1 bt.pectfled., a~ SpaccordAnce a . 

i 
with such general directions as may be i5sued by the Central Gov-
ernment in consuitati9n with the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of Iridia. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure in- 5 
curred by him 'in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any per-
son appointed by' him in connection with the audit of the accounts 
of the Board shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 10 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India has in connection with the audit of Government accounts, 
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect the office of the Board, and the library. I ~ 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him 
in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be for-
warded annually to the Central Government and that Government 
shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. :!c 
Re~urns 22. (1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government at sueh 
and time and in such form and in such manner as the Central Govern-
"6Port~. ment may direct such returns, statements and particulars as the 
Central Government may, from time to time, require. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 25 
Board shall, as lOon as. possible after the commencement of each 
financial year, submit to the Central Government within such time 
as may be speCified by the Central Government a report giving true' 
and full account of thp. activities of the Board during the preVious 
financial year and an account of activities likely to be undertaken 30 
during the current financial year. 
CHAPTER V 
MIscJ:LLAN'E()uS 
Power of . 13. (1) In the discharge of its functions under this Aet, the Board 
Central shan be bound by such directions on questions of p()liey as the Cen-' 35 
Govern. tral Gov~nt ·may give to it· frim) time to time:. mentto 
issue Provided that the Board shall be given an opportunity to exp~s6 
~~~;:'. its'~ews before m:'y direction t. ~ven under this -:b-tection.. . 
... , .. (I) The .d~~8i:on of. the Ct:ntral Government 'whetMr '. questtcm 
, . ii-one of pOlicy Or not shaU~ tIDal ..•. ~. .: :.,' .. : . .' . :~, ... 

9 
; "'U.'The Board may, by general or special order in writing, direct Dele,a-
that all or any of the poW'erS or duties which may be exercised or tion of 
discharged by it'shall, in such circumstances and under such condi- ~ers 
tioris, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercised or d~ ~~ties, 
" charged also by any member, officer or employee of the Board sPe-
eified 'in this behalf in the order, 
25, All officers and employees of th-e Board shall. when acting or Officers 
purporting to a~t i~ p\lrSuance of the proyisions o~, this Act or of ~".fl.~m- '; 
~ny, rule, ~r ~eIDllation ~de there~nder, be ,deemec:t to be p~blic ~:Q=rd; 
!,9 .s,e:r.van~s ,wIthm the meanmg of sec~lon 21 of the Ind~an Penal C~e. to" be ,., "" 
. , " t, pt.ibn:~ ~. : 
servants, 
,.,: i6~ ~~: s~it~ ,pr~~~cution or ~ther l,ega! procecdi~g shall lie agains,t Protection 
the Board or any Inembe~, officer or employe,e. of the Board for;an,,- of actioll 
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursu- taken 
\ aRceof this Act or of any.rule br regulation made t~ereunder. ~~:e~ct 
15 27. '(1) 'The' Central Government may, by notification in the Ofli- Pow!;'!' of 
cial Gazette. make rules to' give ,eftecfto the provisidnS of thts',Act: CentraJ 
_ , Pfovid~d that. when"tbeBoard has been ,established; nei) ~uch rules ~~:~r~; 
't' ~.ball be, made, without. ,consulting 'the, ,Board. ' make 
", (12) InpartJ.cuJ.ar,1 and 'Withou't prej~dice' to.' the generality, of, the 
20 foregoing power, such rules may provide for aU or any 'of the' follow-
' ... ~. 
ing ~att~rs, namely:-
",' 
" «I): the: ~~~,'of office, of. ·~d the, ,manne'r of, ~g ,~ua1 
vacancies among, the members nominated under elaus~lJ,(~):and 
(d) of sub-5'ection (1~ of section 5; 
flo' . h ~.l ." ;'.~ . '. .' '.. • ',' '" " . " • .~' .', '. '. ' , •• ~ 
zS " ,,' (b) the travelling and o~~er allow~~es,par.~~le''t!> .. a,~em-
ber other than the Chainnah' and to a person' associated 'with 
'\J!~~,)~<~ard; l.lpder. ~~~n,lQ; . , .. ' '0, ',:) 
!\ 't ", i!(c)',:'the' c:liSqual;fl.cati'Ohs:fo~inem:bei;s}iip':oFth~ BOartf ,and 
.. :; theproced.ure to be followed in removing a member' whb"Is or 
, beco~es ~ll:bjec;t t!) any, ~qua1iftcation; 
.! ,. r .... '1 ',r r '" ,. ~.,. I ",' ~ J' •• ~ •. ' r:'; ' ....... ;_ . .,' ~: ';: .. 
31J (d) the conditions subject to which, and the mode ,'jn"which, 
contraC't.s may be ,entered ipto by or on bf:half of ~e .. ~ard; 
;r~··rr.~·'·~r~ ;, .. ~ ;i;~'·'-'·.··'" ',.,'~ '>':'~I'" ",:" .• ,.. ..• 1\.j 
~"'!~ ~ ~"\ , ~:~~., r~~!,~~h~ ~~~;t~e~,:f-~~~? f~. ~Q~~~ ,~~.~ay',.;e PfesCribed. 
, : ,J~)rf~~I7 rF~~:nj~~,I..1?d.~:this, s~cUqn shall,be,la;d,. ,~ as 
~S may be after It la' made before eacl;l House of ParUament while it is 
tn:sewlDill !or e'.'tbtal petUKt Of thlrty a.YS:\'f'hieht.tar 'k: ~priJed 
in ollJ'!!,'JeIIidnHit hi two!:it1c1eessfW"1Jeiti6ns',::ancf if 'WOte h"~ 
rul~s, 

Power ai' 
Board to 
mat. re-
eulatioDII, 
I 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately fol-
lowing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
lhall thereafter have effect only in such modified fonn or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 5 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-thine 
previously done under that rule. 
28. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the omclal Gazette, make regulations. 
not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, for •• 
enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power. such regula,"oos may provide for all or any of the 
foU()wint matters, namely:-
(a) the conditions and restrictions subject to which manu- I, 
scripts and books in the library may be used; 
(b) the manner in which, and the PUrpollN for which, 
peraons may be usoeiated with the Board: 
(c) the time and place of meetings of the Board, the proce-
dure to be followed in regard to the transaction of business at 30 
wcb meetings and the quorum nfceaary for the transaction of 
businesl at a meet1n,; 
(d) the maintenance of minutes of meetings of the Board 
ancl the traDllninion of eopies thereof to the Central Govern-
rnmt: ' 
(e) the recruitment and conditions of service of ofticers and 
other employees of the Board: 
<I) the penons by whom and the inanner il'1 which, pay. 
menta, 48p01ita mel investrneftts may be lalde OIl behalf of the 
&w; ~ 
(g) the manmum amount that may be kept in the eurrent 
aecouat; 
(h) the maintenance of registers and accounts; 
(i) the compilation of eatal0lUes and inventortea of the 
mlnustripta. \RIoa and other articles andthlnp in 'the library; IS 
(4) the ate,. t8 be Ukea for thepNienatioD. 'Of tile mana-
..acripta, ~.nd otUr uiicle8 _114 tlUDp in the Jibn&7; 

II 
(k) the general management of the library; 
(Z) the fees and other charges to be levi'ed for the use 01. 
manuscripts and books in the library; 
(m) any other matter in respect of which provision is, in 
the opinion of the Board, necessary for the performance of its 
functions under this Act. 
(3) The Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend, vary or rescind 
any regulation which it has approved; and thereupon the regulation 
10 aball have efrect accordingly, but without prejudice to the exercme 
of the powers of the Board under sub-sections (1) and (2). 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS ' 
Th'ffKhuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library, Patna, was built out, 
"of the valuable personal collections of Arabic and Persian manu-
scripts and books of the late Maulvi' MUhammad 'Bakhsh' 'Khan. 
I".ater on his son, the la,~e Khuda Bakhsh, added to this coll~tion. 
~"in 1891 Maulvi Khuda Bakhsh executed a qeed ,of trust appointing 
: the then GOvernment: of Bengal as trustees for the management' of 
(:t~e Library, The Governm'ent of Bihar (as succeSsor Goverpmen~) 
,,"~re now the trustees, At preSent the Khuda B~h Oriental Pu~l1c 'J 
Li brary, Patna. is being administered· by a Board of Managemen,t 
set up by the Government of Bihar in consonance with the terms 
of the deed of trust and in consultation with the Central GOV~n1-
ment. 
The Government of Bihar have agreed to transfer the control of 
the Library to the Central Government on the following condi-
tions:-
(i) that the Library or any of its possessions should not be 
removed outside the limits of the Patna Municipal Corporation; 
(ii) that the State Government is given an adequate repre-
sentation in the Managing Body of the Library; and 
(iii) that the State Government's share of expenditure 
should not exceed Rs. 50,000 per annum, 
The present premises of the Library will Ire handed over by the 
Government of Bihar to the Central Government free of cost, 
Having regard to the importance and value of the coll"ections in 
the Library and to the need for reorganising and developing the 
Library on modem scientific lines, it is considered that it should be 
d'eclared to be an institution of national importance under entry 62 
in List 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The Bill seeks 
to give effect to this proposal and makes provision mainly for the 
following: - ... "II!ft 
" 
(1) the establishment of a Board consisting of twelve per-
sons for the administration of the Library and the vesting in the 
Board of the property of the IJbrary; 
(2) tnmfer of the existing staff to the Board; 
t2 

13 
(3) the issue of directions by Government to the Board in 
the discharge of its functions, the submission by the Board of 
annual budget estimates and reports to Government, the deposit 
of funds in the Reserve Bank, etc., and the annual audit of the 
. accounts of the Board by the Comptroller and Auditor General 
of lDdia. ":;1 
NEW DELHI; 
TRIGUNA SEN. 
The 1st December, 1987. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 17 (2) of the Bill empowers the Board to purchase or other-
wise acquire such manuscripts, books, articles or things aismay, in 
the opinion of the Board, be worthy of preservation in the Ubrary. 
Clause 18 confers power on the Central Government to pay to th& 
Board in each financial year such sums of money as it may think At 
to enable the Board to discharge its functions eftlciently. The State 
Government of Bihar have agreed to meet an expenditure of Rs. 
50,000 per annum on the maintenance of the Library. 
2. The present premises of the Library will be handed over by 
the Government of Bihar to the Central Government free of cost. 
The question of Government of India bearing the capital cost to-
wards the construction of the building, etc., may be considered at a 
later stage on the recommendation of the Board of Management. It 
may be necessary to provide more accommodation after the control 
of the Library is' assumed by the Central Government through the 
Board of Management. Its immediate need may be met by a small" 
extension of the existing building. Provision for equipment and. 
air-conditioning may also have to be made. Tentative estimates for 
the former place the figure at Rs. 3,00,000; while for the latter also 
the same ftgure is indicated. 
3. A recurring expenditure of about ~. 1,00,000 on the mainten-
ance of the Library will also be borne by the Government of India. 
This is in addition to the contribution of the Govetnment of Bihar 
towards recurring expenditure @ Rs. 50.,000 per annum. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to give effed, to the provisions of the Act. The matters in res-
pect of which such rules may be made relate to the term of office 
of members and the manner of filling casual vacancies among them, 
the allowances payable to members other than the Chairmen and to 
perIODS usociated: under clause 10, the disqualification for member-
lIhip of the Board and the proC'edure to be followed in removing 
Members subject to disqualification, the conditions subject to which 
and the mode in which contracts may be entered into by or on be-
lIalf of the Board. All these matters are comparatively of a millor 
importance and are normally the subject-matter of delegated legis-
lation, and the rules will also be laid before Parliament. 
2. Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulations 
not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules made 
thereunder. The power of making regulations is confined to proce-
dural matters, such as the conditions and restrictions subject to 
which manuscripts and books in the Library may be used, the re-
cnlitrnent and conditions of service of officers and employees of the 
Board, the time and place of meetings of the Board, the prOC'edure 
to be followed at such meetings, the maintenance of minutes of meet-
ings of the Board and the transmission of copies thereof to Govern-
ment, the maintenance of registers and accounts, .the compilation. of 
catalogues and Inventories of books, manuscripts, articles and things 
jn the Library, the fees ana other charges to be levied, etc. The 
power of making regulations is thus confined to matters of detail only 
and this power can be exercised by the Board only with the pre-
vious approval of the Central Government. 
The delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character . 
.. , JS 
", 

ANNEXURE 
DBED OF TRUST DATED 14TH JANUARY. 1891 , 
No. 217 Stamp va.lue Rs. 15 
. I, Maulvi Khuda Bakhsh Khan Bahadur of Muradpur, Chowhatta, 
Thana Pir Bahore, one of the quarters of Patna, Senior Govern-
ment Pleader of Patna, to all men to whom these present come 
greeting. Whereas my late father Maulvi Muhammad Bakhsh Khan 
deceased had been collecting a number of rare Arabic and Persian 
manuscripts and books at a considerable 'expense for some years 
with the view of fonning an Oriental Library, and after him I have 
continued to do the same and my late father often expressed a 
wish that these Arabic books and manuscripts be always for the 
use and benefit of the Public of the district of Patna in the form of 
Public Library and primarily in order to eftectuate that wish, I 
have since added to the manuscripts and books by purchasing oth'Cr 
books and manuscripts as also a number of English books for the 
last 23 years and have taken measures to keep all of them in a good 
condition by making a good and substantial building in the said 
Mohallah Muradpur, Chowhatta, Thana Pir Bahore, one of the 
quarters of Patna, bounded as follows, and various other measures 
thereof, all for the purpose, use of a.ftd benefit of the Public of the 
District of Patn4. Now know all men by these presents that I, the 
said Maulvi Khuda Bakhsh Khan Bahadur, do declare in accord-
anC'e with the wishes and intentions of my late father the said 
Maulvi Md. Bakhsh Khan and of my own wishes and intentions in 
pursuance thereof that I have always held the said collection of 
Arabic and Persian books and manuscripts and English books, the 
list and catalogue of which are now to be found in the building 
aforesaid in which the said collection is with furniture, etc. for the 
use and benefit uf the Public of the Patna District and trust for the 
said Public and I, the said Maulvi Khuda Bakhsh Khan Bahadur his , 
heirs, repreltentatives and assignees shall have no claim or objec>-
tion to the Government of Benga.l a.s the representative. of the 
Public of the DiItrict of Patna ta.king poIse.sion thereof and ezet'-
cising aU right. a.s trustees fOf' the sa.id Pu'blic of the District of 
Patna with these reaenmtiOm as have been always the wishes and 
intentions of my said father and of myself that the said collection of 
rare Arabic and Persian boob and manuscripts are to be always 
held by the .aid Govemment af Bengollll tn&lt.es for the use and 
16 

17 
benefit of the lAid Public of the District oj PatM and the .siel 
builcUng alway. used for the purpose of keeping the said eoUectiou 
and that the ICIid books and manuscripts are at no time to be remoul' 
ed ezcept tem.poraTUy undeT Tules for the use of the .aid Public CII 
may be framed by any Committee for the mtIf&CIgement thereof and 
that the post qf Ubrarian of the said collection is to be held by me 
for life after m!' • death or on my resignation by any of my sons and 
failing auch sons, brother's son and other heirs if found fitting bJ' 
the said Government of Bengal in preference to all not connected; 
with my family. And in witness hereof I have aftixed my seal an4 
signature. 
Boundaries of the Library:-
NOTth.-Land belonging to children. 
South.-House belonging to Yonus Khan' others. 
ECIBt.-Public road. 
West.-Compound of the house belonging to my children. 
Dated Muradpur. 
Chowhattfl, the 14th JflnV4f'1J, 1891. 
S4/-
KHUDA BAKHSH, 
Chowhatta, City, PatH 
14-1-1891. 

.. :, 
'I 
... 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
t } 
to declare the }{huda Bakhsh OrienUll Public Library at Patna 
to be an institution of national importance and to provide for 
its administration and certain other connected matteI'S . 
... 
(Dr. Tn,.-z $111, 
lfIiIIisr. of l1tIw.lu..) 