8UI No. 1 of 1"1 
THE V.P. SUGARCANE CESS (VALIDA· 
TION) BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
• 

u.P. Accl 
of 1938. 
U.P. Act 
XXIV of 
19S3. 
U.P.ACC 
XXII of 
19$6. 
Bm No ... of l,h 
THE U.P. SUGARCANE CESS (VALIDATION) 
BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to validate the imposition and collection of cesses on sugarcane 
under certain. Acts of Uttar Pradesh. 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1 
1. (1) This Act may be called the U. P. Sugarcane Cess (Valida- Short title 
tion) Act, 1961. :!c=e~lt. 
S (2) It shall be deemed. to have come into force on the 3rd day of 
february, 1961. 
2. In this Act,-
(a) "cess" means the cess payable under any State Act and 
includes any sum recoverable under any such Act by way of 
10 interest or penalty; 
• 
IS 
(b) "State Act" means any of the following Acts, namely:-
(i) The United Provinces Sugar Factories Control Act, 
1938; 
(ii) The U. P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Pur-
chase) Act, 1953; and 
(iii) The U. P. Suaarcane Cess Act, 1956. 
Definition •• 

2 
Validation of 3. (1) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or or~er of any 
imposition court, all cesses imposed, assessed or collected or purportmg to have 
!fd~~ been imposed, assessed or collected under any State Act during the 
under State period beginning with the 26th day of January, 1950 and ending on 
~c:~urir ... a the 3rd day of February, 1961 shall be deemed to have been validly S 
period. imposed, assessed or collected in accordance with law, as if the pro-
visions of the State Acts and of all notifications, orders and rules 
issued or made thereunder, in so far as such provisions relate to the 
imposition, assessment and collection of such cess had been included 
Repeal. 
in and formed part of this section and this section had been in force 10 
at all ma~rial times when such cess was imposed, asseseeci or collect-
ed; and accordingly,--
(a) no suit or other proc;eeding shall be maintained or COD-
tinued in any court for the refund of any cess paid Under any 
State Act; IS 
(b) no court shall enforce a decree or order directing the 
r ~fund of any cess paid under any State Act; and 
(c) any cess imposed or assessed under any State Act 
before the 3rd day of February, 1961 but not collected before 
that date, may be recovered (after assessment of the cess, where 20 
necessary) in the manner provided under that Act. 
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing 
in sub-section (1) shall be construed as preventing any person,-
(a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of 
any State Act and rules made thereunder the assessment of any 2S 
cess for any period, or 
• 
(b) from claiming refund of any cess paid by him in exceB8 
of the amount due from him under any State Act and the rules 
made thereunder. 
4. The U. P. Sugarcane Cess (Validation) Ordinance,I961. is here- 30 of 1961. 
by repealed. . I 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the case of the Diamond Sugar Mills Limited. and another vs. 
the State of Uttar Pradesh and tlDother, the Supreme Court by a 
majority judgment delivered on the 13th December, 1960, has held 
the U. P. Sugarcane ceSs Act, 1956 ult-ra vires and beyond the com-
petence of the State Legislature. This decision of the Supreme 
Court invalidates the levy and collection of cesses on sugarcane by 
the U. P. Government under that Act. The total cess collected by 
the U. P. Government on sugarcane since 1950 runs to about 45 
crores of rupees. Unless the cess levied and collected under the 
impugned Act is valid~ted, the U. P. Government would have to 
refund the entire amount of cess so levied and collected. As there 
is no entry in the State List or Concurrent List which authorises 
the State Gover.:nment to validate these past levies and collections, 
it b~ame n~arY to promulgate the U. P. Sugarcane Cess (Vali-
dation) Ordinance of 1961 (1 of 1961) on the 31st of January, 1961. 
The Ordinance validates the cesses imposed, assessed or collected by 
t~e Gove~ent of Uttar Pradesh during the Period from the 26th 
January, 1950 to the date of the commencement of the Ordinance. 
The Ordinance was brought into force with effect from the 3rd 
F.~Q~J.J..'Y, 1961, ~y noti~cation in the Official Gazette. 
2. This. Bill merely seeks to replace the Ordinance by an Act of 
P~u.pi~P;t. . 
• MORARJI R. DESAI . 
NEW DI:uu; 
The 11th February, 1961.' 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE UNITED PROVINCES SUGAR FACTORIES CONTROL ACT, 
1938 
(UNITED PROVINCES ACT No. I OF 1938) 
(As amended 'by the U.P. Acts NOB. VI of 1939, XI of 1940, 
1 of 1941 and XlI of 1943) . 
• • • • • 
CHAPI'ER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
• • • • • 
Tax on sale Z9. (1) The Governor may, after consulting the Board, by notift-
of cane. cation, impose a tax on the sale of sugarcane at a rate not exceeding 
six pies per maund or at a rate not exceeding ten per cent. of the 
sale price, and may, by notification, exempt from such tax sales in 
any area, or any class or classes of such sales, to be specified in the 
notification. 
(2) The GovernOJ' may, after consulting the Board, by notification, 
impose a celS not exceeding ten per cent. of the minimum price. if 
any, fixed under section 21, or four annas a maund, whichever is 
higher, on the entry of sugarcane into a local area, specified in such 
notification, for consumption, use OJ' sale therein: 
Provided that such cess shall not be imposed on the entry iI}to 
any such area of any sugarcane in respect of the sale of ~hich. a tax 
imposed under sub-section (1) is payable: 
Provided further that the Provincial Government may, by notifi-
cation, remit in whole or in part such cess in respect of sugarcane 
used or intended to be used in a factory fOJ' any purpose specified in 
such notification: 
Provided further that the Provincial Government may, by notifica-
tion, remit, with effect from the 16th December, 1944, or from such 
other later date as may be specified in such notification, in whole or 
in part, such cess in respect of sugarcane grown in an area and p~ 
chased at a centre specified in the aforesaid notification, 

• 
(3) The Provincial Government shall make rules specifying the 
authority empowered to collect the tax or cess and the person from 
whom, and the manner in which, the tax or cess shall be collected. 
(4) If any agreement for the sale of cane is entered into before 
the imposition of a tax or cess under this section, the seller will be 
entitled to recover from the buyer in addition to, and as part of, 
the contracted price, the amount of such tax or cess to which the 
seller may be liable. 
(5) All sums payable in accordance with sub-section (1) or (2) 
or the rules made under sub-section (3) shall be recoverable as 
an arrear of land revenue . 
• 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE U. P. SUGARCANE (REGULATION OF 
SUPPLY AND PURCHASE) Ac:r, 1953 
(U. P. Ac:r No. XXIV 0 .. 1953) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTEll IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
ZOo (1) The Governor may, by notification, impose a cess not Tax .. 1Ile 
exceeding four annas a maund, on the entry of sugarcane into an of cane. 
area, specified in such notification, for consumption, use or sale· 
thereof: 
Provided that the State Government may, by·notification, remit 
in wildIe or in part such cess in respect of sugarcane used or intend 
to be used in a factory for any purpose specified in such notifica-
tion . 
• (2) The State Government shall make rules sp~eifying the autho-
rity empowered to assess and collect cess and the person from whom 
and the manne:r in which the cess shall be collected. 

';, 
(3) If any agreement for the sale of can~ is ~ntered intQb~re 
the imposition of a cess under this section, the seller will be entitled 
to recover from the buyer in addition to, and as part of ihe contract-
ed price, the amount of such cess to which the seller may be liable. 
(4) Where· any person is in default in making the payment of 
the cess,' the authority empowered to collect the cess may direct 
that in addition to the amount of the arrears a sum not exceeding 
10 per cent. thereof shall be recovered from the person liable to pay 
the cess, by way of penalty. 
(5) The authority empowered to collect the cess may for,ward 
to the Collector 18 certificate under his signature specifying the amount 
of arrears due from the person concerned and the Colle~tor, oq. 
:receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recove; from such person 
the amount specified therein as if it were an arrear of land reve-
nue. 
(6) Any sum imposed by way of penalty under sub-section (4) 
shall be :recoverable in the manner provided in sub-section (5) for 
the recovery of the arrear of cess. 
• • • • 
THE U. P. SUGARCANE CESS ACT, 1956 
(U. P. ACT No. XXII OF 1956) 
• 
(Authoritative English text oj the Uttar Pradesh Ga1l.M Upkar 
Adhiniyam, 1956) 
to amend and, codtolidate the law re1a.ting to imporition. of cell on 
sugarcane intended jor use, consumption in or s~le to a. jactory 
aftd a GUT, Rab or Khandsa1'i Sugar Manujacturt'l1.g Un,t. 
WHDEAS it is expedient to amend and consolidate the law relat-
iDg to imposition of cess on ·sugarcane intended for use BJld consump-
tion in 01'. sale to a factory and a Qur, Rab f1r K~7I.~ari Sugar 
Manufacturing Unit .. 

u. P. Act 
XXIV of 
19'3· 
l~ is hereby enacted 88 follows in the Seventh Year of the 
Repubiic of India. 
1. (1) This Act may be called the U. P. Sugarcane Cess Act, 1956. Soon title, 
extent and 
commcnce-
'(2) It 'extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. mcnt. 
(3) This section Shall come into force at once, and the provisions 
of sections 2, 3 and 5 to 8 shall be deemed to have come into force 
on and from the 26th day of January, 1950. 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject Defini.ti.cml. 
or context, the words and expressions-
(a) "Appointed Date" means the date on which this Act is 
first })ublisbed in the official Gazette. 
(b) "Cane", "Cane Commissioner", "Factory", "Gur, Rab 
or Khandsari Sugar Manufacturing Unit", "Occupier of a factory 
or a Gur, Rab or Khandsari Sugar ManufactUring UnU", "State 
Government" and "Sugar Cammissioner" shall have the mean-
ings assigned to them in the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Regula-
.. tion of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953; 
(c) "Owner of a factory or a Gur, Rab or Khandsari Sugar 
Manufacturing Unit" will include occupier of a factory or a Gur, 
Rab or Khandsari Sugar Manufacturing Unit and the person by 
whatever name, called, who has ultimate control over the affairs 
of the factory or the GUT, Rab or Khandsari Sugar Manufacturing 
Unit. 
S. (1) The State Government may by notification in the official Imposition of 
Gazette impose a cess not exceeding twenty-five naye paise per cess. 
niaund on the entry of cane into the premises of a factory or of a 
GUT, Rab or Khandsari Sugar Manufacturing Unit for use, consump-
tion or sale therein: 
Provided that different rates of cess may be imposed by the State 
Government for a factory and a GUT, Rab or Khandsari Sugar Manu-
facturing Unit: 
Provided further that the State Government may by notification 
in the ofticial Gazette remit in whole or in part such cess in respect 
of cane usedi or to be used in a factory or in a Gur, Rab or Khand-
sari Sugar Manufacturing Unit for a limited purpose specified In the 
notification. 

I 
Ezplanaticm.-lf the State Government, in the case of any factorY 
or any Gur. Rab or Khandsari Sugar Manufacturing Unit, situate 
outside Uttar Pradesh, so declare, any place in Uttar Pradesh set 
apart for the purchase of cane intendect or required for use, oonswnp-
tion or sale in such factory or in such Gur, Rab or Khandsari Sugar 
~ufacturing Unit shall be deemed to be the premises of the factory' 
or of the GUT, Rab or Khandsari Sugar Manufacturing Unit, as the 
case may be. 
(2) The cess imposed under sub-section (1) shall be payable by 
the owner of the factory or df the G-uT. Rab or Khandsari Sugar 
Manufacturing Unit and shall be paid on such date and at such 
place as may be prescribed. 
(3) Any arrear of cess not paid on the date prescribed under 
sub-section (2) shall carry interest at 6 per cent. per annum from 
such date to date of payment 
(4) The State Government may, for the purpose of assessment 
and collection of the cess appoint officers and authorities and may 
also prescribe the manner in which the cess shall be assessed and 
collected. 
-(5) Where any person is in default in making the payment of 
the cess, the ofticer or authority empowered to collect the cess may 
direct that in addition to the amount of the arrears and interest a 
sum not exceeding 10 per cent. thereof shall by way of penalty be 
recovered from the person liable to pay the cess. 
(6) The officer or authority empowered to collect the cess may 
forward to the Collector a certificate under his signature specifying 
the amount of arrears including interest due from any persoll, and 
on receipt of ~ch certificate the CollectQl' shall proceed to recover 
the amount specified from such person as if it were an arrear of land 
revenue. 
(7) Any sum imposed by way of penalty under sub-section (5) 
shall be recoverable in the manner provided in sub-section (6) for 
the recovery of the arrears of cess. 
GnD of 3-A. (1) No GUT, Rab or Khanclsari Sugar Manufacturing Unit, 
l~ for other than a unit, which has obtained a licence under the Uttar Pra-
=:r- desh Khandsari Sugar Manufacturers Licensing Order, 1959, shall 
NIb. without obtaining a licence from the Sugar C<munissioner, carry on 
or undertake any process connected with the manufacture or produc-
tion of guT' or rAb. 

9 
(2) An application for a licence under sub--section (1) shall be 
made to the Sugar Commissioner in such form and accompanied with 
a treasury chalan for· such fee as maybe prescribed. 
(3) An application for the grant or renewal of a licence under 
sub-section (2) shall be disposed of by the Sugar Commissioner as 
eXpeditiously as may be possilble and shall not be rejected except in 
a case, where the Sugar Commissioner is of the opinion that it is 
necessary or expedient so t<J do in the public interest with a view to 
ensure adequate supplies of cane to a factory for keeping it fully 
engaged in the whole of the crushing seuon. 
(4) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Sugar Commis-
sioner under sub-section (3) may, within thirty days from the date 
of the said order, prefer an appeal to the State Government whose 
decision thereon shall be final. 
(5) In case of rejection of an application for grant or renewal of 
a lieence, the applicant shall ,be entitled to a refund of the licence 
fee paid after the expiry of the period of limitation prescribed for 
filing an appeal against that O'rder or on the rejection of the appeal. 
(6) In case the applicant, of his own accord, returns the licence 
within 15 days of its receipt and satisfies the licensing authority that 
he has done nothing under it, he shall-be entitled to a refund of the 
licence fee. 
3-8. (1) A licence granted under section 3-A shall be valid for Renewal or 
the period of twelve months commencing from October I, each year, Iic:ences. 
but may on application made, not less than thirty days before the 
expiry of the said period be renewed from time to time for a period 
not exceeding twelve months reckoning from October 1, subject to 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed. 
(2) A licence granted or renewed under this Act may, on pay-
ment of such late fee as may be prescriibed, be also renewed in eases 
Where the application for renewal has been made beyond the period 
fixed therefor under Bubo-section (1). 
3-C. (1) The Sugar Commissioner may, in case of contravention ConditiODS 
of any of the provisions of this Act O'r of the rules made thereunder ~r suspeD-
or of any of the conditions of the licence, suspend or cancel a licenc~ ~~f.t'l!D ':f-
granted or renewed under this Aet, or refuse renewal of the same. a liCCDC:e. 
• (2) AIly person aggrieved with the order of the Sugar Commis-
lioner under sub-section (1) may, within such period as may be 
prescribed, prefer an a~al to the State Government whose deci-
sion thereon shall be final. 

10 
(3) The cancellation or suspension of a licence under sub-section 
(1) shall not entitle the licensee to any compensation ar to the re-
fund of any fee paid in respect of such licence. 
Powcn of 3-D. (1) The Sugar Commissioner may, for the purposes of this 
the S~ Act-CoJDllUS81on-
cr. (a) require the owner of a GuT, Rab or KhandsaTi Sugar 
Manufacturing Unit to maintain, furnish or produce such records, 
data or infurmation as may be prescribed; and 
(b) enter and search any premises of a GUT, Rab, KhandsaTi 
Sugar Manufacturing Unit, or seize and take into custody any 
of the implements connected with the manufacture or produc-
tion of sugarcane juice, gUT or Tab of a Unit or the products 
thereof if any contravention of the Act ar of the rules made 
thereunder, or of the conditions of a licence, is believed or appre-
hended. 
(2) The Sugar Commissioner may delegate all or any of the 
powers, conferred on him under sub-section (1) on any officer sub-
ordinate to him. 
Peualties. 4. If any person defaults in the payment of cess imposed under 
sub-section (1) of section 3 or commits breach of any of the provi-
sions of this Act, or, contravenes any pro'Vision of any rule made 
under this Act, he shall without prejudice to his liability therefor 
under sub-section (5) of section 3 be liable to imprisonment up to 
six months or to a fine not exceeding rupees five thousand or both 
and in the case of continuing contravention to a further fine not 
exceeding rupees one thousand for each day during which the contra-
vention continues. 
IDItitutiOD 5. (1) No prosecution shall be instituted under this Act e:fccept 
r;.:..roceed- upon complaint made by or under authority from the Cane ""Com-
Inissioner or the District Magistrate. 
(2) On the application of a person accused of an offence under 
this Act, the Cane Commissioner or with the previous concurrence 
of the Cane Commissioner the District Magistrate may at any stage 
compound such offence by levying a composition fee not exceeding 
rupees five thousand. 
(3) No court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the second class 
shall try any offence against this Act or any rule made thereunder . • 
Special 6. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code 
powcn of of Criminal Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for a Magistrate of Mqiltrate. 
the First Class specially empowered by the State Government in 

II 
this behalf and trying any case under this Act or any :rule made 
thereunder to pass a sentence of fine not exceeding five thousand 
rupees on any person convicted for any offence under this Act. 
7. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie p~tect:fof 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or =:: the en 
intended to be done in pursuance of any Order or a rule made under Act. 
this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State 
Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused by any-
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of any rule made under this Act. 
S. (1) Where the owner of a factory or a Gur, Rab or Khand- Determina-
sari Sugar Manufacturing Unit is a firm or other association of indivi- ~f':; 0/::; 
duals, anyone or more of the partners fir members thereof would be purpose of 
the owner for the purpose of the Act and may be prosecuted and t.bi' Act. 
punished as such for any offence under the Act. 
(2) Where the owner of a factory or a Gur, Rab or Khandsari 
Sugar Manufacturing Unit is a public company anyone or more of 
the directors thereof, or, in the case of a private company anyone 
or more of the shareholders thereof may be prosecuted and punished 
under this Act for any offence for which the owner of the factory or 
the Gur, Rab or Khandsari Sugar Manufacturing Unit is punishable. 
9. (1) Section 20 of the Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and 
Purchase) Act, 1953, is hereby repealed. 
.(2) Without prejudice to the general application of section 24 of 
the U. P. General Clauses Act, 1904, every notification imposing cess 
issued and every assessment made (including the amount of cess 
collected) under or in pursuance of any such notification, shall be 
deemed a notification issued, assessment made and cess collected 
under this Act as if sections 2, 3 and 5 to 8 had been in force at all 
material dates. 
(3) Subject as provided in clause (1) of Article 20 of the Constitu-
tion every' notification issued, cess imposed and act or thing done or 
omitted between the 26th day of January, 1950 and the Appointed 
Date in exercise or the purported exercise of a power under section 
29 of the U. P. Sugar Factories Control AM, 1938, or of section 20 of 
the U. P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953, 
which would have been validly and properly issued, imposed, done 
or omitted if the said sections had been as section 3 of this Act, shall 

12 
in law be deemed to be and to have been validly and properly 
- imposed and done, any judgment, decree or order of any court 
notwithstanding. 
10. (1) The State Government may make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of the Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for-
(a) the manner and the form in which certificate may be 
forwarded to the Collector under sub-section (5) of section 3; 
(b) collecting any information or statistics for the purposes 
of this Act; 
(c) the form and the manner in which any return shall be 
prepared and furnished; 
(c-i) the form of an application for a licence, and the terms 
and ocmditions of a licence under this Act and the fee or the late 
fee to be charged for the grant of a licence; 
(d) the matters which are to be and may be prescribed. 
(3) The power to make rules under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall 
include the power to make rules with retrospective application so 
however that the rules so made shan not have eftect prior to twenty-
sixth day of January, 1950. 
(4) All rules made under this Act shall be laid before the State 
Legislature, as soon as may be, after they are made and shall be 
subject to such omissions, alterations and additions as the Legisla-
ture may make in the sessions they are so laid: 
Provided that any rule having retrospective application shalllhot 
come into force until fourteen days after its copy has been laid on 
the Table of the Legislative Assembly. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
Bll.L 
to validate the imposition and collection of cesses on sugarcane 
under certain Acts of Uttar Pradesh. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 and 
clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitutlon of India, recom-
mended to Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. • 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai. 
Minister of Finance.)' 