AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

_ BilLNo. 4 of 2000

THE ERADICATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT BILL, 2000
है By

Suri Rampas ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL .
to provide for a scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country,
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as

(2) This Act may be called the Eradication of Unempioyment Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India,
, (3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act,—
; (@) “Government” means the Central Government; and
(9) “prescribed” rieans prescribed by rules made under this Act.;

~ 3. The Government shall endeavour to provide every citizen who has attained the
eof eighteen years and who is registered at the Employment Exchange with employment
to his age, qualification and strength.

4. Till such time as employment is

Provided to a citizen under section 3, he or
shall be entitled to such unemp!

loyment allowance, as may be prescribed.

gud 2Srrn onan

Short title,
extent and
‘commencement,

Definitions,

to citizens.

Grant of

allowance.


‘Unemployment
Insurance
Scheme,
Contribution to
‘Unemployment
Insurance
Scheme.

Power to make
rules.

2

5. An Unemployment Insurance Scheme shall be started by the Government so as
to provide for a special fund for the grant of unemployment allowance under this Act.

6. A citizen who has registered himself at the Employment Exchange shall be
sligible to receive benefit of unemployment allowance under this Act subject to his
furnishing an agreement to contribute to the Unemployment Insurance Scheme for a 5
prescribed period immediately after securi 18 employment at a rate as may be prescribed.

7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the (Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act,

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,

such rules may provide for the following matters, namely:— 10

(a) the rate of unemployment allowance referred to in section 4 and different
rates may be prescribed on the basis of qualification and skills;
(0) the necessary details of the unemployment insurance scheme;

(c) the rate of contribution to the Unemployment Insurance Scheme under
section 6; ‘ 15

(d) the procedure to regulate all payments under this Act;

(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The problem of unemployment has assumed menacing proportions. Even the edu-
citizens are rendered indigent. Lack of Opportunity of employment in the country 15
Jeading to brain drain and exodus of a large number of skilled and unskilled persons
road. It is time that concerted efforts are made by the State to assure employment to the
S of the country and to provide unemptoyment reliet to those who have not been able
‘secure employment. It is also Hecessary 10 promote an uncmployment insurance scheme
or the purpose, so that the scheme may serve to finance the funds for the unemployment

RAMDAS ATHAWALE
ber 30, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide unemployment allowance to the citizens who
have attained the age of eighteen years or above. This provision involves a recurring ex-
penditure of about one hundred crore rupees per annum from the Consolidated Fund of
India, The recurring expenditure is expected to reduce substantially as and when employ-
meat is provided.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for fixing the rate of
unemployment allowance. Similarly, clause 6 empowers the Government to fix the rate of
contribution to Unemployment Insurance Scheme.

Clause 7 empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of
the Bill. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made would relate to matters of

procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself.

The delegation of the legislative power is of a normal character.

।
|
|.
|



LOK SABHA

A

; BILL
‘o provide for a scheme for eradication of unemployment from the country.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—3225LS—18-01-2000,