1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 66 of the Constitution, in clause (4), after the words "or other authority",
the words "or Institution of Self Government" shall be inserted.
Bill No. 4  of  2016
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 66.
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments passed by Parliament in 1992 introduced
local self-governance throughout the territory of India. The Constitution (73rd Amendment)
Act, 1992 and the Constitution (74th Amendment) Act, 1992 come into force on 24 April, 1993
and 1 June, 1993, respectively.
These amendments added two new parts to the Constitution, namely:—
(i) Part IX titled "The Panchayats" adding articles 243 to 243O dealing with
Panchayats; and
(ii) Part IXA titled "The Municipalities" adding articles 243P to 243 ZG dealing
with Municipality.
Hence fulfilling one of the Directive Principles of State Policy with respect to
article 40, that is, 'Organisation of Village Panchayats' and accomplishing the vision
and intent of the framers of our Constitution to ensure self government at the lowest
organisational levels of governance.
Articles 243G and 243W prescribe the powers, authorities and responsibilities,
etc. of Panchayats and Municipalities, respectively. The Eleventh and Twelfth Schedule
to the Constitution define the matters in respect of which schemes for economic
development and social justice are to be implemented by Panchayats with regards to
article 243G and by Municipalities with regard to article 243W, respectively. The
Constitution, hence, deals with Panchayats and Municipalities in a great detail.
The 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments substantially changed the Constitution
and the manner in which representation of the citizens, governance and devolution of powers
in the nation was to be conducted.
However, while monumental in themselves, the amendments failed to change the
qualifications for the election of the Vice-President of the Union of India.
Article 66(4) states that a person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President if he
holds any office of profit under the Government of India or Government of any State or under
any local or other authority.
The inclusion of Panchayats and Municipalities as separate and distinct bodies in the
Constitution as established by the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments requires their
inclusion as a disqualification under Office of Profit for election to the office of Vice-President.
This is because the second highest office in the nation should not be influenced in any
manner by any authority in the discharge of his duties.
In view of the above, the proposed amendment Bill seeks to include the Panchayats
and Municipalities as distinct bodies rather than their present inclusion under 'any local or
other authority' as offices of profit for election to the office of the Vice-President.
Hence, it has become expedient to introduce the words "or Institution of Self
Government" within article 66(4) of the Constitution.
N
EW D ELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY
November 13, 2015.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * *
66. ( 1) * * * *
(4) A person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President if he holds any office of
profit under the Government or the Government of any State or under any local are other
authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments.
* * * *
3
Election of
Vice-President.

GMGIPMRND—2817LS(S-3)—22.02.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri P.P . Chaudhary, M.P .)