1
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF LABOUR EXCHANGES BILL, 2017
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Labour Exchange Schemes for ensuring regular employment of unprotected workers.
4. Making variation and revocation of scheme.
5. Disputes regarding application of scheme.
6. Constitution of Board.
7. Power of Appropriate Government to appoint Board consisting of one person.
8. Powers and Duties of Board.
9. Accounts and Audit.
10. Disqualifications and removal.
11. Resignation of office by member.
12. Vacancy to be filled as early as possible.
13. Proceedings presumed to be good and valid.
14. Determination of moneys due from Employers and Workers.
15. Advisory Committee.
16. Inspectors and their powers.
17. Central Government to provide adequate funds.
18. Prohibition of employment of child.
19. Offence to be tried by Labour Court.
20. Cognizance of offence on complaint.
21. Appeal From Labour Court to Industrial Court.
22. Time Limit for disposal of cases by Labour Court and Industrial Court.
23. Application of Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 to unprotected workers.
24. Application of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 to unprotected workers.
25. Application of Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 to unprotected women workers.
26. Rights and privileges under other Laws not affected, in certain cases.
27. Enquiry into working of the Board.
28. Supersession of the Board.
29. Contracting out.
30. Amendment of Schedule.
31. General penalty for offences.
32. Power to make rules.
The Schedule
Bill No.  4  of  2017

1
Short title and
commence-
ment.
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF LABOUR EXCHANGES BILL, 2017
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish Labour Exchanges to regulate the employment of unprotected manual
workers engaged in the unorganised sector; to make better provision for their terms
and conditions of employment; to provide for their welfare, and for health and
safety measures where such employments require these measures; to make
provision for ensuring an adequate supply to and full and proper
utilization of such workers in  such employments to prevent
avoidable unemployment; to provide for the establishment
of Labour Exchange Boards in respect of these
employments and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Establishment of Labour Exchanges Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Bill No.  4  of  2017
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Board” means a Labour Exchange Board established under section 6;
(c) “contractor” in relation to unprotected workers, means a person who
undertakes to execute any work for an establishment by engaging such workers on
hire or otherwise, or who supplies such worker either in groups, gangs (tollis), or as
individuals; and includes a sub-contractor, an agent, and such other professionals as
may be named colloquially in various States;
(d) “employer” in relation to any unprotected workers engaged by or through
contractor, means the principal employer and in relation to any other unprotected
worker, the person who has ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment, and
includes any other person to whom the affairs of such establishment are entrusted,
whether such person is called an agent, manager or is called by any other name
prevailing in the scheduled employment;
(e) “establishment” means any place or premises, including the precincts thereof,
in which or in any part of which any scheduled employment is being or is ordinarily
carried on;
(f) “family” in relation to an employer, means, the spouse, son, daughter, father,
mother, brother or sister of such employer who lives with him and is wholly dependent
on him;
(g) “Inspector” means an Inspector appointed under section 16;
(h) “principal employer” means an employer who engages unprotected workers
by or through a contractor in the scheduled employment;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) “scheduled employment” means any employment specified in the Scheduled
hereto or any process or branch of work forming part of such employment;
(k) “Scheme” means a Labour Exchange Scheme made under this Act;
(l) “unprotected worker” means a manual worker who is engaged or to be engaged
in any scheduled employment;
(m) “worker” means a person who is engaged or to be engaged directly or
through any agency, whether for wages or not, to do manual work in any scheduled
employment and includes any person not employed by any employer or a contractor,
but working with the permission of, or under agreement with the employer or contractor;
but does not include the members of an employer's family; and
(n) “wages” means all remunerations expressed in terms of money or capable of
being so expressed which would, if the terms of contract of employment, express or
implied were, fulfilled, be payable to an unprotected worker in respect of work done in
the establishment, but does not include—
(i) the value of any house accommodation, supply of light, water, medical
attendance or any other amenity or any service excluded from the computation
of wages by general or special order of the Central Government;
(ii) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension fund or provident
fund or under any Scheme of social insurance and the interest which may have
accrued thereon;
(iii) any travelling allowance or the value of any travelling concession;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(iv) any sum paid to the worker to defray special expenses entailed on him
by the nature of his employment; or
(v) any gratuity payable on discharge.
3. (1) For the purpose of ensuring an adequate supply and full and proper utilization
of unprotected workers in scheduled employments, and generally for making better
provisions for the terms and conditions of employment of such workers, appropriate
Government shall formulate a Scheme to be known as the Labour  Exchange Scheme for the
registration of employers and unprotected workers in the scheduled employment, and to
provide for the terms and conditions of work of registered unprotected workers, and make
provision for the general welfare in such employments.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the Scheme may provide for—
(a) the application of the Scheme to such classes of registered unprotected
workers and employers, as may be specified therein;
(b) defining the obligations of registered unprotected workers and employers
subject to the fulfilment of which the exchange contract may apply to them;
(c) regulating the recruitment and entry into the exchange of unprotected workers,
and the registration of unprotected workers and employers, including the maintenance
of registers, removal, either temporarily or permanently, of names from the registers,
and the imposition of fees for registration;
(d) regulating the employment of registered unprotected workers; and the terms
and conditions of such employment, including rates of wages, hours of work, maternity
benefit, overtime payment, leave with wages, provision for gratuity and conditions as
to weekly and other holidays and pay in respect thereof;
(e) providing the time within which registered employers should remit to the
Board the amount of wages payable to the registered workers for the work done by
such workers;
(f) requiring such employers who, in the opinion of the Board, make default in
remitting the amount of wages in time as mentioned in contract, to deposit with the
Board, an amount equal to the monthly average of the wages to be remitted as mentioned
in contract; if at any time the amount of such deposit falls short of such average, for
requiring the employer to make good the amount of such average, and for requiring
such employers who persistently make default in making such remittances in time to
pay also by way of penalty, a surcharge of such amount not exceeding ten per cent. of
the amount to be remitted as the Board may determine;
(g) securing that, in respect of period during which employment or full employment
is not available to registered unprotected workers though they are available for work,
such unprotected workers shall, subject to the conditions of the Scheme, receive a
minimum wage;
(h) the welfare of registered unprotected workers covered by the Scheme in so
far as satisfactory provision therefor, does not exist, apart from the Scheme;
(i) health and safety measures in places where the registered unprotected workers
are engaged, in so far as satisfactory provision therefor, is required but does not exist,
apart from the Scheme;
(j) the constitution of any fund or funds including provident fund for the benefit
of registered unprotected workers, the vesting of such funds, the payment and
contributions to be made to such funds, (provision for provident fund and rates of
contribution being made after taking into consideration the provisions of the Employees'
Provident Funds Act, 1952, and the Scheme framed thereunder with suitable
Labour
Exchange
Scheme for
Ensuring
Regular
Employment
of unprotected
Workers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
modifications, where necessary, to suit the conditions of work of such registered
unprotected workers) and all matters relating thereto;
(k) the manner in which, the day from which (either prospective or retrospective)
and the persons by whom, the cost of operating the Scheme is to be defrayed;
(l) constituting the persons or authorities who are to be responsible for the
administration of the registration, and for the administration of funds constituted for
the purposes aforesaid;
(m) specifying the powers and duties which the persons or authorities referred
to in clause (l) may exercise or perform, for providing appeals and revision applications
against the decisions or orders of such persons and authorities; and for deciding such
appeals and applications and for matters incidental thereto;
(n)  such incidental and supplementary matters, as may be necessary or expedient
for giving effect to the purposes of a Scheme.
(3) The Scheme may further provide that a contravention of any provision thereof
shall be punished with imprisonment for such term as may be specified (but in no case
exceeding three months in respect of a first contravention or six months in respect of any
subsequent contravention) or with fine which may extend to such amount as may be specified
(but in no case exceeding five hundred rupees in respect of the first contravention, or one
thousand rupees in respect of any subsequent contravention) or with both imprisonment
and fine and if the contravention is continued after conviction, with a further fine which may
extend to one hundred rupees for each day on which the contravention is so continued.
4. (1) The appropriate Government may, after consultation with the  Advisory Committee,
by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication,
make one or more Scheme for any scheduled employment or group of scheduled employments,
in one or more areas specified in the notification; and in like manner add to, amend, vary of
substitute another Scheme for, any Scheme framed by it:
Provided that, no such notification shall come into force, unless a period of one month
has expired from the date of publication in the Official Gazette:
Provided further that, the appropriate Government may—
(a) if it considers necessary, or
(b) if a demand or request is made by a majority of the employers or workers in
any other scheduled employment that the provisions of the Scheme for exchanges so
made for any scheduled employment or any part thereof shall be applied to such other
scheduled employment, after consisting the employers and workers in such scheduled
employment by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of such Scheme
or part thereof to such scheduled employment, with such modification, if any, as may
be specified in the notification.
5. If any question arises whether any Scheme applies to any class of unprotected
workers or employers, the matter shall be referred to the appropriate Government and the
decision of the appropriate Government on the question, which shall be taken after consulting
the Advisory Committee constituted under section 15, shall be final.
6. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Board to be known as the Labour Exchange Board for carrying out the provisions of this
Act:
Provided that one or more Board may be appointed for one or more scheduled
employments, and for one or more areas.
(2) Every Board shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and to
contract, and may by that name, sue or be sued.
Making
Variation and
Revocation of
Labour
Exchange
Schemes.
Disputes
Regarding
Application
of Scheme.
Constitution
of Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(3) The Board shall consist of members nominated from time to time by the appropriate
Government representing the employers, the unprotected workers, and the appropriate
Government.
(4) The members representing employers and unprotected workers shall be equal in
number, and the members representing the appropriate Government shall not exceed
one-third of the total number of members representing employers and unprotected workers.
(5) The Chairperson of the Board shall be one of the members appointed to represent
the appropriate Government, nominated in this behalf by the appropriate Government.
(6) After nomination of all the members of the Board including the Chairperson the
appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, publish the names of all
the members of the Board.
(7) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
every member (not being a member representing the appropriate Government) shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(8) The meetings of the Board and procedure to be followed for the purpose and all
matters supplementary or ancillary thereto shall, subject to the approval of the appropriate
Government, be regulated by the Board itself.
7. ( 1) Where by reason of employers or unprotected workers in any scheduled
employment refuses to nominate persons for representing them on the Board or for any
reasons whatsoever, it appears to the appropriate Government that it is unable to constitute
a Board for such scheduled employment in accordance with the provisions of section 6, the
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a person who
shall hold office until a Board is duly constituted under section 6 for such scheduled
employment.
(2) The person so appointed shall be deemed to constitute the Board for the time
being, and shall exercise all the powers and perform and discharge all the duties and functions
conferred and imposed upon the Board by or under this Act and he shall continue in office
until the day immediately preceding the date of the first meeting of such Board.
(3) The person constituting the Board shall receive such remuneration from the fund
of the Board, and the terms and other conditions of service shall be such as the appropriate
Government may determine.
8. (1) The Board shall be responsible for administering each labour exchange Scheme
with respect to which it has been set up, and shall exercise such powers and perform such
functions as may be conferred on it by the Scheme.
(2) The Boards in general shall be responsible for maintaining a register of all workers
employed in the scheduled employment with respect to which the board has been set up.
(3) The Board shall also maintain a register of employers and contractors.
(4) The Board shall endeavour to facilitate employment of unprotected workers by
liaisoning with prospective employers registered with it and providing employers with the
names of workers registered for a particular scheduled employment.
(5) The Board shall be responsible for monitoring compliance with the Scheme by
employers.
(6) The Board shall submit to the appropriate Government, as soon as may be, after the
1st of April every year, and not later than the 31st day of October, an annual report on the
working of the Scheme during the preceding year ending on 31st day of March of that year.
(7) Every report received under sub-section (6) shall be laid as soon as may be after it
is received before each House of the State Legislature if it is in session, or in the session
immediately following the date of receipt of the report.
Power of
appropriate
Government
to appoint
Board
consisting of
one person.
Powers and
duties of
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(8) In exercise of the powers and discharge of its functions, the board shall be bound
by such directions as the appropriate Government may, for reason to be appropriated in
writing, give to it from time to time.
9. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant record and prepare
an annual statement of accounts, including a balance-sheet in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by such qualified person as
the appropriate Government may appoint in this behalf.
(3) The auditor shall at all reasonable times have access to the books of accounts and
other documents of the Board, and may for the purposes of the audit, call for such explanation
and information as he may require, or examine any member or officer of the Board.
(4) The accounts of the Board certified by the auditor, together with the audited report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the appropriate Government before such date as the
appropriate Government may specify in this behalf.
(5) The Board shall comply with such directions as the appropriate Government may,
after perusal of the report of the auditor, think fit to issue.
(6) The cost of audit, as determined by the appropriate Government, shall be paid out
of the funds of the Board.
10. (1) No person shall be chosen as, or continue to be, a member of the Board who—
(a) is a salaried officer of the Board; or
(b) is or at any time has been adjudged insolvent; or
(c) is found to be a lunatic or becomes of unsound mind; or
(d) is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude.
(2) The appropriate Government may remove from office any member, who—
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in sub-
section (1); or
(b) is absent without leave of the Board for more than three consecutive meetings
of the Board.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 5) and ( 7) of section 6 or
other provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, the members (including the
Chairperson), shall hold office during the pleasure of the appropriate Government and, if in
the opinion of the appropriate Government,—
(a) the member representing the employers or the unprotected workers, ceases
to adequately represent the employers, or as the case may be, the unprotected workers;
or
(b) having regard to the exigencies of circumstances or service in the appropriae
Government, the member (including the Chairperson) representing the appropriate
Government cannot continue  to represent the appropriate Government, the appropriate
Government may, by order remove all or any of them (including the Chairperson) from
office at any time.
11. Any member of the Board may at any time resign his office by writing under his
hand addressed to the appropriate Government, and his office shall, on acceptance of
resignation, become vacant.
12. In the event of any vacancy occurring on account of death, resignation,
disqualification or removal or otherwise, the Board shall forthwith communicate the occurrence
to the appropriate Government, and the vacancy shall be filled not later than ninety days
from the date of the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person nominated to fill in the
Accounts and
audit.
Disqualifications
and removal.
Resignation
of office by
member.
Vacancy to be
filled as early
as possible.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
vacancy shall hold office so long only as the member in whose place he is nominated would
have held it if the vacancy had not occurred:
Provided that, during any such vacancy, the continuing members may act as if no
vacancy has occurred.
13. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be questioned or invalidated merely by
reason of any vacancy in its membership or by reason of any defect in the constitution
thereof.
14. (1) The Board or such officer as may be specified by it in this behalf may, by order,
determine any sum due from any employer or worker under this Act or any Scheme made
thereunder, and for this purpose may conduct such inquiry as the Board or such officer may
think to be necessary.
(2) The Board or such officer, conducting the inquiry under sub-section (1) shall, for
the purposes of such inquiry, have the same powers as are vested in a Court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, for trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person or examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnessess: and any such inquiry
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228
and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
(3) No order determining the sum from any employer or worker shall be made under
sub-section (1), unless the employer or worker, as the case may be, is given a reasonable
opportunity of representing his case.
(4) An order made under this section shall be final and shall not be questioned in any
Court.
(5) Any sum determined under this section may, if such sum is in arrears, be recovered
as an arrear of land revenue.
15. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Advisory Committee to advise upon such matters arising out of the
administration of this Act or any Scheme made under this Act or relating to the application
of the provisions of this Act to any particular class of unprotected workers and employers,
or co-ordination of the work of various Boards, as the Advisory Committee may itself
consider to be necessary or as the appropriate Government may refer to it for advice.
(2) The members of the Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the appropriate
Government and shall be of such number and chosen in such a manner as may be prescribed
by rules made under this Act:
Provided that, the Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members
representing employers, workers and the Legislature of the State and members representing
the appropriate Government not exceeding one-fourth of its total number of members.
(3) The Chairperson of the Advisory Committee shall be one of the members appointed
to represent the appropriate Government, nominated in this behalf by the appropriate
Government.
(4) The appropriate Government shall publish in the Official Gazette, the names of all
members of the Advisory Committee.
(5) The meetings of the Advisory Committee and procedure to be followed for the
purpose shall be regulated according to rules made under this Act.
Proceedings
presumed to be
good and valid.
Determination
of moneys
due from
employers
and workers.
Advisory
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.

8
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
every member of the Advisory Committee (not being a member representing the appropriate
Government) shall be such as may be prescribed.
16. (1) The Board may appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors possessing
the prescribed qualifications for carrying out the purposes of this Act or of any Scheme and
may define the limits of their jurisdiction.
(2) Subject to any rules made by the appropriate Government in this behalf, an Inspector
may—
(a) enter and search at all reasonable hours, with such assistants as he thinks fit,
any premises or place, where unprotected workers are employed, or work is given out
to unprotected workers in any scheduled employment, for the purpose of examining
any register, record of wages or notices required to be kept or exhibited under any
Scheme, and require the production thereof, for inspection;
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any such premises or place and who,
he has reasonable cause to believe, is an unprotected worker employed therein or an
unprotected worker to whom work is given out therein;
(c) require any person giving any work to an unprotected worker or to a group of
unprotected workers to give any information, which is in his power to give, in respect
of the names and addresses of the persons to whom the work is given, and in respect
of payments made, or to be made, for the said work;
(d) seize or take copies of such registers, records of wages or notices or portions
thereof, as he may consider relevant, in respect of an offence under this Act or Scheme,
which he has reason to believe has been committed by an employer; and
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed:
Provided that, no one shall be required under the provisions of this section to answer
any question or made any statement tending to incriminate himself.
(3) Every Inspector appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
17. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
18. No child shall be required or allowed to work in any scheduled employment.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section 'child' means a person who has not
completed fourteen years of age.
19. Every offence punishable by or under this Act (including any offence made
punishable by a Scheme made under this Act) shall be tried by the Labour Court, within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction the offence was committed.
20. No Labour Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable by an Inspector
or by a person specially authorised in this behalf by the Board or the appropriate Government.
21. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, an appeal shall lie to the
Industrial Court,—
(a) against a conviction by a Labour Court, by the person convicted;
(b) against an acquittal by a Labour Court, by the complainant;
(c) for enhancement of a sentence awarded by the Labour Court by the appropriate
Government.
Inspectors
and their
powers.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
Funds.
Prohibition of
employment
of child.
Offence to be
tried by
labour court.
Cognizance
of offence on
complaint.
Appeal from
labour court
to industrial
court.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(2) Every appeal shall be made within thirty days from the date of the conviction,
acquittal or sentence, as the case may be:
Provided that, the Industrial Court may, for sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing
allow an appeal after the expiry of the said period.
22. (1) An endeavour shall be made by the Labour Court to hear and dispose of a
complaint of an offence punishable by or under the Act, as far as possible, within three
months from the date the complaint is made to it.
(2) An endeavour shall be made by the Industrial Court to hear and dispose of any
appeal or reference made to it under this Act, as far as possible, within three months from the
date such appeal or reference is made to it.
23. The provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, and the rules made
from time to time thereunder, shall mutatis matandis apply to registered unprotected workers
employed in any scheduled employment to which this Act applies and for that purpose they
shall be deemed to be workmen within the meaning of that Act and in relation to such
workmen, employer shall mean where a Board makes payment of wages to any such workmen,
the Board, and in any other case, the employer as defined in this Act.
24. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Payment of Wages Act, 1936,
(hereinafter referred to in this section as "the said Act"), the appropriate Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, direct that all or any of the provisions of the said Act or the
rules made thereunder shall apply to all or any class of registered unprotected workers
employed in any scheduled employment to which this Act applies, with the modification that
in relation to registered unprotected workers employer shall mean where a Board makes
payment of wages to any such worker, the Board, and in any other case, the employer as
defind in this Act and on such application of the provisions of the said Act, an Inspector
appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be the Inspector for the purpose of the
enforcement of such provisions of the said Act within the local limits of his jurisdiction.
(2) The appropriate Government may, only if the Advisory Committee so advises, by a
like notification cancel or vary any notification issued under sub-section (1).
25.  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (hereinafter
referred to in this section as "the said Act") the appropriate Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, direct that all or any of the provisions of the said Act or the rules made
thereunder shall apply to registered unprotected women workers employed in any scheduled
employment to which this Act applies and for that purpose they shall be deemed to be
women within the meaning of the said Act; and in relation to such women employer shall
mean where a Board makes payment of wages to such women, the Board; and in any other
case, the employer as defined in this Act; and on such application of the provision of the said
Act, an Inspector appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be the Inspector for the
purpose of enforcement of such provisions of the said Act within the local limits of his
jurisdiction.
26. Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any rights or privileges, which any
registered unprotected worker employed in any scheduled employment is entitled to, on the
date on which this Act comes into force, under any other law, contract, custom or usage
applicable to such workers, if such rights or privileges are more favourable to him than those
to which he would be entitled under this Act and the Scheme:
Provided that, such worker will not be entitled to receive any corresponding benefit
under the provisions of this Act and the Scheme.
27.  (1) The appropriate Government may at any time appoint any person to investigate
or enquire into the working of any Board or Scheme and submit a report to the apprpriate
Government in that behalf.
Time limit
for disposal
of appeal by
labour court.
Application of
Workmen’s
Compensation
Act, 1923 to
unprotected
workers.
Application of
the Payment
of W ages Act,
1936 to
unprotected
workers.
Application
of Maternity
Benefit Act,
1961 to
unprotected
women
workers.
Rights and
privileges
under other
laws not
affected in
certain cases.
Enquiry into
working of the
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
4 of 1936.
8 of 1923.
53 of 1961.

10
(2) The Board shall give to the person so appointed all facilities for the proper conduct
of their investigation or inquiry, and furnish to him such documents, accounts or information
in possession of the Board as he may require.
(3) Any person so appointed to investigate or inquire into the working of any Board or
Scheme may exercise all the powers of an Inspector appointed under this Act.
28. (1) If the appropriate Government, on consideration of the report referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 25 or otherwise, is of the opinion—
(a) that the Board is unable to perform its functions; or
(b) that the Board has persistently made default in the discharge of its functions
or has exceeded or abused its powers, the appropriate Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, supersede the Board and constitute it in the prescribed manner,
within a period of twelve months from the date of supersession,
the period of supersession may be extended for sufficient reasons by a like notification by
not more than six months:
Provided that, before issuing a notification under this sub-section on any of the
grounds mentioned in clause ( b), the appropriate Government shall give a reasonable
opportunity to the Board to show cause why it should not be superseded, and shall consider
the explanations and objections, if any, of the Board.
(2) After the supersession of the Board and until it is reconstituted, the powers, duties
and functions of the Board under this Act shall be exercised and performed by the appropriate
Government, or by such officer or officer's as the appropriate Government may appoint for
this purpose.
(3) When the Board is superseded the following consequences shall ensue, that is to
say—
(a) all the members of the Board shall, as from the date of publication of the
notification under sub-section (1) vacate their office;
(b) all the powers and functions, which may be exercised or performed by the
Board shall, during the period of supersession be exercised or performed by such
persons as may be specified in the notification;
(c) all funds and other property vesting in the Board shall, during the period of
supersession, vest in the appropriate Government and on the reconstitution of the
Board, such funds and property shall revest in the Board.
29. Any contract or agreement, whether made before or after the commencement of
this Act, whereby a registered unprotected worker relinquishes any right conferred by, or
any privilege or concession accruing to him under this Act or any Scheme, shall be void and
of no effect in so far as it purports to deprive him of such right or privilege or concession.
30. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the official Gazette not less
than three months' notice of its intention so to do, modify any item of the Schedule or add to
the Schedule any employment in respect of which it is of opinion that the provisions of this
Act should apply to such employment as modified or added.
31. Save as otherwise expressly in this Act, any person, who contravenes any of the
provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall, on conviction by a Labour Court or
the Industrial Court, be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and in
case of continued contravention thereof, with an additional fine which may extend to one
hundred rupees per day for every day during which such contravention continues.
32. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Supersession
of the Board.
Contracting
out.
Amendment of
Schedule.
General
penalty for
offences.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Paliament, while it is in session for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature.
5
10

THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2(j)]
1. Employment in Iron and Steel Market or shops in connection with loading, unloading,
stacking, carrying, weighing, measuring or such other work including work preparatory or
such operations.
2. Employment in Cloth and Cotton Markets or shops in connection with loading,
unloading, stacking, carrying, weighing, 
1[measuring, filling, stitching, sorting, cleaning or
such other work] including work preparatory or incidental to such operations.
3. Employment in docks in connection with loading, unloading, stacking, carrying,
weighing, measuring or such other work including work preparatory or incidental to such
operations.
4. Employment in Grocery Markets or shops, in connection with loading, unloading,
stacking, carrying, weighing, measuring, filling, stitching, sorting, cleaning or such other
work including work preparatory or incidental to such operations.
5. Employment in markets, and factories and other establishment in connection with
loading, unloading, stacking, weighing, measuring, filling, stitching, sorting, cleaning or
such other work including work preparatory or incidental to such operations carried on by
workers not covered by any other entries in this Schedule.
6. Employment in railway yards and goods-sheds in connection with loading, unloading,
stacking, weighing, measuring or such other work preparatory or incidental to such operations
by workers who are not employed by Railway Authorities.
7. Employment in connection with loading of goods into public transport vehicle or
unloading of goods therefrom and any other operation incidental and connected thereto.
8. Employment in vegetable markets (including onions and potatoes markets) in
connection with loading, unloading, stacking, carrying, weighing, measuring, filling, stitching,
sorting, cleaning or such other work including work preparatory or incidental to such
operations.
9. Employment in markets or subsidiary markets in connection with loading, unloading,
stacking, carrying, weighing, measuring, filling, stitching, sorting, cleaning or such other
work including work preparatory or incidental to such operations.
10. Employment in Khokha making, and in timber market.
11. Employment in salt pans.
12. Employment in fishing industry.
13. Employment in connection with the loading, unloading and carrying of foodgrains
into godowns sorting and cleaning of foodgrains, filling foodgrains in bags, stitching of
such bags and such other work incidental and connected thereto.
14. Employment in establishment engaged in cleaning, sorting, loading, unloading,
stacking, carrying, weighing, measuring, stitching, filling of onions or onions bags and other
produce and such other work including the work preparatory or incidental or such operations.
15. Employment in brick kilns, beedi making, incense making and other allied industries.
16. Employment in roadside dhabas and other eateries and food stalls.
17. Employment in cleaning, sweeping, garbage collecting and other sanitation work.
18. Domestic workers.
12

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India has a large informal economy. At present, only ten percent. of India's over
470 million workforce is in the organised sector while the remaining are unorganised and do
not receive the benefits of labour regulations and welfare legislations. Most workers in
India's informal economy are seasonal and circular migrants who stay at the work site for a
certain period, and then either go back to their homes or move on to other work locations.
Most of them perform jobs that are not accounted for in the traditional work force and are not
covered by existing labour regulations such as lifting heavy objects, cleaning and providing
manual labour. According to the International Labour Organization most of this work force
falls under the unacceptable forms of work as defined by it. These workers are often recruited
by labour contractors in mass and face severe exploitation as they are subject to unregulated
and unsafe working conditions without having any legal recourse.
There have been many efforts at addressing the specific problems faced by workers in
the unorganised sector. Several legislations like the Contract Labour (Regulation and
Abolition) Act, 1979, the Unorganized Workers Social Security Act, 1996, etc. were brought
into force seeking to extend social protection to unorganised sector workers. However, they
have been largely unsuccessful and insufficient with respect to bringing the workers in the
informal economy at par with those in the formal economy.
However, one such initiative has been successful in the State of Maharashtra. In the
State of Maharashtra, under the Maharashtra Mathadi. Hamal and Other Manual Workers
(Regulation of Employment and Welfare) Act, 1969 a class of manual workers known as
Mathadis are organised under a welfare Board which regulates the working conditions and
provides them with social security. These Boards were highlightes as a positive example in
an International Labour Organization global and comparative study on Unacceptable Forms
of Work.
Whereas, it is necessary that the success of the labour board system in the State of
Maharashtra be replicated at the national scale in order to provide social security to informal
labour and to safeguard them from exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE V ARUN GANDHI
December 5, 2016.
13

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall formulate a Scheme to
be known as the Labour Exchange Scheme for the registration of employers and unprotected
workers in the scheduled employment, and to provide for the terms and conditions of work
of registered unprotected workers, and make provision for their general welfare. Clause 6
provides for establishment of Labour Exchange Boards by the appropriate Government.
Clause 15 provides for constitution of Advisory Committees by the appropriate Government.
Clause 16 provides that the Board may appoint Inspectors for carrying out the purposes of
this Bill. Clause 17 provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation made
by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. Although, the expenditure relating to States shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. The expenditure relating to
Union Territories shall be borne by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Though, at this stage, it is
difficult to assess the exact expenditure, it is estimated that a sum of rupees  Fourteen Crores
would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees Twenty Five Crores is also likely to be
involved.
14

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
15

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish Labour Exchanges to regulate the employment of unprotected manual
workers engaged in the unorganised sector; to make better provision for their terms and
conditions of employment; to provide for their welfare, and for health and
safety measures where such employments require these measures; to make
provision for ensuring an adequate supply to and full and proper
utilization of such workers in  such employments to prevent
avoidable unemployment; to provide for the establishment
of Labour Exchange Boards in respect of these
employments and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4063LS(S3)—17-01-2017.