     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
       
Bill No. 4 of 2022
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI A. RAJA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
2.  After  article 21A  of  the Constitution, the following article shall be
inserted, namely:—
               “21B. The State shall provide affordable adequate housing to all citizens
in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.”.
Short title.
5
Insertion of new
article 21B.
Right to affordable
housing.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Housing is a basic human need. It is considered to be vital for human survival
and essential for socio-economic development. India with a population of over
1.33 billion people, is the second most populous nation in the world. According
to UN-HABITAT, India is home to sixty-three per cent. of  all slum dwellers in
South Asia. This amounts to 170 million people, seventeen per cent. of the world’s
slum dwellers. India’s per capita income although rising, ranks 124th in the world.
Approximately thirty-five per cent. of  India’s population still earns rupees sixty or
less per day. Census 2011 reported 1.77 million homeless people across India or
0.15 per cent. of  the country’s total population.
The right to housing is the right to live in adequate shelter in security, peace and
dignity. It is not merely having a roof  over one’s head, rather it requires an accessible
habitable space that fulfills the basic human needs to personal space, security,
adequate lighting and ventilation, safe structure, protection from weather besides its
location, all at reasonable cost. Therefore it is the duty of the State to provide
affordable adequate housing for all citizens.
In order to achieve the task, it is felt necessary that a provision should be made
in the Constitution as part of the fundamental rights for the purpose. The Bill seeks to
achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
       NEW DELHI;                                                                           A. RAJA
December 1, 2021.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to make affordable adequate housing to all citizens
a fundamental right. The Bill if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of  India. However, at this stage it will be difficult to make an estimate of such
expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring. The exact amount may be worked
out only when the provisions of the Bill are implemented.
3

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend  the  Constitution  of  India.
————
(Shri  A. Raja, M.P .)