AS INTRODUCED IN Lok 913

mag 202

‘
Bill No. 4 of 2002

‘THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
By
‘Suet RAMESH CHENNITHALA, M. P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2002, Short title.

2. In article 124 of the Constitution, for clause (7), the following clause shall be — Amendment
5 substituted, namely:— of article

124.
>(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court of India

shall— के

(i) plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of
India; H

10 (ii) not be eligible for any office either under the Government of India or
under the Government 6f any State; and



Insertion of
new article
220A.

Judge ofa High
Court not to
be eligible for
any further
office,

2

(iii) not hold office of the President, Vice-President, or Member of Parliament
or Legislature of a State or such post which is filled by election involving public or
their representatives.”.

3. After article 220 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—

“220A. No person who has held office as a Judge of a High Court shall hold
office of President, Vice-President, Member of Parliament or Legislature of a State or
such post which is filled by election involving public or their representatives after he
has ceased to be a Judge of a High Court.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Certain Constitutional authorities like the Comptroller and Auditor General,
: and Members of the Public Service Commission, etc., are not eligible to accept
any employment under the Government after their retirement, The undergoing principle is
that post retirement assignments should not allow them into taking decisions favouring
the Government. This is a very statutory principle which can ensure impartiality and

objectivity in the functioning of these constitutional authorit
However, the prohibition on post retirement employment does not cover the Judges
of the Superme Court and the High Courts. Judiciary in India is independent and partial.
Nevertheless, a minimum safeguard against any possible deviation is in order. It will be a
sad day for Indian democracy if the Judiciary exposes itself tothe charge of being partisan. We
must do everything in our capacity to prevent such a situation. The prohibition accepting
post retirement employment in any form will go long way in ensuring independence and
impartiality of Judges.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Deut, RAMESH CHENNITHALA

February 4, 2002


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* + " * * *
Establishment 124.(1) * sl i * ns
and पे iE
Constitution

of Supreme

Court.

(7)No person who has held office as a Judge of a Supreme Court shall plead or |
any court or before any authority within the territory of India. “1

* * * * कं.


A
: BLL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P,)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4837LS—20.02.2002.