As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

+ 1 4७ 266

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
By

Suri ANANDRAO ViTHoBA ApsuL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.

Short title.


Amendment of
article 117.

Amendment of.
article 207.

Omission of
article 274.

2. In article 117 of the Constitution —
(i) for clause (7), the foilowing clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2) ABill making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses
(०) to (0) of clause (7) of article 110 shai! not be introduced in the Council of
States.”; 5

(ii) Clauses (2) and (3) shail be omitted.
3. In article 207 of the Constitution,—
Amendment ofarticle 207.
(@ for clause (7) the following article shall be substituted, namely:—

"() ABill making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses 10
(०) to (0 of clause (/) of article 199 shall not be introduced in a Legislative
Council:

(ii) Clauses (2) and (3) shall be omitted."
4. Article 274 of the Constitution shall be omitted.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Parliamentary form of democracy is the best form of democracy. Here will of the people
should prevail. Peoples' representatives should have a final say in all matters of the nation.

But certain legislative measures, requires prior sanction of the President for their
introduction/discussion in the Legislatures. These provisions, though technical in nature
sometimes act as an hurdle in piloting important legislations.

Perhaps the logic behind these provisions was that controversial and draconian laws
should not be allowed to be passed with brute majority of the Government. But, there is an
absolute change in the political set up in the country. People have more political awareness
than ever.

In the changed circumstances these provisions are no more required to be in statute.
Hence amendment to the Constitution. But the provision regarding bar of introduction of
Money Bill/Financial Bill in upper House of a Legislature has been kept intact.

New DELHI; ANANDRAO VITHOBA ADSUL
December 13,2005


Special
provisions as to
financial Bills.

Special
provisions as to
financial Bills,

Prior recom-
mendation of
President
required to Bills
affecting
taxation in
which States
are interested.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROMTHE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

117. (1) A Bill or amendment making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-
clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the
recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced in
the Council of States:

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of
an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or
by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of
any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India, shall not be passed by either House of Parliament unless the
President has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.

* * * * * * *

207. (1) A Bill or amendemnt making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-
clauses (a) to (f) of clause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced or moved except on the
recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill making such provision shall not be introduced
ina Legislative Council:

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for the moving of
anamendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.

(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters
aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or
by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of
any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.

(3) ABill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India, shall not be passed by a House of Legislature of the State
unless the Governor has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.

* * * * * * *

274. (1) No Bill or amendment which imposes or varies any tax or duty in which States
are interested, or which varies the meaning of the expression "agricultural income" as
defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax, or which affects the
principles on which under any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter moneys are or may
be distributable to States, or which imposes any such surcharge for the purposes of the
Union as is mentioned in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, shall be introduced or
moved in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President.

(2) In this article, the expression "tax or duty in which States are interested" means—

(a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are assigned to any
State; or

(b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whereof sums are for the time being
payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India to any State.

* * * * * * *

4


A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—S064LS(S-2)—08.02.2006.