Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
                   
                                                       
          
Bill No. 4 of  2023
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
Sඁඋං  Jൺ඀ൽൺආൻං඄ൺ Pൺඅ,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005. 
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—     
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
  2. In section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in clause (f), for the words ''papers'', the words ''papers, photos'' shall be 
substituted.
Short title and 
commencement.
Amendment of 
section 2.

  3. In section 6 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2) , the following sub-section shall 
be substituted, namely:—
  “( 2) An applicant making request for obtaining information shall give reason for 
requesting the information including those details that may be necessary for contacting 
him.”.
  4. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:
''Provided that if the Central Public Information Officers or State Public Information 
Officers, as the case may be, provide the information after the period of thirty days 
of the receipt of the request, the Central Public Information Officers or State Public 
Information Officers, as the case may be, shall furnish the reasons in writing for such 
delay.''.
   
Amendment of 
section 6.
Amendment of 
section 7.

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Right to Information Act, 2005 was enacted to provide transparency in the 
functioning of public authority. One of the major objective of the act was also ensuring 
accountability of the people working in those public institutions. The act seeks to provide 
access to information, contain corruption and strengthen ethos of democracy. To achieve 
all these objectives, a regular upgradation of the rules and regulations become necessary.  
There has been instances where information seekers have harassed people and enjoyed 
advantage through undue influence. Hon'ble Justice S.H. Kapadia, Former Chief Justice of 
India has also pointed once that ''The Right to Information Act is a good law, but it is being 
abused''. Hence, it becomes important to ensure that whether the applicants who are seeking 
information are using for rightful purpose or not.
 The Principal Act provides for the time period to give information. But it does not 
have any provision in case of non-compliance by the public information commission. As 
per the data, a total of 3.14 lakh complaints or appeals are pending with 26 information 
commission across India in October 2022. This can be solved by compelling the information 
commission to dispose those complaints. To make commission more accountable, it is 
important to put some burden on them. Thus, to fill this gap in the principal act, the present 
amendment is being proposed.
 With the advancement of new technology, photos have become one of the major 
sources of information. A lot of information can be gathered through photo itself. Therefore, 
it becomes important to include photos in the meaning of ''information''. To fulfil all these 
objectives, it has become important to bring amendment in the Right to Information Act, 
2005.
 Hence this Bill.
     Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                       JAGDAMBIKA PAL
November 22,  2022.

ANNEXURE 
Eඑඍඋൺർඍ ൿඋඈආ ඍඁൾ Rං඀ඁඍ ඍඈ Iඇൿඈඋආൺඍංඈඇ Aർඍ, 2005 
(Aർඍ Nඈ. 22 ඈൿ 2005)
*                         *                            *          *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 *                         *                            *          *
       ( f) ''information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, 
memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, 
reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form and information 
relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority under any other 
law for the time being in force;
 *                         *                            *          *
 6.  (1) *                         *                            *          *
    ( 2) An applicant making request for information shall not be required to give any 
reason for requesting the information or any other personal details except those that may be 
necessary for contacting him.
 *                         *                            *          *
7. (1) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 5 or the proviso to 
sub-section (3) of section 6, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public 
Information Officer, as the case may be, on receipt of a request under section 6 shall, as 
expeditiously as possible, and in any case within thirty days of the receipt of the request, 
either provide the information on payment of such fee as may be prescribed or reject the 
request for any of the reasons specified in sections 8 and 9:
 Provided that where the information sought for concerns the life or liberty of a person, 
the same shall be provided within forty-eight hours of the receipt of the request.
 ( 2) If the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the 
case may be, fails to give decision on the request for information within the period specified 
under sub-section (1), the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information 
Officer, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have refused the request.
 *                         *                            *          *
Deﬁnitions.
Requeﬆ for 
obtaining 
information.
Disposal of 
request.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
————
(Shri  Jagdambika Pal,  M.P.)