1
THE FAKE NEWS (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI TEJ PRATAP SINGH YADA V, M.P .
A
BILL
to prohibit the creation and distribution of fake news in media and for matters
connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Fake News (Prohibition) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "fake news" includes the following or combinations thereof:—
(i) misquotation or the false and/or inaccurate report of one's statement;
Bill  No.  4 of  2019
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) editing audio or video which results in the distortion of facts and/or
the context; or
(iii) purely fabricated content.
(b) "false or inaccurate report" means to falsities and inaccuracies in reporting
that are primarily geared towards:—
(i) undermining or benefiting a person, agency, entity or event; or
(ii) luring advertisers based on number of "clicks" or "visits" for pecuniary
or commercial gain; or
(iii) imperiling national security or disturbing public order; or
(iv) sowing enmity, hatred or ill towards certain political, cultural, gender
groups or other minorities; or
(v) in broadcast, printed or web-published material disguised as news or
without any factual claims.
(c) "mass media outlet" means:—
(g) any entity incorporated to carry on the business of radio and/or
television broadcasting and granted a valid Government franchise to operate
such business; or
(h) any entity that publishes newspapers with regular public circulation
and uses print, online publication, microwave, satellite or whatever means to
disseminate content for commercial purposes.
(d) “Social media platform” means any user-specific web-based technology
intended to create virtual connection through the internet such as social networking
sites, blog sites, video-sharing sites and the like;
(e) “social media user” includes any person or group of persons, natural or
juridical, organized or unorganized, that utilizes social media platforms to send messages
and/or information across through any social media account, verified or under a
pseudonym, fictitious or false account/page name for whatever purposes it may serve;
(f) “create” means the positive act of bringing into existence whether in written,
audio or video format fake news guised as factual, true and verified news stories, and
the initial dissemination, publication or broadcast of the same through broadcast
media, print and social media platforms;
(g) “disseminate” means the act of deliberately and maliciously sharing,
forwarding, republishing or re-broadcasting fake news through broadcast media, print,
and social media platforms despite the knowledge or reasonable grounds to believe
that such news story is false, fictitious and misleading;
(h) “aid or abet” means the act of conniving or assisting in the creation and/or
dissemination of fake news through advice, financial support, or other positive acts
without which the fake news may not have come into being; and
(i) “retract” means the withdrawal and deletion of fake news broadcast or
published when applicable.
3. The following acts are hereby prohibited:—
(a) create through broadcast, social media platforms and/or print fake news by
any mass media outlet whether or not such mass media outlet knows of its falsity and
regardless of intent;
(b) aid or abet in the creation, distribution or circulation of fake news by any
mass media outlet whether or not such mass media outlet knows of its falsity and
regardless of intent;
Prohibited
acts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) deliberately and maliciously create and disseminate fake news through
broadcast, social media platforms and/or print by any mass media outlet or social
media user;
(d) deliberately and maliciously aid or abetting in the creation, distribution or
circulation of fake news through broadcast, social media platforms and/or print by any
mass media outlet or social media user;
(e) defer or desist from any mass media outlet or social media user,—
(i) retracting any fake news; and
(ii) broadcasting or publishing an erratum addressing the fake news.
4. No person shall maliciously offer, publish, distribute, circulate and spread false
news or information or cause the publication, distribution, circulation or spreading of the
same in print, broadcast or online media housing such false news or information cause or
intend to cause panic, division, chaos, violence, hate or which exhibit or intened to exhibit a
propaganda to blacken or discredit one's reputation and the person knowingly commits such
act with full knowledge that such news or information is false, or with reasonable grounds to
believe that the same is false.
5. If any mass media enterprise or social media platform fails, neglects or refuses to
remove false news or information within a reasonable period after having knowledge, or
having reasonable grounds to believe, of its falsity shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence
punishable under this Act.
6. (1) Any mass media outlet found guilty of creating, disseminating, aiding, abetting
or refuses to retract fake news shall be punished,—
(a) with a fine of rupees five lakh for first offence;
(b) rupees ten lakh and its operation suspended for one week for second offence;
(c) twenty lakh and its operation suspended for a month for any subsequent
violation.
(2) Any social media user found guilty of creating, disseminating, aiding, abetting or
refusing to retract fake news shall be punished with a fine of rupees one lakh for the first
offence, rupees two lakh for the second offense and rupees five lakh for any subsequent
violation.
7. (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act
or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance, of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
Officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—for the purpose of this section:—
(i) “company” means anybody corporate and include a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Prohibition on
malicious
creation and
distribution of
fake news.
Failure to
remove false
news.
Penalties.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force on the subject and save
aforesaid the provisions of the Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The advent of modern technology has caused a shift from traditional news reporting in
print, broadcast media and the internet, especially on social media platforms. We hear and
read the phrase "fake news" every day. Fake news creates impression and beliefs based on
false premises leading to divison, misunderstanding and further exacerbating otherwise
tenuous relations.
The distribution of false information through fake news has become easier in the age
of internet, where anyone can post a report or a statement to resemble a news story and claim
it as true and factual. Fake news or information cause or intend to cause panic, division,
chaos, violence, hate or must exhibit or intend to exhibit a propaganda to blacken or discredit
one's reputation. A large number of incidents of mob lynching have reported from various
part of the country due to the spread of fake news in the social media like whatsapp, Facebook,
Twitter, etc. Studies have also found evidence of political parties spreading propaganda on
social networks during elections in the country.
With the India being one of the most virtually-connected countries in the world with
million active social media users, we have access to platforms of media and access to any
array of information available on the web, some with questionable sources. While the
responsibility of discerning lie from truth falls with the person using the information, it is a
moral duty of the State to protect its people from such lies in the first place. There is need to
curb the existence of disreputable news sources and prevent established mass media outlets
from careless publishing of unverified or false content.
At present, India does not have a specific law to deal with menace of fake news. Other
countries have taken strides in preventing the spread of false information through legislations.
The need is to nip the cause of fake news in the bud by prohibiting the creation and
malicious distribution of false information. It aims to ensure that the content being published
and disseminated by mass media outlets and social media personalities are free from false,
misleading or fictitious stories through a clear definition of what fake news is. It penalizes not
only the creation of false content and the malicious distribution thereof, but also the failure
to remove such content once it has been published, with verying penalties depending on the
gravity of the act.
The need is also to encourage our citizens, especially public officers, to be more
responsible and circumspect in creating, distributing and/or sharing news. Addressing national
and global concerns should not be made more complicated by false news calculated to cause
disunity, panic, chaos and/or violence.
In addition, penalizing mass media enterprise or social media platform that fails, neglects
or refuses to remove false news or information within a reasonable period after having
knowledge, or having reasonable grounds to believe of its falsity is also required.
The Bill aims to encourage responsible and credible journalism, as well as creating
awareness of the harmful effects of spreading untruthful facts. Misleading and deceptive
news may cause divisiveness, health hazards, security risks, panic and chaos to this nation,
contrary to our Constitutionally enshrined principle of adhering to a policy of peace and
cooperation.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; TEJ PRATAP SINGH Y ADA V
19 November, 2018.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the creation and distribution of fake news in media and for matters connected
therewith.
————
(Shri T ej Pratap Singh Yadav, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2228Ls(S3)—16-01-2019.