As inTRODUCED IN Lox SaBHA

4 १६९ णे

Bill No. 4 of 2001,

THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
UTTRANCHAL BILL, 2001

By
Sura Harpat Sincu Sarit, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Uttranchal for the
purpose of promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward sections of People and for the development, exploitation and
proper utilization of its resources.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty second year of the Republic of Indie as
follows:—

1. (0) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Uttranchal
Act, Bill 2001.

(2)Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Uttranchal to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections

of people or for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in the
State.

3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.

Short title and
commence
ment.

Special
Financial
assistance 10
the State of
Uuranchal.

Application of
other !aws not
barred


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Having been part of the erstwhile State of Uttar Pradesh, the region known
Uttranchal remained socially and economically backward mainly because it was fout

of development in the region resulted in the agitation of the people of the region for
separate Statehood. Ultimately, the Government of India respected the wishes of the people

unemployment, illiteracy as well as measures for proper utilization of resources,
weaker sections in the region and for initiating new development schemes are
be addressed urgently and in a time bound manner. Itis, therefore, necessary that the
Government should provide some special financial assistance to the State of Uttranchal fe
its all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the developmet
of its vast resources. Such a step of providing financial assistance to this newly born St
would go, a long way in building this nation more and more strong.

Hence this Bill.

New छह मा; HARPAL SINGH
December 8, 2000. -


LOK SABHA.

‘A
BILL

to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Uttranchal for the purpose of
Promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward

Sections of People and for the development, exploitation and proper utilization of its
resources.

(Shri Harpal Singh Sathi, M.P)

MGIP(PLUJMRND—6191LS—07.02.2001,,