1
Bill No.  4 of 2015
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SANKAR PRASAD DATTA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015. Short title.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After article 16 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“16A. Nothing in this Constitution shall prevent the State from making any
provision for reservation in the matter of employment in private enterprises in favour
of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
Explanation.—In this article,—
(i) “private enterprise” means a private enterprise or organization whose
annual turnover is not less than rupees ten crore; and
(ii) “provision for reservation” includes any incentive, which may be given
to a private enterprise by the State, to encourage the enterprise to provide
reservation in employment to persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes.”.
Insertion of
new article
16A.
Employment
opportunities
to persons
belonging to
Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled
Tribes in
private
sector.
5
10

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Although private enterprises have dedicated ‘Corporate Social Responsibility’
divisions, it is observed that these enterprises have not been actively pursuing their social
responsibilities. Private enterprises are supposed to carry out their social responsibilities
actively in the interest of general public and especially towards weaker sections of our
society. The job opportunities in the private sector have increased manifold following the
liberalization of the Indian economy during the last decade. In order to fulfil its social
responsibility, the private sector should come forward to extend job opportunities to the
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
It is necessary to make an amendment in the Constitution to enable the State to
encourage private enterprises to provide reservation in employment to the persons belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in their establishments.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; SANKAR PRASAD DATTA
December 22, 2014.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Sankar Prasad Datta, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4153LS(S3)—04-02-2015.