1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR YOUTH BILL, 2011
By
SHRI  ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Commission for Youth for their overall
development and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Youth Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  4  of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “appropriate Government” means the State Government or the Central
Government, as the case may be;
(ii) “Commission” means the National Commission for Y outh set up under
section 3;
(iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(iv) “Youth” means any person who has attained the age of eighteen years but
is not above the age of forty-five years.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, set up a
National Commission for Youth.
(2) The Commission shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson having special knowledge in the field of youth affairs, to be
appointed by the Central Government; and
(ii) such number of other members having such qualification as may be prescribed.
(3) The conditions of service, salaries and allowances of Chairperson and other
members of  the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall make available such number of officers and staff
including experts to the Commission as may be required for its efficient functioning.
5. The Commission shall perform the following functions:—
(i) formulate a national policy for the overall development of youth in the country;
(ii) such functions in regard to formulation and implementation of schemes for
the welfare of youth as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government; and
(iii) such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.
6. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Fund to be known as the Youth
Development Fund to implement the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be;   so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
2
Definitions.
National
Commission
for youth.
Central
Government
to provide
officers and
staff for the
Commission.
Functions of the
Commission
Youth
Development
Fund.
Power to make
rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after six decades of independence, no clear-cut policy for the overall development
of youth has been formulated in our country so far. Today, youth of the country are facing
so many problems. This include, to name a few, problems relating to education, poverty,
nutrition, self-employment, vocational training, health, etc. There is no institutional mechanism
to harness their potential and channelise their energy for the betterment of the country.
There is no proper planning for comprehensive development of the youth. The plight of
youth belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
(OBCs) is even worse. Apart from all the problems mentioned above, they also have to face
social ostracisation.
We need to instill a sense of belonging among the youth by providing them all
opportunities for their development so that they can contribute to the progress of the
country to their full potential. The facilities should be provided as a matter of right and not
as privilege. Employment should be guaranteed to the youth. The youth should be linked
directly with the production process. The disparities between the rural and urban youth
should be eliminated in a phased manner. Steps taken in this direction will not only uplift the
conditions of the youth but will also create a better society leading to a civilized and strong
nation. A comprehensive youth policy through the National Commission for Youth, for their
all round development is, therefore, need of the hour.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
February 4, 2011.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a National Commission for Youth.
Clause 4 provides that the Central Government shall make available necessary officers and
staff for the efficient functioning of the Commission. Clause 6 provides for creation of a
Youth Development Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from
the Consolidated  Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees two hundred fifty crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clasue 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—6222LS(S3)—14-02-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a National Commission for Youth for their overall
development and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P.)