AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

j

BulNo. 4 of 2003

THE BAN ON RELIGIOUS CONVERSION BILL, 2003
By
~ SHRI CHANDRAKANT Kuaire, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for ban on religious conversion

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— '

1. (1) This Act may be called the Ban on Religious Conversion Act, 2003
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. No person or institution shall encourage or cause to encourage any person or

group of persons to convert religion by way of inducement in any form or force or through
any other means

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, ‘inducement’ means and includes
giving or offering or promise to give cash, imparting free education, employment, shelter,
food and clothes free of cost. |

3. This Act shall not apply to a person who voluntarily converts to another religion or _

reconverts to his original religion

ong.
3 44 Re

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Ban on
religious
conversion..

Act not to
apply in
case of
voluntary
conversion.


Punishment.

Prohibition on
accepting
donation or
contribution.

Forfeiture of
bank account
and proper-
ties.

Special Judge
to try offence.

Act to be in
addition and
not in
derogation of
any other law.

Power to
make rules.

2

4. (1) If any person violates the provisions of this Act, he shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment of a term which shall be not less than ten years and a fine which shall
be not less than rupees one lakh. | |

(2) If any institution or organization violates the provisions of this Act, the person in
charge of the affairs of the institution or organization, as the case may be, shall be subject
to punishment as provided under sub-section (1) and the registration of the institution or
organization under any law for the time being in force shall be cancelled forthwith.

5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no person or organization violating the provisions of this Act shall be allowed to accept
any donation or contribution of any kind from within the country or abroad.

6. The bank account of any person or institution violating the provisions of this Act
shall be frozen and all properties, whether movable or immovable, of such person or
institution shall be forfeited. [ |

7. An offence under this Act shall be tried by a special Judge designated for this
purpose. जा

_ 8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force. | |

9, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules

for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

A


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

___ Religious conversion is the order of the day. Inducement of all types is offered and
‘sometimes promise to offer certain things is given. Certain organizations indulge in
1 encouraging conversion through all ways and means and money received from abroad and
within the country is put to use for these purposes.

| In many parts of the country, it has been witnessed that conversion has been taking
place through force. Forced or induced conversion should be stopped. It is, therefore,

_ proposed to prohibit conversion through force or inducement. However, a provision is
made for enabling voluntary conversion.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective. |

 NewDes ‘CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE
December 9, 2002 | | |

i


“MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. The delegation of legislative power is of normal character.



- LOK SABHA

BILL.

to provide for ban on religious conversion.

(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P._)

_MGIPMRND—7194LS—03.02.2003..