tOlC BABH1 
CORBIGUDA. 
to . 
THI BMPLOY~S' STATE INSt1lW{Ca (a..-tNl1ftT"" _"IGL'~'''I MLL, 1965 
(To be/As introduged in Lok Sabh.i 
1. Page 4, line 12,-
.&tW "business" murt ", ". 
2. Page 5, line 32,-
~ II(~ .. insert ", n. 
3. page 6, line 10,-
m 'member", I DIW 'member, III. 
4. page 9, line 13,-
m "benefit) s" ~ "nanall1-" 
5. Page 9, line 26,-
~ "of" UiUl "or" 
6. page 11, line 3,-
'~ "then", insert "," 
7. Page 11, line 34,-
R§fore tIle ss" Wsart "not" 
8. Page 13, line 18,-
m "when .t!lA!I "whether" 
9. page 18, line 8,~ 
" .. , .an..G "( 2)" insert 
-to. pag.at9, llne 31,.-
.w IIrestrospect.1'V'elT'....ua4.~t"rospeeUV'8l.1" 
11. page 22, line 18,-
.i1lJI! ';:::atad" m "." ~ ";" 
12. Page 2€. line g,-
m "pavb1e" ~ "paYable" 
13. Page 26, :1n9 20,-
m "marrige" ~ "marr1.agell 
14. pag'e 26, li!'lc 2~,-
~ ,lag9" m i';" n&Sl,II," 
. 15. page 26~ lilln 26,- -
W "SECQD.!>" .u.d 1ISJD)J1)1I 

". ---
• 
-I 2 1_ 
16. Page 27, line 34,_ 
.&tt.u "8.89" in!lir1j "c.m." 
17. Page 28, line 34,-
~ 1119" ~ "49" . 
18. Page 28,. l1ne'43,-
JIJ.lAt "schedule" insert "shall" 
19. Page 29, line ,26,-
m "pois1oning" LW "poisoning" 
m. Page 30, line e,.. 
.A.tt.II "paraffine" inser1j 
21 •. Page 30, line 45,-
" " , 
m "artiel"" ~ "articles" 
22. Page 34, line 13 from bottom,-
!,g,J: "Rs.·..,.OO" ~ "Re. 1.00" 
23. Page 37, line 1~ from bottom,-
m "Schedule I" ..tW "First SChedule" 
24. Page 38, line 8,-
.r.su: "adjustment" J:.W. "adjustments" 
25. Page 40, l1ne 8,-
.:su: "Maternity Benefit Ja.cts" ~ -
"Maternity Ben~flt Act" 
26. Page 4'7, line 11,-
J!iJI. "contribution" ~ "contributions" 
P A7 ~ .. " _ .lJ.ge ... ,-.l ;..;J ,.-.,. 
• 
(4)- - 1n line 24, m' "women" .r..u.4 "wanan"; &n.d 
(11) in line 25, m "regulatIOii"" .l:U "regu].&t1alU". 
28.. l'ag~.llne 2,-
m "41" ~ "49" 
Page 56, line t5 from bottom,-
/' 
againSt S.No.7, under column 2, ..tg,): "7 0"1 ~ -
"7 0 0" 
Page 56,-
against 
'-trom bottom 
31. 
U)/l1ne 8 fran bottCJll" 1n the JDarC1,n, ~ "llav1ev ot" 
(11) line 14~ "whoe J.:U.II "whose" 
Page 57, against Example 3, 1n the marg1n, .m.U -Improper-II 
lUW D.a.HI 
Must 17. ,965 
.. Sravana 26, 1887(Saka) 

· .. , . 
Bill No. 50 of 1"$ 
THE EMPLOYEES' STATE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
• 
1. (1) nus Act may be called the Employees' State Insurance Short Ua.. 
(Amendment) Act, 1965. COIIUDeace-
ment ad 
S (2) It shaH come into force on such date as the Central Govem- appUcation. 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisio~ of this 
Act and for different States or for di1ferent parts thereof. 
(3) 'When the provisions of this Act amending the provisions of 
of 1948. 10 the Employees' State Insurance Act! 1948 (hereinafter referred to 
a~ the principal Act) relating io sickness and maternity benefits 
come into' 'force in any State or any part of a State, then, those 
proVisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act shall apply 
to any employee in that State or part only on (and not before) the 

Amend-
ment of 
Metion 2. 
\;\)' 2 
expiry ... Qf the contribution period of such employee in force on the 
date of the cOming into force of the said provisions of this Act. 
%. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(1) after clause (6), the foUowing clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- S 
'(6A) "dependant" means any of the rfollowing rela-
tives of a deceased insured person, namely:-
(i) a Widow, a minor legitimate or adopted son, 
an unmarried legitimate or adopted daughter or a 
widowed mother; and 10 
(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the 
insured person at the time of his death, a legitimate 
or adopted son or daughter who has attained the age 
of eighteen years and is infirm; 
(iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings IS 
of the insured person at the time of his death,-
(a) a parent other than a widowed mother, 
(b) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried 
illegitimate da~ghter or a daughter legitimate or 
adopted or illegitimate if married and a minor or 20 
if widowed and a minor, 
(c) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or 
a widowed sister if a minor, 
(d) a widowed daughter-in-law, 
(e) a minor child of a pre-deceased son, 2 S 
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter 
where no parent of the child is alive, or 
(g) a paternal grand-parent if no parent of the 
insured person is alive;'; 
(2) for clause (8), the following clause shall be substituted, 30 
namely:-
'(8) "employment injury" means a personal injury to 
I yee Caused by accident or an occupational disease an emp a .. . . g out of and in the course of hiS employment, bemg 
~:surable employment, whether the accident QCCUfs or 35 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
" ot 1923. 30 
35 of 1952. 
35 
! 
the occupational disease is contracted within or outside the 
territorial limits of India;'; 
(3) in clause (9) ,-
(a) for the words "but does not include-" the follow-. , 
mg words shall be substituted, namely:-
"and includes any person emploYed for wages on 
any work connected with the administration of the 
factory or establishment or any part, department or 
bmnch thereof or with the purchase of raw materia13 
for, or the distribution or sale of the products of,' the 
factory or establishment; but does not include-"; 
(b) for sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(b) any person so employed whose w.,es (exelud-
ing remuneration for overtime work) exceed flve 
hundred rupees a month: 
Provided that an employee whose wa,.,., (eseludinr 
remuneration for overtime work) exceed flve hundred 
rupees a month at any time after (and Bot before) the 
beginning of the contribution period, shall continue to be 
an employee until the end of that period;"; 
(4) in clause (11), the words "where the insured person is 
a male," shall be omitted; 
(5) in clause (12) ,-
(a) in the first paragraph,-
(i) for the words "are working or were working", 
the words "are employed or were employed for wages" 
shell be substituted; 
(ii) for the words and figures "Indian Mines Act, 
1923", the words and figures "Mines Act, 1952" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in the second paragraph, the follawing -shall be 
added at the end, namely:-
"and includes a factory which is engaged for a 
period not exceeding seven months in a year-
. , ,{a) in any process. of blending, packing or re-
packing of tea or cof!ee; or J 

" . (b) in such other manufacturing process as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify"; 
. (6) after clause (13), the following clause shall be Inserted, 
bamely:-
'(13A) "insurable employment" means an employment 
ih a factory or establishment to which this Act applies;'; 
(7) after clause (14), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
s 
'(14A) "managing agent" means any person appointed 10 
or acting as the representative of another person for the 
purpose of carrying on such other person's trade or business 
but does not include an individual manager subordinate to 
an employer; 
(14B) "mis-carriage" m£'3.ns explusion of the contents IS 
of a pregnant uterus at any period prior to or during the 
twenty-sixth week of pregnancy but does not include any 
mis-carriage, the causing of which is punishahle under the 
Indian Penal Code;'; 45 of 1880. 
(8) after clause (15), the following clauses shall be insert- 20 
ed, namely:-
'(15A) "permanent partial disablement" means such 
disablement of a permanent nature, as reduces the earning 
capacity of an employee in every employment which he wa3 
capable of undertaking at the time of the accident resulting 2S 
in the disa:blement: 
Provided that every injury specified in Par.t II of the 
Second Schedule shall be deemed to result in permanent 
partiaL disablement; 
(15B) "permanent total disablement" means 8uch dis- 30 
ablement of a permanent nature, as incapacitates an em-
ployee for all work which he ~as c:apable of. performing at 
the' time of the accident resultIng In such dlSablement: 
Provided that permanent total disablement shall be 
deemed to result from every injury specified in Part I of 35 
the Second Schedule or from any combination of injurle. 

14 of 1947. 
r 
B 
specified in Part II thereof where the aggregate Percentage 
of the loss ~ earning capacity, as specified in the said Part 
II against those injuries, amounts to one hundred per cent. 
or more'''' I , 
S (9) in clause (21); for the word "work" occurring at the 
end, the words "doing the work which he was doing prior to 
or at the time of the injury" shall be substituted: . , 
(10) in clause (22), after the words "and includes", the 
words "any payment to an employee in respect of any period" 
10 of authorised leave, lock-out, strike which ~not illegal or lay-
off and" shall be inserted; 
IS 
20 
(11) for clause (24), .the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(24) all other words and expressions used but not 
defined in this Act and defined in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in that Act.". 
3. In Chapter I of the principal Act, ,.fter section 2, the follow- IDieriion 
ing section shall be inserted, namely:- ot DeW 
or' section' 2A. 
"2A. Every factory or establishment to which this Act Reliltrltioa 
applies shall be registered within such time and in such manner of factories 
as may be specified in the regulations made in this behalf.". =b-:'':.;U. 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,- Amend-
. ment of (a) !for clauses (a) and (b), the followmg clauses shall be aeetloD ... 
2S substituted, namely: =--
35 
"(a) a Chairman to be nominated by the Central Gov-
ernment; 
(b) a Vice-Chairman to be nOminat~, by the Central 
Government;"; • 
(b) in clause (c), the words "of ~~om at least ~e shall 
be officials of the Central Government shall be OInltted; 
(c) in clause (h.) the word "and" occurring at the end 
shall be omitted; 
(d) for clause (i), Lse following clauses shall be substi-
tuted, namel;'. --
"(i) three members of Parliament of whom two shall 
be members of the House of the People (Lot Sabha) and 

Amend-
mentof 
section 5. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new . 
section for 
section '1. 
Authenti-
cation'of 
ord~. 
decisicm.s, 
etc. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 8. 
6 
one shall be a m~mber of the Councll at States (Rajya 
Sabha) elected respectively by the members of the House 
of the People and the members of the Counell of States; and 
(j) the Director General of the Corporation, ez-Oflicio.". 
5. In section 5 of the principal Act,- S 
(a)( in sub-section (1), for the words, brackets, letters and 
figure "the ex o1Jicio members and memlbers referred to in 
clauses (ck.-(d) and (e) of section 4,", tl:).e words, brackets, 
letters" and figure ''the members referred to in clauses (a), (b), 
(c), (d) and (e) of section 4 and the ex-oJ1icio member", shall 10 
:be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the br&.ckets., letters and. word 
" (c) , (d) and (e) ", the brackets, letters aDd word .. (eI) , 
(b), (c), (d) and (e)" shall be substituted 
6. For section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall IS 
be substituted, namely:-
"7. All orders and decisions of the Corporation shall be au-
thenticated by the signature of the Director General of the, Cor-
poration and all other instruments issued by the Corporation 
shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director GeneraJ 20 
or such other officer of the Corporation as may be authadsed 
by him.". 
7. In section 8 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (b), for the words "being oftlcia1s of the 
Central Government, nominated by that Government", the 2S 
words ''nominated by the Centml Government" shall be substi-
tuted; 
(b) in clause (c),-
(i) for the word "six", the word "eight" shall be sub-
~~ed; ~ 
(ii) in sub-clauses (ii) and (iii), for the word "two", 
the word "three" shall be sub~tituted; 
(c) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(d) , the Director General of the Corporation, ex ofJf,cio.". 3' 

~ In section 10 o~e principal Act, to sub-section (2). the fol- Amend-
loWIng proviso shall be added namely' - t f ' . men 0 
"Provided that a member of the Medical Benefit CouncU aect10u 10. 
shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of four 
5 years continue to hold office until the nomination of his suc-
cessor is notified.". . . 
9'. In section 12 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the Amend-
following Bub-section shall be inserted, Damely: _ ment of 
aecUOIl 11. 
"(3) A person referred to in clause (i) of sectioD 4 shall 
10 cease to be a member of the Corporation when he ceases to be 
a member of P.ar.Uament.". 
15 
20 
25 
10. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the Amend-
words "the' Central Govemm~t", the words "and of the Corpora- ment ot 
t~o~" shall be inserted. HCt~J;l ·~8. 
11. In section 17 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(a) in sub-section (3), for the words ''posts carrying a me~t of 
maximum monthly pay of five hundred rupees and above", the section 11. 
words and figures "posts corresponding to Class I or Class 
II posts under the Central Government" shan be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (3) I the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
" (4) If any question arises whether a post corresponds 
to a Class I or Class II post under the Central Govern-
ment, the question shall be referred to that Government 
whose decision thereon shall be final.". , 
12. Sections 27 and 31 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omilsion 
ot aectioftl 
27 and 31. 
13. In section 36 of the principal Act, after the words "the audited Amend-
accounts of the Corporation", the words and figures "together with ment of 
the auditor's report thereon under section 34" shall ·be inserted. aec~~, ~ 
30 ' 14. In section 41 of the principal Act, the Explanation occurring ~el!'!-
at the endshall be omitted. menttio°f~l 
35 
. lee n ... 
15. In section 42 of the principal Act,- Amend-
f h ds " ee" ment of (a) in sub-section (1), or t e wor one rup • section 42. 
the words "one rupee and fifty paise" shall be substituted; 
(b)' ub-section (2), for the words "during the whole 
or part ~~ ~hich an employee is employed" occurri~ at the 
end, the words "in respect of the whole or part of which wages 

8 
are payable to the employee and not otherwise" shan be 
substituted; 
(c) sub-sections (4) and (5) shall be omitted. 
Amend- 15. Tn section 43 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the fol-
ment ot lowing clause shall be inserted, namely: - $ 
section 43. 
Insertion 
ot new 
sections 
45A and 
45B. 
Determina-
tion of 
contribu-
tions in 
certain 
cases. 
Recovery 
ot contri-
butions. 
Amend':" 
me~t ot 
section 46. 
" (bb) the dnte by which evidence of contributions having 
been p&!d is to be received by the Corporation;". 
17. In Chapter IV of the principal Act, after section 45, the 
following se~ions shall be inserted, namely:-
"45A. (1) Where in respect of a factory or establishment 10 
no returns, particulars, registers or records are su'bmitted, 
furnished or maintained in accordance with the provisions 
of section 44 or any Inspector or other official of the Corpora-
tion referred to in su.b-section (2) of section 45 is obstructed 
by the Principal or immediate employer or any other person, IS 
in exercising his functions or discharging his duties under sec-
tion 45, the Corporation may, on the basis of information avail-
able to it, by order, determine the amount of contributions 
payable in resp~ct of the employees of that factory or esta'blish-
ment. 20 
(2) An order made by the Corporation under sub-section 
(1) shall be sufficient proof of the claim of the Corporation 
under section 75 or for recovery of the amount determined by 
such- order as an arrear of land revenue under section 45B. 
45B. Any contribution payable under this Act may be 2S 
recovered as an arrear of land revenue.". 
18. In s€dioll 46 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(a) for thE: words "or, as the case may be, their dependants", 
the words "their dependants or the persons hereinafter men-
tionE-d, as th~ ca3e may be," shall be substituted; 30 
(b) in clause (a), after the words "medical practitioner", 
the following words shall be inserted, namely:-
"or by <,.uy other person 'Possessing such qualifications 
and ~xperie~·.ce as the Corporation may, by regulations, 
specify in this behalf'; 3S 

" 
9 
(c) for clause (b), the following clause shan be substituted, 
namely:- . .. 
" (b) periodical payments to an insured woman in case 
of confinement or mi9-Carriage or sickness arising out· of 
S pregnant:y, confinement, premature birth of ehild or mis-
carriagc, such wcman being certified to be eligible f-or such 
payments by an authority specified in this behalf by the 
rel{U13tions (hereinafter referred t~ as maternity ben~t) ;"; 
(d) in clause (d), the word "and" occurring at the end 8hall 
10 be omitted; 
(e) in clause (e), the word uand" shall be inserted at the 
end and after that clause, the following clause shell be inserted, 
beneftt) : 
"(f) payment to the eldest surviving member of the 
IS family of an insured person who has died, toWards the 
expenditure on the funeral of the deceased insured person, 
or, where the insured person did Dot have a family or was 
not living with his family at the time of his death, to the 
person who actually incurs the expenditure on the funeral 
20 of the decea'Sed insured 'person (to be !mown as funeral 
beneftt) : 
25 
30 
3S 
Provided that the amount of such payment shall not 
exceed one hundred rupees and the claim for such payment 
shall be made within three months of the death of the 
insured person or within such extended period as the Cor-
poration of any oftlcer or authority authorteed by it in this 
behalf may allow.". 
19 .. For section 47. of the principal Act, the fallowing section shall Sub.titu-
be substftuted, namely: - tion of new Iee-
tion for 
IKdion 4T. 
"47. A person shall be qualified to claIm slekness benefit for WIlen 
sickness occurring during any benefit period, if during the pe~D 
corresponding contribution period, weeldycontributions in :~:!:C­
respect of him were payable for not less than thirteen weeks: ness bene-
Provided that a person shall be qualified to claim siclmess fit. 
benefit for sickness occurring dUring- the first benefit period, if 
during the corresponding contribution period weekly contrf.bu-
tions in respect of him were payable for not less than half the 
number of weeks of that contribution period, ending in that 
,period.". 

Omission 
ot section 
4a. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 4D. 
Amend-
ment ot 
section 50. 
10 
ZOo Section 48 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
21. In section 49 of the principal Act,-
(4) for the words "Second Schedule", the words "First 
Schedule" lhalJ be substituted; 
(b) in the ftrst proviso, for the words "for an initial waitfnl 5 
period of ·two days", the words "for the first two days of siclm8ll" 
shall be subatituted; . 
(c) for the second proviso. the following proviso shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"Provided further that sickness beneftt shall not be paid 10 
to any person for more than ftfty-six days in any two CODle-
cutive beneftt periods.". 
I!. In section 50 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(0 for the words and figures Utwo-thirds of the number IS 
of weeks during whlcb she shall be deemed to have been 
available for employment within the meaning of section 48, 
subject to a minimum of twelve contributions", the words 
"thirteen weeks" shall be substituted; , 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be 20 
substituted, namely:-
"Provided that an insured woman sha'll be qualifled 
to claim maternity beneftt for a confinement occurring 
or expected to occur during the first beneftt period, if 
during the corresponding contribution .period weekly 2S 
contributions in respect of her were payable for not less 
than half the number of weeks of that contribution 
period ending in that period."; 
(&) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (3)", 30 
the words "the First Schedule" shall be substituted; 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that where the insured woman dies dur.' 
ing her confinement or during the period of six weeks 35 
immediately fallowing her confinement for which she 
is entitleet to maternity benefit, leaving behind in either 

10 
15 
20 
• I 
11 
case the child, maternity beneAt ahall be paid for the 
whole of that period but if the child alao dies durina 
the said period, then for the days up to and includin, 
the day of the death of the child, to the person nomi-
nated by the insured woman in such manner .. may 
be specified In the re,watioDS and if there 18 no mch 
nominee to her legal representative."; 
(c) for sub-section (3), the fallowin, lub-eectiona a1aall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) An. insured woman who is qualified to claim 
matemity benefit in accordance with sub-aection (1) Ihall, 
in case of mis-carriage, be entitled, on -production of such 
proof as may be required under the regulations, to mater-
nity benefit at the rates specified in the First Schedule for 
all days on which she does not work for remuneration. dur-
ing a period of six weeks immediately -followin, the date 
of her mis-carriage. 
(4) An. imured woman who is qualified to claim mater-
nity benefit in accordance with sub-section (1) shall, in case 
of sickness arising out of pregnancy, confinement, premature 
·birth of child or mis-earriage shall, on production of such 
proof alPmlaY be required under the regulations, be entitled, 
in addition to the maternity benefit pay.ble to her under any 
other provisions of this Act for all days on which she does 
not work for remuneration, to maternity benefit at the rates 
specified in the First Schedule for aD days on which abe 
does not work for remuneration during an additional period 
not exceeding one month!'. 
23. For section 51 of the principal Act, the following sections shall SUbatltd-
30 be substituted, namely: _ . tien of new tee-
3S 
tiOna for 
tecllon' 51. 
'51. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the relU- Diaable-
lations, if any,- ment bene-
(a) a person who sustains temporary disablement for fit. 
less than three days (excluding the day of accident) shall 
be entitled to periodical payment for the period of such 
disablement in accordBnce with the prOvisions of the Firat 
Schedule; 
(b) a person who sustains permanent disablement, 
whether total or partial, sball lbe entitled to periodical 

presump-
tion u to 
accident 
arising 
in ceune 
of emp-
loyment. 
Accidents 
happening 
while 
acting in 
brp.ach of 
rerula-i, 
tions, etc:. 
Aceideutl 
happening 
while 
travelling' 
in emp-
loyer's , ,.a:Mport. 
\ It 
p&Jmeat lor' well disablement in accordance with the provi-
.u.s of t1ae J'kst Schedule: 
Provided that where permanent disablement, whether 
total or partial, bas ·been assessed. provisionally for a limited 
period o.r finally, the benefit provided under this ·clause S 
shall be payable for that limited period or, as the case may 
be, for life. 
, 5IA.' For the purposes of this Act. an accident arising in the 
course of an insured person's employment shall be presumed, in 
the absence of evidence to the contrary, also to have arisen out 10 
~at .employment. 
5lB. An accident shall be deem~d. to arise out of and in 
the course of an insured person's employment notwithstand-
, ing th~t he is at the time of the accident acting in contraven-
tion of the .provisions of any law applicable to him, or of any IS 
orders given by or on behalf of his employer or that he is act-
ing without instructions from his employer, if...-
. 
(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have 
arisen had the act not been done in contravention as afore-
said or without instructions from his employer, as the case 20 
may be; and 
(b) the 'act is done for the purpose of and in connec-
tion with the employer's trade or business. 
SIC. (1) An accident happenbtg while an insured person is, 
with the express or implied permission of his employer, tra- 2S 
velling as a passenger .by any vehicle to or from his place of 
work shall, notwithstanding that he is under no obligation.. to 
. his -employer to traver by that vehicle, be deemed tQ arise out 
of and in the course of his employment, if-
(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have 30 
arisen had he been under such obligation; and 
(b) at the time of the aCcident, the vehicle-
(i) is being operated by or, on behalf of his em-
ployer or some other person by whom it is provided in 

I, 
pursuance of arrangement. made with his employer, 
and 
(ii) is not being operated in the ardinaqr course of 
public transport service. . 
5 (2) In this section "vehicle" includes a vEssel and an air-
[0 
craft. 
SID. An accident happening to an insured person in or Accidents 
about any premises at which he is for the time being employed ha~peninl 
for the purpose of his employer's trade or business shall be while 
~eemed to aris~ out o~ and in the course of his employment, if ~~:!~e~c:y~ 
1t ~ whlle he 1S taking steps" on an actual or supposed 
emergency at those premises, to rescue, succour or protect per-
sons who are, or are thought to be or possibly to be, injured or 
imperilled, or to avert or minimise serious damage to property.'. 
15 24. For section 52 of the principal Act, the following sections Substttu-
shall be substituted, namely: - tion of 
35 
new sec-
tions for 
'52 (1) If an insured person dies as a result of an employ- section 52. 
ment injury sustained as an employee under this Act (whe :~:.-
or not he was in receipt of any periodical payment for tem- benefit. 
porary disablement in respect of the injury) dependants' be-
nefit sh~J be payable in accordance with the provisions of the 
First Schedule to his dependants specified in sub-clause (i) and 
sUb-clause (ii) of clause (6A) of section 2. 
(2) In case the insured person dies without leaving behind 
him the dependants as aforesaid, the dependants' benefit shall be 
paid to the other dependants of the deceased in accordance with 
the provisions of the First Schedule. 
52A. (1) If an employee employed in any employment ape- Occupa-
cified in Part A of the Third Schedule contracts any disease tional 
specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar to that em- disease. 
ployment, or if an employee employed in the employment spe-
cified in Part B of that Schedule for a continuous period of not 
less than six months contracts any disease specified therein 
as an occupational disease peculiar to that employment or if 
an employee employed in any employment specified. in Part C 
of that Schedule for such continuous period as the Corporation 
may specify in respect of each such employment, contracts any 
disease specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar to 
that employment, the contracting of the disease shall, unless the 
contrary is proved, be deemed to be an "employment injury" 
arising out of and in the course of employment. 

Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 53. 
Bar 
against 
receiving 
or re-
covery of 
compensa-
tion or 
damages 
under 
anyother 
law. 
I" 
(2) (i) Where the Central Government or a ~tate Govern-
ment, as the cue may be, adds any description of employment to 
the employments specified in Schedule nI to the Workmen's 
Compensation Act, 1923, by virtue of the powers vested in it 
under sub-section (3) of section 3 of the said Act, the said des- S 
cription of employment and the occupational diseases specified 
under that sub-section as peculiar to that description of employ-
ment shan be deemed to form part of the Third Schedule. 
(ii) Without prejudice to the provisions of clause (i), the 
Corporation after giving, by notification. in the Official Gazette, 10 
not less than three months' notice of its intention so to do, may, 
by a like notification, add any description of employment to the 
employments specified in the Third Schedule and shall specify in 
the case of employments so added the diseases which shall be 
deemed for the purposes of this section to be occupational dis- IS 
eases peculiar to those employments respectively and thereupon 
the provisions of this Act shall apply, as if such diseases had been 
declared by this Act tc? be occupational diseases peculiar to 
those employments. 
(3) Save as provided by sub-sections (1) and (2), no benefit 20 
shall be payable to an employee in resp«t of any disease unless 
the disease is directly attributable to a specific injury by accident 
arising out af and in the course of his employment. 
(4) The provisions of section 51A shall not 
cases to which this section applies.". 
apply to the 
2S 
25. For section 53 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"53. An insured person or his dependants shall not be entitl-
ed to receive or recover, whether from the employer of the in-
sured person or from any other person, any compensation or 30 
8 of 192t , 
damages under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, or any 8 of ID23 . .., 
other law for the time being in force or otherwise, in respect of 
an employment injury sustained by the insured person as an 
employee under' this Act.". 

26. For section 54 of the principal Act, the following sections shall Substitu. 
be lubstitu ted, namely: _ tion of 
newleC'-
tiona for 
section 54. 
'54. Any question- Determ.1-
(4) whether the relewnt accident has resulted in per- nation of 
S manent disablement; or question of 
disable-
(b) whether the extent of loss of earning capacity can ment. 
be assessed provisionally or finally; or 
(c) whether the assenment of the proportion of thelosa 
of earning capacity is provisional or final; or 
10 (d) in the case of provisional assessment, as to the 
15 
25 
30 
period ·for which such assessment shall hold good, 
shall be determined by a medical board constituted in accord-
ance with the provisiona of the regulations and any such ques-
tion shall hereafter be referred to as the "disablement question". 
54A. (1) The case of any insured person for permanent dis- References 
ablement benefit shall be referred by the Corporation to a mecU- ~ica~ 
cal board for determination of the disablement question and 1f, appeals a:, 
on that or any subsequent reference, the extent of loss of eaming medical 
capacity of the insured person is provisionally assessed, it shall appeal 
egain be so referred to the medical board not later than the end tribunal. 
of the period taken into account by the provisional assessment. ::y~!.mp-
(2) If the insured person or the Corporation is not satisfied ~nsu:nce 
with the decision of the medical board, the insured person or the ou . 
Corporation may appeal in the prescribed manner, and within 
the prescribed time to--
(i) the medical appeal tribunal constituted in accord-
ance with the provisions of the regulations with a further 
right of appeal in the prescribed manner and within thl! 
prescribed time to the Employees' Insurance Court, or 
(ii) the Employees' Insurance Court directly.'. 
27. For section 55 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
sections Substitu. 
tion of 
new sec-
tion. for 
section 55. 
"55. (1) Any decision under this Act of a medical board or a Review of 
medical appeal tribunal may be reviewed at any ti-nl! by . the decision. 

bymedi-
cal board 
ormed1ca1 
appeal 
tribunal. 
Review 
of depen-
dants' 
benefit. 
16 
medical board or the medical appeal tribunal, as the case may 
be, if it is satisfied by fresh evidence that the decision was given 
in consequence of the non-disclosure or misrepresentation by the 
employee or any other person of a material fact (whether the 
non-disclosure or misrepresentation was or was not fraudulent). S 
(2) Any assessment of the extent of the disablement result-
ing from the relevant employment injury may also be reviewed 
Iby a medical board, if it is 9atisfied that since the making of the 
assessment there has been a substantial and unforeseen aggra-
vation of the results of the relevant injury: 10 
Provided that an assessment shall not be reviewed under this 
sub-section unless the medical board is of opinion that having 
regard to the period taken into account by the assessment and 
the probable duration of the aggravation aioresaid, substantial 
injustice will be done by not reviewing it. IS 
• 
. (3) Except with the leave of a medical appeal tribunal, an 
assessment shall not be reviewed under sub-section (2) on any 
application made less than five years, or in the case of a provi-
sional assessment, six months, from the date thereof and on such 
a review the period to be taken into account by any revised 20 
assessment shall not include any period before the date...of the 
application. 
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, a me-
dical board may deal with a case of review in any manner in 
which it could deal with it on an origiool reference to it, and in :zS 
particular may make a provisional assessment notwithstanding 
that the assessment under review was final; and the provisions of 
section 54A shall apply to an application for review under this 
section and to a decision of a medical board in connection with 
such application as they apply to a case for disablement benefit 30 
under that section and to a decision of the medical board in con-
nection with such case. 
55A. (1) Any decision awarding dependants' benefit under 
this Act may be reviewed at any time by the Corporation if it 
is satisfied by fresh evidence that the decision was given in con- 35 
sequence of non-disclosure or misrepresentation by the claimant 
or any other ·persoXl of a material fact (whether the non-disclo-° 
sure or mi:srepresentation was or was not fraudulent) or that 
the decision is no longer in accordance with this Act due to any 
birth or death or due to the marriage, re-marriage or cesser of in- 40 
ftrmity of, or attainment of the age of eighteen years by, 8 claim-
ant. 

I, 1/7 
(2) Subject to the provision. ot thia Act, the Corporatioa 
may, on such review as aforesaid, direct that the dependant.' 
benefit be continued, increased, reduced or di8continued.". 
Z&. After section 59 of the principal Act, the followin, .ectloD InsertIon 
, mall be inserted, namely:- of new 
section 
59A. 
Cl59A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other ProvisiOll 
provision of this Act, the Corporation may, in consultation with of medica 
the State Government, undertake the responsibility for provid- benefit by 
ing mediCal benefit to insured personr and where such medical th:i Co~ 
10 benefit is extended to their families, to the families of IUch in .. ~~uo~f 
sured persons in the State subject to the condition that the State State 
Government shall share the cost of such medical bene.flt in such Govern-
proportion as may be agreed upon between the State Govern- mente 
ment and the Corporation. 
I, (2) In the event of the Corporation exercising its power 
~o 
25 
30 
under sub-section (1), the provisions relating to medical beneftt 
under this Act shall apply, 10 far as may be, as if a reference 
therein to the State Government were a reference to the Corpo-
ration.". 
!I. SectionJ 88 and 67 of the principal Act Ihall be omitted. OmiJaion 
of sec-
tions 88 
and 87. 
30. In section 71 of the principal Act, for the words "If a person Amend-
dies", the words, brackets and figures "Except as provided in the pro- me~t of 
viso to sub-section (2) of section 50, if a person diea" shall be IUbsti- aectlon 71. 
tuted. 
31. Section 73H of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omiulon 
of sec-
tion 73H. 
D. In section 75 of the prinCipal Act,- Amend-
ment of I 
(a) in sub-section (1) ,- Hction 71.1 
(i) for clause (ee), the tollowinl clause shan be .ubsti-
tuted, ~ely:---
"(ee) any direction issued by the Corporation 
under section 55A on a review of any payment of de-
pendants' ibenefits, or"; 
(ii) clause U) aha11 be omittedi 

Amend-
ment of 
section 77. 
11 
(iii) in clause (g), the following words ahall be inser-
ted at the end, namely:-
"or any other matter required to be or which may be decided 
by the Employees' Insurance Court under this AJ:t"; 
(iv) after the words "such question or dispute", the S 
words, brackets, figure and letter "subject to the provisions 
of sub-section (2A) " shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2)-
(i) for the words "The following claims", the words, 
brackets, figure and letter "Subject to the provisions of sub- r 0 
section (2A), the following claims" shall be substituted; 
(ii) clause (c) shall be omitted; 
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section sball 
be inserted, namely: -' 
" (2A) If in any proceedings before the Employees' IS 
Insurance Court a disablement question arises and the deci-
sion of a medical board or a medical appeal tribunal has 
not been obtained on the same and the decision of such 
question is' necessary for the determination of the claim or 
question before the Employees' Insurance Court, that Court 20 
shall direct the Corporation to have the question decided by 
this Act and shall thereafter proceed with the determina-
tion of the claim or question before it in accordance with 
the decision of the medical board or the medical appeal 
tribunal, as the case may be, except where an appeal has 25 
been filed before the Employees' Insurance Court under 
sub-section (2) of section 54A in which case the Employees' 
Insurance Court may itself determine all the issues arising 
before it.". 
(d) in sub-section (3), for the words "the Employees' In- 30 
surance Court", the words "a medical board, or by a medical 
appeal tribunal or by the Employees' Insurance Court" shall be 
substituted. 
33. In section 77 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - 35 
"(lA) Every such application shall be made within a 
period of three years from the _ dat~ on which the eause of aetlon 
arose. 

, -', 
19 
ErpZ4n4tion..-For the purpose of this sub-section,-
(a) the cause of action in -respect of a claim for benefit 
shall not be deemed to arise unless the insured person 
or in the case of dependants' benefit, the dependants of the 
S insured person claims or claim that benefit in accordance 
with 'the, regulations made in that behalf within a period 
of twelve months after the claim became due or within such 
further period as the Employees' Insurance Court may allow 
on grounds which' appear to it to be 'r.easonable; 
10 (b) the cause at action in respect of a claim by the Cor-
poration for recovering cOntributions from the principal 
employer or a claim by the principal employer for recover-
ing contributions from an immediate employer shall not be 
deemed to arise till the date by whi.:h' the evidence of COD-
IS tributions having been paid is due to be received by the 
CorPoration Under the regulations.". 
M. Section 80 of the principal Act shall be omitted. OmiIIloD 
of HC-
tion 80. 
35. In section 86 of the principal Act, in sub-seCtion (1), for the Amend· 
words "Central Government" the words "Director General of the ment of 
20 Corporation" shall b~ sUbsti_t~ted. section 88. 
2S 
30 
36. In section 90 of the principal Act,- Amenc:l-
ment of 
(a) after the words "The appropriate Government may,", lection 80. 
the words "after consultation .with the Corporation," shall be 
inserted; 
(b) 'after the words "local authority'''' the words "from the 
operation of this Act" shall be inserted. 
37. After section 91 of the principal ·Act, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
section Insertioll. 
of new 
section 
91A. 
"91A Any notification granting exemption un~er, section Exemp-
.87, section 88, section 90 or section 91 may be issued so as to t~ons to be 
take effect either prospectively or restrOspective1y on such date eIther 
be, ified th ." prospec-as may spec erem. . tive or 
, . retrOlpeC-
38. In section 95 of the principal Act,- tive. . 
(a) in sub-section (1), after the worth "the Central Gov- Amend· 
:ernmentmay,", the words ""after ,consultation with the Corpo- ment of 
. ratiOn -aDd" --ahall be inserted; IeCtJon II. 

'. . 
. ~ . 
.... 
(b) in • ub-aection (2) , after clause (e) , the lo11owfng 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ee) the manner in which and the time within which 
appeals may be filed to mediea1 appeal tribunals or Emp-
loyees' Insurance Courts;"; S 
(c) after aulHeet:ton (3), the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
II (4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, 
as soon u may be afte. it is made. before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 10 
days whicll may be eomprised in one session or in two 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
fn which it fa 110 laid or the session Immediately following, 
both HoUses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made. IS 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modifted 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anythini previously done under 
that rule.-. 20 
Amend- •. In section 98 of the principal Act, In sub-section (1), after 
men.t of the words "The State Government may,", the words ccafter eonsulta-
IeCtion 8l • ion with the Corporation and" shaU be inserted. 
Amend-
ment of 
aection 17. 
40. In section 97 of tlie principal Act, fn sub-section (2) ,-
(a) after claWJe (i). the following clause shall be inserted. 25 
namely:-
Ie (ia) tJie time within which and thf! manner in which 
a factory or establishment shall be registered;"; 
(b) after clause (iii), the fO'lloWing clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 30 
• (lila) the 'levy of interest at a rate not exeeedinlt six 
per cent. per annum on eontributions due but not paid;"; 
(e) for clause (m), the follOWing e1elll5e shall be substitu-
ted, namely:-
• (m) the method of determlnin« whether an insured 3S 
person Is sutferln~ from one or more of the diseases spe-
effted in the Third Schedule;"; 

• i 
. ,-
Sf 
(d) in clause (viii), for the words "and the form in 
which", the words .uand the form and manner in whic:h" shall 
be substituted; 
(e') after clause (xii), the following clauses shan be inser-
S, ted, namely:-
" (xiia) specifying the authority competent- to give 
certificate of eligibility for maternity benefit; 
(riib) the manner of nomination by an insured woman 
for payment of maternity benefit in case of her or her child's 
ro ~~; . 
IJ 
(xiic) the production of proof in support of claim for 
IllJlternity benefit or additional maternity benefit;"; 
(I) after clause (xvi), the following clauses shall be inser-
ted, namely:-
"(xvia) the qualifications and experience which a person 
should possess for giving certificate of sickness; 
(xuib) the constitution of medical boards and medical 
appeal tribunals;". 
41. After section 99 of the principal Act, the followin,. aection Iuertloa ol 
20 shall be in:serted, namely:- ' new 88C-
tion 
ISA. 
"99A. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving et!ect to the pro- Power to 
visions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order pub- remove 
lished in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such cWBcultiel. 
directions, not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as 
appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty. 
(2) Any order made under this section shall have eJ!ect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith in any rule. 
or regulations made under this Act.". 
30 U. For ',schedules I and II of the principal Act, the following Su~tu-
Schedules shall be substituted, namely: _ tloft ot new 
'THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See sections 39, 49, 50, 51 and ~) 
i. '.a.'11e amount of weekly contribution payable in a eontrlbu-
J5 tion period in respect ot an employee· shall be calculated with 
Schedul. 
for 
Sc:b~ 
I and It 

IS 
reference to the average daily wages during the first wage period 
1ft r~ of that employee ending in such contribution period: 
Provided that where an employee changes his employment 
durin; the currency of the contribution period, contributions in 
respect of him shall continue to be calculated during the said 5 
contribution period at the rate at which they were being paid 
in the ftrst employment except when the employee does not dis-
close the earlier employment to the second or subsequent em-
ployer in which case they may be calculated with reference to 
the average daily wages during the first wage period in the latter 10 
employment. 
2. The average daily wages shall be-
(a) in respect of an employee who is employed on 
time-rate basis, the am~unt of wa,ges which would have been 
payable to him for the complete wage period had he worked 1 S 
"on 'all the working days in that wage period, divided by 28 
if he is monthly rated, 13 jl he is fortnightly I rated, 6 if he 
is weekly rated and 1 if he is daily rated. 
(b) in respect of an employee employed an any other 
basis, the amount of wages earned during the first complete 20 
wage period in the contribution period divided by the num-
ber of days in full or part for which he worked for wages in 
that wage period: 
Provided that where an employee receives wages without 
working on any day during such wage period, he shall be deem- 25 
ed to have workeq !for 26, 13, 6 or 1 days or day if the wage 
period be a month, a fortnight, a week or a day respectively. 
Exp14na.tion I.-Where any night shift continues beyond 
midnight, the period of the night shift after midnight shall be 
counted for . reckoning the days worked as part of the day pre- 30 
ceding. 
Exp14nati011. 11.-"Wage period" means the period in Iespec!t 
of which wages are ordinarily payable whether in terms of the 
contract of empIoyment, express or implied or otherwise. 
3. (a) For the purpose of fixing the amount of weekly 35 
contribution payable, employees shall be divided into nine 
-groups on 'the basis of ,their averagedaUy wages ascertained lD 
·the'maaner' lJMdfted . in', paragraph 2. 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
40 
(b) The employee's contribuUon and employer's CODtI'lbu .. 
tion payable in respect of the group of employees .pecified in the 
first column of the Table below shall be at the rates re~tive1y 
specified in the corresponding entries in the second and third 
columns thereof. 
(c) The daily rate of benefit (hereinafter referred te 18 the 
"standard benefit rate") in respect of the group of employees 
specified in the first column of the Table b~l.ow ~ be the 
amount respectively specified in the corresponding entry in the 
fifth column thereof: 
!C-~} Provided' that where a peraon has been 'in more tban &De of 
the groups as specified in the first column of the said 'rable 
during a contribution period, the standarci beneftt rate iDrespect 
of him shall be the amount specified in the fifth column corres-
ponding to the lowest of such groups. 
TABLE 
Group of employees whoac avcrqe employccs' Employer's Total Correa-
daily wages are weekly con- weekly weeily pondina 
... tribution c:ontri- ,qQnC(J- daily 
(recoverable bution bution standard 
from (employee's benefit 
elJ1.p~JCCs) ~ rate 
emploYer" 
co~ 
butlon) 
1 2 3 .. S 
P P P P 
I. BelowRe.1 Nil 4S 4S 4S 
2. Re. I and above but below 
RI. I'SO . Nil 4S 4' 6, 
3· RI. I . SO and above but below 
Rs.2 2S so 7S 90 
1t. Rs. 2 and above but below Rs. 3 40 80 120 130 
S· RI. 3 and above but below RI. 4 So 100 ISO 115 
6. Rs. 4 and aJ:K>ve but below RI. 6 10 140 210 2S0 
,. Rs. 6 and above but below RI. 8 9S 19o 28S 3So 
8. Rs. 8 and above but below RI. IS US 2S0 315 SOO 
9· Rs. IS and above . 115 3So S2S 8so 
4. The daily rate of sickness beneftt in respect of a perIOD 
during ,any benefit period shall be the .tan~ benefit rate 

cor:responding to the average daily wages of that person during 
the corresponding contribution period 
5. The daily rate of maternity benefit payable in respect ot 
confinement occurring or expected to occur during any benefit 
period, shall be equal to twice the standard beneftt rate carreB- S 
ponding to the average daily wages in respect of the insured 
woman during the corresponding contribution period. 
6. (4) The daily rate of disablement and dependants' benefit 
shall be the rate, twenty-five per cent. more than the standard 
benefit rate rounded to the next higher multiple of five paise 10 
corresponding tff-the average daily wages in the contribution 
period corresponding to the benefit period in whlch the empl6y-
ment injury occurs. 
(b) Where an employment injury occurs before the com-
mencement of the first benefit period in respect of a person, the IS 
daily rate o~ disablement and dependants' benefit shall be-
(i) where a person sustains employment injury after 
the expiry of the first wage period in the contribution period 
in which the injury occurs, the rate, twenty-five per cent. 
more than the standard benefit rate rounded to the next 20 
higher multiple of five paise corresponding to the wage 
group in which his average daily wages during that wage 
period fall; 
(ii) where the person sustains employment injury 0&-
fore the expiry of the first wage period in the contribution 2, 
period in which the injury occurs, the rate, twenty-five per 
cent more than the standard benefit rate, ,rounded to the 
next higher multiple of five paise corresponding to the 
group in which wages actually earned or which would have 
been earned had he worked for a full day on the date of acci- 30 
dent, fall. 
The diSlblem.ent or dependants' benefit rate calculated 
as aforesaid shall be called the "full rate". 
7. The disablement benefit shall be payable to the insured 
person as follows: - 35 
(4) for temporary disablement, at the full rate; 
(b) for permanent total disablement, at the full rate; 
(c) for permanent partial disablement resulting from 
an injUI7 lpeci1led in Part II of the Second Schedule, at 

s 
10 
such percentage of the full rate which would have been 
payable in the case of permanent total disablement as is 
specified in the said SchEdule as being the percentage of the 
loss of earning capacity caused by that injury; 
(d) for permanent partial disablement resulting from 
an injury not specified in Part II of the Second Schedule, 
at such percentage of the full rate payable in the case' of 
permanent total disablement as is proportionate to the loss 
of earning capacity permanently caused by the injury. 
Explanation..-Where more injuries than one are caused 
by the same accident, the rate of benefit payable UItderi 
clauses (c) and (d) shall be aggregated but not so in any 
case as to exceed the -full rate; 
IS (e) in cases of disablement not covered by clauses «I), 
(b), (c) and, (d) at such rate not exceeding the full rate, 
as may be provided in the regulations. 
8. In the case of death of the insured person, the dependants' 
benefit shall be payable to his widow and children as follows:-
20: «I) to the widow during life or until remarriage, an 
amount equivalent to, three-fifths of the full rate and, if ,,<, 
there are two or more widows, the amount payable to the 
widow as aforesaid shall be divided equally 'between the 
widows; 
2$ (b) to each legitimate or adopted son, an amount equi-
valent to two-fifths of the full rate until he attains eighteen 
years of age: 
Provided that in the case, of a legitimate son who is 
infirm and who is wholly dependent on the earnings of the 
30 insured person at the time ot his death, dependants' beneftt 
shall continue to be paid while 'the infirmity luts; 
35 , 
I(C) to each legitimate or adopted unmarried daughter, 
an amount equivalent to two-fifths of the ,full rate until she 
attains eighteen years of age or until marriage, whichever 
is earlier: 
Provided that in the case of a legitimate or adopted· un-
married daughter who is infirm and is wholly dependent on the 
earnings of the insured person at ~e time of his death, depend-
ants' benefit shall continue to be paid while the inftrmity lasts 
. and she continues to be unmarried: 

V' 
aa 
Provided further that if the total of the dependants' benefits 
. distributed among the widow or widows and legitimate or adopt.. 
ed children df the deceased person as aforesaid exceeds at any 
time the fUll rate, the share of eadh of 'the dependants shall be 
proportionately reduced, 80 that the total amount paya'ble to S 
them does not exceed the amount of disablement benefit at the 
full rate . 
. 9. In case the deceased person does not leave a widow or 
legitimate or adopted child, dependants' beneftt shall ,be payble 
to the other dependants as folIows:- 10 
"~~{CI) to a parent r1r 'grand-parent, for life, at an amount 
equivalent to 1hree-tenths of the full 1'8te and if ,there are , 
two or more parents or grand-parents, the amount payable 
to the parents or grand-parents as aforesaid shall be equally 
aivided between the~; IS 
(b) to any other-
(i) male dependant, until he attains eighteen yean 
of age, 
(ii) female dependant, until she attains eighteen 
years of age or until'mM'rige, whichever-is earlier or if ao 
widowed until abe attains eighteen years of age; 
at an amount equiv8Ient to two-tenths of the full rate pro-
vided that irf there be more than one dependant under clause 
(b) the amount payable under this clause shan be equally 
divided between them. 25 
THE SECODD SCHEDULE 
[See Section 2 (lSA) and (15B)] 
Serial 
No. 
Description ofinJury 
----------------------------------------------------PART r 
'1Jft~., ttCJOalinHlBMIID"fO a.tJLT IN PIRMAMINT TOTAL DISABr.DUlNT 
I Loal of both banda or amputation at hiJher lites roo • 
s Loa. of a hand and a foot • • • • • • roo ' 3' 
, Dodble 'am~on throuah leg or thiah, or amputatioD'throuihlei 'or 
thiah on ODe .ide and leu of other foot • • . .• 100 
.. Loll of lilht co rucb an extent a. to render the c:1aimant unable to perform 
lIlY wort 'for which e~ liiht is 'eaaendal . . . .' roo 
, Very ..... '&cial cfia1l'pIftment 100 40 
, Absolule dafncn • 'roo 

'n 
s 
7 
8 
10 
9: 
la 
IS II 
I~. 
13 
14 
I, 
20 16 . 
17 
18 
19 
2S 20 
21 
22 
23 
30 
24 
25 
26 
3S 
27 
28 
.29 
30 
D !scriptio~ of iniun' 
PART II 
~(V .f 
. ·z· :;, 
PCIC"UP 
of 1011 of 
IInlinI capecity 
LIST 0 •. INJURIBS DIBMID TO IUlSULT IN PIIRMAlGNT PARTIAL DIMBLIM8NT 
A".",tatio..........,,,., limbs (';tkr a.,.) 
Amputation through sho~d" joint • 90 
Amputati'?I1 below shoulder wi~ stump less .than 20' 32 c.m. &om tip of 
acromion. . . . • • • . • • • 10, 
Amputatio~ from:o' 32 c.m. from tip of aaomion to leal than 11'43 c.m. 
below tiP of olecranon . . • • • • • • 7. 
Loss of a hand or of the thumb and four finaen of one hand or amputa-
tion from II' 43 c.m. below tip of OlecraDOD. • • • •. 60 
Loss of thumb 30 
Loss of thumb and its metaCarpal bone 40 
Loss of four fingers of one hand so 
Loss of three finlers of one hand 30 
Loss of two fingers of one hand 20 
Loss of terminal phalanx of thumb 20 
A mputatiort-lorHr 'limbs 
Amputation of both feet resulting in end-bearing stumps 90 
Amputation through both feet proximal to the metatano-phalangeal joint 80 
Loss of all toes of both feet through the metatarso-pJWanaeal joint 40 
Lots of all toes of both feet proximal to the proximal inter-phalanaea1 
joint 30 
Loss of all toes of both feet distal to the proximal inter-phalangeal joint 20 
Amputation at hip 90 
Amputation below hip with stump not exceeding I2' 70 c.ni. in length 
measured from tip of 8I'C8t trencbanter • • • 80 
Amputation below hip with stump exceeding 12'70 c.m. iQ 1ensth mea-
sured from tiP of great trenchanter but not' beyond middle thigh 70 
Amputation bc;low middle thigh to 8, 89 C.m. below knee 60 
Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 8, B9 but not exceeding 
12'70 c.m. So· 
Amputation below knee with stump exceeding U· 70 c.m. . 4° 
Amputation of one foot resultina in cad-bearing 30 
Amputation through one foot proximal to ~ m~pbaJM1aca1 joint 30 
Loss of all toes of one foot through the met8larSo-pbalanaca1 joint 20 

Serial No. Description of injury 
... 
Otlln &'jrnWs 
~t Loalof one eye, without complicatiOOl, the other beiDl normal 
32 Losl of vision of one eye without complications or disfiaurement of eye-
ball, the other beinl normal •• • • • • • • 
Lou 0/-
33 Whole. 
34 Two phalanges 
3 S One phalanx . 
A.-Fm,m o/";'hI or l./rlumd 
lnau f""w 
36 Guillotine amputation of tip without losl of bone. 
37 Whole. 
38 Two phalanges 
39 One phalanx . 
Milldl. finger 
40 Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 
41 Whole . 
4-'1 Two phalanges 
43 One phalanx • 
Ring or liltl. Ii",er 
4,~ Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 
B.-Toes of riIlht or hIt fOOl 
Gr.C.1 to. 
4S Through metatarao-phalangeal joint. 
46 Part, with some loss of bone 
Any other loe 
47 Through,metatarso-phalangeal joint. 
48 Part, with some lOIS of bone • 
TrDO tou of one foot, .xcluding gr.at loe 
~9 Through metatarso-phalangeal joint. • • 
.50 Part, with !lome loss of bone 
Thr •• 10.s of one fOOl, ,,"ludi,,, great tIM 
.51 Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 
53 Part, with some losl of bone 
Four to.s of one foot .%&ludi", ",eat toe 
PCIUD~ 0(101'1 f 
, 
.. 
earnin. 
capacity 
~ 
40 
30 
10 
I" 
II 
9 
5 IS 
12 
9 
7 
" 
20 
7 
6 
5 
2 2S 
14 
3 
3 
I 
30 
2 3S 
6 
3 
53 Through metatano-pha1anaeal joint • 9 40 
'4 Part, with lOme losl of bone 3 
Non .--Complete and permanent 1011 of the use of any limb or member referred to 
III thiI lChedule be deemed to be equiValent of the lou of that limb or man_. 

tHE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section S2. A) 
LIST OP OCcuPATIONAL DISBASBS 
Occupational diacuc Employment 
S PART A 
Anthru Any employmcDt-
(a) involvilll thc handlin. of wool, bair, 
brildcl or animal carc:uICI or partS of 
luch carcuaca, inc:1udina hidca, hoofa 
10 and hol'l1l; or 
IS Comprcaacd air illness or its sequclae 
Poisoning by lead tetra-ethyl 
Poisoning by nitrous fumes 
20 Poisoning by organic phospho.ru. insecti-
cides 
(b) in connection with anima1a infected with 
antb,rax ; or 
~) involving the loading, unIoadinc or trIDI .. 
port of any mcrchandi1c. 
Any procell carried on in comprcaacd air. 
Any proceSI involvina the Ule of lead tetn-
cthyl. 
Any procellll involvina exposure to niuoua 
fumcs. 
. .. Any procell involvinc thc use or handlin. 
or expolure to the fumes, dUlt or vapour 
~n~.ng any of the organic: phOlphorul 
lDIect.icidea. 
PARTB 
2 S Poisoninc by lead, its alloys or compounds Any process involvinl the blndli n• or Ule of 
or its sequelae excluding poisioning by lead ore or lead or any of its preparations 
lead tetra-cthyl. or compounds except lead tetra-cthyL 
Poisoning by phosphorus or its compounds, Any process involving the liberation of phos-
or its sequelae. ph,?ruI or usc. or handling of pboapborul 
30 or lts preparanons or compounds. 
Poisoning by mercury, its amalgams and 
compounds, or its sequelae. 
Poisoning by benzene, or its homoloaues, 
their amido and nitroderivatives or its 
35 sequelae. 
Chrome ulc:cration or its sequelae 
Aily process involving the use of mercury or 
its preplll'8tions or compounds. 
4.. 
My process involving the man~lCtUre, h'be-
t'ation, or ule of benzene, benzene homo-
loguea and their amido and nitroderivativel. 
Any process Ulvolving the use of chromic acid 
or bichromate of ammonium porulium 
or sodium or their prepantioDi or the 
manufacture of bichromate. 
Jtn Poisoning by arsenic or its compounds, or its Any process involvinc the production, 
'"f- lequeJae. libention or utilisation of arsenic· or ita 
compounds. 
29 

Employmeftt 
PatholoP:a1 manifestations due te>-. .. 
(ca) radium Ind ot'her radio-active sub- A1JIj pxuell involvilla e~ to the ICtiob 
ltaDCaI jOf radium. ndio-acdve lubiltaocel or 
X-n~. 5 
(6) X-nYI. 
Primary apitheliomatoUl c:anc:er of the 
akin. 
Any p~1 invoJviDa the baDdlilll or Ule 
of tar; pitch. bitumen., millen! oil, paraftiDe 
or the compouDdt, productl or residues of 
these lubstaDces. It? 
Poi-olling by haloacnated hydroc:arbana Any Procell involviJll the Qlanufac:ture, 
of the aliphatic seriel and their halo- liberation and QIe of hyCfrOcirbona of the 
IICndcrivativcl. ., . aliphatic series and theil' baJoaen derivatives. 
• .1 i 
Poisonina by carbon dilulphide or 
lequelae; 
its Any employment iD-
(a) the manufac:tUrC of carbon disulphide j IS 
or 
(6) the manufactUre of utiftcial silk b)r 
viacose proc:eel j or 
(c) rubber industry j or 
(4) any other indUitry involviq the produc-
tion or use of products containinc car-
bon disulPhide or cxl"llure to emaDa-
tiona from earbon diaulpbide.· . . 
20 
~~nal cataract due to inf~-~ Any manuff:tUrina procell invol\riDa 25 
~. exposure to iJare from molten material or 
to any other lourceS of infra-red radiation.. 
Telegraphist's Cramp Any employment involvina the \lie of tele-
. graphic: instruments. 
PoiJonina by manganese or a compound 
of ~apno:se, or its sequelae. 
Any proce'ls involvin. the lde of, or handlin. 30 
of, or . exposure to the fumes, dust 01' 
vapour of, manganese or a compound of 
manpnese. or a subltance CODrainina 
Silicolis 
Coal Miners' Paeumoco~sis 
Asbestosis 
manpnese. . , 
PART C 
Any eDltPloyment involviDf exposure to the 
... inhalation of dUst conta'!'i n, silica. 
• Any employment in coal ~. 
Any employment iD-
35 
(I) the production of- 4~ 
, (a) fibro cemeilt materiala ; or 
(ia) asbestos mill board j or 
(2) the processing of ores containina .. be,tos. 
• Any employment in the prodUction of 
tiaguse mill board or other artidc', from 45 
.. puc .... 

31 
a. No provision of this Act shall apply to and in relation to any ACt DOt 
payment whh:h has been, or is being, or is required to be, made under : ap~ 
the principal Act in respect 'of any employment Injury sustained ca:" 
by an employee in any State or part thereof at any time before the 
5 date of the COming into operation of that provision and any such 
payment and any application, appeal or other proceeding for or 
relating to such payment pending before any authority immediately 
before such date shall continue 'to be governed by the provisions of 
the principal Act as they stood immediately 'before ihat date. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Employees' State Insurance Act, llKA, provides, inter aUe&, 
for certain benefits to employees in case of sickness maternity and 
employment injury and for certain other matters in ~elation thereto. 
Experience of the administration of the Act has disclOsed certain 
difticulties in its working. The object of the present Bill is to 
remove such difficulties and to make the administration of the Act 
simpler. The major amendments proposed in the Bill are indicated 
below:-
(4) The wage limit for coverage of employees is being 
raised from Rs. 400 to Rs. 500 per month to secure benefits of 
the sch~me for a larger number of employees. 
(b) The existing definition of the term "employee" does not 
cover administrative staff engaged in sale, distribution and 
other allied functions. The definition is being amended to 
cover such employees. 
(c) The definition of the term "family" is being amended 
to include dependent parents of female insured persons; 
dependent parents of male insured persons are already includ-
ed. 
(d) The number of represen·tatives of Parliament on the 
Employees' State Insurance Corporation is being raised from 
two to three with a view to include two Members from the 
Lok Sabha and one from the Rajya Sabha. 
(e) Provision for the grant of funeral benefit, not exceed-
ing Rs. 100, on the death of an insured person is being made 
for the first time. 
(f) The scheme of maternity benefit is being enlarged. 
(g) Provision for the taking over by the Employees' State 
. Insurance Corporation of the administration of the medical 
benefit from State Governments is being made. 
(h) The rate of disablement benefit is being increased. 
Certain minor and formal amendments to the Act have also been 
proposed in the Bill. 
2. The notes On clauses explain in detail the important provisioDi 
of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; A. K. SEN. 
!:I'he 7th August, 1965. 
, 

Note, on clawe, 
Clause 1.-Thls ,:lause empowers the Central Government to 
Itagger application of the Act to ensure systematic and gradual 
change over from the exis ting provisions. . . 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to' clarify certain terms and expres-
sions used in the Act and also to raise the wage-limit for coverage 
under the Act from Rs. 400 to Rs. 500 per month. Another change 
proposed by this clause is to bring within the scope of the definition 
of ·'seasonal factory" a factory which works for ~ period not exceed-
ing 7 months in a year and is engaged during that period in . any 
process of blending, packing or re-packing of tea or coffee or 1ll 
such other manufacturing process as the CentI'll Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. . . 
Clause 3.':"-'This clause seeks to insert a new section 2A which 
will make it obligatory on the principal employer to have his factory 
or establishment registered under the Act. 
Clause 4.-This clause seeks to amend section 4 of the Act so 
as to empOwer the Central Government to appoint a Chainnan and 
a Vice-Chairman of the Corporation and in addition to provide that· 
-none of the five persons to be nominated by that Government under 
clause (c) need be an official. This clause also seeks to provide 
that the Director General of the Corporation shall be itS e:r-offleio 
member and that the number of representatives of Parliament on 
the Corporation shall be 3 instead of 2. 
Clause 5.-This clause seeks to make amendments of a con-
sequential nature in section 5 of the Act. 
Clause e.-This clause seeks to substitute sectien 7 of the Act. 
It provides for authentication of all orders and decisions" of the 
Corporation by the signature of the Director General who will now 
be an u-of1tcio member of the Corporation and for the authentica-
tion of all other instruments issued 'by the Corporation by the 
signature of the Director General or such other oftlcer 'of the Cor-
poration as may be authorised by him. 
Cz41Ue 7.-This clause seeks to raise the number of representa-
tives of employers and employees on the Standing Committee from 
two to three and also provides that· the Director General shaJI ~ 
an u-opicio meml?er of this Committee. 
" 

34 
Clause S.-This clause seeks to provide that members of the 
Medical Benefit Council other then ex-officio members and those 
nominated by Government shall continue to hold office until the 
nomination of their successors is notified, notwithstanding the 
expiry of the normal term of their membership. 
CZa.use 9.-This clause seeks to provide that a person shall cease 
to be a member of the Corporation when he ceases to be a Member 
of Parliament. 
Clause 10.-This clause provides that the sanction of the Central 
Government as well as the Corporation will be obtained before a 
'~~,2rincipal Officer undertakes any work not connected with his office. 
Clause H.-This clause seeks to amend sub-section (3) of aec .. 
tion 17 to provide that consultation with the Union Public Service 
Commission will be necessary in the case of certain classes of posts 
instead of posts with a certain maximum monthly pay. 
Clause 12.-This clause seeks to omit sections 27 and 31 of the 
Act which are out of date. 
Clause 13.-This clause makes a clarificatory amendment in 
section 36 of the Act. 
Clause 14.-This clause makes an, amendment of a consequential 
nature. 
Clau.se 15.-This clause provides that no contribution shall b8 
payable in respect of an employee whose average daily wages are 
below Rs. l' 50 instead of Rs. l' 00 as at present. It also seeks to 
omit sub-sections (4) 'lnd (5) of section 42 of the Act and to modify 
sub-sedion (2) thereof so as to make the liability to pay contribu-
tions co-terminus with the liability for payment of wages. 
Clause l6.-This clause' empowers the Corporation to frame 
Regulati'ons fixing the date by which evidence of contributioJll 
having peen paid is to be received by it. ' 
. ' 
Clause 17.-This clause seeks to introduce new sections 45A and 
45B empOwering the Corporation to determine in certain cases the 
amount of contributions payable in respect of employees of a factory 
or establishment on the basis of available information and providing 
that any contribution payable under the Act may be recovered AI 
fln arrear of l#lnd revenu.e, 

i; 
Cla.use IS.-This clause empowers the Corporation to accept 
alternative evidence of sickness in cases where an insured penon is 
unable to produce a medical certificate from a Medical Prtlctitioner 
appointed under the Scheme. This clause further seeks to provide 
~oi periodical payments to an insured woman also in case of mis-
carriage or sickness arising out of pregnancy, confinement, pre 
mature birth of child or miscarriage. 
~other amendment proposed by this clause is to provide for 
payment of an amount not exceeding Rs. 100 towards the expendi-
ture on the funeral of a deceased insured person. 
Clave 19.-This clause simplifies '.' the conditions for drawal of 
sickness -benefit by providing that a person shall be qualified to 
claim such benefit during a benefit period if during the correspond-
ing contribution period, weekly contributions in respect of him 
were payable for a minimum period of 13 weeks. The right to 
eligibility will accrue on payment of contributions for half the 
number of weeks in the first benefit period. 
Clause 2O.-This clause makes a consequential amendm~nt. 
Clause 21.-This clause provides for payment of sickness benefit 
for a maximum period of 56 days in any two consecutive benefit 
periods and makes certain other amendments of consequential 
A8t~e. 
Clause 22.-This clause provides that as in the case of sickness 
benefit, maternity benefit shall be payable if the insured woman 
has paid contributions for a minimum period of 13 weeks in a con-
Fib!-ltion periQ:d. The right to eligibility .will ~ccrue. o.n payment 
of contributions _ for half the number of \Veeks in tJte. first beneftt 
period. 
This clause also provides for-
(a) payment of maternity benefit in the event of death of 
the insured woman or the child to her nominee or legal repre-
sentative; 
(b) grant of maternity benefit for ~ix weeks in case of 
mi~arrfage; and . . 
(el gJ;ant .of m~ternity b~netit ,for an additional period of 
. ;~ne,pu>nth in ~~ of. si~~ess arising out of. pregnancy, coqqne-
ment, etc. 
Clause 23.-This clause seeks to recast the existing section 51 
relating to disablement benefit and introduces new sections 5-1A, 
51B, 5IC and 51D to simplify the adjudication of employm~t 
. injUfY ~~ by,.m~' certain. ~~c. p'rovia+~D8. in ~e . Act. 

. , . , 
Claw! 24.~This clause leeks to recast the existlni section D2 
relating to dependants' benefit by specifying the share of each 
dependant in the Act itself and empowering the Corporation to 
decide the question of payment of benefit to dependants and rates 
applicable to them without reference to the Employees' Insurance 
Court. 
This clause also introduces a new section 52A incorporating the 
provisions relating ,to the occupational diseases in the Workmen'. 
Compensation Act, 1923 with suitable modifications. 
Clause-~This clause makes changes of a consequential nature . . ' 
Cla.use 26.-This clause seeks to replace the existing section 54 by 
a revised section 54 and a new section 54A providing for determina-
tion of questions connected with disablement by a Medical Board 
and for right of appeal against the Board's decision to a Medical 
Appeal Tribunal or an Employees' Insurance Court. 
Clause 27.-This clause seeks to recast the existing section 55 80 
as to provide for review of decisions of Medical Boards and Medical 
. Appeal Tribunals and for review of dependants' benefit. This clause 
also specifies the circumstances in which a review of benefits may be 
made. _ ..... .-J. 
Clause 28.-This clause seeks to introduce a new section D9A 
. enabling the Cprporation to take over, in consultation with the State 
"'d'overnment concerned, the aC1ministration of medical care where it 
, be~'omes"necessary or desirable to do so. 
Clause 29.-This clause seeks to omit sections 66 and 67 with • 
view to provide the employers complete insurance cover. 
Clause 30.-This clause makes amendment of a consequential 
lla ture to section 71 of the Act. ' 
CleJuse 31.-This clause seeks to omit section 73H as a aimilar 
provision ~ proposed to be inserted ,by new section 99A-
Clause 32.-This clause, besides making certain amendments of a 
consequential nature, also empowers the Employees' Insurance Courts 
to direct the Corparation, if necessary, to have any disablement 
. 'question considered by a Medical Board or a Medical Appeal Tribunal 
Cla.Ule 33.-This clause leeks to amend section 77 so as to provide 
for a tim~ limit of three years for commencement of the proceed1np 
before an- Employ~' Insurance Court. 
C'ltIuI~'34 . .:.-Th1s clause seekS to make consequential amendment.. 

'., 
" 
, , , 
.,... . 
Claw. 35.-Tb1t clause empowers the OOeC\or General to autho-
rise an ofllcer of the Corporation other than the lasurance Commis-
sioner .to institute or to sanction prosecuLi0D3 under the Act. 
'Clause 36.-This clause seeks to provide for consultation with the 
Corporation before exemption is granted by the appropriate Govern-
ment to factories or establishments belongmg to Uovernment or a 
local authority. 
Clause 37.-This clause introduces a new section 91A providing 
for grant of exemptions under the Act either prospectively or retros-
pectively. 
Clause 38.-This clause amends section 95 so as to empower the 
Central Government to frame rules in regard to filing of appeals 
before medical appeal tribunals or Employees' Insurance Courts and 
to provide that the Centra! Government will consult the Corporation 
wnue making rules under the Act. 
Clause 39.-This clause amends section 96 so as to provide that 
the State Governments will also consult the Corporation while mak-
ing rules under the Act. 
Clause 4O.-This clause seeks to empower the Corporation to make 
reguLatlo.DS in regard to certam adciluona! matters necessitated by 
the other amendments made in the Bill. 
Clause 41.-This. ~clause seeks to introduce a new section 99A 
empowering the Central Government to remove diftlcultiea in living 
eJtect to the provisiOns of the Act. 
Clause 42.-This clause seeks to replace the existing Schedules 1 
and II by a new ~ Schedule I and makes the following importan .. 
changes therein:-
(a) The average daily wage will be calculated by divldiDa 
the standard wage of an insured person by 26, 13. 6 or 1 depend-
ing on whether be is monthly rated. fortnightly rated, weekly 
rated or daily rated. 
(b) Average daily wage will need to be worked out only once 
in the first wage period in a contribution period. The lBDle rate 
will apply for the whole contribution period. 
(c) The number of wage aroup. for payment of contribu· 
tions and grant of benefits has been increased from 8 to 9 to 
provide for the enhanced wage limit for coverage from Ra. 400 
to Rs. 500 per meuaem. 

• 
, " 
'I I 
(d) A ..tandard rate of sick.., beDeftt is being Axed cor-
,responcling ,~ ,each wage group. Calc¢8tion of .the rate of 
beneftt jor 8Kh -incUvidual ~ will no longer be llecessary _ __ _ 
(e) Tae Ate of disablem.ent and dependants' benefit is being 
ft.ud at ' •. ~ cent. ,over and above ~ sickness beDeflt rate, 
.hich .is aboUt half the average wage. 
</> The rates of weekly contributions have been rationalised 
~d ~ar,ginw. .adjustm~t have been made in Ulese rates. The 
~.d r~ ofcontrib~tion as well ~ ,benefits have been 
rounded off to the nearest multiple of five paise. 
AAot~r~~ge .~ffected by this ,clause ~ the ~se~iQn of the 
.S.ec:~Q. &psi T~q Sc)1~~u.J ~hiC;h ~re new, giving l~~ of' inj~es 
.r~ltm.gjn~ma.Jlent ,disablement :and occupatio~al ~ise,.ses. 
Clause 43.-This clause seeks to introduce a new section providing 
that the provisions of the amendment Act will not apply to any past 
or J»e~~g cases of payment in respect of any employment injury 
IUSt~ed before the commencement of the amendment Act and that 
the MIDe will be governed by the proviSions ,of th~ principal Act .. 
they stood befare the commencement of the amendment 'Act. 

Jl'INANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 applies to a number Of 
Central Government undertakings. Some of the amendments pro-
POSed in the Bill will have the effect of increasing the liability of 
the employers (including Central Government) for payment of con-
tributions. Clause 2 (3) of the Bill seeks to incrEtlse the wage limit 
for coverage of employees from Rs. 400 to Rs. 500 per month. This 
involves payment of contribution by employers also in respect of' 
~r,nployees Who draw a monthly wage between ~~-480 and Rs. 500. 
Clause 42 seeks to replace the existing Schedules I and II by a Dew 
Schedule First which provides for rationalisation of the rates of 
contribution payable by employerS and employees. These rates 
have been rounded off to the nearest multiple of five paise and the 
rates of contribution payable by employers are in some cases higher 
tlmn the existing rates. These proposals in so far as they concern 
the Central Government undertakings will thus involve increued 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It may, however, 
be added. that the proposed changes in the rates of contribution will 
not affect the employers till the transitory provisions in Chapter VA 
of the Act are withdrawn. So long a'S this Chapter is in force, the 
employers in public and priwte sectors will pay the Employer's 
Special Contribution as leviable thereunder in lieu of the employer'. 
contribution at the rates as laid down in the existing Schedule I 
to the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 or at the rates now 
proposed to be revised under the Bill. The liability of employers 
to pay contribution at the higher rates will, therefore, accrue only 
after some time. As regards the contribution payable in respect of 
employees who draw a monthly wage between Rs. 400 and Ra. SOO, 
it may be stated that many of the Central Government undertakinp 
have been exempted from the operation of the Act under section 90, 
since they provide benefits which are superior or ,ubstantiaDy 
similar to those awi1able undet. the Act. The Scheme is appUed to 
such Government undertakings only as do not provide similar or 
superior benefits but as it is being extended to new area from time 
to time, the number of undertakings and employees covered goes 
on changing. 
The additional lialbility of employers due to (4) the inclusion of 
employees who draw a monthly wage nmging between Rs. 400 and 
Rs. 5()0 and (b) the rounding off of the rate! of employers, contribu-

r\ I 
tion, has been estimated at (i) Re. O· 36 per annum per , covered 
employee and (Ii) Rs. 1·19 per annum per covered employee I'H-
peettvely, le., Rs. 1· 55 in all per annum p,r _ covered employee. 
The additional liability on account of inclusion of empioyees -who 
draw (1 monthly wage between Rs. 400 and Rs. 500 will, however, 
be off-eet to the extent th~ employers will get relief from their 
liability in respect oof such employees under the Workmen's Com-
pensation Act and the Maternity B~neftt Acts and the expenditure 
on medical treatment and sickness leave which are at present being 
granted. 
As the nWD!ber of undertakings and employees covered goes on 
changing from time to time, it is not possible to give-°an estimate 
of the tot'll additional expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATEO-LEGtSLATION 
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to amend section 95 of the Act to 
empower the Central Government to make rules in regard to the 
manner in which and the time within, which appeals may 'be filed to 
medical appeal tribunals or Employees' Insurance Courts. 
Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to amend section 97 of the Act to em-
power the Corporation to, make regulations in relation to certain 
additional matters. The additional matters relate Inter alia to the 
marmer til which a factory or establishment shall be registered, the 
levy of interest at a rate not exceeding six per cent. per annum on 
contributions due but not paid, the method of determining whether 
an insured person is suffering from any occupational disease, the 
qualifications of persons who may issue sickness certificates and 
constitution of medical boards and medical appeal tribunals. 
The matters referred to in clauses 38 and 40 pertain to procedw-e, 
form or detail and the delegation of legislative powers is thus of a 
normal character. 
" • I 
.' '1' 
,~J 
, : 

Defini-
tions. 
ANNEXURE --_._. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EMPLOYEES' STATE INSURANCE 
ACT, 1948 
34 OF 1948 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
• • • • • 
(8) "employment injury" means a personal injury to an emp-
loyee caused by accident or an occupational disease llrisiJlg out of 
and in the course of his employment in a factory or establishment 
to which this Act applies, which injury or occupational disease 
would entitle such employee to compensation under the Workmen's 
Compensation Act, 1923, if he were a workman within the meaning 8 of 1923. 
of the said Act; 
(9) "employee" means any person employed for wages in or in 
connection with the work of a factory or establishment to which 
this' Act applies and-
(i) who is directly employed by the principal employer on 
any work of, or incidental or preliminary to or connected 
with the work of, the factory or establishml!nt. whether 
such work is done by the employee in the factory or estab-
lishment or elsewhere; or 
(ii) who is employed by or through an immediate employer on 
the premises of the factory or establishment or under the 
supervision of the principal employer or his agent on work 
which is ordinarily part of the work of the factory or estab-
lishment or which is preliminary to the work carried on in 
or incidental to the purpose of the factory or establishment; 
or 
(iii) whose services are temporarily lent or let on hire to the 
prinCipal employer by· the person with w}ft)m the person 
whose services are so lent or let on hire has entered into 
a contract of service ; 
hut does not include-
• • • • • 
(b) any person employed on a remuneration which in the 
aggregate exceeds four hundred rupees a month ; 
• • • • • 
42 

(11) "family" means the spouse and minor legitimate and 
~dopted children dependent upon the insured person and where the 
Insured pel'SOn is a male, .nis dependent parents ; __ 
(12) "f,lctory" means any premises including the precincts 
thereof whereon twenty or more persons are working or were work-
ing on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part 
of which a manufaduring process is being carried on with the aid 
of power or is ordinarily so carried on but does not include a mine 
.. of 1923. subject to the operation of the Indian Mines Act, 1923 or a railway 
running shed; 
"seasonal factory" means a factory which is exclusively engaged 
in one or more of the following manufacturing processes, namely, 
cotton ginning, cotton or jute pressing, decortication of groundnuts, 
the manufacture of coffee, indigo, lac, rubber, sugar (including 
gur) or tea or any manufacturing process which is incidental to or 
connected with any of the aforesaid processes; 
The expressions "manufacturing process" and "power" shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Factories Act, 
63 of 1948. 1948;. 
8 of 1923. 
• • • • • 
(21) "temporary disablement" means a condition resulting from 
an employment injury which requires medical treatment and rend-
ers an employee, as a result of such injury, temporarily incapable of 
work; 
(22) "wages" means all remuneration paid or payable in cash 
to an employee, if the terms of the contract of employment, express 
or implied, were fulftlled and includes other additional remunera-
tion, if any, paid at intervals not exceeding two months, but does 
not include-
:~) any contribution paid by the. employer to any pension 
fund or provident fund, or under this Act; 
• • • • • 
(24) the expressions "dependant", ,"managing agent", "occupa-
tional disease", "partial disablement" where the disablement is of 
a permanent nature and "total disablemenkmt" ~llChave respect' tiveA ItY 
the meaniI\gs assigned to them in the Wor en S ompensa Ion c, 
1923. 

Constitu-
tion of 
Corpora-
tion. 
Term of 
office of 
members 
of the 
Corpora-
tion. 
Authen-
tication 
aforders, 
decisions, 
etc. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Standing 
Committee. 
:~ 
CHAPrER II 
CORPORATION, STANDING COMMITl'BE ANI) MEDICAL BOUlT COUNCIL 
• -- -. -- *------ -- • • • 
4. The Corporation shall consist of the following members, 
namely:-
(a) the Minister for Labour in the Central Government, ex 
otficio, as Chairman; 
(b) the Minister for Health in the Central Government, ex 
officio, as Vice-Chairman; 
(c) not more than five persons to be nominated by the Central 
-~ ;.- 'Government of whom at leas~ three shall be officials of the 
Central Government; 
• III III • • 
(h) two persons representing the medical profession to be nomi-
nated by the Central Government in consultation with such 
organisations of medical practitioners as may be recognised 
for the purpose by the Central Government; and 
(i) two persons to be elected by Parliament. 
5. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the 
term of office of members of the Corporation, other than the ex 
offiCio members and members referred to in clauses (c), (d) and 
(e) of'\ection 4, shall be foUl' years commencing from the d.te on 
'which their nomination or election is notified: ; 
Provided that a member of the Corporation shall, notwithstand-
ing the expiry of the said period of four years, continue to hold 
office until the nomination or election of his successor is notified. 
(2) The members of the Corporation referred to in clauses (c), 
(d) and (e) of section 4 shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Government nominating them.-
• • • • • 
7. All orders and decisions of the Corporation shall be authenti-
c~te(J by the signature of the Chairman or some other member 
~ 
authorised by the Corporation in this behalf and all_ other instru-
ments issued by the Corporation shall be authenticated by the sig-
nature' of lsuch member or officer of the Corporation as may be 
authorised by it. 
8. A Standing Committee of the Corporation shall be constituted 
from among its members, consisting of-, -
• .. ' • • • • 
(b) three members of the Corporation, being ofticials of the 
Central Government, nominated by that Government; 
• • • • • 

(c) six members elected by the ~orporation as follows:-
(ii) two members from among the members of the Corpora-
. - tion representing employers; -- - - -- -
(iii)- two members from among the members of the Corpora-
tion representing employees; 
... ... ... ... ... 
10. (1) ... ... • • • Medical 
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the term Benefit 
of office of a member of the Medical Benefit Council, other' than a Council. 
member referred to in any of the clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section 
(1), ~ be four years from 'the date on which his nomination is 
notified. 
• ... • ... ... 
16. (1) ... • .;. ... • Principal 
(3) The Principal Officers shall be whole-time officers of the Officers. 
Corporation and shall not undertake any work unconnected with 
their office without the sanction of the Central Government. 
... ... • ... ... 
17. (1) ... • • ... • Staff. 
(3) Every appointment to posts carrying a maximum monthly 
pay of five hundred rupees and above shall be made in consulta-
tion with the Union Public Service Commission : 
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to an officiating 
or temporary appointment for an aggregate period not exceeding 
one year. 
... 
... 
-. ... 
CHAPTER III 
FINANCE AND AUDIT 
• • 
• ... 
• • 
27. The Central Government shall, every year during the first Grant' by' 
five years, make a grant to the Corporation of a sum equivalent to the Central 
two-thirds of the administrative e~pe~ses of the Corporation not in- ~~:~~­
eluding therein the cost of any benefits provided by or under thi~ 
Act. 
... • • • ... 
31. All expenditure incurred by the Central Government for and 
in connection with the establishment of the Corporation up to the 
date of its establishment shall be treated as a loan advanced by the 
Expendi-
ture by 
Central 
Govem-
Central Government to the Corporation and such loan shall be ad- ment to 
justed against grants from the Central Gov~rnment to. the Corpora- be treated 
tion. 'as a loan . 
• • • • • 

Bud,et, 
audited. 
accOWlts 
and the 
annual 
report to 
be placed 
before 
Parliament. 
Recovery 
of contri-
bution 
from 
immediate 
employer. 
General 
provisions 
uto 
payment 
ofcontri-
butions. 
36. The annual report, the audited accounts of the Corporation, 
and the budget as finally adopted by the Corporation shall be placed 
. 'before Parliament and pU'blished in. the Ofticial Gazette. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER IV 
CONTRIBUTIONS 
• • • • • 
41. (1) A principal employer, who has paid contribution in res-
pect of an employee employed by or through an immediate employer, 
shall be entitled to recover the amount of the contribution so paid 
(that is to say. the employer's contribution as well as the employee's 
contribution, if any) from the immediate employer, either by de-
duction from any amount payable to him by the principal employer 
under any contract, or as a debt payable by the immediate employer. 
(2) In the case referred to in sub-section (1), the immediate 
employer shall be entitled to recover the employee's contribution 
from the employee employed by or through him by deduction from 
wages and not otherwise, subject to the conditions ,pecifted in the 
prOviso to sub-section (39 cf section 40. 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of sections 40 and 41, wages shall 
be deemed to include payment to an employee in respect of any 
period of authorised leave, lock-out or legal strike. 
42. (1) No employee's contribution shall be payable by or on 
behalf of an employee whose average daily wages are below one 
rupee. 
ExpZa.na.tion.-The average daily wages of an employee shall be 
calculated in the manner specUled in the First Schedule. 
(2) Contribution (both the employer's contribution and the 
employee's contributionl shall be payable by the principal employer 
for each week during the whole or part of which an employee is 
employed. 
• • • • • 
(4) No contribution shall be payable in respect of an employee 
for any week during the whole of which no services are rendered 
by an employee and in respect of which no wages are payable to 
him. 

-- , 47 
(5) Notwithstandin~ the provlSlons of sub-section (4), con-
tribution shall be payable, in respect of any week during which no 
services are rendered by and, no wages are paid to an employee, at 
therate-it-which--contribution was last paid, where the failure to 
render such services is due to the employee being on authorised 
leave, or is, due to a lock-out or a legal strike, if in respect of the 
period covered by such legal strike the employee receives wages in 
full or in part. 
4.3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Corporation may Method of 
make regulations for any matter relating or incidental to the pay- payment of 
ment and collection of contribution payable under this Act and contribu-
without prejudice to'".:'tbe generality of the foregoing power sueh tion. 
regulations may provide for-
... ... ... 
CHAPTER V 
BKNU'ITS 
• ... 
46. (J) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the insured persons Beneftts. 
or, as the case may be, their dependants shall be entitled to the 
following benefits, namely:-
(a) periodical payments to any insured person in case of his 
sickness certified by a duly appointed medical practi-
tioner (hereinafVr referred to as sickness benefit); 
(b) periodical payments in case of confinement to an insured 
women, certified to be eligible for such payments by an 
authority speCified in this behalf by the regulation (here-
inafter referred to as maternity benefit); 
... ... • • • 
47. A person shall be qualified to claim sickness benefit during When per-
any benefit period, if during the corresponding contribution period, IIOD elllible 
weekly contributions in respect of him were payable for not less for 
than two-thirds of the number of weeks ,duriDg which he shall be :!:tte:.s 
deemed to have been availa,ble for employment within the meaning 
of section 48, subject to a minimum of twelve contributions : 
Provided that the Corporat~on may waive the minimum number 
of contributions during the first contribution period. 
48. A person shall always be deemed to have been available for When per_ 
employment in any week, except when during t the whole of such IIOD deemed 
week,-. available 
for em-
(a) he ·was unable to work on account of sickness which had ployment . 
. been dUly certified, whether entitling him to receive sick-
ness benefit or not, or .' .. ., 
i 

(b) he was qualified to receive disablement benefit for tem-
porary disablement, or 
-----_._--- -(c) in the case of an insured woman, she was entitled to the 
maternity benefit provided in section 50 or she would have 
been entitled to such benefit if she had fulfilled ali other 
conditions entitling her thereto. 
Sickness 
benefit. 
Maternity 
benefit. 
49. Subject (to the provisions of this Act and the regulations, if 
any, a person qualified to claim sickness benefit in accordance with 
section 47 shall be entitled to receive such benefit at the rates speci-
fied in .J:Jle Second Schedule for [the period of his sickness: 
Provided that he shall not be entitled to the benefit for an initial 
waiting period of two days except' in the case of a, spell of sickness 
following, at an interval of not more than fifteen days, the spell of 
sickness for which sickness benefit was ,last paid : 
Provided further that sickness benefit shall not be paid to any 
person for a number of days in excess of the number which taken 
together with the number of days for which he has already re-
ceived the benefit I makes up a total of fifty-six days during any 
continuous period of three hundred and sixty-five days. 
50. (1) An insured woman shall be qualified to claim maternity 
benefit for a confinement occurring or expected to occur in a 
benefit period if during the corresponding contribution period, 
weekly contributions in respect of her were payable for not less 
than two-thirds of the number of' weeks during which she shall be 
deemed to have been avanable for employment within the meaning 
of section 48, subject to a minimum of twelve contributions: 
Provided that at· least one contribution has been paid between 
thirty-five and forty weeks I before the week in which the confine-
ment tak .. s place or in which notice of pregnancy is given before 
confinement whichever is more advantageous to the insured person. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and the regulations, 
if any, an irisured woman who js qualified to claim maternity bene-
fit in accordaDce with sub-section (1) shall be entitled to receive 
it at the daily rate specified in sub-section (3) for all days on 
which she does . not work for remuneration during a period of twelve 
weeks of which not" more' than six shall precede the expected date 
of confinement. 
, 

49 
(3) The daily rate referred to in sub-section (2) shall be-
(i) the rate at which the insured woman could have claimed 
---- --------- sickness benefit for any period of sickness during the bene-
8 of 192.'\ 
8 of 1923. 
fit period in which the confinement occurs or is expected 
to occur if she had been qualified to claim sickness bene-
. fit during that period, or 
(ii) twelve annas, 
whichever is greater. 
51. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and the regula- Disable-
tions, if any, disablement benefit shall be payable- ment. 
benem. 
(a) to a person who sustains temporary disablement, during 
the period of such disablement; 
(b) to a person who sustains permanent partial disablement, 
during his life; 
(c) to a person who sustains permanent total c:Jisablemen~, 
during his life; and 
(d) to a person~ in all cases of disablement not falling under 
sub-clauses (a), (b) or (c) of this sub-section, as may be 
provide4 in the regulations. . 
(2) Disablement- benefit shall be paid' on the scale and subject 
to the conditions specified in this behalf m. the Second Schedule. 
52. Whe-re an insured person dies as a result of an employment Depen-
injury sustained as an employee under this Act, dependants' bene- danta' -. 
fit shall be payable subject to the provisions of this Act and the benell 
regulations, if any, to his dependants at such rates and for such 
period as is specified in the Second Schedule. 
53. Where an insured person is or his dependants are entitled to Disablement 
receive or recover, whether from the employer of the insured and 
f h . d depen-person or rom any ot er person any compensatIon or amages dants' 
under the WorkDlen's Compensation Act, 1923, or otherwise, in bene- ~ 
respect of an employment injury sustained by the insured person_ 
as an employee ~nder this Act, then the following provisions shall 
apply, namely:-. 
(i) The insured person shall, in lieu of such compensation or 
damages, receive the disablement benefit provided by this 
Act (but subject otherwise to the conditions specified in 
the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923) from the Cor-
paration and not from the employer or other person. 

!~ 
(ii) If the insured person dies as a result of the employment 
injury 8J18tained as an employee under this Act (whether 
or not he was in receipt of any periodical payment -for 
temporary disa.blement in respect of the injury), depen-
dants' benefit shall be payable at the rates and in the pro-
portion specified in the Second Schedule to his widow or 
widows during her or their widowhood, and to minor legi-
timate or adopted sons and minor legitimate unmarried 
daughters. 
(iii» ·lJR caae the" insUred person cioes not leave him survi'ring 
any widow or children as mentioned in clause (ii) or in 
the case of an insured woman if she does not leave her survi-
ving any children as mentioned in clause (ii), dependants' 
benefit shall be paid to the other dependants of the decea-
sed at such rates as may be determined by the Employees' 
Insurance Court having jurisdiction. 
(iv) The amount of dependants' benefit payable under clause 
(iii) shall not exceed one-half of the amount which would 
have been payable to the insured person as benefit on 
permanent total disablement. 
(v) Save as modified by this Act, the obligations and liabilities 
imposed on an. employer by the Wa.kmen's Compensation. 
Act, 1923, shall conti.nue to apply to him. 8 of 1923. 
Medieal 54. All medi~al examinations and treatment referred to in the 
ua- Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, shall, for the purposes of this' nt 1923. 
mination.Act, .be carried out by duly appointed medical practitioners . 
• , .. ,:.-· ............... 4~·~ 
Review of 55. (1) Subject to the provIsIons of this Act, the CorpOll"ation. 
bendts·may, either of its own motion or on the application of the person re-
ceiving the benefit, review the payment of any disablement or de-
pendants' benefit: 
Provided that unless otherwise specified in the regulations made 
in this behalf ~very application for the review of a disablement 
benefit shall be accompanied by a certificate of a duly appointed 
medical officer. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Corporation may 
on such review as aforesaid, direct that the disablement or depen-
dants' benefit b~ continued, increased, reduced Or discontinued . 
• • • • • 

• • 
51 
General 
• • • 
86. (1) Where any employment injury is sustained by an insured Corpora- ---
person as an employee under this Act by reason of the negligence of t.i~·s 
the employer to observe any of the safety rules laid down by or nwbt to recover under any ~nactment applicable to a factory or establishment or by damacea 
reason of any wrongful act of the employer or his agent, the Corpo- from 
ration shall notwithstanding the fact that the employer has paid ~e ~ployer 
weekly contributions due under this Act in respect of such insured In certaiQ 
person be- entitled to be reimbursed by the employer or the principal eua. 
who is liable to pay compensation under section 12' of the Workmen's 
8 of 1923. Compensation Act, 1923, the actuarial -pMsent value of the periodical .• 
payments which the Corporation is liable to make under this Act. 
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the actuarial -present value of 
the periodical payments shall be determined in such manner as may 
be specified in the regulations. 
17. Where an insured person is entitled to receive or to recoverCorpora-
(but has not received or recovered), whether from his employer or ~o:" 
any other person, compensation or damages under any lew for tJ:1e;:~_ 
time being in force in respect of any employment injury caused nifted ID. 
under circumstances creating a legal liability in some person other certa1D 
than the employer or his agent, the Corpq{ation shall be entitled to cue •. 
be indemnified by the person so liable: . 
Provided that the CorpoI'ltion shall not be entitled to be indemni-
_ fled by an employer who has paid contributions in respect of the em-
ployee sustaining the employment injury as an employee under th1a 
Act, except in cases covered by section 66. 
• • • • • 
71. If • person dies during any period for which he is entitled to ~ 
a eash benefit under this Act, the amount of such benefit up to mei:: to • 
including the day of his death shall be paid to Gny person nominated and inclucf.. 
by the deceased person in writing in sllch form as may be specified inI day 
in the regulations or, if there is no such nomination, to the heir or Of dea~. 
legal representative of the deceased person. 
• 
• 
• • • 
CHAPTER V-A 
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS 
• • • 
• 
• 
73H. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions Power to 
of this Chapter, the Cent:r;al Goyer~en~ m~y, by order notifted in;ties. 

Matters to 
be decided 
by Em-
ployees' 
Insurance 
Court. 
52. 
the Official Gazette, make such provision or give such direction u 
appear to it to be necessary for the removal of ' the di1Bculty. 
(2) Any order made under thl~ section shaiCliave effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith in any rules or regulations 
made under this Act. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER VI 
ADJUDICATION OF DISPUTE AND CLAIMS 
• • • • • 
" 
75. (1) If any question or dispute arises as to-
• • • • • 
(ee) any direction issued by the Corporation under section 
55 on 8 review of any payment of disablement or dependants' 
benefits; 
(f) the actuarial present value of the periodical payments 
referred. to in section 66, or 
(g) any other matter wdich is in dispute between a principal 
employer and the Corporation, or between a principal employer 
and an immediate employer, or between a person and the Cor-
poration er between an employee and a principal or immediate 
employer, in respect of any contribution or benefit or other duet 
payable or recoverable under this Act. 
such question or dispute shall be decided by the Employees' Ins\u'. 
ance Court in accordance with the prOvisions of this Act. 
.. (2) The following claims shall be decided by the EmplQYees' In,. 
surance Court, namely:-
• • • • • 
(c) claim under section 66 or 67 made by the Corporatioq' 
against the employer or other person liable thereunder: 
• • • • • 
(3) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to decide or deal with 
any question or dispute as aforesaid or to adjudicate on any lia'bllity 
which by or under this Act is to be decided by the Employees' IDSur~ 
Ince Court. 
• • • • 

80. An Employees' Insurance Court shall not direct the payment Bendt 
of any benefit to a person unless he has made a claim for such benefit not admis-
in accordance with the regulations made in that behalf, within sible 
twelve months after the claim became Que: - ----- ---- -. ~a:d 
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that there was reasonable in time. 
excuse for not making a claim for the benefit within twelve months 
after it became due, it may direct the payment of the benefit as if 
the claim had been made in time. 
• • 
• • 
• 
CHAPTER VII 
PENALTIES 
• 
• • 
• • 
86. (1) No prosecution under this Act shall be instituted except PrOlecu-
by or with the previous sanction of the Insurance Commissione'l' or tions. 
of such other officer of the Corporation as may be authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
• • • • • 
90. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Ofti- Exempti~n 
cia! Gazette and subject to such conditions as nmy be specified in the of f~t!.l. 
notification, exempt any factory or establishment belonging to the ~ell:ts 
Government or any local authority, if the employees in any such be1011,. 
factory or establishment are otherwise in receipt of benefits substan-lng to 
tially similar or superior to the benefits provided under this Act. Govern-
mentor 
• • • • • my local 
authority. 
95. (1) Th~ C~ntl'9.1 Government m~y, su~ject to ~he c~ndition of ~::;~ of 
previous publIcation, make rules not InCOnslstent wlth thIS Act for Govern-
the purpose of giving effect to the provisions thereof. ment to 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the = 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
jn~ matters, namely:-
• • • • • 

/' 
Power .of 
State Goy.. 
ernment 
ItO make 
ruleI.. 
Power of 
Corpora-
tion to 
makere-
gulations. 
-54 
~. (1) The State GOvernment may, subject to the condition of 
prevIOUS publication, make rules not inconsistent with this Act in 
:repro ~ _ ~ or any __ ~_~e following matters, namely:- I 
• • • • • • 
17. (1) • • • • • 
(2). In particular and without prejudice ,to the generality of the 
foregomg power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matter~, namely:-
• • • • • 
(vi) the method of determining the actuarial present value of 
periodical payments; 
• • • • • 
(viii) the time within which and the form in which any claim 
for a benefit may be made and the particulars to be speci_ 
fied in such claim; 
• • • 
SCHEDULE I 
(See Section 39) 
• • 
1. The amount of weettly contribution payable in respect of an 
employee shall be calculated with reference to his average dally 
wages. 
2. The average daily wages shall be-
(a) in respect of aD. employee whose wage period is • ciay, 
the amount 01 wages earned during the, .. week divided by 
the number of days w&tkecl. in that. week; 
(b) in respect of m employee employed' on the basis' of any 
other wage period, the amDunt of wages earned in that 
wage period, in which the contribution falls due divided 
by the numbepof days worked in such wage period; 
(c) in respect of an employee employed on any other basis, 
the amount calculated on the basis o! wages earned for 
the day on which the contribution falls due. Qr on such 
other day as may be specified in the regulations in this 
behalf. 
Explana.tion I.-Subject to any regulationS made in this behalf, 
the term "days worked" means the number of days on which the 
employee' worked for wages. . 

E:rpZanation II.-Where any night shift continues beyond mid-
night, the period of the night shift afte!" midnight shall be counted 
.~o!, recko~g-.!~!_~~y:sv.r0rked_. as part of the day preceding. 
Explanation IU.-Exeept as provided by/regulations, wages, pay, 
salaries or allowances paid in respect of any period of leave or holi-
days other than the weekly holidays shall not be taken into account 
in calculating wages. 
Ezplanatton IV.-''Wage period" mea~ the period in respect of 
which wages are ordinarily payable whether in terms of the contract 
of empwyment, express or implied, or otherwise. 
~. (4) For the purposes of fixing the amount of weekly contri-
bution payable, employees shall be divided into eight groups on the 
basis of their average daily wages ascertained in the manner speci-
fied in paragraph 2. 
,. (b) The· employees' contribution and employer's contribution pay-
. able in respect of the group of employees speci1ied in the first 
column of the table below shall be at the rates respectively speci-
fied in the corresponding entries in the second and third columns 
thereof. 
TAJILE 
----,----- --------_._---------
Group of employees 
I. ~~~';es who~ av~ae ~i1Y v.:aFs ~re below 
3. Employees whOle averaae daily wages are Re. 1 
, and above but below RI. 1-8-0 . . . 
3. Employees whose averqe daily wages are Rs. 
1-8-0 and above but below Rs. 2. 
4. Em,ployees whose averaae daily wages are Rs. 2 
and above but below RI. 3. . . . 
S. Rmpw,ees whole average daily wages are RI. 3 
aM above but below Rs. 4· . . • 
6. Employees whOle average daily waFS are RI. 4 
and above but below RI. 6. . . . 
7'. Employees whose averace dail\' wqea are Rs. 6 and 
above but -below ,Rs. 8 . . . • 
8. Bmployees Whole averap daily waaes areas. 8 
and above 
Emplo- Employ-
yeest COIl- erts con-
trfburfGn trfbution 
(recover-
able from 
emplo-
yees) 
:I 3 
lb. A. p. lb. A. P. 
Nil 0 7 0 
0 2 0 0 7 0 
0 4 0 0 8 0 
0 6 0 012 0 
0 8 0 r 0 0 
011 0 II 6 0 
o IS 0 I 14 0 
I 
'" 
0 3 8 0 
Total 
contribu-
tion(em-:ployeest 
And em-
ployer's 
contribu-
tion) 
4 
Rs. A. P. 
0 1 0 
0 9 0 
012 0 
r 2 0 
r 8 0 
2 r 0 
:I 13 0 
312 0 

SCHEDULE II 
.----... '~-----;--(See sections 41, 51, 52 and 53) 
Sickness Benefit and DisAblement and Depend4ntB' Bmsflb 
. 1: The average daily wages of an employee in each of the groups 
specIfied i~ the first column of the table below shall, for the purpose 
of calculatIng the sickness benefit and disablement and dependants' 
benefits be assumed to be the rate specified in the corresponding 
entry in the second column thereof. J 
TABLE 
, Group of employees \of 
I 
Averaae 
allumed 
daily 
waaea 
2 
RI. A. P. 
I. Employees whose average daj)y wagcs are bclow Re. I. 0 14 0 
2. Employees whose average daily wages are Re.' I and atove tut h](" 
Ra. 1-8-0... .••. • • • • • I 4 0 
3· Employees whose avera£l' daily wages are RI. 1-8-0 and above but below 
Rs. 2. . . . • • . • • • • • I 12 0 
. 4· Employees whose averall daily wages are Rs. 2 anet above but below 
Rs. 3. . . . . . . . . . . . 2 3 0 
s: Employees whose average daily wages are Rs. 3 and above but 
Rs. 4. . . • . . • . • • 
6. En- ?Ioyees whose average daily wages are Rs. 4 and above but 
!~I. 6 . . . • . . . . . . 
7. Empbyees whose average daily wages are Rs. 6 and above but 
ib. 8 . 
8. Emplayees whoc average daily wages are Rs. 8 and above 
below 
below 
below 
3 3 0 
S o 0 
7 0 
10 0 0 
2. The daily rate of sickness benefit during any benefit period shall 
be an amount equivalent to one-half of the sum of the assumed 
_ average daily wages as aforesaid for eech of the w~ks for 
w ilich contributions were paid in respect of the pEnon during the 
corresponding contribution period, divided by the number of weeks 
Review at in that contribution period in which he was. deemed to have 'been 
available for employment within the meaning of section 48 (plus 
the number of any other weeks in that contribution period for 
which contributions were paid in respect of the person: provided 
that where the amount of the benefit so calculated includes a mc';' 
tion of an anna, it shall be rounded to the next' higher anna. The 
calculation indicated above is illustrated by the following exam-
ples:-

'7 
Example I.-If the aSsumed average daily waees of the person as 
-an employee were Rs. 1-4-0 a day for 10 weeks, Ra. 1-12-0 a day 
for 10 weeks and B.s. 2-8-0 a day for 6 weeks, the average of the 
assumed daily wages olor the purpose of the rate of sickness benefit 
will be:-
10 x 20+ 10 x 28..1-.6 x 40 27!.~ 
26 .. 26 
The daily rate of sickness benefit payable in the benefit period 
will then be I 3~ . .annas, rounded to the next higher anna, name .. 
ly, 14 annas. 
Example 2.-If the person was deemed to have been not available 
for employment for 14 weeks in any contribution period and' was 
employ:ed as an employee for only 12 weeks in that contribution 
period, his assumed average daily wages "being Ra. 1-4-0 for the 
12 weeks, the average of the assumed daily wages for the p~ 
of the rate of sickness benefit will be:-
12X20 
-----2080:- ... (26- 14) 
The daily rate of sickliess benefit payable in the bene1lt period 
will then be 10 annas. 
Example 3.-If the person was deemed to have been not available 
for employment for 4 weeks in any contribution period and was em-
ployed as an employee for only 20 weeks (he having been without 
any employment for 2 weeks) in that contribution period, his assum-
ed average daily wages being Rs. 1-12-0 for 20 weeks, the average 
of the daily wages for the purpose of the rate of sickness benefit 
will be:-
20X28 s 
.-tf26-4) -25 Ii annas. 
The daily rate of sickness benefit payable in the (benefit period 
will then be 12rr annas, rounded to the next higher anna, 
namely, 13 annas. 
3. Disablement and dependants' benefit shall be an amount equi-
valent te one-half of the sum at I the assumed average daily wages 
for each of the weeks for which contributions were paid in respect 
of the employee during the period of fifty-two weeks immediately 
preceding the week in which the employment injury occurs, divided 
by the number of weeks for which contributions were so paid: 
impropel'. 

58 
. Provided that whe~e no contribution was paid in respect of the em-
-- ployee during the aforesaid period of' fifty-two weeks the disable-
me~t and dependants' benefit shall be an amount equivalent to one-
fifty-seco~d part of the monthly wages calculated in accordance with 
sectll>n 5 of the Workmens' Compensation Act, 1923, and provided 8 of 1923. 
further that where the amount of the benefit so calculated includes 
a fraction of an anna, it shall be rounded to the next higher anna. 
The calculation indicated above is illustrated by the following ex-
amples:-, . 
Example 1.-1of the· assumed average daily wages of an employee 
were 14 annas a day-ior-:20 weeks, Rs. 1-4-0 a day for 20 weeks and 
Rs. 1-12-0 a day for 12 weeks, the average of th~ assumed daily 
wages for the purpose of disablement and dependants' benefit will 
be:-
20XI4+20X20+12X28 28 
-------~------~I9~nu. 
52 52 
. The disablement or dependants' benefit will then be 9i~ annas 
rounded to the next higher anna, namely 10 annas a day. 
Example 2.-I..f the employeof worked only for 34 weeks in the 
period of 52 weeks preceding the week in which the employment 
injury occurs and his assumed average daily wages were 14 annu 
a day for 20 weeks and Rs. 1-4-0 for 14 weeks, the average of the 
assumed daily wages for the purpose of disablement and dependants' 
benefit will be:-
20X 14+I4X20 16 
=I6-annas. 
34 34 
The disablement or dependants' benefit will be 8~annas, rounded 
to the' next higher anna, namely, 9 annas a day. 
The disablement or dependants' benefits calculated as aforesaid 
shall be called the Ifull rate. 
4. The disablement or dependants' benefit shall be payable to a 
Person suffering front disablement as a result of an employment 
injury sustained as an employee in a factory or establishment to 
which this Act applies, or if he dias as a result of such injury, to, 
his dependants, as follows:-
(i) to the insur~ person-
(a) for temporary disablement, during the period of such 
. disablement at the .full rate; 
(b) for permanent partial disablement, at a percentage of 
the full rate, as provided in section 4: of the Workmen'. 
Com~nsation Act, 1923, for life; 8 of 1923. 
.. 
• 

. " 59 
(c) for permanent total disablement, at the fulll'ate for life; 
"(d) in cases of disablement not covered by clauses (a), (b) 
and (c) above, as may be provided in the regulations. 
(ii) In the case of the death of the person, to his widow and 
children as follows:-
(a) to the widow during life or until remarriage an amount 
equivalent to three-fifths of the full rate and, If there are 
two Qr more widows, the amount payable to the widow 
as aforesaid shall be divided equally between the 
!-widaws; 
(b) to each legitimate or adopted son, an amount equivalent 
to two-fifths of the full rate until he attains fifteen years 
of age; 
(c) to each legitimate unmarried daughter, an amount equi-
valent to two-fifths .of (\. the full rate until she attains 
fifteen. years of age or until marriage, whichever is 
earlier: 
Provided, that the Carporation may continue such benefit to 
any legitimate· or adopted son or any legitimate unmarried daughter 
until he or she attains the age of eighteen years if such son or 
daughter continues education to the satisfaction of the Corporation: 
Provided further that if the total of the dependants'. benefits dis-
tributed among the widow or widows and legitimate children or 
adopted son of the deceased person as aforeA.id exceeds at any time 
the full rate, the share of each of the dependants shall be propor-
tionately altered so that the total amount payable to them does not 
exceed the amount of disablement benefit at the full rate. 
5. In case the deceased person does not leave a widow or legi-
timate child, dependants' benefit at such rates as may be determined 
by the Employees' Lnsurance Court having jurisdiction shall be 
payable as follows:-
(a) to a p~nt or grand parent, for life; 
(b) to any other male dependant, until he attains fifteen years 
of age; 
(c) to· any other female dependant, until she attains fifteen 
. years of age or until marriage, whichever is earlier, or if 
widowed untu she attains fifteen years of age. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
furtller to amend the Employees' State Insurance Aa, 1948. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen~ 
Minister of LarD and 
Social SlCurity.) 