Bill No. 50 of 1959 
THE PUBLIC WAKFS (EXTENSION OF 
LIMITATION) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 3RD AUGUST, 1959) 

ORIGINAL 
Bill No. 50 of 1959 
THE PUBLIC WAKFS (EXTENSION OF LIMITATION) 
BILL,1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to exten.d the period of limitation in certain cases for suits to recover 
possession of immovable property forming part of public wakfs. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Wakfs (Extension of Short tide 
Limit'.ltion) Act, 1959. and extent. 
S (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
2. In this Act, "public wakf" means the permanent dedication by Definition. 
a person professing Islam of any immovable property for any purpose 
recognised by Muslim Law as a public purpose of a pious, religious or 
10 charitable nature. 
3. Where a person entitled to institute a suit of the description Hxtenaion 
referred to in article 142 or article 144 of the First Schedule to the of period 
I di L· ·t t· A 1908 f . f . bI oflimita-n an Iml a IOn ct, , or possessIOn 0 any Immova e property tion in cer-
forming part of a public wakf or 'my interest therein has been dis- tain c~ 
ed h d · . ed th . t ti af h for SUits to 15 possess , or as lSCOntmu e possessIOn, a any me ter t e recover 
14th day of August, 1947, and before the 7th day of May, 1954, or, as Pf~ssion 
the case may be, the possession of the defendant in such a suit has ~b::=-­
become adverse to such person at any time during the said period, perty formi 
then, notWithstanding anything contained in the said Act, the period ~~'f,rcrt 0 
~ of limitation in respect of such a suit shall extend up to the 15th day waltfs. 
of August, 1967. 

Repeal and 
uvinl. 
4. (1) The Public Wakfs (Extension of Limitation) Ordinance, 
1959, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 20th 5 
day of July, 1959. 
:2 of 1959. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Following the partition of the country in August, 1947, a number 
of wald properties passed into unauthorised hands. Many of the 
mutwallis who were in charge of these properties had migrated to 
Pakistan and the few who stayed behind could not for various reasons 
institute civil proceedings for the recovery of possession of these 
properties. The result is, that ever since the partition, a large num-
ber of these wakf properties has been in the possession of unautho-
rised occupants. Under the law as it stands at present, the title of 
the true owners would be extinguished, if the properties are in ad-
verse possession for twelve years or more. It is, therefore, proposed 
to extend the period of limitation up to the 15th August, 1967, in 
respect of suits for the recovery of possession of any immovable pro-
perty forming part of a public wakf in any case where the disposses-
sion has taken place at any time between the 15th August, 1947 (the 
date of partition) and the 7th May, 1954 (the date from which power 
to declare any property as evacuee property under the Administra-
tion of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, ceased). This would ena?le the 
Wald Boards constituted under the Wakf Act and other interested 
persons to institute such suits. 
Since the period of limitation in some cases would expire in 
August, 1959, an Ordinance was promulgated for making the neces-
sary alteration in the law of limitation. The present Bill seeks to 
replace the Ordinance by an Act of Parliament. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 31st July, 1959. 
3 
A. K. SEN. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to extend the period of limitation in certain cases for suits to 
recover possession of immovable property forming part of 
public wakfs. 
(Shr; Asoke K. Sen, Minister of Law.) 