Bill No. 50 of 1953 
~HE BANKING COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1953 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short tltle.-This Act may be called the Banking Companies 
(Amendment) Act, 1953. 
2. Amendment of section 5, Act X of 1949.-ln section 5 of the 
Banking Companies Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 5 
Act), clause (e) of sub-section (1) shall be omitted. 
3. Insertion of new section 36A in Part m In Act X of 1949.-ln 
Part III of the principal Act, after section 36, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"36A. HiJgh Court dejined.-In this Part and in Part IlIA, 10 
'High Court', in relation to a banking company, means the High 
Court exercising jurisdiction in the place where the registered 
office of the banking company is situated or, in the case of a 
banking compal1y incorporated outside India, wher~ its principal 
place of business in India is situated". 15 
4. Substitution of "High Court" for Court In Part m in Act X of 
1949.-ln Part III of the .p,rincipal Act, for the word "Court" wher-
-ever it occurs the words High Court" shall be substituted. 
5. Amendment of section 37, Act X of 1949.-ln section 37 of the 
principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 20 
inserted, namely: - . 
"(3) When an application is made under sub-section (1), the 
High Court may appoint a special officer who shall forthwith 
take into his custody or under his control all the assets, books, 
documents, effects and actionable claims to which the banking 26 
company is or appears to be entitled and shall also exercise such 
other powers as the High Court may deem fit to confer on him, 
having regard to the interests of the depositors of the bankin~ 
company". 

2 
6. Insertion of new section 38A in Act X of 1949.-After section 38 
c:Jf the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted. 
namely:-
"3BA. Court liquidator.-(l) There shall be attached to every 
5 High Court a court liquidator to be appointed by it for the 
purpose of conducting all proceedings for the winding up of 
·banking companies and perfonning such other duties in refer-
ence thereto as the High Court may impose. 
(2) Where there is a court liquidator attached to a High 
10 Court and an order is passed by the High C .::':.t for the winding 
up of any banking company, then. notWithstanding anything 
contained in section 17lA or section 175 of the Indian Com-
panies Act. 1913 (VII of 1913). the court liquidator shall become 
the official liquidator of the banking company unless the High 
15 ('..curt, having regard to the special circumstances obtaining in 
the case of the banking company and for reasons to be recorded, 
otherwise directs in the order for the winding up of the banking 
company. 
(3) Where there is a court liquidator attached to a High 
20 Court and any proceeding for the windihg up of a banking com-
pany in which any person other than the Reserve Bank or the 
court liquidator has been appointed as official liquidator is pend-
ing before the High Court immediately before the commencement 
of the Banking Companies (Amendment) Act. 1953. or the date 
25 on which the court liquidator is so attached to the High Court, 
whichever is later, then, notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 176 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), the 
person appointed as the official liquidator shall, on such com-
mem:.ement or, as the case may be, on the aforesaid date, be deem-
30 ed to have vacated his office as such and the vacancy so caused 
shall be deemed to be filled up by the appointment of the court 
liQuidator as the official liquidator: 
Provided that where the High Court is of opinion that the 
appointment of the court liquidator would be detrimental to the 
35 interests of the depositors of the banking company, it may direct 
the person appointed as the official liquidator to continue to act 
as such. 
(4) Where having regard to the number of banking com-
panies wound up and other circumstances of the case, the Central 
40 Government is of opinion that it is not necessary or expedient 
to atach for the time being a court liquidator to a High Court, 
it may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that this section shall not have effect in relation to that 
High Court". 
45 7. Amendment of section 39, Act X of 1949.-In section 39 of the 
principal Act, after the words "Notwithstanding anything contained" 
the words, figures and letter "in section 38A of this Act or" shall be 
inserted. 
8. Substitution of new sections for section 43 in Act X of 1949.-
50 For section 43 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
substituted. namely:-
"43. Booked depositors' credits to be dleemed proved.-In any 
proceeding for the windin~ up of a banking company, every 
depositor of the banking company shall be deemed to have flIed 

3 
his claim for the amount shown in the books of the banking com-
pany as standing to his credit and, notwitbstaDding anything. to 
the contrary contained in section 191 of the Indian CompanIes 
ActJ 1913 (VII of 1913), the High Court shall presume such claims 
to nave been Droved. unless the official liauidator shows that 5 
there is reason· for doubtinlZ its correctness. -
43A. Preferential payment to small depositors.-(l) In every 
proceeding for the w:nding up of a banking company, after the 
Dreferential payments referred to in section 230 of the Indian 
Companies Act. 1913 (VII of 1913) have been made, there shall 10 
be paid. to every depositor in the savings bank account of the 
banking company, a sum of one hundred rupees or the balance at 
his credit, whichever is less, in priority to all other debts from 
out of the remaining assets of the banking company available for 
payment of general creditors. 15 
(2) The aforesaid payments shall rank equally among them-
selves and be paid in full, unless the assets are insufficient to 
meet them. in which case they shall abate in equal proportion". 
t. Amendment of section 45, Act X of 1949.-Section 45 of the 
principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section «1) thereof, and- 20 
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered. for the words "as 
not being detrimental to the interests of the depositors of such 
company", the words "in writing as not being incapable of being 
worked and as not being detrimental to the interests of the 
depositors of such banking company" shall be substituted: 25 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Where an application under section 153 of the Indian 
Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) is made in respect of a 
banking company, the High Court may direct the Reserve 30 
Bank to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of the 
banking company and the conduct of its directors and when 
such a direction is given, the Reserve Bank shall make such 
inquiry and submit its report to the High Court". 
10. Substitution of new Part for Part rnA In Act X of 1949.-For 35 
Part IlIA of the principal Act. the following Part shall be substi-
tuted. namely:-
"PART IlIA 
SPEC:AL PROVISIONS FOR SPEEDY DISPOSAL OF WINDING UP PROCEEDINGS 
45A. Part IlIA to override other laws.-The provisions of this 40 
Part and the rules made thereunder shall have effect notwith-
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Indian 
Companies Act. 1913 (VII of 1913) or the Code of Civil Procedure. 
1908 (Act V of 1908) or the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 
(Act V of 1898) or any other law for the time being in f~rce or 45 
any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law but the 
provisions of anv such law or instrument in so far as the same 
are not varied by, or inconsistent with. the provisions of this 
Part or rules made thereunder shall apply to all proceedings 
under this Part: GO 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
35 
40 
50 
4 
4~B. Power ~f High COU:Tt to decide all claims in respect of 
banktng compan~s.-The HIgh Court shall. save as otherwise 
expressly provided in section 45C. have exclusive jurisdiction to 
ent~rtain and. decide any claim made by or llgainst a banking 
company which is being wound up (including claims by or 
against any of its branches in India) or any application made 
under section 153 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) 
by or in respect of a banking company or any question of priori-
ties or any other questiO'Il whatsoever. whether of law or fact, 
which may relate to or arise in'the course of the winding up of 
a banking company, whether such claim or question has arisen 
or arises or such application has been made or is made before 
or after the date of the order for the winding up of the banking 
company or before or after the commencement of the Banking 
Companies (Amendment) Act, 1953. 
45C. Transfer of pending proceedings.-(l) Where a winding 
up order is made or has been made in respect of a banking com-
pany, no suit or other legal proceeding, whether civil or criminal, 
in respect of which the High Court has jurisdiction under this 
Act and which is pending in any other court immediately before 
the commencement of the Banking Companies (Amendment) 
Act, 1953, or the date of the order for the winding up of the 
banking company, whichever is later, shall be proceeded with 
except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(2) The official liquidator shall, within three months from 
the date of the winding up order or the commencement of the 
Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1953, whichever is later, 
submit to the High Court a report containing a list of all such 
pending proceedings together with particulars thereof. 
(3) On receipt of a report under sub-sectic:: (2), the High 
Court may, if it so thinks fit, give the parties concerned an 
opportunity to show cause why the proceedings should not be 
transferred to itself and after making an inquiry in such manner 
as may be provided by rules made under section 45U, it shall 
make such order as it deems fit transferring to itself all or such 
of the pending proceedings as may be specified in the order and 
such proceedings shall thereafter be disposed of by the High 
Court. 
(4) If any proceeding pending in a court is not so transferred 
to the High Court under sub-section (3), such proceeding shall be 
continued in t.he court in which the proceeding was pending. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall apply to any proceeding 
pending in appeal before the Supreme Court or a High Court. 
45D. Settlement of list of debtors.-(l) Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being 
in force, the High Court may settle in the manner herein-
after provided a list of debtors of the banking company which 
is being wound up. 
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made under section 52, 
the official liquidator shall, within six months from the date of 
the winding up order or the commencement of the Banking 

5 
Companies (Amendment) Act, 1953, whichever is later, from 
time to time, file to the High Court lists of debtors containing such 
particulars as ~re specified in the Fourth Schedule: 
Provided that such lists may, with the leave of the High 
Court, be filed after the expiry of the said period of six months. 5 
(3) On receipt of any list under sub-section (2), the High 
Court shall, wherever necessary, cause notices to be issued on 
all persons affected and after making an inquiry in such manner 
as may be provided by rules made under section 45U, it shall 
make an order settling the list of debtors: 10 
Provided that nothing in this section shall debar the High 
Court from settling any such list in part as against such of the 
persons whose debts have been settled without settling the 
debts of all the persons placed on the list. ' 
(4) At the time of the- settlement of any such list, the High 15 
Court shall pass an order for the payment of the amount due by 
each debtor and make such further orders as may be necessary 
in respect of the relief claimed, including reliefs against any 
guarantor or in respect of the realisation of any security. 
(5) Every such order shall, subject to the provisions for 20 
appeal. be final and binding for all purposes as between the 
banking company on the one hand and the person against whom 
the drder is passed and all persons claiming through or under 
him on the other hand, and shall be deemed to be a decree in a 
suit. 25 
(6) In respect of every such order, the High Court 
shall issue a certificate specifying clearly the reliefs granted and 
the names and deSCriptions of the parties against whom such 
reliefs have been granted, the amount of costs awarded and 
by whom, and out of what funds and in what proportions, such 30 
costs are to be paid; and every such certificate shall be deemed 
to be a certified copy of the decree for all purposes including 
execution. 
(7) At the time of settling the list of debtors or at any other 
time prior or subsequent thereto, the High Court shall 35 
have power to pass any order in respect of a debtor on the appli-
cation of the official liquidator for the realisation, management, 
protection, preservation or sale of any property given as security 
to the banking company and to give such powers to the official 
liquidator to carry out the aforesaid directions as the High 4f.) 
Court thinks fit. 
(8) The High Court shall have power to sanction a compro-
mise in respect of any debt and to order the payment of any 
debt by instalments. 
(9) In any case in which any such list is settled ex parte as 45 
against any person, such person may, within thirty days from 
the date of the order settling the list, apply to the High 
Court for an order to vary such list, so far as it concerns him, 
and if the High Court is satisfied that he was prevented by 
any sufficient cause from appearing on the date fixed for the 50 
settlement of such list and that he has a good defence to the 

5 
10 
25 
30 
40 
45 
50 
6 
,claim of the banking company on merits, the High Court 
may vary the list and pass such orders in relation thereto as it 
thinks fit: 
Provided that the High Court may, if it so thinks fit, 
entertain the application after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days. 
(10) Nothing in this section shall-
(a) apply to a debt which has been secured by a 
mortgage of immovable property, if a third party has any 
interest in such immovable property; or 
(b) prejudice the rights of the official liquidator to 
recover any debt due to a banking company under any other 
law for the time being in force. 
45E. Special provisions to make calls on contributories.-
Notwithstanding that the list of the contributories has not been 
settled under section 184 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII 
of 1913), the High Court may, if it appears to it necessary 
or expedient so to do, at any time after making a winding up 
order, make a call on and order payment thereof by any eontri-
butory under sub-section (1) of section 187 of the Indian Com-
panies Act, 1913, if such contributory has been placed on the 
list of contributories by the official liquidator and has not appear-
ed to dispute his liability. 
45F. Documents of banking company to be eviden~.-(lj 
Entries in the books of account or other documents of 
a banking 'company which is beiq wound up shall be 
admitted in evidenoe in all proceedings by or against the 
banking company; and all such entries may be proved either 
by the production of the books of account Grother documents of 
the banking company containing such entries or by the pro-
duction of a copy of the entries, certified by the official liquidator 
under his signature and stating that it is a true copy of the 
original entries and that such original entries are contained in 
the !.>ooks of account or other documents of the banking company 
in his possession. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (I of 1872), all such entries in the 
books of account or other documents of a banking company 
shall. as against the directors of the banking company in respect 
of which the winding up order has been made before the com-
mencement of the Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1953, 
be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters purporting to 
be therein recorded, 
45G. Public examination of directors and auditors.-(l) 
Where an order has been made for the winding up of a banking 
company, the official 'liquidator shall submit a report whether 
in his opinion any loss has been caused td the banking company 
since its formation by any act or omission (whether or not a 
fraud has been committed by such act or omission) of any person 
in the promotion or formation of the banking company or of any 
director or auditor of the banking company. 
(2) If, on consideration of the report submitted under sub-
section (1), the High Court is of opinion that any person 

.. ; 
who has taken part in the promotion or formation of the banking 
company or has been a director or an auditor of the banking 
company should be publicly examined. it shaE hold a public 
sitting on a date to be appointed for that purpose and direct that 
such person, director or auditor shall attend thereat and shall be 5 
publicly examined as to the promotion or formation or the con-
duct of the business of the banking company, or as to his conduct 
and dealings, in so far as they relate to the affairs of the b3nking 
company. 
(3) The official liquidator shall take part in the examination 10 
and for that purpose may, if specially authorised by the High 
Court in that behalf. employ such legal assistance as may 
be sanctioned by the High Court. 
(4) Any creditor or contributory may also take part in thl" 
examination either personally or by any person entitled to appear 15 
before the High Court. 
(5) The High Court may put such questions to the person 
examined as it thinks fit. 
(6) The person examined shall be examined on oaLh and 
shall answer all such questions as the High Court may put 20 
or allow to be put to him. 
(7) A person ordered to be examined under this section may, 
at his own cost. employ any person entitled to appear before 
the High Court who shall be at liberty to put to him such 
questions as the High Court may deem just for the purpose 25 
of enabling him to .explain or qualify any answer given by him: 
Provided that if he is, in the opinion of the High Court, 
exculpated from any charges or suggestions made against him, 
the High Court may allow him such costs in its discretion as it 
may deem fit. ,30 
(8) Notes of the examination shall be taken down in writing, 
and shall be read over to or by, and signed by, the person 
examined and may thereafter be used in evidence against him in 
any proceeding, civil or criminal, and shall be open to the inspec-
tion of any creditor or contributory at all reasonable times. SiS 
(9) Where on such examination, the High Court is of 
opinion (whether a fraud has been committed or not)-
(a) that a person who has been a director of the banking 
company is not fit to be a director of a company, or 
(b) that a person who has been an auditor of the banking 40 
comapny or a partner of a firm acting as such auditor is not 
fit to act as an auditor of a company or to be a partner of a 
firm acting as such auditor, 
the High Court may make an order that that person shall 
not, without the leave of the High Court, be a director of, or in 45 
any way, whether directly or indirectly, be concerned or take 
part in the management of any company or, as the case may be, 
act as an auditor of, or be a partner of a firm acting as auditors 
of, any company for such period not exceeding five years as may 
be specified in the order. 50 

8 
45H. Special provision8 for a.B8e8sing damages against delin-
quent directors, etc.-(l) Where an application is made to the-
High Court under section 235 of the Indian Companies Act. 
1913 (VII of 1913) against any promoter, director, manager, liqui-
dator or officer of a banking company for repayment or restoration 
of any money or property and the applicant makes out a prima 
facie case against such person, the High Court shall make-
an order against such person to repay and restore the money or 
property unless he proves that he is not liable to make the repay-
10 ment or restoration either wholly or in part: 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Provided that where such an order is made jointly against 
two or more such persons, they shall be jointly and severally 
liable to make the repayment or restoration of the money or 
property. 
(2) Where an application is made to the Hi~h Court 
under section 235 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) 
and the High Court has reason to believe that a property 
belongs to any promoter, director, manager, liquidator or officer 
of the banking company, whether the property stands in the name 
of such person or any other person as the ostensible owner, then, 
the High Court may, at any time, whether before or after making 
an order under sub-section (1), direct the attachment of such pro-
perty, or such portion thereof, as it thinks fit and the property so-
attached shall remain subject to attachment unless the ostensible-
owner can prove to the satisfaction of the High Court that 
he is the real owner and the provisions of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908) relating to attachment of property 
shall, as far as may be, apply to such attachment. 
451. Duty o~ directors and officers of banking compa;ny to 
assist in the realisation of property.-Every director or other 
officer of a banking company which is being wound up shall give 
such assistance to the official liquidator as he may require in the-
realisation and distribution of the property of the banking com-
pany and if the director or other officer fails to do so, he shall 
be guilty of contempt of court. 
45J. Special provisions for punishing offences in relation to-
banking companies being wound up.-(l) The High Court 
may, jf it thinks fit, take cognizance of and try in a summary way 
any offence alleged to have been committed by any person who 
has taken part in the promotion or formation of the banking 
company which is being wound up or by any director, manager or 
officer thereof: 
Provided that the offence is one punishable under this Act 
or under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913). 
(2) When trying any such offence as aforesaid, the High 
Court may also try any other offence not referred to in sub-
sectidn (1) which is an offence with which the accused may, under 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), be charged 
at the same trial. 

9 
(3) In any case tried summarily under sub-section (1), the 
High Coqrt-
(a) need not summon any witness, if it is satisfied that 
the evidence of such witness will not be material; 
(b) shall not be bound to adjourn a trial for any purpose & 
unless such adjournment is, in the opinion of the High 
Court, necessary in the interests of justice; 
(c) shall, before passing any sentence, record judgment 
embodying the substance of the evidence and also the parti-
culars specified in section 263 of the Code of Criminal Prace- 10-
dure, 1898 (Act V of 1898). so far as that section may be appli-
cable; 
and nothing contained in sub-section (2) of section 262 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall apply to any such triaL 
(4) All offences in relation to winding up alleged to have been ]5-
committed by any person specified in sub-section (1) which are 
punishable under this Act or under the Indian Companies Act, 
1913 (VII of 1913). and which are not tried in a summary way 
under sub-section (1) shall, notwithstanding anything to the 
cctntrary contained in that Act or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 20-
1898 (Act V of 1898) or in any other law for the time being i.n 
force, be taken cognizance of and tried by a Judge of the High 
Court other than the J ud~e for the time being dealing with 
the proceedings for the winding up of the banking company. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in :zo· 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), the High 
Court may take cognizance of any offence under this section 
without the accused being committed to it for trial and all such 
trials shall be without the aid of a jury. 
45K. Power of High Court to enforce schemes of 3(} 
arrangements, etc.-(1) Where a High Court makes an order 
under section 153 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) 
sanctioning a compromise or arrangement in respect of a banking 
company, it shall have power to supervise the carrying out of the 
compromise or arrangement and may at the time, of making such 3J>. 
order or at any time thereafter lZive such directions in regard to 
any matter or make such modifications in the compromise or 
arrangement as it may consider necessary for the proper working 
of the compromise or arrangement. 
(2) If the High Court is satisfied that a compromise or 40 
arrangement sanctioned under section 153 of the Indian Companies 
Act. 1913 (VII of 1913) cannot be worked satisfactorily with or 
without modifications, it may. either on its own motion or on the 
application of any person interested in the affairs of the banking 
company, make an order winding up the banking company and 45 
such an order shall be deemed to be an order made under section 
162 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall. so far as they may, 
apply to a banking company in respect of which an order under 
section 153 of the Indian Companies Act. 1913 (VII of 1913) 50-
sanctioning a compromise or arrangement has been made before 
the commencement of the Banking Companies (Amendment) 
Act, 1953. ..<·'~\~1 

10 
1.5 
:20 
:25 
:30 
-40 
10 
45L. Public uamination of direc.tors and auditor" etc., in 
respect of a banking com.pany u.nder schemes of arrangement.--
(1) Where an application for sanctioning a compromise or arrange-
ment in respect of a banking company is made under section 153 
of the Indian Companies Act. 1913 (VII of 1913) or where such 
sanction has been given and the High Court if of opinion, 
whether on a report of the Reserve Bank or otherwise, that any 
person who has taken part in the promotion or formation of the 
banking company or has been a director or auditor of the banking 
company should be publicly examined. it may direct such exami-
nation of such person and~the provisions of section 45G shall, as 
far as may be, apply to the banking company as they apply to a 
banking company which is being wound up. 
(2) Where a compromise or arrangement is sanctioned under 
section 153 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) in 
respect of a banking company. the provisions of section 235 of 
the said Act and of section 45H of this Act shall, as far as may 
be, apply to the banking company as they apply to a banking 
company which is being wound up as if the order sanctioning 
the compromise or arrangement were an order for the windihg 
up of the banking company. 
45M. Special provisions for banking companies working under 
schemes of a'1'Tangement at the commence,ment of the 
Amend~nt Act.-Where any compromise or arrangement sanc-
tioned in respect of a banking company under section 153 of the 
Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) ~being worked at the 
commencement of the BankinE Companies (Amendment) Act, 
1953, the High Court may, if it so thinks fit. on the application of 
such banking company,-
(a) excuse any delay in carrying out any of the provi-
sions of the comprOmlse or arrangement: or 
(b) allow the banking company to settle the list of its 
debtors in accordance with the provisions of section 45D and 
in such a case, the provisions of the said section shall, as far 
as may be, apply to the banking company as they apply to a 
banking company which is being wound up as if the order 
sanctioning the compromise or arrangement were an order for 
the winding up of the banking company. 
45N. Appeals.-(1) An appeal shall lie from any order or 
decision of the High Court in a civil proceeding under this Act 
when the amount or value of the subject-matter of the claim ex-
ceeds five thousand rupees. 
(2) The High Court may by rules provide for an appeal 
against any order made under section 45J and the conditions 
subject to which any such appeal would lie. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-
section (2) and notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, every order or decision of the 
High Court shall be final and binding for all purposes as between 
the banking company on the one hand, and all persons who are 
parties thereto and all persons claiming through or under them 
or any of them, on the other hand. 

11 
450. Speciat period of limitation.-(l) Notwithstanding any-
-thing to the contrary contained in the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 
(IX of 1908) or in any other law for the time being in force, in 
.computing the period of limitation prescribed for a suit or appli-
.cation by a banking company which is being wound up, the period 5 
commencing from the date of the presentation of the petition for 
the winding up of the banking company shall be excluded. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
-the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 1908) or section 235 of the 
Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) or in any other law for 10 
the time being in force, there shall be no period of limitation for 
the recovery of arrears of calls from any director of a banking 
company which is being wound up or for the enforcement by the 
banking company against any of its directors of any claim based 
.(}n a contract, express or implied; and in respect of all other If) 
claims by the banking company against its directors, the period 
-of limitation shall be twelve years from the date of the accrual 
-of such claims. 
(3) 'I1he .provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, 
apply to a banking company in respect of which apeti-tion for the 20 
winding up has been presented ·before the commenoement of the 
Banking Companies (Amendment) Act, 1953. 
45P. Reserve Bank to tender advice in winding up proceed-
ings.-Where in any proceeding for the winding up of a banking 
eompany in which any person other than the Reserve Bank has 25 
been appointed as the official liquidator and the High Court 
has directed the official liquidator to obtain the advice of the 
Reserve Bank on any matter (which it is hereby empowered to 
do), it shall be lawful for the Reserve Bank to examine the record 
of any such proceeding and tender such advice on the matter as 30 
it may think fit. 
45Q. Power to inspect.-( 1) The Reserve Bank shall, on being 
directed so to do by the Central Government or by the High 
Court, cause an inspection to be made by one or more of its 
officers of a banking company which is being wound up and its 35 
books and accounts. 
(2) On such inspection, the Reserve Bank shall submit 1ts 
report to the Central Government and the High Court. 
(3) If the Central Government, dn consideration of the report 
of the Reserve Bank, is of opinion that there has been a subs- 40 
tantial irregularity in the winding up proceedings, it may bring 
such irregularity to the notice of the High Court for such action 
as the High Court may think fit. 
(4) On receipt of the report of the Reserve Bank under sub-
section (2) or on any irregularity being brought to its notice by 45 
the Central Government under sub-section (3), the High Court 
may, if it deems fit, after giving notice to and hearing the Central 
Government in regard to the report, give such directions as it 
may consider necessary. 

5 
10 
l.'i 
20 
25 
30. 
35 
40 
45 
I!! 
45R. Power to call for returns and injormation.-The Reserve-
Bank may, at any time by a notice in writing, require the liqui-
dator of a banking company to furnish it, within such time as may 
be specified in the notice or such further time as the Reserve-
Bank may allow, any statement or information relating to or 
connected with the winding up of the banking company; and it 
shall be the duty of every liquidator to comply with such 
requiremen ts. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section and section 
45Q, a banking company working out a compromise or arrange-
ment but· prohibited from receiving fresh deposits, shall, as far 
as may ,be, be deemed to be a banking company which is being 
wound up. 
45S. Chief 'P"'esidency magistrate and district magistrate t~ 
assist otJicial liquidator in taking charge of property of banking 
company being wound up.-( 1) For the purpose of enabling the-
official liquidator or the special officer appointed under sub-section 
(3) of section 37 to take in his custody or under his control, all 
property, effects and actionable claims to which a banking com-
pany, which has been ordered to be wound up, is or appears t.o 
be entitled, the official liquidator or the special officer, as the case 
may be, may request in writing the chief presidency magistrate' 
or the district magistrate, within whose jurisdiction any property, 
books of account or other documents of such banking company 
may be situate or is to be found, to take possession thereof, and 
the chief presidency magistrate or the district magistrate, as the-
case may be, shall, on such request being made to him, take posses-
sion of such property, books of account or other documents and 
forward them to the official liquidator or the special officer. 
(2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provi-
sions of sub-section (1), the chief presidency magistrate or the-
district magistrate may take or cause to be taken such steps and 
use or cause to be used such force as may, in his opinion. be-
necessary. 
45T. Enforcement of OTders and decisions of High Court.-
(1) All orders made in any civil proceeding by a High Court 
may be enforced in the same manner in which decrees of such 
court made in any suit pending -therein may be enforced. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), a liquidator 
may apply for the execution of a decree by a court other than t.he 
one which made it on production of a certificate granted under 
sub-section (6) of section 45D and on his certifying to such other 
court in writing the amount remaining due or relief remaining 
unenforced under the decree. 
(3) Without prejupice to the provisions of sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2), any amount found due to the banking company 
by an order or decision of the High Court may, with the leave of 
the High Court. be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of 
l~nd revenue. 

13 
45U. Power of High Court to make Tules.-The High Court 
may make rules consistent with this Act and the rules made 
under section 52 prescribing-
(a) the manner in which inquiries and proceedings under 
Part III or Part IliA may be held; 5 
(b) the offences which may be tried summarily; 
(c) the authority to whicl\ and the conditions subject to 
which appeals may be preferred and the manner in which 
such appeals may be filed and heard; 
(d) any other matter for which provision has to be made 10 
for enabling the High Court to effectively exercise its func-
tions under this Act. 
45V. Part II not to apply to banking companies being wound 
'Up.-Nothing contained in Part II shall apply to a banking com-
pany which is being wound up. 15 
45W. Validation of certain proceedings.~Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 45B or any other provision of this 
Part or in section 11 of the Banking Companies (Amendment) 
Act. 1950 (XX of 1950), no proceeding held, judgment delivered 
or decree or order made before the commencement of the Bank- 20 
ing Companies (Amendment) Act. 1953. by any court other 
than the High Court in respect of any matter over which the 
High Court has jurisdiction under this Act shall be invalid or be 
deemed ever to have been invalid merely by reason of the fact 
that such proceeding, judgment, decree or order was held, deliver- 25 
ed or made by a court other than the High Court." 
11. Amendment of section 52, Act X of 1949.-ln section 52 of the 
)Jrincipal Act,-
.(a) to sub-section (2), the following shall be added, namely:-
"and the form in which the official liquidator may file 30 
lists of debtors to the Court having jurisdiction under Part III 
or Part IlIA and the particulars which such lists may contain 
and any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed"; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: - 35 
"(4) The Central Government may by rules made under 
this section annul, alter or add to. all or any of the provisions 
of the Fourth Schedule." 
12. Insertion of new Schedule In Act X of 1949.-After the Third 
Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be insert- 40 
oed, namely:-
"THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 45D (2)] 
LIST OF DEBTORS 
1. The official liauidator shall from time to time submit lists of 45 
ciebtors to the High- Court, each list being verified by an affidavit. 

14 
2. Every such list shall contain the following particulars:-
(a) names and addresses- of the debtors; 
(b) amount of debt due to the baJllking company by each 
~~; . 
5 (c) rate of interest, if any, and the date up to which such 
interest has been calculated in the case of each debtor; 
(d) description of papers, writings and documents, if anYr 
relating td each debt; . . 
(e) relief or reliefs claimed against each debtor. 
10 3. (a) In every such list, the official liquidator shall distinguish 
between the debts for which the banking company holds any security 
other than a personal security and the debts for which no security or 
only a personal security is given; 
(b) In the case of secured debts, particulars of the securities claim-
15 ed by the banking company, and whenever possible their estimated 
value, and the names and addresses of person or persons, if any, paving. 
an interest in the securities or the right of redemption therein; 
(c) In case the debt is guaranteed by any person or persons,. 
the name and address of the guarantor or guarantors with particulars 
20 as to the extent to which the debt is guaranteed and description of 
documents, papers or writings in support of such guarantee. 
4. If the debtor is adjudged insolvent either before or after he has 
been included in any such list, but before such list is settled, the 
name and address of the assignee or the receiver of his estate, as the 
25 case may be, should be stated in, or added to, the list. 
5. If the original debtor dies either before or after he has been 
included in any such list, but before such list is settled, there shl'lll be 
substituted in his place the names and addresses of his legal represen-
tatives as far as the official liquidator is able to ascertain." 
30 13. Repeal of Ordinance 4 of 1953.-(1) The Banking Companies 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1953 (4 of 1953) is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken in the exercise of any -power conferred by or under the said 
Ordinance shall be deemed io have been done or taken in the 
35 exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act, as if this Act 
were in force on the day on 'which such thing was done or action 
was taken. 

15 
STATEMENT'OF OBJECTS AND .REASONS 
The Banking Companies Act, 1949 (X of 1949) was passed to-
ensure proper administration of the banking companies in India. 
The liquldation of banks, however, continued to be governed by the' 
prO'V'isio1'ls of the Indian Companies Ad, 1913. 
Experience of the liquidation of a large nUlJl'ber of banks that 
failed during the post-war ,and post-partition period disclosed that 
the procedure for the liquidation of joint stock companies was totally 
inadequate for'the liquidation of banking companies in a manner 
satisfactory to the depositors. A bank has a far larger number of 
debtors than a joint stock company of a comparable size, and the 
necessity to pursue legal proceedings agair:st each debtor, quite fre-
quently in different courts, involves considerable expenditure and 
immense delay. In order to remove such difficulties, the Banking 
Companies Act was amended in 1950. 
The law thus amended, however, did not go far enough and com-
plaints continued to be received about the distress of the depositors. 
A committee was, therefore, appointed in July, 1950 to examine the 
difficulties ar.d defects in the existing liquidation procedure and to 
recommend changes in law, procedure and machinery, in order to 
facilitate the speedy disposal of proceedings in liquidation. The 
Committee submitted its report in December, 1952 aI1d the report 
discloses that 321 banks were under liquidation under the various 
courts dating from 1926, with outside liabilities of about Rs. 30 crores 
and that the procedure for winding up of banking companies is cum-
bersome, prolonged and expensive. The Committee has recommend-
ed certain administrative as well as legislative measures for simplify-
ing the procedure and expediting the proceedings. The Reserve 
Bank, the State Governments and the various High Courts were 
consulted on the recommendations of the Committee and the present 
Bill is based on the recommendations of the Committee and the 
suggestions of the authorities consulted. 
The recommendations of the Committee requiring administrative 
action are being implemented. It was the intention of the Govern-
ment to give effect to the recommendations requiring legislation 
~jmultaneously, but on account ot the pre-occupation of Parl:ament 
with other urgent legislative measures during the last session, it 
was not found possible to have the Bill enacted during that session. 
Meanwhile, certain data recently collected about 82 banks in liqui-
dation in West Bengal showed that while the expenses of liquida-
tion amounted to Rs. 39·81 lakvs, the moneys returned to the depo-
sitors totalled to only Rs. 17·64 lakhs of which Rs. 15' 61 lakhs were 
paid by one single bank. The publication of the Committee's report 
has evoked hopes in the minds of a large number of distressed depo-
sitors that implementation would soon follow and numerous requests 
were hein.g received urging immediate action. It was also not pos-
sible to implement some of the administrative measl,lres without an 
amendment of the Act. As the circumstances required immediate 
action, an Ordinance was promulgated on the 24th October, 1953-
The Banking Companies (Amendment) Ordinance, 1953 (4 of 1953). 
The present Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance by an Act of 
Parliament and the notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the 
provisions thereof. 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DELHI; . 
The 12th November, 1953. 

16 
Notes on clauses 
Cla,,* 2.-The expression 'court' was defined in section 5 to mean 
the court having jurisdiction under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 
In Parts m and rnA, the e~pression 'High Court has been used. 
The definition of 'court' in section 5 is misleading and has been omitted. 
Clause 3.-In Parts III and IlIA, the expression High Court has 
'been used. Its jurisdiction has been defined in sect\ons 45B 45C 
and 45J. The High Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction t~ deal 
with three distinct classes of case!r-
(a) proceedings in relation to suspension of business of banks; 
(b) winding up proceedings and questions which relate to 
or arise in the course of the winding up of the banking company, 
whether such question has arisen or arises before or after the 
winding up order; . 
(c) schemes of compromise or arrangement 'Jnder section 153 
of the Indian Companies Act, 1913. 
Under section 45J, the High Court will have jurisdiction to 
"try all offences under the Banking Companies Act as also under the 
Indian Companies Act. Under section 45C, it has been provided that 
all proceedings, whether civil or criminal, pending in any court, other 
than the High Court, shall be automatically stayed as soon as 
the Act comes into force. The High Court may transfer to itself 
such of the proceedings as it thinks fit. Cases which are net so trans-
ferred to the High Court shall be continued in the court in which 
they are pending. 
Clause 5-section 37.-The appointment of special officer to take 
into his custody or under his control all the assets, books and docu-
,ments of a banking company which has applied for suspension of 
business is considered necessary in the interests of the depositors in 
order to prevent persons with access to the banking company's re-
-cords from concealing relevant books or altering entries therein. 
Clause 6-section 38A.-The practice which prevails in all the 
States, except Bombay, is that a private liquidator is appdinted by the 
court as official liquidator. It is considered desirable for greater 
f!xpedition and reduction in costs of liquidation and from other stand-
points that a court liquidator should be appointed who shall be in 
charge of all liquidation proceedings. -it has, therefore, been provid-
ed that a court liquidator should be appointed by every High Court 
. unless the Central Government grants an exemption in this behalf. 
'The court liquidator shall be the official liquidator, unless the High 
Court otherwise directs. In respect of proceedings now pending 
before any private liquidator, the private liquidator shall, unless the 
High Court otherwise directs, vacate his office and the vacancy shall 
be filled in by the appointment of the court liquidator as the official 
liquidator. An exception has been made in respect of the Reserve 
Bank in section 39. When the Reserve Bank makes an application 
in this behalf. the Reserve Bank shall be appointed as the official 
liquidator. 
Clause 8-section 43.-This seeks to clarify the intention under-
lying section 43. In interpreting the existing section 43, some High 
Courts have held that depositors should be required to file their 

17 
claims. The revised section dispenses with the nec~ssity of filing 
such formal claims in order to rank for dividend. 
Section 43A.-In some countries, the small depositor is an object 
of particular solicitude. The bulk of savings bank account holders 
belong to the poor and lower middle class. The distress caused to 
these classes, when a bank fails, is relatively greater. Preferential 
payment of Rs. 100 is intended to afford tnem some relief. 
Clause 9-section 45.-Section 45 has been amended to clarify the 
functions of the Reserve Bank in relation to schemes of arrangement. 
A certificate of the Reserve Bank under section 45 of the Banking 
Companies Act shall state that-
(a) the arrangement is not detrimental to the interests of the 
deposi tors; and 
(b) that arrangement is not impracticable. 
It is considered that on a direction from the High Court, the Reserve 
Bank should investigate into the affairs of the bank and the conduct 
of the rast management. Such a report of the Reserve Bank will be 
helpfu to the High Court in exercising its discretion in sanctionin.g 
the scheme. 
Clause 10 
Section 45A.-This is intended to override the provisions of any 
law which is repugnant to this Part and in so far as such law is not 
so repugnant, such law shall continue to apply to proceedings under 
this Part. 
Sections 45B, 45C and 45J.-The intention underlying these sections 
is to allow the liquidator to proceed with all proceedings in one court, 
namely, the High Court, and avoid recourse to a multiplicity of courts. 
The High Court has, however, been given the discretion not to transfer 
to itself any pending proceeding, if such transfer causes hardship to 
the parties. 
Section 45D.-Multiplicity of proceedings has been one of the 
major evils and one of the chief causes of delay and expense in liqui-
dation proceedings. The ordinary legal machinery for collection of 
debts by filing suits is slow and subject to delaying tactics on the 
part of the debtors. This section provides for a simple procedure for 
settlement of the list of debtors on the analogy of the list of contribu-
tories under the Indian Companies Act, 1913. 
Section 45G.-Under the Indian Companies Act, calls cannot be 
made .m contributories unless the entire list of contributories is settl-
ed. Such settlement is delayed when any of the contributories d,15-
putes his liability. It is, therefore, considered necessary that in the 
case of banking companies, there should be a departure from the 
normal procedure of the Indian Companies Act and that contributo-
ries on the list who do not dispute their liability should be called 
upon to pay. 
Section 45F.-It is often difficult for a liquidator to prove the 
entries in documents of banking companies. To obviate such difficulty, 
a simple mode of proving such entries has been provided. 

18 
. Under the ordinary law, such entries, by themselves, are not sum-
Clent to charge any person with liability. It is very difficult for a 
liquidator to produce the independent evidence required by law to 
sub;tantiate such entries. This difficulty is acutely felt in misfeasance 
summons where large amounts are claimed from directors. At the 
same time, to make a general rule that such entries shall be taken as 
correct and sufficient proof of the transactions to which they relate 
would hardly be justified. The scope of section 45F(2) has, there-
fore. been restricted only to directors of banks which have gone 
into liquidation before the Amendment Act comes into force and the 
entries in the books of account will be prima facie evidence of the 
truth of all matters purporting to be recorded therein against the 
dirtc:tQr.s and the onus of proving the contrary will be on the direc-
tors. 
Section 45G.-In the case of a banking company, the depositors, 
whose moneys are liable to be squandered, have no voice in the 
appointment of directors. Since the failure of a bank is mostly due 
to mismanagement and misdeeds on the part of the directors, it is 
l'eaeonable that the delinquent directors and the auditors should be 
made answerable for defaults and be liable to penal ties. 
Section 54H. The practical difficulty of establishing a claim and 
ensuring its satisfaction under section 235 of the Indian Companies 
Act is co.usiderable. This provision is intended to lessen such diffi-
culty. 
The ~igh Court has also been given powers to attach at any 
time any property which, in the opinion of the High Court, belongs 
to, aDY' promoter, director or officer of the banking company, though 
swzh, property may stand in the name of a benamdar of such a person. 
Section 45I.-This provision has been introduced on the lines of 
aee:tlion 43 c:Jf the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909. 
Section 45K.-This seeks to empower the High Court to exercise 
control over schemes of arrangement and also order winding up of 
banking companies when such schemes are found to be unworkable. 
Section 4SL.-It provides that the provisions of public examination 
of directors and auditors and those of section 235 of the Indian Com-
~es Act, 1913, which are applicable to banks in liquidation onlYl 
Shall also be availal!tle in respect of banks under schemes of arrange-
ment. 
Section 45M.-This seeks to give the benefit of the slmple procedure 
of the settlement of debtors also to banks at present working under 
schemes of arrangement. 
Section 45N.-It provides for a restricted right of appeal in certain 
eases. 
Section 450 . .:-This section deals with the question of limitation. 
In any suit or application by a bankin,li!; company which is being 
woUlld up, limitation should cease to run from the date of the presen-
.tion of thE: petition for winding up. It is also necessary to provide 
that there should be no limitation in the case of claims of a banking 
company arising ex contractu against the directors. In all other 

19 
claims of the banking company against-directors, the period of limi-
tation should be twelve years. This section has been given retros-
pective effect. 
Section 4SP.-It reproduces the existing section 15D. 
Section 45Q.-It provides for a cl0set'Supervision by the Reserve 
Bank over banking companies in liquidation. 
Section 45R.-This would enable the Reserve Bank to keep itself 
in touch with liquidation proceedings and schemes of arrangement and 
would enable Government to decide when an inspection of any alich 
bank is necessary. 
Section 45S.-It reproduces the existing section 45E with slight 
modifications. 
Section 45T.-45T(1) reproduces the existina section 45H. 45T(2) 
and 45T(3) are intended to exp~dite execution of orders and decree. 
passed against debtors. 
Section 45U.-It deals with the rule-making powers ot the Hiib 
Court. 
section 45V.-Obviously, provisions which are intended to appl, 
to a bank which is carrying on normal business cannot be applicable 
to a bank in liquidation. 
Section 45W.-Certain proceedings pending before courts other 
than the High Court which ought to have been transferred to tJie 
High Court have not been so transferred. This seeks to vali~ 
all such proceedings. 
Clause ll-section 52.-Amendment of section 52(2) is oBly 
consequential. 
A new sub-section has been inserted as sub-section (4) to confer 
powers on the Central Government to frame rules consistent with 
section 45D for the effective implementation of the scheme of settle-
ment of liat of debtors. 
Clause 12.-The Fourth Schedule.-This Schedule specifies the 
particulars which an application for the settlement of the list of 
debtors should contain. 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING COMPANIES ACT, 1949 
(X OF 1949) 
• • • 
Section 5(1)(e) 
• 
5. InterpretatioD.-(I) In this Act, unless there is anythIng 
repugnant in the subject or context,-
• • • • • 
(e) "Court" means the Court having jurisdiction under the 
Indian Companies Act, 1913; 
• • • • • 
PART III 
SUSPENSION OF BUSINESS AND WINDING UP OF BANKING COMPANIES 
37. Suspension of buslness.-(I) The Court may on the application 
of a banking company which is temporarily unable to meet its 
obligations make an order (a copy of which it shall cause to be 
forwarded to the Reserve Bank) staying the commencement or conti-
nuance of all actions and proceedings against the company for a fixed 
period of time on such terms and conditions as it shall think fit and 
proper, and may from time to time extend the period so however 
that the total period of moratorium shall not exceed six months. 
, (2) No such application shall be maintainable unless it is ac-
companied by a report of the Reserve Bank indicating that in the 
opinion of the Reserve Bank the banking company will be able to 
pay its debts if the application is granted: 
Provided that the Court may, for sufficient reasons, grant relief 
under this section even if the application is not accompanied by such 
report, and where ·such relief is granted, the Court shall call for a 
report from the Reserve Bank on the affairs of the banking company, 
on receipt of which it may either rescind any order already passed 
or pass such further orders thereon as may be just and proper in the 
circumstances. 
38. WlncUng up by Court.-(I) Without prejudice to the provisions 
contained in section 162 or section 271 of the Indian Companies Act, 
1913 (VII of 1913), and without prejudice to its powers under 
section 37, the Court shall order the winding up of a banking com-
pany if it is unable to pay its debts and the Court shall also order 
the winding up of a banking company if the Reserve Bank appliei in 
this behalf to' the Court. 
(2) The Reserve Bank t;l1ay make an application under this section 
only if it is directed so to do by order under clause (b) of sub-
section (4) of section 35 or if the banking company has failed to 
comply within due time with the demand contained in a notice under 
sub-section (5) of section 46. 
20 

21 
(3) Without prejudice to the prOVISIons contained in section 163 
of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VlI of 1913), a banking company 
shall be deemed to be unable to pay its debts if it has refused to meet 
any lawful demand for payment made at any of its offices or branches 
within two working days, if such demand is made at a place where 
there is an office, branch or agency of the Reserve Bank, or within 
five working days, if such demand is made elsewhere, and if the 
Reserve Bank certifies in writing that the banking company is unable 
to pay its debts. 
(4) A copy of every application by the Reserve Bank under sub-
section (1) shall be sent by the Reserve Bank to the registrar. 
39. Reserve Bank to be oftlc1al liquJdator.-Notwithstanding any-
thing contained in section 175 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 
(VII of 1913), where in any proceeding for the winding up by the 
Court of a banking company, an application is made by the Reserve 
Bank in this behalf, the Reserve Bank shall be appointed as the 
official liquidator of the banking company in such proceeding. 
40. Stay of proceedlngs.-Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in section 173 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 
1913), the Court shall not make any order staying the proceedings 
in relation to the winding up of a banking company, unless the court 
is satisfied that an arrangement has been made whereby the company 
can pay its depositors in full as their claims accrue. 
41. Report 01 liquldator.-Notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in section 177B of the Indian Companies Act, 
1913 (VII of 1913), where a winding up order is made in respect of 
a banking company, the official liquidator shall submit a preliminary 
report to the Court within two months from the date of the order 
giving the information required by that section so far as it is avail-
able to him, to enable the Court to order the payment of a 
preliminary dividend if sufficient asset., are available. 
42. Power to dispense with meetings of creditors, etc.-Notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in sections 178A and 
183 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), the Court may, 
in the proceedings for winding up a banking company, dispense with 
any meetings of creditors or contributories or with the appointment 
of a committee of inspection if it considers that no object will be 
secured thereby sufficient to justify the delay and expense. 
43. Booked depositors' credits to be deemed proved.-Notwith- • 
standing anything to the contrary contained in section 191 of the 
Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), the Court shall presume 
that the amounts shown in the books of a banking company as stand-
ing to the credit of depositors are proved without requiring further 
proof from the depositors concerned unless the official liquidator 
shows that there is reason for doubting any particular entry. 
44. Restriction on voluntary winding up.-Notwithstanding any-
thing to the contrary contained in section 203 of the Indian Com-
panies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), no banking company which holds a 
licence granted under section 22 may be voluntarily wound up unless 
the Re$erve Bank certifies in writing that the company is able to 
pay in full all its debts to its creditors as they accrue, and without 

22 
prejudice to the provisions contained in sections 218 and 220 of that 
Act, the Court shall, on the application of the Reserve Bank, order 
the winding up of the company by the Court if at any 5taee during 
the voluntary winding up proceedings the company is not able to 
meet such debts as they accrue. 
44A. Procedure for amalgamation of banking com:pales.-(1) 
~otwithstanding B:nything contained in any law for the time being 
m force, no bankmg company shall be amalgamated with another 
banking company, unless a scheme containing the terms of such 
amalgamation has been placed in draft before the shareholders of 
each of the banking companies concerned separately, and approved 
by a resolution passed by a majority in number representing two-
thirds in value of the shareholders of each of the said companies, 
present either in person or by proxy at a meeting called for the 
purpose. 
(2) Notice of every such meeting as is referred to in sub-section (1) 
shall be given to every shareholder of each of the banking companies 
concerned in accordance with the relevant articles of association, 
indicating the time, place and object of the meeting, and shall also 
be published at least once a week for three consecutive weeks in Dot 
less than two newspapers which circulate in the locality or localities 
where the registered othces 01 Lne banking companies concerned are 
situated, one of such newspapers being in a language commonly 
understood in the locality or localities. 
(3) Any shareholder, who has voted against the scheme of amalga-
mation at the meeting or has given notice in writing at or prior to 
the meeting to the company concerned or to the presiding officer of 
the meeting that he dissents from the scheme of amalgamation, shall 
be entitled, in the event of the scheme being sanctioned by the Reserve 
Bank, to claim from the banking company concerned, in respect of 
the shares held by him in that company, their value as determined by 
the Reserve Bank when sanctioning the scheme and such determina-
tion by the Reserve Bank as to the value of the shares to be paid to 
the dissenting shareholder shall be final for all purposes. 
(4) If the scheme of amalgamation is approved by the requisite 
majority of shareholders in accordance with the provisions of this 
section, it shall be submitted to the Reserve Bank for sanction and 
&hall, if sanctioned by the Reserve Bank by an order in writing 
passed in this behalf, be binding on the banking companies concern-
ed and also on all the shareholders thereof. .. ' 
(5) Where a scheme of amalgamation is sanctioned by the Reserve 
Bank under the provisions of this section, the Reserve Bank shan 
transmit a copy of the order sanctioning the scheme to the registrar 
before whorr. the banking companies concer:ned have been registered, 
and the registrar shall, on receipt of any such order, strike off the 
name of the company (hereinafter in this section referred to as the 
amalgamated banking c~mpany) which by reason of the amalgama-
tion will cease to functIon. 
(6) On the sanctioning of a scheme of amalgamation by the 
Reserve Bank, the property of the amalgamated banking company 
shall, by virtue of the order of sanction, be transferred to and vest 

23 
in! and the liabilities of the said company shall, by virtue of the 
S8.ld order be transferred to, and become the liabilities of the bank-
mg company which under the scheme of amalgamation is' to acquire 
the busIness of the amalgamated banking company, subject in all 
cases to the terms of the order sanctioning the scheme. 
45-. Restdction on compromise or arrangement between banking 
PlMpany and credJtors.-Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
law for the time being in force, no court shall sanction a compromise 
or arrangement between a banking company and its creditors or any 
class of them or between such company and its members or any 
class of them unless the compromise or arrangement is certified by 
the Reserve Bank as not being detrimental to the interests of the 
depositors of such company. • 
PART IlIA 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SPEEDY DISPOSAL OF WINDING UP PROCEEDINGS 
45A. Court deflned.-In this Part and in Part III, "Court" means 
the High Court exercising jurisdiction in the place where the register-
ea office of the banking company which is being wound up is situated 
or, in the case of a bankipg company incorporated outside India 
which is being wound up, where its principal place of business is 
situated, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), or in any notification, 
order or direction issued thereunder or in any other law for the time 
being in force, no other court shall have jurisdiction to entertain 
any matter relating to or arising out of the winding up of a banking 
company. 
45B. Power of Court to decide all claims by or against banldng 
oompanles.-(I) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contain-
ed in the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), or in any other 
law for the time being in force, the Court shall have full power to 
decide all claims made by or against any banking company (includ-
ing claims by or against any of its branches in India) and all questions 
of priorities and all other questions Whatsoever, whether of law or 
fact, which may relate to or arise in the course of the winding up 
of the banking company coming within the cognizance of the Court. 
(2) There shall be a right of appeal from every order or decision 
made under this section which, so far as regards the Court express.-
ing it, conclusively determines the rights of the parties with respect 
to any matter in controversy, and the Court may make rules pres-
cribing the manner in which and the conditions subject to which any 
such appeal may be filed and heard. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and notwithstand-
ing anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
every such order or decision shall be final and binding for all purpos-
es as between, on the one hand, the banking company and, on the 
other hand, all persons who are parties thereto and all persons claim-
ing through or under them or any of them. 
45C. Special provtsimls for punishing offences In relation to com-
panies being wound up.-(1) Notwithstanding anything to the con-
trary contained in the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of .1898), or in any other 

24 
law for the time being in force, the Court may, if it thinks fit, take 
cognizance of and try in a summary way any offence alleged to have 
been committed by any person who has taken part in the formation 
or promotion of the banking company which is being wound up or 
any past or present director, manager or officer thereof: 
Provided that the offence is one punishable under the Indian 
Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), with imprisonment for a term 
which does not exceed two years, or with fine which does not exceed 
one thousand rupees. 
(2) In every case tried summarily under sub-section (1), the 
Court-
(a) need not 'summon any witness, if it is satisfied that the 
evidence of such witness will not be material; 
(b) shall not be bound to adjourn a trial for any purpose 
unless such adjournment is, in the opinion of the Court, necessary 
in the interest of justice; 
(c) shall, before passing sentence, record judgment embody-
ing ijle substance of the evidence and also the particulars speci-
fied in section 263 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1898 (Act 
V of 1898), so far as that section may be applicable; 
and nothing contained in sub-section (2) of section 262 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall apply to any such trial. 
(3) All offences in relation to winding up alleged to have been 
committed by any person speCified in sub-section (1) which are 
punishable under the Indian Companies Act ... 1913 (VII of 1913), and 
which are not tried in a summary way unaer sub-section (1) shall, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in that Act or 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), or in any other 
law for the time being in force, be taken cognizance of and tried by 
a judge of the Court other than the Judge for the time being dealina 
with the proceedings for the winding up of the banking company. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), the Court shall 
take cognizance of any offence under this section without the accus-
ed being committed to it for trial and all such trials shall be without 
the aid of a jury. 
450. Reserve Bank may tender advice in winding upproeeed-
Ings.-Where in any proceeding for the winding up of a bankin, 
company in which any person other than the Reserve Bank has been 
appointed as the official liquidator the Court has directed the official 
liquidator to obtain the advice of the Reserve Bank on any matter 
(which it is hereby empowered to do), it shall be lawful for the 
Reserve Bank to examine the records of any such proceeding and 
tender such advice on the matter as it may think fit. 
45E. District magistrate to assist oftlclall1quldator In taking charee 
of property of banking company being wound up.-For the purpose 
of enabling the official liquidator to take into his custody or under 
his control, all property. effects and actionable claims to which a 
banking company, which has been ordered to be wound up, is or 
appears to be entitled, the official liquidator may request in writina 

25 
the district magistrate, within whose jurisdiction any property. 
books of account or other document of such banking company may 
be situate or is to be found, to take possession thereof. and the district 
magistrate shall, on such request being made to him, take possession 
of such property, books of account or other document and forward 
them to the official liquidator. 
(2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of 
sub-section (1), the district magistrate may take or cause to be taken 
such steps and use or cause to be used such force as may in his 
opinion be necessary. . 
45F. Special period of llmltatlon.-Notwithstanding anything to 
the contrary contained in the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 
1908), or in any other law for the time being in force, in computin. 
the period of limitation prescribed for any suit or application by a 
banking company, the period of one year immediately preceding the 
date of the order for the winding up of the banking company shall 
be excluded. 
456. Power of Court to make rules.-The Court may make rules 
consistent with this Act, concerning the mode of proceedings to be 
had for the decision of all claims or questions and all other proceed-
ings, whether civil or criminal, which are to be decided pursuant to 
the provisions of Part III or Part IlIA and concerning all other 
matters for which provision has to be made for enabling the Court 
to effectively exercise its functions under the said provisions. 
450. Power of Court to enforce orders.-All orders made in any 
civil proceeding by a Court exercising jurisdiction under Part III or 
Part IlIA may be enforced in the same manner in which decrees of 
~\.lCh court made in any suit pending therein may be enforceq. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
flIrt·her to &Jllend the Banking Companies Act, 1949, 
(SAri O. D. Duhmukk, 
Mf1'~r tor ,i"fJ1JCt.) 
GJPD-LAD-aoB M of L-I4-u·53- 1750 