54 of '948· 
Bm No. 50 of 1984 
THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY)· AMENDMENT BILL, 1984 
A 
BILL 
. ·further to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the ·Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Electricity (Supply) Amendment 
Act, 1984. 
• 5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
10 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. • 
2. In section 28 of the E]~tricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (2), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- . 
"(2A) The Board or, as the case may be, the Generating Com-
pany shall, as soon as may be after it has sanctioned any scheme 
which is not of the nature referred to in section 29, forward the 
scheme tel the Authority and, if required by the Authority so to do, 
supply to the Authority any information incIaental or supplementary 
to the scheme within such period as may be specified by the Authority." 
3. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words 
"oue crore of rupees". the words "five crores of rupees" shall be substi-
tuted 
Short 
title 
and com • 
mence-
ment • 
Amend-
mentof 
section 28. 
Amend. 
ment of 
aection 29. 

, 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 2& of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 19(8 deals with the pre-
paration and sanctioJUng DY State Electricity Boards and generating com-
panies of schemes relating to the establishment or acquisition of gene-
rating stations, tie-lines, sub-stations or transmission lines. Under this . 
section, read with. section 29 of the Act, prior concurrence of the Central 
Electricity Authority is necessary for sanctioning any scheme involving 
a capital expenditure exceeding one crore of rupees. In view of the esca-
lation in costs since this limit of one crore of rupees was laid down, 
it is proposed to enhance this limit so that relatively small schemes 
costing up to :five crores of rupees can be sandioned by a Board or a 
generating company without having to go through the detailed procedure 
of obtaining prior concurrence of the Authority. However, as the Autho-
rity is closely involved in the planning process, it would be essential for 
it to have information in :J;"espect of such small schemes also. It is pro-
posed to make suitable provisions for this purpose. . 
2. The Bill seeks to amend sections 28 and 29 of the Electricity (Sup-
ply) Act, 1948 to achieve the above objects . 
• 
Nsw Da.HI; • 
The 2ndMlif" 19h. 
.. 
2 

• 
. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM 'l'HE ELECTRICITY (SUPl'LY) Acr, 1948 
(54 .oF 1948) 
• • • • 
29. (1) Every scheme estimated to 'involve a capital expenditure ex-
c~ng one crore of rupees shall, as soon as may be after its preparation, 
be submitted to the Authority for its concurrence. 
• • • • • 
.. 
Submis. 
sionof 
schemes 
for con-
currence 
of Autho-
rity, etc • 

LO~ SABJlA 
• 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
(Shri Arif Mohd. Kh4n, 
Minister of State in the 
Ministry of Energy.) 