Bill !ie. ,. ., It I 
THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE 
CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOI{ SABRA) 

-
THE nmUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION (AMENDMEnT) BILL, 1957 
(As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. 1, On the title page, for ''Bill No. 50 of 195" ~ "Bill No. 50 
of 1957". 
2. Page 3, .. 
in the marginal heading. to Clause 10, f2..!: "Amendmen" ~ 
"Amendment" • 
3. Page 9, -
:in the marginal heading to Section 21, f.2.!: "Borrwing" ~ 
"Borrowing". 
4. Page 10, line 6, -
for "tengible".~ "tangible ft. 
NEW DELHI, 
'R' 
29th July, 1957 ~ 

BIU lICe ... " IM7. 
THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
(To _ INTllODVCBD IN LoE SAlIBA) 
A 
BILL 
further tg emend th~ Ind1Utrial FNncC C9rporetion Act, 1148 • 
.. 1\ eDaCted by Parliament in th~ Eilhth Year of th~ Republic 
.f IBdfa .. follows:-
J. (I) TbJa Act may be called the Industrial Finance Corpora- Short riO. 
~um (Amendment) Act, 1957. .... cca-
III elU:Cac at. 
, (2) It shall come into force on such dat~ as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notiftcation in the Oftlclal Gazette, appoint. 
&. In section 2 of qte Industrial Finance Corporation Act, IH8 AmcDdDlcat 
(hendaaftat reltfted· to as the priDoipal Act), to clause (c), the of aetUOD 2. 
fo1lowiA. ~lonation shall be added, namely:-
Je ~"~-The exprel8ion "prOCttllll'iq of 1fOOds" 
itM:ludes any art or pl!OCIIII for producini, prepariJlI or malt· 
iDi an article by lubjectin. aDy material to a man.ual, mecha-
nical, ehemical, electrical or any other like operation;'. 
3. ba sectiOft 17 of the principal Aet, after SUb-aec:ttOll (5) I the Aac.,mc.DI 
IS followtn, tub-seetion shaIl be inserted, namely:- oflCaiOJl17, 
.. (6) If, 1M any reason, a Director nommatedunder clause 
(aG) or clause <,> of section. 10 is unable to attend any meet-
inC ef the Board, the ·Central Govenunent or the ReJenre 
.8aIak, as die cue may be, may depute any other person t. 

, ' 
~ 
attend the &aid meetinl and such person shall, for aU put-
poH8 of the said meeting, be deemed to be a Director nomi-
nated under clause (aa) or clause (b), as the ease may be, of 
the said section.". 
Amea4IDeat 4. In the provilo to sub-aeetion (l) and the provillo to aub-' 
.t1lCdu31, eeeUon (4) of seetion 21 of the principal Act, for the words "1lve 
tim_", the words "ten times" shall be substituted. 
Ameadment S. In lleCtion 22 of the principal Act, for the words "depolits 
at..uc2~. from the pubUc", the worda "from the Government, local authori-
tt_, or any person deposits" shall be substituted. 10 
•. In eectton 23 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sulHection (1), after clause (G) , the followine 
claUR shall be inserted, namely:-
" (GG) auaranteeing on such terms and conditions as 
may be agreed upon, deferred payments due from any IS 
industrial concern in connection with its import of capital 
eoocia from outside India: 
Provided that no such guarantee shall be given with-
out the prior approval of the Central Government;"; and 
(ii) in sub-aection (2), after the words "pre&eribed by 20 
reJUlatioDS", the words "or, unless it is JU8l'anteed' as to the 
repayment of principal and the payment of interest by the 
Central Government, State Government, a scheduled bank or 
a State eo-operative bank" shall be inserted. 
7. In sub4ection (2) of section 25 of the principal Act,- 25 
(i) for the words, figures and brackets "the Indian Com-
paniee Act, 1913 (VII of 1913)", the words and ftiW'e& "the 
Companiee Act, 1956" shall be substituted; and 
(it) after the words "any instrument relatine to the in-
duttrial concern", the words eland nothing in the said Act or J. 
in any IJUCh law or instrument in so far as it makes, in rela-
~n to a director, any provision for the holding of any share 
quall1lcation, age limit, restrictions on the number of direc-
torships, retirement by rotation or removal from oftlce shall 
apply to any Director apPointed by the Corporation in pur- 35 
suane •• f'this section" shall be 1DIerted. 
I of 1956. 

10 
• 3 
i. In section 27 of the principal Act,- ~=:;. 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "or otherwise", the 
wom "or any bank or financial institution in India or in any 
foreign country" shall be substituted; and 
(it) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"(4) Any loss or profit accruing in connection with 
any borrowing of foreign currency under sub-section (1) 
for the purpose of granting loans or advances to any indus-
trW concern or concerns or its repayment on account of 
any luctuatiOl18 in the rates of exchan,e shall be reimbur-
sed by, or paid to, the industrial concern or concerns, as the 
case may be.". 
9. In section 28 of the principal Act,- AmeDdmeat 
of section 21. 
15 (i) in sub-section (1) , after the words "default in repay-
ment", the words "of any loan or advance or any instaknent 
thereof" shall be inserted; 
.(ii) in sub-section (3A), for the words "properly incurred 
by it", the words "which, in the opinion of the Corporation, 
have b'een properly incurred by it" shall be substituted; and 
(in) in sub-section (4), the words "of the owner" shall be 
omitted. 
10. For sub-section (J 3) of section 30 of the principal Act, the Ammd .. .,a. 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - of aecdoD 3-
"(13) The functions of a District Judge under this section 
shall be exercisabl~ 
(a) in a presidency-town, by the High Court; and 
(b) elsewhere, also by an Additional District Judge.". 
11. In sub-section (1) of section 30A of the principal Act, AIMDdmcDt 
30 after the words "Directors of that industrial concern", the follow- ~aectfon 
ing shall be inserted, namely:- ' 
35 
"and nothing in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any such 
law or instrument relating to the industrial concern in so far 
as it makes, in relation to a director, any provision for the 
holding of any share qualification, age limit, restrictions on 
the number of directorships, retirement by rotation or removal 
from oftlce shall apply to any Director appointed by the Cor-
poration under this section.". 

.. :re=( 12. In sections 308 and 30E of the prinoi,al Act. for the ...... 
308 aDd 302. ftIurea and brac:ketl "Indian Companies Act, 1111 (VII f!JI 1.11)U, 
wherever they occur in thaN sections the werdl aDd IIW'- "Com .. 
panln Act, i956" shall be sub8t1tuted. I" ",... 
:;':=-~. 13. In sub-section (J) of section :M of the priDdpal Act,- j 
(i) for the words, ftlW'H and braekets "eeetion 1" ,,1 tIM 
Indian Companies Aet, 1913 (VII ef 1.11)". the Words and 
fllUfe8 "eecUon 226 of the CompuIiea Act, Iter shall be aub- 1 III ",,-
sUtuted; and 
(it) for the words "the other", tke werds '~ otaer ."cIt .. IG:' 
tor or auditors" shall be subltituted. 
AmeDdmcDt 14. In sub-section (3) of section 35 of the principal Act. ier the 
ohectioD 3,. words "three months", the words "four montlu" IIltaU lie IUWtttute4. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
As • sequel to rapid industrialisation of the country under the 
8eeond Plan. heavy impo!1 of capital i00ds by industrial con-
cems is necessary. In the present foreian exchange situation of 
the country, it is not possible for the Government to find all the 
foreJ&n excl1anle required for large scale purchases of capital goods 
from abroad. hporters are inclined to arree to deferred payments 
but 1ns1st on auarantee from Government or semi-Government 
institutions in respect of such payments. Accordinily, it is proposed 
to empowet' the Industrial Finance Corporation to undertake this 
type of bUSiness. 
2. The Cei'p<)ration is at present empowered ta borrow from the" 
public. i\elerve Bank and the Central Government up to five times 
its paid-up share capital and the reserve fund. With the increasing 
tempo of industrialisation, the business of the Corporation has in-
creased considerably durin, the last two years. To enable the 
Corporation to cope with the increasing demands on it, it is propos-
ed to authorise the Corporation to borrow up to ten times its paid-
up share capital plus the reserve fund. 
3. Under the existing 8ub-aection (4) of section 27 of the Act, 
tlte entire risk ariain. out of ftuctuations in the rate of exchange in 
respect of foretan currency borrowing and repayment thereof is to 
be borne by the Central Government. In view of the large scale 
forefp exchange operations that wUl be required during the next 
few years, it is eonsidered that these risks should more appropria-
tely be home by the industrial concerns on whose accounts these 
forelen ez:chanae transaetions take place. A suitable provision to 
this deet Is aceordinlly proposed to be made. 
4. In onier to enable a larae number of industries to avail them-
.elves of the loanUliatance from the Industrial Finance Corpora-
tioD, it is propoaed to define the upression "processing of goods" on 
the JJnee .f the amendment made in 1955 in the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 1831. It is also proposed to enable the Corporation 
to provide . credit to new industrial concerns when they 
are -not in a position to offer adequate securities but deserve en-
eourllement from the point of view of national economy by an 
ameftdment to SUb-Bection (2) of section 23 of the Act. 
5 

, 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. Opportunity has also 
.een taken to incorporate some other amendments which are either 
found necessary in the light of experience gained in the working of 
the Act or are of a consequential or procedural nature. The notes 
on clauses appended to the Bill explain the provisions thereof. 
NEW DELHI; 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
The 18th Ju4(. 1957. 

Notes (In ClaUlfl8 
ClaUlfl 2.-An explanation defining the expression "processing of 
goods" iii being added to section 2 (c) of the Act on the lines of the 
amendment made last year in the State Financial Corpora-
tions Act, 1951. This will enable a larger variety of industrial con-
cerns to avail themselves of the loan assistance from the Corporation. 
ClaUl8 8.-This clause seeka to enable the Central Government 
and the Reserve Bank to nominate substitute Directors for attend-
ing the meetings of the Board of Industrial Finance Corporation. A 
similar provision was made last year in the State Financial Corpo-
rations Act, 1951. 
Clause 4.-The Industrial Finance Corporation is at present 
empowered by section 21 of the Act to borrow from the public, 
Reserve Bank and the Central Government up to five times its paid-
up capital plUl reserves. Its present paid-up capital is Rs. 5 crores 
and reserves stand at Rs. 24 lakhs. The Industrial Finance Cor-
poration has already borrowed to the extent of Rs. 17' 3 crores from 
these sources and the Central Government is to lend Rs. 7' 5 crores 
more to the Corporation during the remaining period of the Second 
Plan. With the increasing tempo of industrialisation, the business 
of the Corporation has increased considerably during the last two 
years. To enable the Corporation to cope with increasing demands 
on it, it is proposed to amend section 21 of the Act so that the Cor-
poration may be able to borrow up to ten times its paid-up capital 
plus reserves. 
Clause 5.-Section 22 of the Act empowers the Corporation to 
accept deposits only from the public. A!J it is felt doubtful whether 
the existing provision would enable acceptance of deposits from 
State Governments, local authorities, etc., it has become necessary 
to amend it, 
Clause 6.-(i) AJJ a sequel to rapid industrialisation, heavy 
imports of capital goods by the industrial concerns are necessary. 
In the difficult foreign exchange situation of the country, it is not 
possible for Govern~ent to find all the foreign exchange required 
for large scale purchases of capital goods from abroad. Exporters 
are inclined to agree to deferred payments but insist on guarantees 
from Government or semi-Government institutions. It is, there-
fore, proposed to unend sub-section (1) of section. of the Act 
7 

I 
so as to enable the Industrial Finance Corporation to guarantee 
such deferred payments by industrial concerns. 
(ii) The amendment proposed to sub-section (2) of section 28 
of the Act is similar to that made in the State Financial Corpora-
tions Act, 1951, last year. It seeks to enable the Industrial 
Fin~ce Corporation to provide credit particularly to new indust-
rial concerns when they are not in a position to ofter adequate 
security but deserve encouragement from the point of view of 
national economy. 
Clause 7.-This clause seeks to 'exempt Directors appointed by 
the Corporation on the Boards of the borrower concerns from cer-
tain provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, e.g. retirement by rota-
tion, disability on account of share qualifications, age limit, etc. 
Clause 8.- (i) The amendment proposed is to make the inten-
tion clear. 
(ii) Under the existing provision in section 27(4), the· entire 
risk arising out of fluctuations in the rate of exchange in respect of 
foreign currency borrowing and repayment thereof are to be :home 
by the Central Government. These risks should be more'appropria-
tely borne by the industrial concerns on whose account these foreign 
exchange transactions take place. 
Clause g.-The amendments are mainly clarificatory in nature. 
ClaUfe 10.-Tbe amendment aims at expeditious disposal of 
court C8S8II. 
Clauses 11 to a.-The amendments are of a minor and consequen-
tial nature. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION ACT, IH8 
.(15 OF 1948) 
2 
• • • • • • • • • • 
(c) "industrial concern" means any public limited company 
or co-operative society incorporated by a Central Act or an Act 
of the Legislature of a State or under -any law for the time 
being in force and registered in India which is engaged or is to 
be engaged in the manufacture or processing of goods or in 
shipping or in mining or in the generation or distribution of 
electricity or any other form of power; 
• • • • • • 
21. (1) The Corporation may issue and sell bonds and debentures BorrwiDa 
carrying interest for the purpose of raising its wor}ting capital: powers •. 
Provided that the total amount of bonds and debentures issued 
and outstanding and of the contingent liabilities of the -Corporation in 
the form of guarantees given by it or underwriting agreements enter-
ed into by it shall not at any time exceed five times the amount of 
the paid-up share capital and the reserve fund of the Corporation . 
• • • • • • 
(4) The Corporation may also, for the purpose of carrying out 
its functions under this Act, borrow money from the Central Gov-
ernment on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon: 
Provided that the total amount borrowed by the Corporation 
from the Central Government under this sub-section and from the 
Reserve Bank under clause (b) of sub-section (3) together with the "r . 
amount of bonds and debentures issued under sub-section (1) and 
outstanding shall not at any time in the aggregate exceed five times 
the amount of the paid-up share capital and the reserve fund of the 
Corporation. 
22. The Corporation may accept deposits from the public repsY,'- Deposits 
able after the expiry of a period which shall not be less than fiv~ C;:~~~:tiOD. 
years from the date of the making of the deposit, and on such other 
terms as it thinks fit: 
Provided that the total amount of such deposits shall not at any 
time exceed ten crores of rupees. 

Ie 
Buaineu 23. (1) • • • • •• 
which the (2) No accommodation shall be given under clauses (<<) and (e) 
Corporation of sub-section (1) unless it is secured by a suftlcient pledge, mort-
~~' i gage, hypothecation or assignment of Government or other seeur· 
power to 
impoae COIl-
ditions for 
accommoda-
tien. 
Loans in 
foreign cur-
rency. 
Riahtlof 
Corporation 
is C8Ie of 
.cfault. 
ties, stocks, shares or secured debentures, bullion, movable or, im-
movable property or other tenpble asse. in the mUller prescribed 
by rei'llationa. 
• • • 
25. (1)· • • • 
(2) Where one of the conditions impoled is that one or more 
Directors shall be appointed by the Corporation on the Board of 
Directors of the industrial concern to protect the interests of the 
Corporation, such condition shall be valid notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Companies Act, 1913, or any other law for the 7 of 
time being in force or in any instrument relat1ne to the industrial 
concern. 
• • • • • 
27. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Ex-
change Regulation Act, 1947 or in any other enactment for the time 1 at 1947. 
being in force relating to foreign exchange, the Corporation may, 
for the purpose of granting loans or advances to industrial concerns, 
borrow, with the previous consent of the Central Government, 
foreign currency from the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development or otherwise. 
• • • • • .. 
(4) A:sly loss or profit accruing to the Corporation in connection 
with any borrowing of foreign currency under sub-aection (1), or 
its repayment on account of any fluctuations in the rates of exchange 
shall be re-imbursed by, or paid to, the Central Government, as the 
ease may be. .1 
28. (1) Where any industrial concern which is Wlder a liability 
to the Corporation Wlder an agreement makes any default in repay-
ment or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of its agreement 
with the Corporation, the Corporation shall have the right to take 
over the management of the concern" as well as the right to kana-
fer by way of lease or sale and realise the property pledeed. mort. 
gaged, hypothecated or asSigned to the Corporation . 
• • • • • • 
(3A) Where the management of an industrial concern is taken 
over by the Corporation or any property is transferred and realised 
by it under the provisions of sub-section (1), all costs, charges and 
expenses properly incurred by it as incidental to such management, 
er transfer and realisation .hall Be rec9T8I'alale "GIll the inti.trW 

7.f 1,13· 
II 
eoncem, and the money which is received by it from iUch manage-
ment, or transfer and realisation shall, in the absence of any contract 
to the contrary, be held by it in trust to be applied, firstly, in pay-
ment of such costs, charges and expenses and, secondly, in d.i8chars. 
of the debt due to the Corporation, and the residue of the mon.rlO 
received shall be paid to the person entitled thereto. 
(4) Where the Corporation takes ,over the management ot a 
concern under the provisioIl8 of SUb-section (1), it llhall be d~med 
to be the owner of such co~cern for purposes of suits by or against 
such concern and shall sue and be sued in the name of the owner of 
the concern. 
• • • • 
30. (1) • • • • 
(13) The functioIl8 of a District Judge under this section Ihall, 
in a presidency-town, be exercised by the High Court. 
Special pro-
vlsiona for 
enforcement 
of claims by 
the Corpora-
tieD. 
30A. (1) When the management of an industrial concern is power of, 
taken over by the Corporation, the Corporation may, by order noti- ~!g;,~~~n 
fled in the Official Gazette, appoint as many persons as it thinks fit Dir~cton <?f 
to be the Directors of that industrialconc(!rn. ~n~~·tnal 
• • • .'. .' when mana-
SOB. On the issue of a notified order under section 30A,-
gement ia 
taken over. 
(a) all persons holding office as Directors of theinduatrial ;!~~~rdel' 
concf!rn immediately before the issue of the notified order shall appointina 
be deemed to have" vacated their offices as such; Directors. 
(b) any contract of management between the in-
dustrial concern and any managing agent or any Director thereof 
holding oftice as such immediately before the issue of the noti-
fied order shall be deemed to have terminated; 
(c) the managing agent, if any, appointed under section 
lOA shall be deemed to have been duly appointed in pursuance 
of the Indian Companies Act, llH3 and the memorandum and 
articles of association of the industrial concern and the provi-
sions of the said Act and of the memorandum and articles shall, 
subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, apply ac-
cordingly, but no such managing agent shall be removed from 
oftice except with the previous consent of the Corporation; 
(d) the Directors appointed under section 30A shall take 
such steps as may be necessary to take into their custody or 
under their control all the property, effects and actionable ClaiymB, ,,' 
te wWch the industrial concern is, or appears to be, entitled, and ' 
:>,' 
" .-,."' 
(/' 

Audit. 
12 
, all the property and effects of the tndustrialeoncem mall be 
deemed to pe in the custody of the Directors as from the date of 
the notffted order; 
(e) the Directors appointed under section 30Ashall be, tor 
all purposes, the Directors of the industrial concern duly consti-
tuted under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 and shall alone be 7 ef ISU3· 
entiUedto exercise all the powers of the Directors of the 'indus-
trial concern, whether such powers are derived from th'8 said 
Act or from the memorandum or articles 01 association of the 
industrial concern or from any other source. 
• • • • • • 
SOE. (1) Where the management 'of an industrial concern, being 
a company as defined in the Indian Companies Act, 1913, is taken 7 of 1913. 
over by the Corporation, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in the said Act or in the memorandum or articles of association of 
such concem,-
(a) it shall not be lawful for th~ shareholders of such e~ 
cern or any other person to nominate or appoint any person to 
be a Director of the concern; 
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders 
of such concern shall be giv.ene1fect to unleu appro.ved,by the 
Corporation; 
(c) no proceeding for the winding' up of such concern or for 
the appointment of a receiver iIi respect thereof shall lie in any 
Court, except with the consent of the Corporation. 
(2) Subject to the provisions contained'in sub-section (U and 
to the other provisions contained in this Act and subject to such 
other exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in 
this behalf, the Indian Companies Act, 1913 shall continue to apply, of 1,13. 
to such concern in the same manner as it applied thereto before the 
issue of the notified order under section lOA. 
• '. • • • • 
34. (1) The affairs of the Corporation shall be audited by not 
less than two auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of companies 
Under sub-section(l) of section 144 of the Indian Companies Act, 
J • 
1913, one of whom shall be appointed by the Central Government 7 of 1913. 
in coasultation with the~ Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
and the other elected in the prescribed manner by the parties men-
tioned in sub-section (3) of section 4, and such remuneration as the 
Central Government may fix shall' be paid to the au&t6rs by the 
Corporation. 
• • • • • 

35. (1) • • • • • • B.cturDB • 
(3) The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government and 
the Reserve Bank within three months of the close of the financial 
year a statement in the prescribed form of its assets and liabilities 
as at the close of that year together with a profit and loss account 
for the year and a report of the working of the Corporation during 
the year, and copies of the said statement, account and report shall 
be published in the Official Gazette and shan be laid before Parlia-
rrumt 
• • • • • • 
, 

LOK SA"HA 
1 
BILL 
funher to llmend the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 19.8. 
(Shri T. T. KrisltnaMachari, 
. M mister of Finance) 