LOK SABRA 
CORRICrENDA 
to 
NTI SHIPPINJ COHPANY (TAKING OruB OF lLANAG~HENT) 
BILL, 1966 
(To beLAs introduced in Lok Sabha) 
ge 4, in the marginal headins to clause 6,-
for It faith etc." re~d II faith, etc.," 
ge.8, ~ine 35, after "sort, ins8rt ", •.• 
IlJle __ ~, 
, e lOu: after "Company", insert ", Il 
e 11, line 1, for IfRSECOYll'1ENDATIONu read "RECOHHENDATION't 
rect line numbers on page 8. 

;(;)7' y . 
(. I As INTI\OJ)UCEI) IN Lo~ SAlJIL\ ON 
I .1 \ . 
--,' 
• 
Bill No. 50 of 1966 . 
JAYANTI SHIPPING COMPANY (TAKING OVER OF 
MANAGEMENT) BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
... n-"nn"LQ for the taking over of the ma~gement of the undertaking 
the J ayanti Shipping Company Limited for a limited period 
ordeT to secure the proper management of the same. 
it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
....... , .... \,; of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
This Act may be called the J ayanti Shipping Company (Taking Short 
'of Management) Act, 1966. . title. 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
,~~ . (a) "company" means the Jayanti Shipping Company 
,.I.~~ited, being a company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956~ 
;;:. Vlng its registered office in the UniQn territory of Delhi; 
Defini-
tions. 

Board of 
Control 
to take 
over the 
manage_ 
ment 
of the 
under-
taking 
of the 
company. 
2 
(b) "notified order" means an order notified in the Official 
Gazette; 
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(d) "undertaking" means the property and assets of the 
'company; 
(e) w()r'i' 1.nj expressions used but not defined in this Act 
and defined in the Companies Act. 1956. shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
THE TAKING OVER OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE UNDERTAKING 0':: 
THE JAY ANTI SHIPPING COMPANY i 
1 
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notified order, appoint~ 
a body of persons (hereinafter referred to as the "Board of Contrcl")~ 
to take over the management of the whole or any part of the under-~ 
taking of the company or to exercise in respect of the whole or any 
part thereof such functions of management as may be specified 
the notified order. 
(2) The Board of Control ;hall consist of a Chairman and 
number of other members not exceeding ten as the Central 
ment may think fit, to be appointed by that Government. 
(3) The Central Government may either in the notified 
issued under sub-section (1) or in a subsequent order specify 
one or more members of the Board of Control shall be a full-ti 
member or full-time members' thereof. 
(4) The term of office of, the procedure to be follo~ed in 
discharge of their funct~ons by, and the manner of filling vaca .. ~·--. 
among, the mem~ ~- r~ ,f th,; B,)Clrd of Centrol shall be ~uch as 
be prescribeu. 
(5) The salaries, al1owanc.~s ~nd f)thfl" remuneration and 
conditions of ~,'rvirF' at tp~, m"'Tl1l)~r~ of ~he B'Jard of Con"rol sh 
be such as may 'lJe d,~tf'rrr1ine1 by the Central Government. . . 
(6) Any notifi~d order issued under sub-section (1) shall re 
in force for E uch period not exceeding five years as may be speci 
in the order: 
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that in 
to secure the prop~1' JYl!:lna~ement of the u'ldertaking of the CUIU .... ---. 
it is expedie'1t tl-tRt ~ny such nQtified ord~r should continl:':e in 

3 
the expiry of the period of five years as aforesaid, it may, from 
to time, issue directions for such continuance for such period, 
.... a,\ .. v.roPfllning two years at a time, as may be fpecified in the direc-
but no such notified order shall in any caSe remain in force 
inor~ than a total period of ten years; and where any such 
is issued, a copy thereof shall be laid, as soon as may be, 
.... ,. ... w·,. each Hou~e of Parliament, 
(1) On the issue of a notified order under ,section 3 appointing Effect ot 
of Can lrol to take over the management of the undertaking notified 
company,- order 
issued 
(a) all persons in charge of the management, including under 
holding offices as directors or managers Or any other sectiori 3. 
1 personnel of the company immediately before the 
issue of the notified order, shall 'be deemed to have vacated their 
as such; 
(b) any contract of management between the company and 
managing agent or any director or any other managerial 
. rsonnel thereof holding office as such immediately before the 
of the notified order shall be deemed to have terminated; 
(c) the Board of Control shall alone be entitled notwith-
-'-!lInn ing anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956, to 
all the powers of the Board of directors of the company 
ding the powers to sell or otherwise di~pose of any ships 
()ther properties or assets of the company) whether such 
~1~lprC! are derived from the said Act or from the memorandum 
of association of the company or from any other 
(d) as from the date of the notified order, all the propertie~, 
_~LS and effects of the company shall be deemed to be in the 
y of the Board of Control who shall, as soon as may be 
such date, take all such steps as may be necessary tc take 
its possession or centrol all such properties, assets and effects 
all aci-ionable claim~ to which the company is or appears 
, be entitled. 
Subject to the other prOVISlOns contained in this Act and 
:control of the Central Government, the Board of Control shall 
steps as may be necessary for the purpose of efficiently 
the business of the company and shall exerci~e such other 
and have such other dutif's as may _be prescribed. 

Power of 
Board of 
Control to 
appoint 
managing 
agent. 
Contract!; 
in bad 
faith etc. 
maybe 
. cancelled 
or varied. 
5; (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the CoMpanill 
Act, 1956, or in any other law for the time being in force, or in the 
memorandum Or articles of association of the company, the Board 
of Control may, with a view to securing the proper management of 
the undertaking of the company, appoint with the previous approval 
of the Central Government any individual, firm or body corporate 
as the managing agent of the company. 
(2) The managing agent shall receive such remuneration as may 
be determined by the Board of Control with the previous approval 
of the Central Government. 
(3) The managing agent shall exercise in respect of the whole 
or any part of the undertakiag of the company such functions of 
management as may be specified in the order of appointment and~ 
as may from time to time be entrusted to it by the Board of Control ~ 
~ 
(4) The managing agent shall not be removed from office except1 
with the previous permission of the Central Government. 
(5) In the discharge of his functions the managing agent 
be under the general liiuperintendence and control of the Board 
Control. 
(6) The management of the undertaking of the company shall 
carried on pursuant to any· directions given by the Board of Con 
in accordance with the· provisions oB the notified order issued UDlC1e111 
sub-section (1) of section 3 and the managing agent or any 
person having any functions of management in relation to 
undertaking of the company or any part thereof shall comply 
such directions. 
6. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 4, 
Board of Control may, with the previous approval of the C 
Government, make an application to any court having jurisdi 
in this behalf for the purpose of cancelling or varying any contrad 
or agreement entered into, at any time before the issue of the 
fled order under sub-section (1) of section 3, between the COInp,~ 
and any other person and the court may, If satisfied after due inq 
that such contract or agreement had been entered into in bad 
and is detrimental to the interests of the company, make an 
cancelling or varying (either unconditionally or subject to 
conditions as it may think fit to impose) that contract or 
and the contract or agreement shall have effect accordingly. 

s 
'J. -Notwithstanding anything contained in any law tor the time No right 
bag-in force, no perSon who ceases to hold any office by reason to com-
.• ,,_ provisions contained in clause (a) of SUb-section (1) of sec- pensatio? 
~ h t t 'f . t . ted b f for terml_ ~,,, o~ W ose cOn. rac ? management IS ernuna . y reason 0 nation of 
lJWOVlSions c()ntamed m clause (b) of that sub-sectIon, shall be officeor 
(ft1ad to any compensation for the loss of office or for the pre- ·contract. 
mite termination of his contract of management: 
~ 
~~vided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the 
lht of any such person to recover 'from the company moneys re-
IB11WJLt: otherwise than by way of such compensation. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 
~.uI.'" in the memorandum or ,articles of association of the com-
'~'!:(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of the com-
·l<'NlftV or any other person to nominate or appoint any person to 
a director o'f the company; 
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the sharehold-
.. of the company shall be given effect to unless approved by 
Central Government; 
: (c) no proceeding for the winding up of the company or for 
"appointment of a liquidator or receiver in respect thereof 
lie in any court except with the consent o'f the Central 
IOVE~rnrnent. 
to the prOVISIons contained in sub-6ection (1), and 
other provisions contained in this Act and subject to such 
_C~Dti'OI restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Central 
i"IllblneJlt may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. in 
the Companies Act, 1956, shall continue to apply to the 
in the same manner as it applied thereto before the issue 
order under sub-section (1) of section 3. 
Applica-
tion of 
Act 1 of 
1956. 
any time it appears to the Central Government on the Power of 
o'f any shareholder of the company or otherwise that the Central 
of the notified order made under sub-section (1) of section Govern_ 
fulfilled or that for any other reason it is not necessary ment Ito can('e 
should remain in force, the Central Government may, order 
order, cancel such order and on the cancellation of any notified 
the management of the undertaking o'f the company shall under 
the shareholders of the company. 

Duty to 
deliver 
posses-
sion of 
property 
and docu_ 
ments 
relating 
thereto. 
Duty to 
furnish 
particu-
lars. 
Powers 
of ins-
pection. 
6 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS 
10. (1) Where 'a notified order has been made under su~ 
tion (1) of section 3 in relation to the undertaking of the com~ 
every person having possession, custody or control of any pr0l?! 
shall deliver the property to the B8ard of Control or to any S1 
person (including the managing agent) as may be authorised 
Board in this behalf. 
. 
(2) Any person who, on the commencement o'f this Act," 
in his possession or under his control any books, documents or 
papers relating to the undertaking of the company shall be 
account for the said books, docu~ents and papers to the 
Control and shall deliver them up to the Board or to any such 
(including the managing agent) as may be authorised by the 
in this behalf. 
(3)'l'he Central Government may take all neceslry 
'securing possession of all properties of the company.' 
11. The company shall, within ten days 'from the com men 
of this Act or within such further period as th~ Central 
ment may allow in this behalf, furnish to the Board of 
complete inventory of all the properties and assets (incl ........ , .. a. 
ticularsof book debts and investments and belongings) of 
pany at the commencement of this Act, and of all 
and obligations of the company subsisting at such 
and also of all agreements entered into by the company and i~ 
from such commencement. 
12. (1) For the purpose of ascertaining whether any 
the property of the company or for any other purpose menuv ... -,-
this Act or the rules made thereunder, any person authorised 
Central Government in this behalf shall have the right to-
(a) en ter and inspect any premises; 
(b) require any person having the possession, 
control of any register or record of the company to 
register or record; 
(C)' require the occupier of any property belonging 
claimed to be the property of, the company, to submit 
person so authorised such accounts, books or other 
or to furnish to him such information as he may reason a 
necessary; and 

~ 7 
J6(d) examine any person having the control of, or employed 
iilPDDection with, the company and require him to make any 
lileJDent touching the affa:rs of the company. 
~l • 
}'~AnY person authorIsed by the Central Government under 
~n (1) shall be deemed. to be a public servant within the 
_~of section 21 of the IndIan Penal Code. 
" .. f(J) If any person,- Pena'ty 
~" . for {alse 
~.1:(") when required by this Act or by any order made slate_ 
this Act to make any statement or furnish any ments. 
r..._t,· on, makes any statement or furnishes any information 
is false in any m.ferial particular and which he knows or 
to be false or dfs not believe to be true; or 
) makes any such statement as aforesaid in any book, 
record, return or other document which he is required 
,order made under th;s Act to submit, . 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
'ft".n,n years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand 
with both. 
,having in his possession, custody or control any property 
part of the assets' of the 'company, wrongfully with-
such property from the Board of Control, or 
,wrongfully obtains possession of any property forming 
~the assets of the company, or 
wilfully withholds or fails to produce to any person 
" under this Act, any register, record or other 
I,'" ~t ~hich may be in his possession, custody or :ontrol, or 
" ) ,falls, w'thout any reasonable cause, to submIt any ac-
, , ' books or other document~, when required to do so, 
~"""''',"Lable with imprisonment fO,r a term which ,may ex-
years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand 
'With both. . ' 
. shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
--'cept with the previous sanction of the Central Gov-
,,~ of an officer authorised by thQt Government in this 
Limita-
tion on 
prosecu_ 
tion. 

Protec. 
tion of 
action 
taken 
under the 
Act. 
Overrid. 
ing effect 
of Act. 
Payment 
ofremu. 
neration 
and 
expenses 
out of the 
funds of 
company. 
Power of 
Central 
(i{)vern-
ment to 
give 
directions. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
Power to 
remove 
difficul-
ties. 
8 
15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie agaj 
the Central Government or the Board of Control or any meJll 
thereof or any other person (including the managing agent) for a 
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 1 
Act. 
16. The provisions of this Act or any order or rule mJ 
thereuncier shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsist 
therewith contained in any law other than this Act or any instruJlli 
having effect by virtue of any law other than'this Act. 
" 
17. All salaries, allowances and other remuneration paid to j 
Chairman and other members of the Board of Control, the mana; 
agent or any other person who may be appointed or employ~ 
connection with the affairs of the management of the company ~ 
all other expenses duly incurred in connection with such 
ment shall be paid out of the funds of the company. 
18. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
sions of this Act the Central Government may give such 
to the Board of Control as that Government may deem fit for 
proper management of the undertaking of the company 
Board of Control shall comply with such directions. 
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of 
and such rules may provide that they shall take effect either 
pectively or retrospectively on such· date, not earlier than the, 
day of .. Tune, 1966, as may be specified therein. ' 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
cessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in 
is so laid or the session immediatl. y following, both Houses 
in making any modification in th'rule or both Houses agree 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
that rule. 
20. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provi 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order as ,..,..,.,."'.-
quires, do anything (not inconsistent with the provisions 
Act) which appears to it to be necessary for the pu 
removing the difficulty. 

'~' 
'I;~; 
"I~llJ'·. 
9 
~) The Jayanti Shipping Company (Taking Over of Manage- Repeal 
f()rdiJiance, 1966, is hereby repealed. and. 
,,;.. saVings. 
"Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
. ',including any notified order issued, appointment made or 
given under the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have 
or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act, 
Act had commenced on the 10th day of June. 1966. 
/ :r 
'I''''~' .\ '" -.. 
:'.ihli 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 'IiJI 
Jayanti Shipping Company Ltd., was· a new venture 
1961. The Shipping Development Fund Committee, a statutory 
had committEd its'elf to advance a loan of up to Rs. 20'25 crores 
a period of years and out of this about Rs. 6'60 crores were 
advanced by 7th June, 1966. . 
For some time past complaints had been made, both 
Parliament and outside, against the management of this 
alleging mismanagement, misuse of company's funds; 
foreign exchange, non-deposit of Provident Fund and 
deductions, non-payment ofbtills for supplies and services, 
payment of salaries and family allotments, non-payment of 
for insurance of ships and so on. An Enquiry Committee 
appointed to go into these complaints but they could not make 
headway due to the non-cooperation of the company. 
Meanwhile, the pressure of the creditors on' the company 
so great that it was on the verge of being dragged to insolvency 
ccedings. Accordingly, to payoff its creditors the company 
to Government for permission to sell four of its ships--two to 
abroad and one or two in India. Government could not, 
agree to this because firstly ~s would result in depletion 
Indian fleet and secondly even ~fter the sale of these 4 
company would still be short by about Rs. l' 5 crores to 
liabilities upto 31-3-1967. Since at the same time it was u .... ··-... 
to do something effective to safeguard the interests of the 
Development Fund Committee, to maintain the reputation of 
national shipping industry in world shipping and to take DOl);:;CtIJ.I 
of the books of account, etc., with a view to examining how the 
of the company have been conducted, Government decided to 
over the management of the company for a limited period. 
As Parliament was not in session, an Ordinance called the 
Shipping Company (Taking Over of Management) Ordinance, 
wa" promulgated by the President on the 10th June, 1966. 
The Bill seeks to replace the Jayanti Shipping Company 
On'r of Management) Ordinance, 1966. 
NEW DELHI; N. SANJIVA 
The 19th July, 1966. 
10 

.... .I'u;.uIDENT'S RSECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
.. ~".( " 
> J [Copy of letter No. 3~MD (78) /66, dated the 1st August, 1966 
~ Shri C. M. Poonacha, Minister of State in the Ministry cf 
~port and Aviation to the Secretary, Lok SabtJ. 
:. If'Iie President having been informed of the jbject matter 0f 
Bill to provide for the taking over of the management of the 
.lIDdeJ~tallOn.g of the Jayanti Shipping Company for a limited period 
order to secure the appropriate management of the same, rc-
under article 117 (3) of the Constitution of India, the 
.mDSl'QeJ~ation of the said Bill in the Lok Sabha. 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
contemplates the appointment of a Board of Control 
shall alone be entitled to exercise all the powers of the board 
Tgr'TnlrC' of the Jayanti Shipping Company. The Bill also contem-
the appointment by the Board of Control of managing agents 
the management of the undertaking of the company and further 
that the managing agent shall receive such remuneration 
be determined by the Board of Control with the previous 
of the Central Government. 
Clause 17 of the Bill, however, provides that all salaries, allow-
and other remunerations paid to the Chairman and other 
of the Board of Control, the managing agent or any other 
who may be appointed or employed in connection with the 
of the management of the company and all other expenses 
incurred in connection with such management shall be paid 
.of the funds of the company. Therefore, whatever expenses are 
incurred from the Consolidated. Fund of India to meet the 
allowances and other remunerations of the Chairman and 
members of the Board of Control or of the managing agent 
. be ultimately recouped from the funds of the J ayanti Shipping 
and as such no net expenditure is likely to be incurred from 
~-.. ~",.uuated Fund of India. 
I ) 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 19 authorises the Central Government to make rules for' 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 3 (4) of the Bill con .. ~ 
templates the making of rules providing for the term of office of, the1 
procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and, 
the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of the Board of 
Control. These are matters of detail and as such the delegation 0, 
the legislativ~ power is of a normal character. ' 
t' 

LOK SABHA 
BJLL 
to provide for the taking over of the management of the un 
taking of the Jayantl Shipping Compan~ Ldnite~ f01' a lim 
period in order to secure the proper ~ment of the same 
(Shri N. Salljiva Reddy, 
Minister of Transport, 
Aviation, Shipping tit 
Tourism) 