Bill NO.2 of IUS. 
THE E1.ECTRICITY (SUPPLY) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1955 

2 
(b) one shall be an electrical engineer with wide ex· 
perience; and , 
(c) one shall be a person who has experience of account-
ing and financial matters in a pu'blic utility undertaking, 
preferably an electricity supply undertaking.". , 
Amen~t 5. Section 10 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-of section 10. • 
sectIon (1) thereof, and-
• 
(a) in the sub-section as so re-nu~bered, for clause (e), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(e) in the opinion of the State Govemment-
(i) has refused to act; or 
(ii) has become incapable of acting; or 
(iii) has so abused his position as a member as to 
render his continuance on the Board detrimental to the 
10 
interests of the general public; or J, 
(iv) is otherwise unfit to continue as a member; or"; 
(b) after the sub-section as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) The State Government may suspend any member 
pending an inquiry against him. 20 
(3) No order of removal shall be made under this section 
unless the member concerned has been given an' opportunity 
to submit his explanation to the State Government, and when 
such order is passed, the seat of the member removed shall 
become vacant and another member may be appointed 2S 
under section 5 to fill up the vacancy. 
(4) A member who has been removed shall not be eligible 
for reappo.intment as member or in any other capacity to 
the Board. 
(5) If the Board fails to carry out its functions, or 30 
refuses or fails to follow the directions issued by the State 
Government under this Act, the State Government may 
remove the Chairman and the members of the Board and 
appoint a Chairman and members in their places.". 
laaertion of 6. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall 3S 
::.leCtion be inserted, namely:-
Power of 
Stall! G0-
vernment to 
declare cer-
tain transac-
tions vuid. 
"lOA. (1) The State Government may declare void any tran-
saction in connection with which' a member has been removed 
under sub-clause (iii) of clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 10 
after consjdering the report on the facts of the case made 40 
to it by a district judge nominated by it in this behalf. 

IX of 18tz. 
! 
(2) A district judge nominated under sub-section (1) shati, 
before making his report under that sub-section to the State 
Government in relation to any transaction, give all parties 
interested in the transaction a reasonable opportunity of being 
Sheard. 
10 
IS 
(3) Where a transaction is declared void under this section, 
it shall not be enforceable by any party to the transaction but 
the provisions· of section 65 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 
shall, so far as may be, apply to such transaction as they 
apply to an agreement which is discovered· to be void or a con-
tract which becomes void. 
(4) The decision of the State Government declaring any 
transaction void under this section shall be final and shill not 
be called in question in any court.". 
7. To section 15 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall :r~~;. 
be added, namely: - . 
"Provided that the appointment of the Secretary shall be 
subject to the approval of the State Government." 
8. In section 16 of the principal Act, for the words 'State Electri- Af~dmen~ 
20 city Council', wherever they occur, the words 'State Electricity 0 o~ I • 
Consultative Council' shall be substituted. . 
9. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words =:e:~ 
'on terms similar to the terms offered by the Board' shall be omitted. 
10. In section 26 of the principal Act,- :t.:a~. 
2S (a) in the proviso, for the words and figures 'Clauses I to 
XII', the words and figures 'Clauses I to V, Clause vn and 
Clauses IX to XII' shall be substituted; 
(b) after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:-
30 "Provided further that the provisions of Clause VI of the 
Schedule to that Act shall apply to the Board in respect 
of that area only where distribution mains have been laid 
by the Board and the supply of energy through any of them 
has commenced.". 
3S 11. In section 28 of the principal Act. in the existing proviso, after Amen~t 
the word 'provided' the word 'further' shall be inserted and before of section 28. 
the said proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that no scheme or a part of a scheme which 
is estimated to result in a capital expenditure exceeding 

4 
ten lakhs of rupees shall be prepared by the Board without 
prior consultation with the State Government.". 
12. In section 29 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words and figures 'The Board 
shall cause every scheme prepared under section 28', the words S 
and figures 'The Board shall send a copy of every scheme pre-
pared under section 28 to the State Government and to the 
Authority and shall cause every such scheme' shall be substi-
tuted; I 
(b) in the first proviso to sub-section (2j, for the words 10 
'fifty lakhs of rupees', the words 'one crore of rupees' shall be 
substituted. 
I\mcndment 13. In section 55 of the principal Act, for the words 'the station', 
of 1CCti0D SSe the words 'his undertaking or any· part thereof' shall be substituted. 
Substitution 14. For section 57 of the principal Act, the following sections 15 
~ 'To': shall be substituted, namely:-
• acc:tioD ". 
LiceDIICCI'S 
charges to 
MDM'DJCn. 
Ratin.$ . 
COlDlDlt~S •. 
"57. The provisions of the Sixth Schedule and the Seventh 
Schedule shall be deemed to be incorporated in the licence of 
every licensee, not being a local authority-
i 
(a) in the case of a licence granted before the com- 20 
mencement of this Act, 'ft/6m the date of the commencement 
of the licensee's next succeeding year of account; and 
(b) in the case of alicence granted after the commence-
ment of this Act, from the date of the commencement of 
supply, 2S , . 
and as from the said date, the licensee shall comply with the 
p;rovisions of the said Schedules accordingly, and any provisions 
of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and the licence IX of 1910. 
granted to him thereunder and of any other law, agreement or 
instrument applicable to the licensee shall, in relation to the 30 
licensee, be void and of no effect in so far as they are inconsis-
tent with the provisions of the said Schedules.". 
57 A. (1) Where the provisions of the Sixth Schedule and 
the Seventh Schedule are under section 57 deemed to be incor-
porated in the licence of any licensee, the following provisions 3S 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
~ 
shall have eft~ct in relation to the said licensee, namely:-· 
(a) the Board or where no Board is constituted under 
this Act, the State Government-
(i) may, if satisfied that the licensee has failed to 
comply with any of the provisions of the Sixth Schedule; 
and 
(ii) shall, when so requested lSy the licensee in writ-
ing or when the licensee has given notice to the State 
Government for the enhancement of rates for the supply 
of electricity under paragraph I of the Sixth Schedule 
and such enhanced rates are not approved by the State 
Government, 
constitute a rating committee to examine the licensee's charges 
for the supply of electricity and to make recommendations in 
that behalf to the State Government: 
Provided that where it is proposed to constitute a rating 
committee under this section on account of the failure of the 
licensee to comply with any provisions of the Sixth Schedule, 
such committee shall not be constituted unless the licensee has 
been given a notice in writing of thirty clear days (which period, 
if the circumstances so warrant may be extended from time to 
time) to show cause against the action proposed to b.e taken: 
Provided further that no such rating committee shall be 
constituted if the alleged failure of the licensee to comply with 
any provisions of the Sixth Schedule raises any dispute or differ-
ence as to the interpretation of the said provisions or any mat-
ter arising therefrom and such difference or dispute is referred 
by the licensee to the arbitration of the Authority under para-
graph XVI of that Schedule within the period of the notice 
referred to in the preceding proviso: 
Provided further that no rating com'mittee shall be consti-
tuted in respect of a licensee within three years from the date 
on which such a committee has reported in respect of that 
licensee, unless the State Government declares that in its opinion 
circumstances have arisen rendering the orders passed on the 
recommendations of the previous rating committee unfair to the 
licensee or any of his consumers; 
(b) a rating committee under clause (a) shall,-
(i) where such committee is to be constituted under 
sub-clause (i) of that clause, be constituted not later 
than three months after the expiry of the notice refer-
red to in the first proviso to that clause, 

~ 
(ii) where such committee is to be constituted at 
the request of the licensee, be constituted within three 
months of the date of such request, and 
(iii) where such committee is to be constituted as a 
result of the State Government refusing to approve the S 
enhanced rates, notice whereof has beeD given by the 
licensee, be constituted before the expiry of the period 
of such notice; 
(e) the rating committee shall, after giving the licensee' 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after taking 10 
into consideration the efficiency of operation and manage-
ment and the potentialities of his undertaking, report to the 
State Government within three months from the date of its 
constitution, making recommendations with reasons therefor, 
regarding the charges for electricity \!hich the licensee may IS 
make to any class or classes of consumers so, however, that 
the recommendations are-not likely to prevent the licensee 
from earning clear proUts sufficient when taken with the 
sums available in the Tariffs and Dividends Control·Reserve 
to afford him a reasonable return as defined in the Sixth 20 
Schedule during his next succeeding three years of account: 
Provided that the State Government may, if it so deems 
necessary, extend the said period of three months within 
wbtch the report of the rating committee may be submitted 
to it: 25 
(d) within one month after the receipt of the report 
under .clause (c), the State Government shall cause the 
report to be published in the OfBcial Gazette, and may at 
the same time make an order in accordance therewith ftxing 
the lieensee's charges for the supply of electricity with effect 30 
from such date, not earlier than two months or later than 
three months. after the date of pUblication of the report 
as may be specified in the order and the licensee shall 1orth-
with give effect to such order; 
(e) the charges for the supply of electricity fixed under 3S 
clause (d) shan be in .operation for such period not exceed-
iDs three years as the State Government may specify in the 
order: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to 
prevent a licensee from reducing at any time any charges 40 
80 ftxed. 

s 
10 
IS 
;20 
XXXVIII 1)1 
7 
(2) Where a Board is constituted under this Act, the rating 
committee shall consist of three members, two of whom shall 
De members of the Board (one such member of the Board !laving 
experience of accounting and financial matters) and one shall be 
a representative co-opted by the said two members of the Board 
from an association of licensees of which the licensee concerned 
is or is eligible to be a member or, if there is no such association, 
from such Chamber of Commerce or similar body as the Board 
may direct. 
. (3) The Board shall appoint one of its two members on the 
rating committee to be the Chairman of the committee. 
(4) Where no Board is constituted under this Act, the rating 
committee shall consist of five members of whom the Chairman 
and two other members shall be nominated by the State Govern-
ment, one member shall be nominated by the. licensee and one 
member shall be nominated by the association referred. to in 
sub-section (2) or if there is no such association, by such Chamber 
of Commerce or similar body as the State Government may 
direct. 
19490 25 
(5) Of the three members to be nominated by the State 
Government under sub-section (4), one shall be a person who 
is or has been a judicial officer not below the rank -of a district 
judge, one shall be a registered accountant within the meaning 
of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 having' at least t~ 
years' experience and one shall be a person with .administrative 
experienee. 
(6) The expenditure incuned in conpection with a rating 
committee as certified by it shall be payable,-
(4) where the rating committee was constituted ,at the 
request of a licensee, or where the rating committee has 
held that the licensee has failed to comply with any of the 
provisions of the Sixth Schedule, by the licensee from 
his reasonable return as defined in the Sixth Schedule or 
from his distributable profits, as the case may be; 
3' (b) in any other case, by the Board or the State Govern-
ment, as the case may be. 
(7) Where a licensee makes default in paying. any amount 
which he is liable to pay under sub-section ·(6), such amount 
may, on application to a civil court having jurisc!liction, be 
40 recovered from· the licensee by the distress and sale of any 
movable property of the licensee. 

Power of 
rating com-
mittee to 
call for in-
formation, 
etc. 
Amendment 
ofeec:tion 
S8 •• 
Amendment 
of KCtion 
60 • 
• 
Amendment 
of aec:tion 
67. 
8 
57B. A rating committee constituted under section 57A may, 
for the purpose of discharging its functions, by notice in writing, 
require the liceI].see to give such information, or to furnish such 
accounts and other documents in his possession or power, as may 
be specified in the notice.". S 
15. To section 58 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall 
be added, namely:-
"Provided that the Board shall not issue any directions 
under this section except after obtaining the prior approval of 
the State Government.". 10 
16. In section 60 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(IA) All schemes sanctioned by the State Government and 
transferred to the Board shall. for the purposes of this Act, be 
deemed to have been sanctioned by the Board.", 15 
n. In section 67 of the principal Act,-
'! 
(a) in clause (vi), the. words 'repayment of principal and' 
shall be omitted; 
(b) after clause (vii), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
~ely:- 20 
"(viia) the write-down of amounts in respect of intangi-
ble assets to the extent to which they are actually appropriat-
.!d in any year for the purpose in the books of the Board; 
(viib) all taxes on income and profits;"; 
(c) in clause (viii), after the words 'not exceeding', the 2S 
words 'one-half or shall be inserted; 
(d) for clause (x), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(x) of the balance remaining, one-half in the reduction 
of tariffs or for such other purposes beneficial to electrical 30 
development in the State, as the Board may think fit, and the 
remaining one-half to the Consolidated Fund of the State .... 
~ubstitutioD 18. For sections 68 and 69 of the principal Act, the following 
:: s;;- sections shall be substituted, namely:-
IeCtiona 68 
and 69. 
Dapreciation 
Rnene. "68. The Board shall cr~ate a depreciation reserve 35 
and, as far as compliance with the provisions of section 
67 makes it practicable, shall, at the end of every year, 
credit to such reserve from its revenue, such amount as would 
if made annually throughout the prescribed period of assets speci-

9 
ned in the Table appended to the Seventh Schedule and accumu-
lated at compound interest at the rate of three per centum per 
. annum produce by the end of the prescribed period an amount 
equal to 90 per centum of the original cost of the assets: 
5 Provided that if in any year it is not practicable fully to 
comply with the provisions of this section, the amount by which 
the sums actually credited falls short of the amount required 
under this section in respect of that year, shall be carried forward 
and together with compound interest thereon at the aforesaid 
10 rate, shall be credited to the said reserve as soon as it is found 
possible in accordance with section 67, so to do: 
Provided further that the accumulations in the depreciation 
reserve may be invested in the business of the Board, or utilised 
for repayment of principal not guaranteed under section 66 or for 
IS repayment of sums paid by the State Government under guaran-
tees under that section· 
69. The Board shall cause proper accounts and Accounts 
other records in relation thereto to be kept, includ- and audit. 
ing a proper system of internal check and prepare an annual 
20 statement of accounts, including the profit and loss account and 
the balance sheet in such form as may be prescribed .by the State 
.Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the 
25 Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or by such person 
as he may authorize in this behalf and any expenditure incur-
red by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by 
the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any 
30 person authorized by him in connection with the audit of the 
accounts of the Board shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts an!! in particular shall have the right to 
3.~ demand the production of books, accounts, connected .~ ouchers 
and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the oftlces 
of the Board. 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any other person authorized by 
40 him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall 
be forwarded annually to the State Government and that Govern-
ment may issue such instructions to the Board in respect thereof 
as it deerps fit and the Board shall comply with such instruc-
tions. 

Amendment 
of section 
76 .. 
10 
(5) The State Government shall-
(a) cause the accounts of the Board together with ·the 
audit report thereon forwarded to it under sub-section (4) 
to be laid annually before the State Legislature; and 
(b) cause the accounts of the Board to be published in 5 
the prescribed manner and make available copies thereof on 
sale at a reasonable price." 
19. In section 76 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-:-
"3A. Where any question or matter is referred to the Authority 10 
for arbitration under this section,-
(a) the Authority shall be deemed to .enter on the ref-
erence for the purposes of paragraph 3 of the First 
Schedule to the Arbitration Act, 1940 on the date on 
which the parties appear before the Authority for IS 
the first time: 
Provided that where the parties or any of them fail to 
appear before the Authority on the date fixed for the 
first hearing of the case and the Authority decides 
either on that date or any subsequent date to proceed 20 
with the case in the absence of the parties or any of 
them, as the case may be. the Authority shall be deem-
ed to enter on the reference on the date of such deci-
sion; 
(b) the Authority may, having regard to the circumstances 25 
of each case, charge such arbitration fee as it may 
deem reasonable .... 
X of 194(\, 
Substitution 20. For section 77 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
~f new scc- be substituted namely:-tlOns for ' 
section 77. 
Penalties. "77: If any licensee or other person, not being the 30 
Board, fails without reasonable excuse to comply with, or give 
effect to, any direction,' order or requirement made under any 
of the following provisions, namely:-
(a) section 4; or 
(b) section 55; or 
(c) c1ause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 57A; or 
(d) section 57B; or 
(e) section 58; or 
(f) sub-section (3) of section 75; 
3S 
he shall be punishable with fine which may ectend to five 4Q 

S 
Ie> 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
If 
hundred rupees, and in the case of a continuing offence with a 
further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for each day after 
the first during which the offence continue&. 
77A. All fines payable by a licensee under this Act or under SOUhl-'7 ftrjOlD 
•• W lell u:s 
any other law for the time being In force m respect of any may be 
offence committed by the licensee, shall be _payable by him paid. 
from his reasonable return as defined in the Sixth Schedule or 
from his distributable profits, as the case may be. 
77B. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act OffCI'ce •. by 
is a company, every person who at the time the offence was companlC"&. 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the com-
pany for the conduct of the business of the company as well as 
the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be-liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-s(!ction shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that 
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of sucn 
offence. -
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the 
part of, any director or manager, secretary, or other officer of 
the corppany, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) 'company' means any body corporate and includes 
a firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) 'director' in relation to a firm means a partner in 
the firm. 
77C. No court shall take cognizance of an -offence under co~izance 
section 77, except on the complaint of,- . 0 offences. 
(a) in the case of an offence relating to iection 4, by 
an officer of the Authority authorised in that behalf by the 
Authority; 
(b) in the case of any other offence,~ 
(i) where a Board is constituted, by an officer of 
,the Board authorised by the Board in that behalf; 
(ii) where no Board is constituted, by an officer 
of the State Government authorised by the State Govern-
ment in that behalf.". 

u 
Amendment 
of aection 
78. 
21. In section 78 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),-
(i) in clause (a), after the words 'term of office', the words 
'and the powers' shall be inserted; 
(ii) in clause (b), for the words 'State Electricity Councils', 
the words 'State Electricity Consultative Councils shall be sub- S 
stituted. 
Insenion . of 22. After section 78 of the principal Act, the following section 
~M. lectton .ball be inserted, namely:-
Diteotior.s "78A. (1) In the discharge of its functions, the Board shall 
.by the State be guided by such directions on questions of policy as may 'be 10 Goftl1lDlCr.t. 
Amendment 
of Fint 
Schedule. 
Amendment 
of Third 
Schedule. 
Amendment 
of Fifth 
Schedule. 
Amendment 
of Sixth 
Schedule. 
given to it by the State Government. 
(2) If any dispute arises between the Board and the State 
Government as to whether a question is or is not a question of 
policy, it shall be referred to the Authority whose decision 
thereon shall be final.". IS 
23. In sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph I of the First Schedule to 
the principal Act, the words 'on terms similar to the terms offered 
Dy the Board' shall be omitted. 
24. In sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of paragraph V of the Third 
Schedule to the principal Act, after the words 'the station', the words 20 
'or the entire undertaking' shall be inserted. 
25. In the Fifth Schedule to the principal Act, in paragraph 1,-
(i) in clause (b), for the words and brackets '(including 
super-tax payable by the licensee as a company, but excluding 
other taxes on profits)', the words and brackets '(including all zS 
taxes on income and profits)' shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (e), for the words and brackets from 'interest 
on rooney' to 'attributable to lines' the following words and 
brackets shall be substituted, namely: - . 
~'interest on the depreciated cost of the lines shown 30 
in tl\e books of the undertaking and properly attributable 
to the lines (whether defrayed o\1t of capital or revenue) 
and interest on such working capital as is properly attribut-
able to the lines.". 
26. In the Sixth Schedule to the P'l'incipal Act,- 35 
(a) for the words, .brackets and figures '(See section 57)" the 
words, brackets, figures and letter' (See sections 57 and 57A) , 
shall be substituted; 

13 
(b) for paragraph I, the following paragraph shall be IUbsU-
tuted, namely:-
"1. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Electricity Act, 1910 and the provisions in the licence of a IX of 1910. 
licensee, the licensee shall be entitled to so adjust his rates 
for the sale of electricity whether by enhancing or reducing 
them (not more than once in each year) that his clear profit 
in any year of account shall not, as far as possible, exceed 
the amount of reasonable return: 
10 Provided that the licensee shall not be deemed to have 
failed so to adjust his rates if the cle~r profit in any year of 
account has not exceeded the amount of reasonable return 
by fifteen per centum of the amount of reasonable return: 
Provided further that the licensee shall not be entitled 
IS to enhance the rates for the supply of electricity until after 
the expiry of a notice in writing of not less than sixty clear 
days of his intention to so enhance the rat~s, given by him 
to the State Government and to the Board, unless during 
the period of the said notice the State Government has com-
20 municated to him i13 approval to the enhanced rates: 
Provided further that the licensee shall not be entitled 
to so enhance the rates under this paragraph if during the 
period of the notice referred to in the preceding proviso, a 
rating committee has been constituted under section 57A 
2S for determining whether he is justified in enhancing the rates 
as proposed by him; 
3S 
40 . 
(c) for sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph II, the following 
lub-paragraph shall be substitutea, namely:-
"(1) Where the dear profit of a licensee in any year of 
account is in excess of the amount of reasonable return-
(a) if the excess does not exceed fifteen per centum 
of the amount of reasonable return, one-half of such 
excess shall be at the disposal of the undertaldng and 
the remaining one-half shall be appropriated to a reserve 
which shall be called the Tariffs and Dividends Control 
Reserve; 
(b) if the excess exceeds fifteen per centum of the 
amount of reasonable return, the excess up to fifteen 
per centum shall be distributed as provided in clause 
(a) and the remaining amount of the excess shall eitheI 
be distributed to the consumers in the form of a pro-
portionate rebate on the amounts collected from the 

XI of 19U. 
14 
sale of electricity ~nd meter rentals or carried forward 
in the accounts of the licensee for distribution in future 
to the consumers in such manner as the State Govern-
ment may direct."; 
(d) paragraph V shall be re-numbered as sub-paragraph (1) S 
thereof and after the sub-paragraph as so re-numbered, the fol-. 
lowing sub-paragraph shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) On the purchase of the undertaking, the balance 
remaining in the Contingencies Reserve shall be handed over 
to the purchaser and shall be maintained by the purchaser 10 
as such Contingencies Reserve."; 
(e) after paragraph V, the following paragraph shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"V A(1) There shall be created a reserve to be called 
the Development Reserve to which shall be periodically IS 
appropriated the amount of the difference between the in-
come-tax and super-tax which would have been payable 
by the licensee if the Development Rebate referred to in 
clause (vib) of sub-section (2) of section 10 of the Indian 
Income-Tax Act, 1922, had not been allowed and the 20 
income-tax and super-tax actually paid by the licensee 
after making an allowance for such Development Rebate. 
(2) The Development Reserve shall be available only 
for investment in the business of electricity supply of the 
undertaking. 2S 
(3) The Development Reserve shall be deemed to be a 
part of the assets of the undertaking and where the under-
taking is transferred, any balance remaining in the reserve 
together with any assets financed from such reserve shall 
stand transferred to the transferee along with other assets 30 
of the undertaking and no consideration shall be payable in 
respect thereof"; 
'hi. (I> in paragraph VI, after sub-paragraph (2), the following 
sub-paragraph shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) Any sums invested in investments approved by the 3S 
State Gove.rnment under sub-paragraph (2) shaU, as soon 
as practicable, be utilised in the business of electricity supply 
of the undertaking and if such sums are not so utilised they 
shall not form part of the capital base under clause (d) of 
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph XVII."; 
(9) in paragraph IX, after the words 'the excess', the worda 
'afftrr cMductmg all ta:xes paid thereon' shall be insertedj 

10 
t$ 
(h) for paTagraph X, the following paragraph shall be su"" 
stituted, namely:-
"X. Except with the consent of the State Government, 
no sums shall be carried to a reserve and no dividends in 
excess of 3 per cent. shall be paid on share capital and no 
other distribution of profits shall be made to the 
shareholders, so long as any sums allowed in respect of 
depreciation for the year of account or any arrears of depre-
ciation or any previous losses remain to be written oft in the 
books of the undertaking."; 
.• 
(i) to paragraph XIII, the following Explanation shall be 
added at the end, namely:-
"Exptanation.-For the purposes of this paragraph, the 
expression 'managing agent' shall include every person, by 
IS whatever name called, who is in charge of the management 
of the undertaking and where more persons than one are 
placed in charge of the management of the undertaking, the 
total remuneration payable to all such persons shall not in 
the aggregate exceed the limits specified in this paragraph."; 
20 (j) to paragraph XVI, the following proviso shall be added, 
Damely:-
"Provided that where a rating committee has been 
constituted under section 57A, no such dispute or difference 
shall be referred to the arbitration of the Authority during 
25 the period between the date of the constitution of such com-
mittee and the date of the order of the State Government 
made on the recommendations of the committee."; 
35 
(k) in paragraph XVII,-
(a) in sub-paragraph (1),-
(i) in clause (a), after the word 'assets', the words 
'available for use and necessary for the purposes of 
the undertaking' shall be inserted; 
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely: - • 
.. (d) the amount of investments compulsorily 
made under paragraph IV of this Schedule together 
with the a..mount of such investments made after the 

td 
Conimencement of this Act from contributions tb-
wards depreciation as in the opinion of the Autho-
rity could not be utilised for the purpose of the 
business of electricity supply of the undertaking."; 
(iii) in clause (e)(i) (which provides for deduc- , 
tion of certain amounts), the word 'and' at the end shall 
be omitted; 
(iv) in clause (e)(ii) (which provides for deduction. 
of certain amounts), the words, figures and brackets 
'under the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph I!) 
I of the First Schedule' shall be omitted; 
(v) after the said clause (e)(ii), the following sub-
clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
"(iii) the amount of security deposits of 
consumers held in cash; 15 
(iv) the amount drawn from the Tariffs and 
Dividends Control Reserve for capital purposes; 
and 
(v) the amount set apart for the Develop-
ment Reserve."; 20 
(b) in clause (b) of sub-paragraph (2) ,-' 
(i) for the words 'expenditure incurred on', the 
words 'expenditure properly incurred on' shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (iv), the words, brackets and figures 2.5 
'under sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph I of the First 
Schedule' shall be omitted; 
(iii) in sub-clause (x), for the word 'hereinafter., the 
word 'hereinbefore' shall be substituted; 
(iv) in sub-clause (xi), after the words 'other ex- 30 
penses', the words and brackets 'excluding interest on 
debentures and loans)' shall be inserted; 
(v) after sub-clause (xii), the following sub-clause 
shall be inserted, namel~:-
"(xiii) bonus paid to the staff with the approval3S 
of the State Government or where there is any dis-
pute about such bonus, the amount of the bonus as 
determined under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947."; ,XIV of 15141, 

10 
IS 
J7 
(c) in clause (c) of sub-paragraph (2),-
(i) in sub-clause (i), for the words 'actually appro-
priated for the purpose in the books of the undertaking', 
the words 'permitted by the State Government' shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (iv), for the word 'hereinafter', the-
word 'hereinbefore' shall be substituted; 
(iii) after sub-clause (v), the following sub-clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(va) contributions towards the Development 
Reserve referred to in paragraph VA;"; 
(d) in sub-paragraph (6), clause (b) shall be omitted; 
(e) in sub-paragraph (9),-
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(b) the income derived from investments other 
than those included in the capital base under the 
provisions of clause (d) of sub-paragraph (1)."; 
(ii) in clause (c), the words, figures and brackets 
'under sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph I of the First 
Schedule' shall be omitted; 
(f) for sub-paragraph (10), the following sub-parAgraph 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"( 10) 'standard rate' in respect of any year of 
account means the Reserve Bank rate ruling at the be-
ginning of that year, plus two per centum." 
21. In the Seventh Schedule to the principal Act,- Amee ........ 
fA SeftadI 
(a) for the words, figures and brackets '(See section 68 and Sc:beduIe. 
the Fifth and Eighth Schedules)" the following shall be substi-
30 tuted, namely:-
"(See sections 57, 57A and 68 and the Fourth and the 
Sixth Schedules)."; 
(b) in paragraph II, in sub-paragraph (1), for the words 'the 
Fourth and Sixth Schedules', the word and figures 'Section 68' 
JS shall 'be substituted; 
(c) the heading of the Table, namely, the words, figures and 
brackets «(See also section 57 and the :Fourth ~nd Sixth ~he-
:. dules)' shall be omitted; 

18 
(d) in the Table, in item C,-
(i) after sub-item (d) (iv), the following sub-item shall 
be inserted, namely: - . 
"(iva) Roads other than kutcha roads--one hundred."; 
(ii) after sub-item (f), the following sub-item shall be 5 
inserted, namely:-
"(0) Lightning arrestors-
(i) station type-Twenty 
(ii) pole type-Fifteen 
(iii) synchronous condensers-Thirty-five."; 10 
(iii) for sub-item (i), the following sub-item shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(i) Overhead lines, including supports-
(i) lines on fabricated steel supports operating 
at nominal voltages higher than 66 ·kilovolts- 15 
Thirty-five. 
(ii) lines on steel supports operating at nominal 
voltages, higher than 13·2 kilovolts but not exceed-
ing 66 kilovolts- Thirty. 
(iii) lines on 
supports-
steel or reinforced concrete 20 
Twenty-five. 
(iv) lines on treated. wood supports-Twenty."; 
(iv) in sub-item (n), after clause (ii), the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
U (iii) Internal wiring, including fittings and appa- 25 
ratus- Fifteen. 
(iv) street light fittings- Fifteen."; 
}v) after ·sub-item (0), the following sub-item shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(p) Communication equipment-
(i) Radin And high freQuencv carrier system-
Fifteen. 
(ii) Telephone lines and telephones- Twenty."; 

· . 19 
is. In the Eighth Scheduie to the principal Act, in paragraph 1,- :ren=~ 
(a) in clause (b), for the words and brackets' (including Schedule. 
super-tax payable by the licensee as a company but excluding 
other taxes on profits)', the words and brackets' (including all 
5 taxes on income and profits)' shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (e), for the words and brackets from 'interest 
on money', to 'the production of electricity therein', the follow-
ing words 'and brackets shall be substituted, namely:-
"interest on the depreciated cost of the station shown in 
10 the books of the undertaking and properly attributable to 
the station (whether defrayed out of capital or revenue) and 
interest on working capital properly attributable to the 
station and the production of electricity therein." 

t\J' - , " . • 
StAtEMENt OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to remove anomalies and difficulties 
which have come to notice in the working of ~he Electricity (Supply) 
Act since its enactment in 1948. 
2. The amendments proposed in the Bill have been under pro-
longed deliberation and are largely the result of decisions taken at 
the inter-State Conference held in February this year at which 
the representatives of the electricity supply industry were also 
heard. 
3. To ensure the co-ordination of development policbs of the State 
Electricity Boards with those of Government Departments, it is 
necessary to vest certain supervisory powers in the State Govern-
ments. Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the State Gov-
ernments to exercise control over the activities of the Boards in 
matters of policy and to require the Boards to consult State Gov-
ernments in the preparation of schemes estimated to cost oyer 
Rs. 10 lakhs. Because of the interest of State Governments in the 
financial policies of local authorities, it is proposed also to subject 
to the approval of the State Governments the directions that may 
be given by the Boards to local authority licensees in connection 
with their amortisation and tariff policies. 
l When the principal Act was passed in 1948, the Reserve Bank 
rate was 3 per cent. and the standaTd rate of "reasonable return" 
for electricity supply licensees was fixed at 5 per cent. i.e. 2 per 
cent. over the Bank rate. The Bank rate rose to 31 per cent. in 1951 
and, therefore, an increase in the standard rate by I per cent. is 
justified. It is proposed to link the standard rate with the Bank 
rate at 2 per cent. above the latter to enable its automatic adjust-
ment with the money market. 
,. The working of the Act has shown that some of the provisions 
of t-.he Sixth Schedule to the Act enable the licensees to earn return 
in pxcess of that intended under the scheme of the Schedule. These 
entitle the 1icens~es to earn interest as well as "reasonable return" 
on assets created out of debenture and loan capital and from 
amounts invested out of accruals in' the depreciation reserve out-
side their business of electricity supply. The licensees are also able 
to earn return on capital assets acquired from consumers' money 
20 

:u 
such as consumers' security deposits 'and amounts invested in busi-
ness out of Tariffs and Dividends Control reserve. The licensees can 
klso charge the pay of a managing director or manager as an item 
of business expense in addition to the remuneration and office 
allowance paid to the managing agents. It is proposed to make 
suitable provisions to close these loopholes. 
6. It is further proposed to prevent licensees from paying divi-
dends on share capital in excess of 3 per cent. or distributing other 
profits so long as any arrears of depreciation or previous losses re-
main to be written off in their books and to require them to reduce 
their rates when their clear profits exceed the amount of "reasonable 
return" by 15 per cent. as against the existing limit of 30 per cent. 
7. It is also proposed to provide for the electricity supply industry 
to avail of the benefits of the Development Rebate permitted under 
the provisions of s~ction B of the Finance Act, 1955, by allowing 
the creation of the Development Reserve. The accumulations in 
this Reserve will be utilised for the development of the undertak-
ings. Licensees, ho..yever, are not to be permitted to earn "reason-
able return" on the assets financed from this reserve. 
8. Under the existing provisions of the Act, interest-free loans 
granted to the Board by the State Government are repayable out 
of its revenues. With a view to reducing the' financial liabilities 
of the Board, such loans are proposed to be treated on the same 
footing as interest-bearing loans advanced by the State Government 
and they will not be repayable out of the revenues of the Board. 
With the same object, provision is proposed to be made to enable 
the Board to repay the loans borrowed from sources other than the 
State Government out of the accumUlations in the depreciation 
reserve instead of its revenues. 
9. With a view to tightening, control over the finanCial opera-
tions of the Boards, it is proposed to subject their accounts to the 
audit of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
10. The Bill also provides for some consequential and minor 
amendments and clarifications. 
G. L. NANDA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 31st August, 1955_ 

Notes on dausei 
Clause 2.-5ections 2, 76 and 82 which are connected with those 
provisions of the Act which came into force at once and which also 
should have been brought into force along with those provisions are 
now being brought into force. Certain new sections which are being 
added by the Bill are also being .brought into force atonce. 
Clause 3.-The existing definition of "maximum demand" has been 
amplified to empower the State Government to vary the period for 
which such demand may be determined by any undertaking. 
Clause.4.-The qualifications of the accounts Member are being 
relaxed to include persons who have experience of accounting and 
financial matters. 
Clause 5.-The provisions relating to removal and suspension of 
members of the Board are being brough' in line with the analogous 
provisions in section 5] of the Damodar Valley Corporation Act. 1948. 
Clause 6.-This clause laYli down the procedure to be followed 
by the State Government for declaring void any transaction in con-
nection with which a member of the Board is removed under sub-
el l 'L clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 10. 
Clause 7.-This clause provides that the appointment of the 
Secretary of the Board shall be made with the approval of the State 
Government. ! 
Clause B.-The State Electricity Councils are in fact Consulta-
tive Councils only. The amendment makes this position clear. 
Clause 9.-This clause liberalises the terms and conditions under 
which a licensee could raise his own capital in preference to a loan 
advanced by the Electricity Board for financing the works to be 
carried out under the directions of the Board. 
Clause lO.-This clause imposes the same obligations on the Board 
as are imposed on a ~icensee under clauses VI and VIII of the 
Schedule to the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, in connection with the 
requisitions for the supply of electricity for general purposes and 
for street lighting. 
Clause ll.-This clause provides that the Board shall consult the 
State Government before preparing any scheme which is estimated 
to involve a capital expenditure exceeding Rs. 10 lakhs. 
22 

23 
,Clause 12.- (a) This requires the Board to send a copy of every 
scheme prepared by it to the State Government and to the Central 
Electricity Authority. 
(b) This raises the limit of capital expenditure of the schemes 
which can be sanctioned by the Board without consulting the Cen-
tral Electricity Authority from Rs. 50 lakhs to Rs. 1 crore. 
Clause l3.-In order to ensure economy and efficiency in the 
operation of the undertaking of a licensee, the State Electricity Board 
is being empowered to issue directions to Ii licensee in respect of the 
working of the undertaking or any part thereof. 
Clause l4.-Licensees' charges to consumers.-The existing pro-
visions of sub-section (1) of section 57 of the Act are being retained 
and in addition it is being made clear that the provisions of the 
Sixth and Seventh Schedules shall apply to licences granted after 
the commencement of the Act. 
Rating Committees.-The existmg !Jlovisions of sub-sections (2), 
(3), (4) and (5) of section 57 have been retained. A time limit has 
however been fixed both for the constitution of the rating committee 
and for the making of recommendations by the rating committee. A 
rating committee is not to be constituted where a licensee has refer-
red 'any dispute to the arbitration of the Central Electricity Autho-
rity. Provision has also been m'ldc for the recovery of the expendi-
ture incurred in connection with the rating committee from the 
party liable for it. A rating committee has been empowered to call 
for any information, accounts or other documents from a licensee 
for the purpose of any enquiry befcre It. 
Clause I5.-This clause provides that any directions, issued by 
" the Board to a licensee, being a local authority, shall be subject to the 
approval of the State Governm£'nt 
Clause l6.-This clause provides that all schemes sanctioned. by 
the State Government and transferred to the Board shall be deemed 
to be the sanctioned' schemes of the Board. 
Clause l7.-"Taxes on income and profits" and "writing down of 
amounts in respect of intangible assets" have been added to the 
priority list of liabilities of the Board. Repayment of interest-free 
loans out of the revenue of the Board is being omitted from such 
ltst. 
Clau8e l8.'-Sectlon 68 of the Act has been redrafted so as to 
remove '~ertain ambiguity in the section. The newly drafted section' 
69 provides that the accounts of the Board shall be audited by the 

24 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or by a person authorised 
by him in this behalf. 
Clause 19.-This clause is intended to remove certain diftlcultiea 
which the Central Electricity Authority has experienced in dealing 
with arbitration cases. 
Clause 20.-The penal section 77 has been revised so as to include 
a penalty for contravention of certain new provisions added by the 
Bill. Express provision is also being made in respect of offences by 
companies on the lines of a similar provision in other Acts. 
Clause 21.-This clause makes certain clarificatory amendments. 
Clause 22.-This clause empowers the State Government to issue 
directions to the Board on questions of policy. 
Clause 23.-The reasons for the amendment are the same as those 
for the amendment made by clause 9 . . 
ClatLs~ 24.-This clause entitles a licensee to require the Board to 
purchase his undertaking in the event of his generating station hav-
ing been closed down by the Board. 
Clause 25.-This clause entitles a licensee to take into account-
(i) certain proportion of the taxes on income and profits 
paid by him; and 
(ii) interest on the depreciated cost of the transmission 
lines, 
for the purpose of computation of the amount to be recovered by him 
from the Board for the use of his transmission lines. 
Clause 26.-(a) This amendment is consequential on the amend-
ment made by clause 14. 
(b) Paragraph 1 of the Sixth Schedule has been redrafted so as 
to make the intention clear. A, licensee is required to give notice 
to the State Government and the Board before increasing his rates. 
The excess of clear profit over the amount of "reasonable return" 
which would warrant revisinn of rates by the licensee has been re-
duced from 30 per cent. to 15 per cent. of the reasonable return. 
(c) This prescribes the manner for the utilisation of the excess 
of clear profit over the amount of reasonable return. 
(d) This provides that, in the event of the undertaking changing 
hands, the balance remaining in the Contingencies Reserve shall be 
transferred to the purchaser without any additional consideration. 

25 
(e) 'the amendment made is consequential on the Deveiopment 
Rebate permitted under the provisions of section 8 of the Finance 
Act, 1955. 
(f) This provides that the funds invested by a licensee from his 
depreciation reserve outside the business of electricity supply should 
be utilised in the business as soon as it is practicable so to do. 
(g) This provides for payment of taxes on the amounts received 
by a licensee from the sale of his fixed assets· 
(h) This provides that until the arrears of depreciation or the 
previous losses of the licensee are written off, the licensee shall not 
pay dividend beyond 3 per cent. of the share capital or distribute 
other profits without the consent of the State Government. 
(i) The amendment restricts the aggregate remuneration that 
may be paid to the Managing Agents or other persons employed for 
managing the undertaking. 
(j) This provides that a licensee shall not he entitled to claim 
arbitration during the period between the date of appointment of a 
rating committee and the date of the orders passed by the State Gov-
ernment on the recommendation of the rating committee .. 
(k) (a) (i) This makes it clear that the licensee shall include in 
the' "Capital base" the original cost of only those assets which are 
actually available for use. 
(ii) This prevents the licensee from including in the 'Capital base' 
investments made by him out of his depreciation fund before the 
coming into force of the Act. 
(iii) This is a formal amendment. 
(iv) This amendment is related to the amendment made by sub-
clause (b) (ii). 
(v) Provision is being made for the deduction of certain deposits 
and reserves from the 'Capital base'. . .. 
(b) (i) This prevents the licensee from charging to revenue the 
expenses which have not been properly incurred by him. 
(ii ) This permits the charging to revenue of interest on all loans 
advanced to the licensee by the Board, whether under section 23 or 
under paragraph 1 of the First Schedule to the Act. Earning of rea-
sonable return on such loans is not being allowed [vide sub-clause 
(a) (iv).] . 
(iii) This is a formal amendment. 

i6 
(it,) This makes it clear that interest on loans and debenture. 
other than those advanced by the State EleeVici~Beuclis IIOt to 
be charged to revenue. 
(v) This provides for payment of bonus to staff. 
(c) (i) This permits the writing off of previous losses to the ex-
tent permitted by the State Government. 
(ii) This amendment is formal. 
(iii) This amendment is consequential on the amendment made 
by clause 26 (e). 
(d) This prevents the charging to Capital Account of interest 
on Capital expenditure incurred from borrowed money during "the 
period of construction of an asset. 
(e) (i) This permits the earning of dividend by the licensees only 
on those investments which are not permitted to earn 'reascmabl. 
return'. 
(ii) This is consequential on the amendments made by clause 26 
(k) (b) (ii). 
<f) This links the "Standard Rate" of "reasonable return" to the 
prevailing Bank Rate and fixes it at 2 per cent. 'above the latter. 
Clawe 27.-(a) The amendment is consequential on the amend-
ment made by clause 14. 
(b) and (c). These amendments are formal. 
(d) This enlarges the Table of assets and their pl1eecribed 
periods. 
Clause 28, Sub-clawe (a) .-This entitles the Board to take into 
account a proper proportion of all taxes on income and profits paid 
by it, for the purposes of determining the cost of production of elec-
tricity. 
Sub-clawe (b).-This entitles the Board to take into account 
interest on the depreciated cost of the generating station, for the 
purposes of determining the cost of production of electricity. 

ANNEXURE 
ftTUC'l'S BOM THE ELECTRICITY (SUPPLY) ACT, 1948 (ACT No. LIV 
OF 1948) 
'" '" '" 
1. Shof't title, utmlt and commencement.-
til lit 
• • 
(3) This section and sections 3, 4, 57, 58, 77. and 83 and the Sixth 
SChedule and the Table appended to the Seventh Schedule of this 
Act shall come into force at once. 
'" • '" • 
2. Interpretation.-In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant 
in the subject or context,-
'" • '" '" 
(8) "maximum demand" means, in respect of any period twice 
the largest number of kilowatt-hours supplied and taken 
during any consecutive thirty minutes (calculated from 
either the commencement or the middle of an hour) in 
the period; 
• • • 
CHAPI'ER m 
State Electricity Boor48 
• 
5. COn3titution and cO'rJ'Q)osition of State Electricity Boards.-
• • • • 
(4) Of the members, one shall be a person of proved administra-
tive ability and commercial experience; one shall be an electrical 
engineer With wide experience; and one shall be an accountant with 
experience of the electricity supply industry or other public utility. 
• '" '" '" 
10. Removal' or 3uspension of members.-
'" '" • ... 
(e) in the opinion of the State Government has failed or is 
unable to carry out his duties so as to render his sus-
pelEion or removal, as the case may be, necessary; or 
· . . -

28 
16. State Electricity Council.-(l) The State Government shall 
constitute a State Electricity Council for the State, and in cases to 
which sections 6 and 7 apply, the State Governments concerned 
shall constitute such one or more State Electricity Council or Coun-
cils and for such areas as they may by agreement determine .. 
(2) The State Electricity Council shall consist of the members of 
the Board and such other persons being not less than seven and not 
more than fifteen, as the State Government or the State Govern-
ments concerned may appoint after consultation with such represen-
tatives or bodies representative of the following interests as the 
State Government or the State Governments concerned thinks or 
think fit, that is to say, local self-government, electricity supply 
industry, commerce, industry, transport, agriculture and labour em-
ployed in the electricity supply industry, 'but so that there shall be 
at least one member representing each such interest in the Council. 
(3) The Chairman of the Board shall be ex-officio Chairman of 
the State Electricity Council. 
(4) The State Electricity Council shall meet at least once in every 
three months. 
(5) The functions Gf the State Electricity Council shall be as 
fol1ows:-
(i) to advise the Board on major questions of policy and major 
, schemes; 
(ii) to review the progress and the work of the Board from 
time to time; 
(iii) to consider such other matters as the Board may place 
before it; and 
(iv) to consider such matters as the State Government may 
by rules prescribe. 
(6) The Board shall place 'before the State Electricity Council the 
annual financial statement and supplem~tary statement, if any, 
before submitting such statement to the State Government under 
section 61 together with copies of the report and proceedings . 
• • • • 
%3. Loans by Board to licensees. 
• • • • 
(2) The Board in the discharge of its functionFl may call upon a 
licensee to expand his undertaking and offer to advance to him a 
loan on such terms and conditions as it may deem proper for such 
expansion, and if the licensee refuses, fails or neglects to accept the 

29 
ioan from the Board on the terms and conditions offered or to raise a 
loan from other sources or to employ his own funds on terms simi-
lar to the terms offered by the Boarci for purposes of such expan-
sion and to carry out such expansion, the Board may, after giving 
the licensee six months' notice in writing, purchase his . undertaking . 
• • • • 
26. Board to have powers and obligations of licensee u.nder Act 
IX oj 19l0.-Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall, 
in respect of the whole State, have all the powers and obligations 
oi a licensee under the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (IX of 1910), 
and this Act shall be deemed to be the licence of the Board for 
the purposes of that Act: 
Provided that nothing in sections 3 to 11, sub-sections (2) and (3) 
of section 21 and sections 22, 23 and 27 of that Act or in Clauses I 
to XII of the Schedule to that Act relating to the duties and obli-
gations of a licensee shall apply to the Board. 
• • * • 
29. Publication and sanctioning of schemes.-(l) The B9ard shall 
cause every scheme prepared under section 28 to be published in 
the Official Gazette and in such local newspapers as it may consider 
necessary, and shall give public notice of the date, not being less 
than two months after the date of the notice, by which licensees and 
other persons interested may make representations thereon and 
when publishing such a scheme the Board shall show estimates of 
the capital expenditure involved and of the initial and ultimate 
revenues anticipated from the sale of energy, meter rentals and other 
services. 
(2) The Board, after considering any such representations and after 
making such inquiries, if any, as it thinks fit, may sanction the 
scheme either without modification or subject to such modifications 
as it thinks fit, and either generally or in respect of any part of 
the area specified in the published scheme, and shall publish the 
scheme as sanctioned by it; and where the scheme has been sanc-
tioned in respect of part of the said area, it may subsequently 'be 
.sanctioned in respect of other parts of that area: 
Provided that no sanction shall be accorded by the Board to any 
scheme or part of a scheme estimated to result in a capital expendi-
ture exceeding fifty lakhs of rupees without prior consultation with 
the Authority and until any recommendations which the Authority 
may, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, make upon such 
consultation have received due consideration by the Board: 
* * • .. 

30 
55. Licensees to comply with Board's directiDns.-E:very licenset! 
shall comply with such directions as the Board may from time to 
time give him for the purpose of achieving the maximum of economy 
and eHiciency in the operation of the station. 
• • * • 
57. Licensees' charges to consumers.-(1) The provisions of the 
Sixth Schedule and the Table appended to the Seventh Schedule 
shall be deemed to be incorporated in the licence of every licensee, 
not being a local authority, from the date of the commencement of 
the licensQe's next succeediug year of account, and from such date 
the licensee shall comply therewith accordingly and any provisions 
of such licence or of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (IX of 1910), 
or any other law, agreement or instrument applicable to the licensee 
shall, in relation to the licensee, be void and of nO effect in so far 
as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this section and the 
said Schedule and Table. 
(2) Where the provisions of the Sixth Schedule and the Table 
appended to the Seventh Schedule are under sub-section (1) deemed 
to be incorporated in the licence of any licensee, the following pro-
visions shall have effect in rp lation to the said licensee, namely:-
(a) The Board, or where no Boarn is constituted under this Act 
the State Government, may, if it is satisfied that the 
licensee has failed to comply with any provision of the 
Sixth Schedule, and shall when requested so to do by the 
licensee constitute a rating committee to examine the 
licensee's chargeR for thp lOupply of electricity and to 
recommend thereon to the State Government: 
Provided that no rating committee shall be constituted in 
respect of a licensee within three years from the date 
on which such a committee has reported in respect of 
that licensee, unless the State Government declares that 
in its opinion circumst~ces have arisen rendering the 
orders passed on the recommendations of the previous 
rating committee unfair to the licensee or any of bis 
consumers. 
(b) The \rating committee shall, after giving the- licensee a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard and after taking 
into consideration the efficiency of operation and 
management and the potentialities of his undertaking, 
report to the State Government making recommendations 
(and giving reasons therefor) regarding the charges for 
electricity which the licpnRee may make to any class or 

~l 
classes of consumers so however that the recommenda-
tions are not likely to prevent the licensee from earning 
clear profits sufficient when taken with the sums avail-
able in the Tariffs and Dividends Control Reserve to 
afford him a reasonable return during his next suc-
ceeding three years of accounts if the potentialities of 
the undertaking of the licensee, with· efficient operation 
and management, so permit. 
(c) Within one month after the receipt of the report under 
clause (b) the State Government shall cause the report 
to be published in the official Gazette, and may, at the 
same time make an order in accordance therewith fixing 
the licensee's charges for the supply of electricity with 
effect from such date, not earlier than two months or 
later than three months after the date of publication of 
the report, as may be specified in the order; and the 
licensee shall forthwith give effect to such order: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to pre-
vent a licensee from reducing at any time any charge~ 
so fixed. 
(3) Where a Board is constituted under this Act, the rating com-
mittee shall consist of three members, two of whom shall be 
members of the Board and one shall be a repre~entative, co-opted-
by the two members of the Board from a licensees' association of 
which the licensee concerned is or is eligible to be a member or, 
if there is no such association, from such Chamber of Commerce 
or similar body as the Board may direct; one of such members of 
the Board shall be experienced in accounting and financial matters 
and one of the members of the Board shall be the Chairman of the 
committee. 
(4) Where no Board is constituted under this Act, the ratin/! 
committee shall consist of five members of whom the Chairman and 
two other members shall be nominated by the State Government, 
one member shall be nominated by the licensee and one member 
shall be nominated by the local Electric Licensees' Association, or 
if there is no such association, by such Chamber of Commerce or 
similar body as the State Government may direct. 
(5) Of the three members to be nominated by the State Govern-
ment under sub-section (4), one shall be a person who is or has 
been a judicial officer not below the rank of a District Judge, one 
shall be a registered accountant having at least ten years' experience 
and one shall be a person with administrative experience . 
• • • 

32 
61. PriOTity of liabilities of the Board.-
• • • • 
(vi) repayment of principal and interest on sums paid by the 
State Government under guarantees under section 66; 
• • • • • • * 
(viii) contribution to general reserve of an amount not exceed-
ing one per centum per annum of the original cost of 
fixed assets employed by the Board so however that the 
total standing to the credit of such reserve shall not 
exceed eight per centum of the original cost of such 
fixed assets, 
• • * • 
(x) of the balance remaining, one-half in the reduction of 
tariffs or for such other purposes beneficial to el~ctrical 
development in the State, as the Board may think fit, 
and the remaining one-half as far as available in the 
following order, namely:-
(a) repayment of interest-free loans; 
(b) to State revenues. 
68. Depreciation reserve.-The Broad shall create a depreciation 
reserve and, as far as compliance with the provision of section 67 
makes it practicable, shall at the end of every year credit to such 
reserve from its revenues-
(i) sums ascertained in accordance with the Seve~th Sc'ledule, 
and 
(ii) interest at the rate of three per centum per annum on all 
sums at credit of the depreciation reserve on i:h .. first day 
of thp. said year: 
Provided that if in any year it is not practicable fully to com-
ply with the provisions of this section, the amount by 
which the sums actually credited falls short of the 
amount required under this section in respect of that 
year shall be carried forward and, together with com-
pound interest thereon at the aforesaid rate, shall be 
credited to the said reserve as soon as it is found possible 
in 'accordance with section 67 so to do. 
89. Accounts and audit.-(l) The- Broad shall cause to be main-
tained such proper books of account and other books in relation to 
its accounts as the regulations may require, and shall prepare in 
accordance with the rules an annual statement of accou~ts, 

33 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited concurrently and 
annually by a person who shall 'be qualified under the provisions of 
section 144 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), to act 
as an auditor of companies and who shall be appointed by the State 
Government. 
(3) As soon as the accounts of the Board have been audited, the 
Board shall send a copy thereof together with a copy of the report 
of the auditor thereon to the State Government, and shall cause the 
accounts to be published in the prescribed manner and place copies 
thereof on sale at a reasonable price. 
(4) The Board shall comply with such orders and instructions, 
as the State Government may, upon perusal of the "eport of the 
auditor, think fit to issue. 
• • • • 
77. Penalties and p1'ocedure.-(l) If any licensee or other person 
fails without reasonable excuse to comply with or give effect to any 
direction, order or requirement made under section 55 or under 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 57 or under section 58 or 
under sub·section (3) of section 75, he shall be deemed to have com-
mitted an offence under this section and shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and in the case of 
continuing offence with an additional fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees for every day after the first during which the offence 
continues. 
(2) Where any licensee or other person is a firm, company or 
other body corporate, every partner, managing director, manager, 
secretary or other responsible officer thereof shall, unless he proves 
that an offence under this section was committed without his know-
ledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent its commis-
sion, be deemed to be guilty of the offence. 
(3) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under this sec-
tion except on the complaint of an officer of the Board, or where no 
Board is constituted under this Act on the complaint of an officer of 
the State Government, authorised by the Board or as the case may 
be by the State Government in this behalf. 
18. Power to make rules.-
• • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
(a) the term of office of the Chairman and other members of 
the Board, the conditions under which they shall be 
eligible for re'appointment and their remuneration, 
allowances and other conditions of service; 
• • • • 

34 
THE· FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 34 and'25] 
AtTUnge7Mnt in. Terpect of con.tTolled ,toticml. 
PART I 
Assumption of control 
• • • • 
(2) To enable a licensee to comply with any direction under sub· 
paragraph (1) requiring extension of the station or any part thereof 
for purposes of the ltGatd, 'the Board may, if it considers it expedient 
and practicable so to do, offer to advance to him a loan upon such 
terms and conditions as it may deem proper andtheUcensee shall 
accept the 'loan from the Board on the terms and conditions offered, 
. uniess he raises a loan from other sources or employs his own ,funds 
'for purpeses of su¢h extension on terms similar to the terms offered 
'ey rthe Board: 
• • • • 
TilE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section36J 
Cloling down of generating stations othef' than controlled stations 
• • • 
V. 'The licensee shall have theop~i'On, to be exercised .by a datto 
not l'aterthan three months prior to the (date of 'Closing down, 
ei'ther-
• • • 
(b) (i) to require the Board to purchase the station at the:date 
of closing down at a price determined under the Fourth Schedule, 
and 
• • 
THE :rIFTH ~HEDULE 
[See section 41] 
• 
Char.{la fOT use by' Board of transmission line, and main traurnillion 
line, 
• • • 
(b) sums paid in respect of ' the' lines' for insurance and as rents, 
ra~es and taxes '(including super-tax payable by !the licenPee sa a 
company but exebldtng otbertaxes !0n profttl); 
• • 

ts 
(e) interest on money pt'Op81'ly-,.xpeaded for capital purposes 
(whether defrayed out of capital or revenue) and attributable to the 
lines, and interest on such working capital as is properly attribut-
alJle to the lines: 
• • • 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 57] 
• • • 
L T~.licensee uall so ,adjust his rates for the sale of electricity 
by. Pteriodical . revision that hiB clear Pfodtin aay year shall not as 
far, as possible eJreeed the amount of reasonable return: 
Pi'O¥ided that· the lieensee shall not be considered to have failed 
so to adjust hIS' rates if the clear profit in any year of account has 
not .~eeeded the 'amouat of the reaSOllable retum by more than 
thirty per centu.m of the amount of the reasonable return. 
II; (1) If·the clear profit of a licensee in any year of account is 
in excess of the amount of reasonable return, one-third of such 
excess, not exceeding '1i per cent. of the amount of reasonable return, 
shall· be at the-dispMal of the amdertakiug. Of the. balance of the 
tm:es6, . oae-aau, sAUl be aPPll'Opriatedto a I1eseJTYe which shall be 
called the Tariffs ,and.DivideDds Cootrol,Beaenre and the remaining 
balfshall either, be distributed in the ferm. of a proportional rebate 
OIl the. amounts coUectel!l, from the sde of electricity and meter 
rentals or carried forw.arciiin,tae accounts·of.the licensee for distri-
bution to tbe consumers in future. in such manner as the State Gov-
ernment may direct. 
• • • • 
IX. When any, fixed asset is sold fw all amolUlt exceeding its 
written down cost the excess shall be. credited to the Contingencies 
Reserve. 
X. Except with the consent of the State Government no sums 
shall be carried to a reserve, and no dividends in exc~s of 3 per 
cent. on share capital and no other distribution of profits shall be 
made tomueaolciers while any sum allowed, in respect of depre-
ciation for~e 1or:ef aaeount·O!r Illy instaiments·,due in respect of 
any arrears of depreciatio,n as provided i.g. paragraph XI. remains to 
be written-off in the books of the undertaking. • 
• • • 

l6 
DEFINITIONS 
xvn. For the purposes of this Schedule-
(1) "capital base" means the sum of-
(8) the original cost of fixed assets, subject to the provision 
of para. XII in respect of service lines; 
• • • • 
(d) the amount of investments compulsorily made, under 
paragraph IV of this Schedule, together with such 
investments made before or after the commencement 
of this Act from contributions towards depreciation 
8S may be shown to the reasonable satisfaction of the 
Authority as being amounts which could not be or 
could not have been utilised by the undertaldn( undet 
clauses (a) and (b) of this sub-paragraph; 
(e) an amount on account of working capital equal to the 
sum of-
(i) on~twelfth of the sum of the book cost of stores, 
materials and supplies including fuel on hand at the 
end of each month of the year of account; 
(Ii) on~twelfth of the sum of cash and bank balances and 
call and short term deposits at the end of each month 
of the year of account, not exceeding in the aggre-
gate an amount equal to one quarter of the expen-
diture under sub-paragraph 2(b)'of this paragraph 
excluding clauses (i), (iv) and (x); 
. ' 1* • 
(2) "clear profit" means-
the difference between the amount of income and the sum 
of expenditure plus specific appropriations, made up 
in each case as follows:-
• ;* * 
(b) expenditure incurred on-
• .. • • 
(tv) interest on loans advanced by the Board under sub-
paragraph (2) of paragraph I of the First Schedule; 
• • • • 
(x) depreciation, computed as hereinafter set out; 

31 
(xi) other expenses admissible under the. law for the tint. 
being in force in the assessment of Indian Income-
tax and arising from and ancillary or incident81 to 
the business of electricity supply; 
• • .. .. .. .. .. 
(c) special appropriations sufficient to cover-
.. 
• 
(i) previous losses (that is to say excess of expenditure 
over income) which have arisen from the business 
of electricity supply to the extent in any year actual-
ly appropriated for the purpose in the books of the 
undertaking; 
.. • 
(iv) contributions to the contingency reserve, computed 
as hereinafter set out; 
.. • 
(6) "original cost" means in respect of any asset the sum of-
• .. .. • 
(b) interest charges on capital expenditure incurred from 
borrowed money and properly attributable to the asset 
upto the date of bringing it into use at a rate not 
exceeding average Reserve Bank rate ruling at that 
tiple plus one per cent . 
.. .. .. .. 
(9) "reasonable return" means-
• • .. .. 
(b) the income derived from investments other than those 
made under paragraph IV of this Schedule; 
(c) an amount equal to one-half of one per centum on any 
loans advanced by the Board under. sub-paragraph (2) 
of paragraph I of the First Schedule. 
(10) "standard rate" means-
5 per centum 
.. .. • • 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 68 and the Fifth and Eighth Schedules] 
.. .. • \ • 
II. (1) Save as provided in the Fourth and Sixth Schedules, the 
Bcale of depreciation applicable to the assets specified in the Table 
appended to this Schedule in any financial year, and proportionately 

38 
for any portion. of a financial year, shall be an allowance of such 
amount as would if made annually throughout the prescribea period 
and accumulated at compound interest at the rate of 4 per centum 
per annum produce by the end ·of the prescribed period an amount 
equal to 9Q per centum of the original cost of the asset. 
• • • • • 
TABLE 
[See also section 57 and the Fourth and Sixth Schedules] 
Description of asset 
• • • 
C. Assets purchased new-
• • • 
(i) Overhead lines, including supports-
(i) lines on steel or reinforced concrete 
supports, operating at nominal 
voltages higher than 13.2 kilovolts. 
(Ii) other lines on steel or reinforc ed 
concrete supportS. 
(iii) lines on wood supports. 
• • • 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
Number of years 
or period 
• 
• 
Thirty. 
Twenty-five. 
Twenty. 
• 
[See the First and Third Schedules] 
Determina.tion of cost of production of electricity at generating 
Stations. 
I. For the purposes of the First and Third Schedules, the cost of 
production of electricity at a generating station shall be ascertained 
by calculating and taking into account the following costs, charges 
and allowances in respect of the year of account, namely:-
• • • • 
(b) sums paid in respect o~ the station for insurance and as 
rents, rates and taxes (including super-tax payable by 
the licensee as a company but excluding other taxes 
on profits) j 
• • • • 

• 
(e) 
39 
interest on money properly expended for capital purposes 
(whether defrayed out of capital or revenue) and attri-
butable to the station, and interest on working capital 
properly attributable to th~ station and the production 
of electricity thereiii: 
Provided that for the pUJ;;j?ose of ascertaining the principal on 
which interest is payable within the meaning of this 
clause, there shall be left out of account any part of 
principal on which interest is payable out of capital; 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
• 
further to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, 
Minister of Irrigation and Power.) 