AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

¢ JUH 1998

Bill No. 50 of 1998

‘THE STATES REORGANISATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
SHRI BHAGWAN SHANKAR RAWAT, M.P.
A
BILL

Jpurther to amend the States Reorganisation Act, 1
॥ the Republic of India as

956.

it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year o

‘This Act may be called the States Reorganisation (Amendment) Act, 1998.

2, In section 51 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956:
tion shall be inserted, namely—

(i) after sub-section (2), the following sub-se
*(2A) The President may, after the expiry of every four years, review the

matter of establishment of a permanent bench or benches of the High Court of

‘a new State with reference to demand made in regard thereto:

ice of that High Court, after being

ion in writing within six months

.d that the Chief Justice has no

Provided that where the Chief Just
formally requested to, does not express his opini
from the date of such request, it shall be deeme
opinion to give on the subject:

Short tule

Amendment of
section SI


2

Provided also that the President s
under sub-section (2) by the Gov
the High Court of that State:

hall not be bound by the | gi
ernor of a new State or the Chief Justice

Provided also that the President, if he deems fit,
member Commission, chaired by a sitting or retired J
Court, to examine the matter of desirability and feasibi
establishment of a new Permanent bench or benches of
new State and to give its opinion in regard thereto after ascertaining the vie
of the Governor and the Chief Justice of the High Court of that State, and if,
President does so, there shall be no further requirement for the President
consult the Governor or the Chief Justice of the High Court of that State:";

(1) after sub-section (3), the following provisons shall be added, namely:—

“Provided that the desirability of sitting of the judges and division courts of
High Court for a new State at such other new place or places in that State shall

reviewed Periodically after every four years by the Chief Justice of that High Cot

may appoint a
७५४९ of the Sup
lity of and site for
the High Court for

Provided further that the Chief Justice may order that any case or class of.

arising before the judges at such Place or places be heard and disposed of at
Principal seat of that High Court:

Provided also that the cases, involving interpretation of the provisions of
Constitution or the vires of statute or

under the statute, which have not alrea


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In a democratic set-uy
ps of the people.

0 , it is the basic duty of the State to bring justice to the door-

that distance of the principal seat of a High Court from the
makes it extremely difficult, may impossible, to avail
\damental and other rights,

itution for enforcement of fun
icy of the Government of India to provide justice at the

To establish a permanent Bench or Benches of the High Court is the Constitutional
*ogative of the Union Parliament vide entry 78 of the Union List of the Seventh Schedule
Constitution. The statute law enacted by the Parliament in that regard is the State
rganisation Act, 1956 (Act No. 37 of 195
Section 51(2) of the said Act provi
her constitutional functionaries, namely,
he High Court of that State, depicting ii

6).

ides for consultation by the President with two
the Governor of the State and the Chief Justice
involvement of three functionaries

thas been experienced that these of

ften results an impasse due (0 al

ibsence of | unanimity
functionaries,

which culminates into denial of the
ice to the door steps of the people, as enshrined in

is a burning illustration thereof.
The reasons for absence of unanimity by the three aforesaid functionaries are more
Apparant. The Chief Justice of the High Court also does not easily agree for
Siablishment of the Benches despite popular demand of the Public at large and of elected
sentatives. It, hence, nece:

sitates that some one should have the final say in the
and that can alone be of the President under the Constitutional frame work.

BHAGWAN SHANKAR RAWAT


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE STATES REORGANISATION Act, 1956.
(Act No. 37 oF 1956)

* * * * *

51 (1) The principal seat of the High Court for a new State shall be at such place as the
President may, by notified order, appoint.

(2) The President may, after consultation with Governor of anew State and the Chief
Justice of the High Court for that State by notified order, provide for the establishment
of a permanent bench or benches of that High Court at one or more places within
the State other than the principal seat of the High Court and for any matters connected
therewith.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the judges
and division Courts of the High Court for a new State may also sit at such other
place or places in that State as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the
Governor, appoint.

* * * * *


LOK SABHA,

A
BILL.

further to amend the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.

(Shri Bhagwan Shankar Rawat, M.P.)

G:AWIN1\G\347Is..