As INTRODUCED IN Log SABRA ON 
BW N0. ,,50 of 1117 
nm PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE-PRESIDENTIAL 
ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1977 
A 
BILL 
furlher to amend the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elt'ctions Act, 
1952. 
:!bI it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eightb Year of the Republic 
of'Incfia as fonows:-
1. This Act may be called the Presidential and Vice-Presidential 
BledtlltMy ~Amendment) Act, 1977. 
s •. In the Presiden'tial and Vice-Presidential ElectiOl)s Act, 1952, for 
,: '-'t m. 'the folloWing Part shall be substituted, namely:-
'PART TIl 
DISPUTES REGARDING ELECTIONS 
13. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) ·'candidate" means a person who has been or claims to 
have been ~u1y nominated as a candidate at an eleetiou; 
Short 
title. 
Subltitu-
tion of 
new Part 
for Part 
mofAd 
31 of 1952. 
DefIni-
tion., 

Authority 
to try 
election 
petitions. 
Preaenta~ 
Hon of 
petition. 
Form of 
petitions, 
'E:tc.and 
procedure. 
Relief 
that 
may be 
claimed 
by the 
petitioner. 
Ord'erg 
otthe 
Suprf'me 
Court. 
(b) "costs" means all costs, charges and expenses of, or inci-
dental to, a trial of an election petition; 
(c) "returned candidate" means a candidate whose name has 
been published under section 12 as duly elected. 
14. (1) No election shall be called in question except by present- S 
ing an election petition to the authority specified in sub-section (2). 
(2) The authority having jurisdiction to try an election petition 
shall be the Supreme Court. 
(3) Every election petition shall be presented to such authority 
in accordance with the provisions of this Part and of the rules made 10 
by the Supreme Court under article 145. 
14A. (1) An election petition calling in question an election 
may be presented on one or more of the grounds specified in sub-
section (1) of section 18 and section 19, to the Supreme Court by 
any candidate at such election, or- 15 
(i) in the case of Presidential election, by twenty or more 
electors joined together as petitioners; 
(ii) in the case of Vice~Presidential election, by ten or more 
electors joined together as petitioners. 
(2) Any such petition may be presented at any time after the 20 
date of publication of the declaration containing the name of the 
returned candidate at the election under section 12, but not later 
than thirty days from the date of such publication. 
15. Subject to the provisions of this Part, rules made [whether 
before or after the commencement of the Presidential and Vice~ 25 
Presidential Elections (Amendment) Act, 1977] by the Supreme 
Court under article 145 may regulate the form of election petitions, 
the manner in which they are to be presented, the persons who are 
to be made parties thereto, the procedure to be adopted in connec-
tion therewith and the circumstances in which petitions are to abate, 30 
or may be withdrawn, and in which new petitioners may be substi-
tuted, and may require security to be given for costs. 
16. A petitioner may claim either of the following declarations:-
(a) that the election of the returned candidate is void; 
c· 
(b) that the election of the returned candidate is void and 35 
that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected. 
17. (1) At the conclusion of the trial of the election petition, 
the Supreme Court shall make an order-
(a) dismissing the election petition; or 
(b) declar~ng the election of the ret\.trnfilQ can<iidate tQ be 40 
void; or 

4501 1880. 
,,: 'II 
3 
(c) declaring the election of the returned candidate to be 
void and the petitioner or any other candidate to have been duly 
elected. 
(2) At the time of making an order under sub-section (1), the 
5 Supreme Court shall also make an order fixing the total amount of 
costa payable and specifying the persons by and to whom' castoR shall 
be paid. 
18. (l) If the Supreme Court is of opinion,-
10 
(a) that the oftence of bribery or undue influence at the 
election bas been committed by the returned candidate or by 
any person with the consent of the returned candidate; or 
Grounds 
for declar-
ing the 
election 
30 
35 
45 
(b) that the result of the election has been materially 
affected--
of a 
returned 
candidate 
to be veld. 
(i) by the improper reception or refusal of a vote, Qt 
(ii) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the 
Constitution or of this Act or of any rules or orders made 
under this Act; or 
(iii) by reason of the fact that the nomination of any 
candidate (other than the successful. candidate), who has 
not withdrawn his candidature, has been wrongly accepted; 
or 
(c) that the nomination of any candidate has been wronal)' 
rejected. or the nomination of the successful candidate has been 
wronely accepted; 
the Supreme Court shall declare the election of the returned candi-
date to be void. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, the oftenc~s of bribery 
and undue infiuence at an election have the same meaning as in 
Chapter IXA of the Indian Penal Code. 
19. II any person who has lodged an election petition has, in 
addition to calling in question the election of the returned candi-
date, claimed a declaration that he himself or any other candidate 
has been duly elected and the Supreme Court is of opinion that in 
tact the petitioner or such other candidate received a majority of 
the valid votes, the Supreme Court shall, after declaring the election 
of the returned candidate to be void, declare the petitione: or such 
other candidate, as the case may be, to have been duly elected: 
Provided that the petitioner or such other candidate shall not 
be declared to be duly elected if it is proved that the election Of such 
candidate would have been void if he had been the returned candi-
date and a petition had been presented calling in question his 
election. 
20. The Supreme Court shall, after announcing the orders made 
under section 17, send a copy thereof to the Central Government, 
and on receipt of such copy the Central Government shall forthwith 
cause the order to be published in the Official Gazette.'. 
Grounds 
for which 
a candi-
date 
other than 
the re-
turned 
candidate 
may be 
declared 
to have 
been 
elected. 
Trans_ 
mission of 
orders 
to the 
Central 
Govern-
mentand 
ittpubU-
cattOD. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND R1:ASONS 
Prior to the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 19?5, article 
71 as it then stood, specifically provided that doubts and djs~tG·arising 
out of or in connection with the election of a President or Vice-President 
shall be inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision 
shall be final. New article 71 substituted by the Constitution (Thirty-
ninth Amendment) Act however empowered Parliament to constitute 
an authority or body for inquiring into and deciding dG)11bts and dis-
putes relating to Presidential and Vice-PresidentialelectioJls and further 
provided that the decision of such authority or body shall nen be called 
iR' qUestioD by any Court. 
On the 3rd February, 1977, the President proPilulgated an Ordinance 
to amend the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections, Act, 1952, so 
as to substitute a new Part for Part III of that Act providing for the 
setting up of all authority consisting of nine members--three to be 
neminatedby the Speaker of the Lok Sabha-one of whom shall be the 
Chief Justice or retired Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and another 
a person having knowledge of election law, three to be elected by the.· 
Lok Sabha and the remaining three to be elected by the Rajya Sabha. 
In addition to this substantive provision constituting the· authority, the 
Ordinance contained certain other pt'ovisions relat.ing top*edure and 
matters of detail. In that Ordinance the scope and a~tucie of the 
oftellc~s of bribery and undue influence were circumscribed so that 
those expressions would not have the meanings assigned to them in 
Chapter IXA of the Indian Penal Code, but would be merel, corrupt 
practices having the meanings assigned to these expressioR!j in the 
Representatian of the People Act, 1951. 
After the general election, Government decided not to r~ce that 
OrdiDance by parliamentary legislation and the Ordinance wa~ allowed 
to lapse. Government consider that it is not only appropriate, but also r 
desirable to restore the position obtaining prior to the COnstftutiOD 
(Thirty~inth Amendment) Act, 1975, with regard to· the forum fOr the 
trial of eleetfon petitions challenging Presidential anei Vice-Presidential 
electi~ns, including the scope and amplitude of the oifellCCS of' bribery 
and undue influence. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above object by ma~ an. am~dment 
in the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 1952, so as to 
specifically provide as required by new article 71, that the Supreme 
Court shall be the authority for the trial of disputes. relating to 
Presidential and Vice-Presidential elections and thus restore the . earlier'-
position. 
NEW DELHI; P. C. CHUNDER. 
The 311t M4I/J 1977. 

ANNEXURE. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PRESIDENTIAL AND VICZ-PRJSI.DENTIAL 
ELEcftelfS At::I, 1_ 
31 OF 1~2 
• • • • .' PART III 
DISPUTES REGARDING BLBCTlONS 
IS.. In this Part, unless the coD.tex~ otherwise reqJ,lirea-
(ao) IIcaadidate" meaDS a person who has betA or claials to have 
been duly nomin.ated as a cmdida~ at an electiQQ,. 8IlCl 1mJ. 8\IIIJh 
P'Il'S~ shall be deemed. to have been a caadidaW.88. from. the ij,me 
when, with the election in prospect, he began to hold himself out 
as a prospective candidate; 
(b) "costs" means all costs, charges and expenses of, or inciden-
tial to, a trial 01 an election petition; 
(c) "returned candidate~' meaDs a candidate whole name has 
been published under section 12 as duly elected. 
1'- (lJ No electiQl'l shall be called in ql,le8tion eJU;ept by an election 
petition presented to the Supreme Court in accordance 'with the provi-
sions of this Part and of the l'ules made by the Supreme Court under 
article 145. 
(Z) An electiea. petition calliDg in questiaG all eleotion may be 
prea-ted. OR ODe or more of the· ground •. apectilec1·inlllbaMOtion (1) of 
sectioQ.. 18 aDd section ·19 to. the Supaaaa Com by 1lII¥·..."tcIwte at such 
election, or-
(i) in the case of Presidential election, by twenty or more 
, electors joined together as petitioners; 
(ii) in the case of Vice-Presidential election, by teu or more 
electors joined together as petitioners. 
(3~ Any suell petition may be PA!IIeBtM at my time, a., the date 
of publication of the declaration contaiIIIIDg the Dame ot the retaraed 
candidate at the election under section 12 but not later than thirty days 
from the date of such publication. 
11. Subject to the provisions of this Part, ruJa ,maO by the SupHDle 
Court UDder article 146 may regulate the fol7Dl .of eleetion petitions, the 
menner in, which they are to be presented, the penon. who are to be 
made parties thereto, the procedure to be adopted in connection thue-
with and the circumstances in which petitions are to abate, or may be 
withdrawn, and in which new petitaoners may be substit1l&ed, &lid may 
require security to be given for costs. 
s 
Deftni-
tiOIUl. 
Election 
petition •. 
: .. ~ . 

~ellef that 
may be 
claimed 
by the 
petitioner. 
Orders 
of the 
Supreme 
Court. 
Grounds 
tor dec-
larinlthe 
election of 
a return"ad 
candidate 
to be void. 
Grounds 
for which 
a candi-
date 
other than 
the re-
, turned 
candidate 
may be 
declared 
to have 
been 
_lectecL 
16. A petitioner may claim either of the following declarations:-
(a) that the election of the returned candidate is void; 
(b) that the election of the returned candidate is void and that 
he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected. 
17. (1) At the conclusion of the trial of the election pf'tition, the 
Supreme Court shall make an order-
(a) dismissing the election petition; or 
(b) declaring the election of the returned candidate to be void; 
or '.. i i.·, = 
(c) declaring the election of the returned candidate to be void 
and the petitioner or any other candidate to have been duly elected. 
(2) At the time of making an order under sub-section (l), the 
Supreme Court shall also make an order fixing the total amount of costs 
payable and specifying the persons by and to whom costs shall be paid. 
18. (1) If the Supreme Court is of opinion,-
(a) that the offence of bribery or undue influence at the election 
has been committed by the returned candidate or by any person 
with the consent of the returned candidate; or 
(b) that the result of the election has been materially aftected-
(i) by the improper reception or refusal of a vote, or 
(ii) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the 
Constitution or of this Act or· of any rules or orders made under 
this Act; or 
(iii) by reason of the fact that the nomination of any 
candidate (other than the successful candidate), who has not 
withdrawn his candidature, has been wrongly accept.ed; or 
(c) that the nomination of any candidate has been wrongly re-
jected or the nomination of the successful candidate has been wrong-
ly accepted; 
the Supreme Court shall declare the election of the returned candidate 
to be void. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, the offences of bribery and 
undue in1iuence at an election have the same meaning as in Chapter 
IXA of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1880. 
19. U any person who has· lodged an election petition has, in addition 
to calling in question the election of the returned candidate, claimed a 
declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected 
and the Supreme Court is of opinion that in fact the petitioner or such 
other candidate received a majority of the valid votes, th~ Supreme 
Court shall, after declaring the election of the returned candidate to be 
void, declare the petitioner or such other candidate, as the case may be, 
to have been duly elected: 

? 
Provided that the petitioner or such other candidate shall not be 
declared to be duly elected if it is proved that the election of such 
candidate would have been void if he had been the returned candidate 
and a petition had been presented calling in question his election. 
20. The Supreme Court shall, after announcing the orders made under 
section 17, send a copy thereof to the Central Government, and on 
receipt of su(:h copy the Central Government shall forthwith cause the 
order to be publisbed in the Official Gazette. 
• • • • • 
Transmis-
sion of 
orders to 
the 
Central 
Govem-
mentand 
itapubli-
catton. 

SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further' to amend the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 
1952. 
(Dr. P. C. Chunder, 
Minister of Education, 
Social Welfa:re and 
Culture.) . . 