1
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI ARJUN MEGHWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In section 364A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the Code),
the words "or death", shall be omitted.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 50 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment of
section 364A.
45 of 1860.
5

2
3. After section 364A of the Code, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"364B. Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person or keeps a person in detention
after such kidnapping or abduction, and causes death of such person due to any
reason, shall be punished with death.".
4. In section 376A of the Code, the words "causes death of the woman or" shall be
omitted.
5. After section 376A of the Code, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"376AA. Whoever, commits an of fence punishable under sub-section ( 1) or
sub-section (2) of section 376 and in the course of such commission causes the death
of the woman, shall be punished with death.".
Insertion of
new section
364B.
Punishment
for kidnapping
and causing
death.
Amendment
of section
376A.
Insertion of
new section
376AA.
Punishment
for causing
death of rape
victim.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There has been an alarming rise in the rate of crimes against women in recent times.
Incidents of kidnapping, abduction, rape, gang-rape and murder of women have become a
routine affair across the country. Not a single day passes when heinous crimes against
women are not reported from cities and villages. It appears that there is no safety for women
of any age group unless they are protected by their bodyguards. However, such privileges
are available only to the women of rich and highly placed families.
The recent case of brutal gang-rape and murder of two teenage girls at Badaun in the
State of Uttar Pradesh has not only shocked the conscience of the whole country but has
also caused outrage across the world. It has adversely affected the country's image at the
international level. The United Nations has strongly condemned such gruesome crime against
women and called for stern action against the culprits.
It may not be out of place to mention that most of the victims of kidnapping and sexual
violence are dalit women. According to National Crime Records Bureau, more than four dalit
women are raped every day across the country. But in reality the situation may be far worse
than what the statistics show as majority of the cases go unreported. Most of the cases are
not even registered. Therefore, the number of cases reported does not reflect the actual
number of cases of sexual violence, abduction and murder of women which are widespread
both in rural and urban areas of the country.
Similarly, there has been an alarming rise in the case of kidnapping and murder of
children in the country.
Therefore, it is high time that a stringent law, which may act as a deterrent for such
perverted acts of violence is brought forward by amending the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ARJUN  MEGHWAL
June 12, 2014.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * * *
364A. Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person or keeps a person in detention after
such kidnapping or abduction and threatens to cause death or hurt to such person, or by his
conduct gives rise to a reasonable apprehension that such person may be put to death or
hurt, or causes hurt or death to such person in order to compel the Government or any
foreign state or international inter Governmental organization or any other person to do or
abstain from doing any act or to pay a ransom, shall be punishable with death, or imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
* * * * * * *
376A. Whoever commits an offence punishable under sub-section (1) or sub-section
(2) of section 376 and in the courses of such commission inflicts an injury which causes the
death of the woman or causes the women to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years,
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person's natural life, or with death.
* * * * * * *
Kidnapping or
abducting with
intent secretly
and wrongfully
to confine
person.
Punishment
for causing
death or
resulting in
persistent
vegetative
state of
victim.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Arjun Meghwal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—717LS(S3)—02.07.2014.