1
THE PALLIATIVE CARE (EDUCATION AND TRAINING) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the recognition of palliative care as an integral part of health care system
of the country; education and training in palliative care in medical colleges and
institutions; treatment facilities in hospitals and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Palliative Care (Education and Training) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint but which shall not be later than three months from the date of
assent.
2. (a) "palliative care" means care given with the intention of improving the quality of
life of persons with a terminal illness by—
(i) treatment which controls and relieves pain, distress, discomfort or other
symptoms caused by, related to or coincidental with terminal illness; and
(ii) psychological, social and spiritual help and support;
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No.  50 of  2008
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
SERVER5\BILL_ 2008/LS/2866LS
5
10

2
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act; and
(c) "terminal illness" means an illness, disease or conditions which,—
(i) is inevitably progressive and fatal, and
(ii) cannot be reversed by treatment.
3. (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall
take all necessary steps to recognize palliative care as an integral part of the health care
system.
(2) The Central Government shall issue such directions as may be necessary to the
Indian Medical Council to take steps for comprehensive study in palliative care and take
such steps as may be necessary to make palliative care an integral part of health care system
and medical eduction in the country.
4. The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, shall formulate
a policy for palliative care with a view to create awareness about palliative care and to
encourage the non-governmental organizations working in the field of palliative care.
5. Within two years from the commencement of this Act, every medical college or
institution imparting medical education or training shall provide teaching and training of
palliative care in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) Within two years from the commencement of this Act, every medical institution
or hospital established and run by the Central Government or a Union territory
Administration shall provide palliative care for persons with terminal illness.
(2) The State Governments shall be informed of the palliative care to be provided to
persons with terminal illness in hospitals under clause (1) so that they may also provide for
it in the hospitals being run by them.
7. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to recognize
palliative care.
Formulation
of a policy for
palliative care.
Medical
colleges to
impart
teaching and
training in
palliative care.
Hospitals to
provide
palliative care.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Palliative care which is aimed at reducing or relieving the pain suffered by the terminally
ill patients is not recognized or considered in India as an integral  part of our medical system.
The palliative care coverage at national level is less than three percent while in the State of
Kerala it varies between thirty to seventy percent in various districts. The State has also
formulated a policy on palliative care. In a modern society, it is necessary that this system
finds its place as an integral part of our medical system with facilities to teach and train the
people. It is also necessary that the medical colleges provide facilities for teaching and
training in palliative care.
Palliative care is a combination of medical treatment with humane attitude, friendly
environment, love and affection for patients who are terminally ill with no possibility of cure.
Such patients could be provided with conditions where they could be relieved of pain. If all
these are put together, such patients would at least be able to live their last days peacefully.
A civilized society is expected to have this attitude to the helpless who are fatally
afflicted by such disease which has no cure. The number of such persons is on the increase
now. To provide succour to such persons it is necessary that the Government should recognize
palliative care as an integral part of our health care system.
The Bill aims at creating educational and training facilities and institutional mechanism
to give a push to palliative care with the provision of assistance to the non-governmental
organizations working at grass root level with the help of Government institutions including
local self-government institutions.
The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.
N
EW DELHI; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
August 5, 2008.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides that every medical college or any other institution  imparting
medical education or training shall provide teaching and training of palliative care. Clause 6
of the Bill provides that every hospital or nursing home under the Central Government or the
Union territory Administration shall provide palliative care for terminally ill persons. While
the expenditure relating to medical institutions under State Governments will be met out of
the consolidated funds of the respective States, the expenditure relating to medical institutions
under the Union territory Administration and the Central Government, shall be met out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a non-recurring expenditure of rupees one
hundred crore will be involved.
A recurring expenditure of rupees five crore is also likely to be incurred.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the recognition of palliative care as an integral part of health care system of
the country; education and training in palliative care in medical colleges and institutions;
treatment facilities in hospitals and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—2866LS(S5)—08-09-2008.