‘TOBE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA.

AIS au

Bill No. 50 of 2002

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

By
‘Suri Priya RANJAN DasMunst, M.P..
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2002.
2. In article 2430 of the Constitution, in clause (3), in sub-clause (c), after the words
5. “‘of the State”’, the words ‘‘or their nominees” shall be inserted.

3, Inarticle 243R of the Constitution, in clause (2), in sub-clause (a), in item (ii), after
the words ‘‘of the State”, the words “‘or their nominees” shall be inserted.

Short title.

Amendment
of article
243C.
Amendment
of article
2438.


Insertion of
new article
243MM.

Audit of
accounts of
District
Council.

2
4. After article 243M of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

“243MM. The Legislature of a State where District Council is in existence shall,
by law, provide that accounts of the District Council shall be audited by the Accountant
General of the State and such audited report shall be examined by the Finance Committee
of the District Council which shall be presided by the Leader of the Opposition of the
District Council and if any omission or commission is found in the audited report
successively for two years, the Chairman of the District Council shall cease to be Chairman
of the Council and he shall not be eligible to contest elections to that body."



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 243C of the Constitution provides for the composition of the Panchayats and
article 243R provides for the composition of Municipalities. In order to ensure that the
elected representatives of an area are closely associated with these institutions at the smallest
administrative unit, it is appropriate that they have to right to appoint their nominees in
these institutions.

The funds placed at the disposal of the District Councils in some States should be
audited by a statutory authority and those found guilty should not be allowed to hold any
position in District Councils.

The Bill seeks to achieve these objectives.

New Daur, PRIYA RANJAN DASMUNSI
May 3, 2002.


ANNEXURE

‘EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
2430. (1) * * * *
3) (a) * * * *

(०) of the members of the House of the People and the members of the Legislative
Assembly of the State representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly a
Panchayat area at a level other than the village level, in such Panchayat.

* * * a * * *
243R. (1) * कु # *
(2) * कं * *

(a) Gi) the members of the House of the People and the members of the Legis-
lative Assembly of the State representing constituencies which comprise wholly or
partly the Municipal area;

* * * s * * *



LOK SABHA

A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Priya Ranjan Dasmunsi, M.P.)

MGIF{7LU)MRND—1869LS—09-07-2002.