1
THE  CENTRAL  UNIVERSITIES  (CONDITIONS  OF  SERVICE  OF
NON-TEACHING  STAFF)  BILL,  2010
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for uniform conditions of service for the non-teaching staff of the Central
Universities and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Conditions of Service of Non-
Teaching Staff) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "non-teaching service or post" in relation to a Central University means any
service or post other than teaching;
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) "Central University" means  a university established or incorporated by or
under an Act of Parliament.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  50 of 2010
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA

2
Conditions of
service of
non-teaching
staff of
Central
Universities.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to make
rules.
5
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the conditions of service of a person holding any non-teaching service or post in any Central
University for such period, as may be prescribed, shall be same as that of a person holding
comparable service or post in the Central Secretariat Service.
(2) For the purpose of determining services or posts in Central Secretariat Service
which shall be comparable to non-teaching services or posts in Central Universities, the
Central Government shall appoint an Expert Committee headed by the Chairman of the
University Grants Commission and consisting of such number of other members, as it may
deem fit.
Explanation.—For the purpose of sub-section (1), the expression 'conditions of service'
includes pay, allowances, leave, gratuity, pension, provident fund, medical benefits, insurance
and such other matters as may be specified by the Central Government, from time to time.
4. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Government
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing such
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of Expert
Committee.
10
15
20
25

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are thousands of non-teaching staff employed in the universities. As far as the
teaching staff of the universities are concerned, the University Grants Commission has fixed
uniform pay and allowances for them through recommendations from time to time. But there
is no uniformity in the pay and allowances of non-teaching staff. This has resulted in variance
in the service conditions of similarly situated employees performing similar duties in different
universities. There is no protection for such non-teaching staff under any statute. They are
also entitled to same benefits of pay and allowances, etc. as are available to similarly placed
staff in the Central Government.
The non-teaching staff of the universities have been agitating for this cause for a long
time and it is, therefore, essential to regulate their service conditions in this regard.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA  PAL
March 19, 2010

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the non-teaching staff of Central Universities shall
have the same conditions of service as are admissible to the comparable staff of the Central
Secretariat Service. It also provides for the constitution of an expert committee for the
purpose of determining the posts of non-teaching staff in Central Universities which shall
be comparable to the posts in the Central Secretarial Service. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.
It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore per
annum.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for uniform conditions of service for the non-teaching staff of the Central
Universities and for matters connected therewith
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1675LS(S5)—19-04-2010.