THE ADMINISTRA TIVE TRIBUNALS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third  Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act,
2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 6 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act),—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "a Judge of a High Court", the words
"a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court" shall be
substituted;
Short title and
commencement.
13 of 1985. Amendment of
section 6.
Bill No. 50 of 2012
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) for sub-sections (3), (4) and (5), the following sub-sections shall
respectively be substituted, namely:—
"(3) The Chairman and every other Member of the Central
Administrative Tribunal shall be appointed by the President after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
(4) The Chairman and every other Member of an Administrative
Tribunal for a State shall be appointed by the President after consultation
with the Chief Justice of India and the Governor of the concerned State.
(5) Subject  to  the terms of the agreement between the participating
State Governments published under sub-section (3) of section 4, the
Chairman and every other Member of a Joint Administrative Tribunal
shall be appointed by the President after consultation with the Chief
Justice of India and the Governors of the concerned States.".
3. In section 8 of the principal Act, sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
4. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"10. The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits
of,—
(a) the Chairman shall be the same as applicable to a Judge of the
Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court, as the case may be,
depending the office actually held by him; and
(b) a Member shall be the same as applicable to a Judge of the High
Court:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairman or Member shall be varied to his
disadvantage after his appointment:
Provided further that where a serving Government officer is appointed
as a Member, he shall be deemed to have retired from the service to which he
belonged on the date on which he assumed the charge of the Member but his
subsequent service as Member shall, at his option, be reckoned as a post-
retirement re-employment counting for pension and other retirement benefits
in the service to which he belonged.".
5. In section 10A of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the word and figure
"section 8", the words and figures "sections 6 and 8" shall be substituted.
6. In section 25 of the principal Act, for the words "the Chairman may transfer
any case", the words "the Chairman or a Member authorised by him in this behalf may
transfer any case" shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 8.
Substitution of
new section for
section 10.
Salaries,
allowances and
other terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairman and
Members.
Amendment of
section 10A.
Amendment of
section 25.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In pursuance of article 323A of the Constitution, the Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 (the Act) was enacted. Administrative Tribunals have been set up under
the Act for adjudication or trial of disputes and complaints with respect to recruit-
ment and conditions of service of persons appointed to Public Services and posts in
connection with the affairs of the Union or any State or any local or other authority
within the territory of India or under the control of Government of India or in corpo-
rations owned or controlled by the Government.
2. Under existing provisions contained in section 6 of the Act, a person shall
not be qualified for appointment as Chairman unless he is or has been, a Judge of a
High Court.  The Chairman and every other Member of the Central Administrative
Tribunal are appointed after consultation with the Chief Justice of India by the
President. The Chairman and every other Member of the Administrative Tribunals for
a State or of Joint Administrative Tribunal are appointed by the President after
consultation with the Governor of the concerned State.   Section 8 of the Act provides
that the condition of the service of the Chairman is same as applicable to the Judges
of the High Courts.
3. To make Judges of the Supreme Court eligible for appointment as Chairman,
in the Central Administrative Tribunal, the State Administrative Tribunal and any
Joint Administrative Tribunal and to bring uniformity in appointment of  the Chair-
man and other Members of these Tribunals,  following amendments are proposed to
be made in the Act, namely:—
(a) to amend sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Act so as to provide that
a person shall not be qualified for the appointment as Chairman unless he is, or
has been, a judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of the High Court;
(b) to substitute sub-sections (3) to (5) of section 6 of the Act with new
sub-sections so as to provide for consultation by the President with the Chief
Justice of India and the Governor of the respective States, in the case of State
Administrative Tribunal and Joint Administrative Tribunals in addition to con-
sultation by the President with the Chief Justice of India in the case of appoint-
ment of Chairman and every other Member of the Central Administrative Tribu-
nal;
(c) to substitute section 10 of the Act so as to provide that the salary and
allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service including
pensions, gratuity and other retirement benefits, for the Chairman shall be the
same as are applicable to the Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of
the High Court and Members shall be eligible for such benefits as are appli-
cable to a Judge of the High Court;
(d) to amend section 25 of the Act so as to confer power upon a Member
authorised by the Chairman to transfer any case pending before one bench to
any other bench for disposal in addition to the Chairman having such power;
(e) to make consequential amendments in the Act.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; V . NARAYANASAMY
The 9th April, 2012.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
All the expenses towards the Central Administrative Tribunal are borne by the
Central Government and in respect of State Administrative Tribunal the same are
borne by the respective State Government. The Bill involves financial implications as
and when new Chairmen are appointed on expiry of the term of office of the existing
Chairmen since such new Chairmen will be entitled to the service conditions as admis-
sible to a sitting Judge of the Supreme  Court or Chief Justice of a High Court, as the
case may be.  The additional expenditure in this regard would be rupees 1.56 lakh per
annum towards salary and sumptuary allowance and rupees 1 lakh for appointment
(approximately) per Chairman.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ADMINISTRATIVE  TRIBUNALS ACT, 1985
(13 OF 1985)
* * * * *
6. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he
is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court:
Provided that a person appointed as Vice-Chairman before the commencement
of this Act shall be qualified for appointment as Chairman if such person has held the
office of the Vice-Chairman at least for a period of two years.
* * * * *
(3) The Chairman and every other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal
shall be appointed after consultation with the Chief  Justice of India by the President.
(4) Subject to the provision of sub-section (3), the Chairman and every other
member of an Administrative Tribunal for a State shall be appointed by the President
after consultation with the Governor of the concerned State.
(5)  The Chairman and every other Member of a Joint Administrative Tribunal
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) and subject to the terms of the
agreement between  the participating State Governments published under sub-section
(3) of section 4 of the principal Act, be appointed by the President after consultation
with the Governors of the concerned States.
Explanation.—In computing for the purpose of this section, the period during
which a person has held any post under the Central or State Government, there shall
be included the period during which he has held any other post under the Central or
State Government (including an office under this Act) carrying the same scale of pay
as that of first mentioned post on a higher scale of pay.
* * * * *
8. (1) * * * * *
(3) The conditions of service of Chairman and Members shall be the same as
applicable to Judges of the High Court.
* * * * *
10. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairman,
and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairman, or other Member shall be varied to his
disadvantage after his appointment:
Provided further that where a serving Government officer is appointed as a
Member, he shall be deemed to have retired from the service to which he belonged on
the date on which he assumed the charge of the Member but his subsequent service
as Member shall, at his option, be reckoned as a post-retirement re-employment
counting for pension and other retirement benefits in the service to which he belonged.
10A. The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Member of a Tribunal appointed before
the commencement of the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 shall
continue to be governed by the provisions of the Act, and the rules made thereunder
as if the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 had not come into force:
Provided that, however, such Chairman and the Members appointed before the
coming into force of Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006, may on
Qualifications
for appointment
as Chairman,
Vice-Chairman
and other
members.
Salaries and
allowances and
other terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and
other Members.
Saving terms and
conditions of
service of Vice-
Chairman.
Term of office.
1 of 2007.
5
1 of 2007.

6
Power of
Chairman to
transfer cases
from one Bench
to another.
completion of their term or attainment of the age of sixty-five or sixty-two years, as the
case may be, whichever is earlier may, if eligible in terms of section 8 as amended by
the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 be considered for a fresh
appointment in accordance with the selection procedure laid down for such
appointments subject to the condition that the total term in office of the Chairman
shall not exceed five years and that of the Members, ten years.
* * * * *
25. On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties, and
after hearing such of them as he may desire to be held, or on his own motion without
such notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for
disposal, to any other Bench.
* * * * *
.

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
—————
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State for
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions)
GMGIPMRND—217LS(S3)—20.04.2012.