Bill No.  50 of  2017
THE TURMERIC BOARD BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMA TI KA VITHA KALV AKUNTLA, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE TURMERIC BOARD
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board.
4. Secretary and other officers.
5. Advisory Committees.
6. Functions of the Board.
CHAPTER III
C
ERTIFICA TE FOR EXPORT OF TURMERIC
7. No person to export turmeric without certificate.
8. Grant of certificate.
9. Cancellation, suspension, etc., of certificate.
10. Appeal.
11. Power to permit export without certificate.
CHAPTER  IV
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
12. Power to control price and distribution of turmeric.
13. Power to prohibit or control import of turmeric.
14. Power of the Central Government to issue directions.
15. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Board.
CHAPTER  V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
16. Grants and loans by the Central Government.
17. Board Fund.
18. Budget.
19. Annual report.
A
S INTRODUCED  IN  LOK SABHA

CLAUSES
20. Accounts and audit.
21. Annual report and auditor’s report to be laid before Parliament.
CHAPTER  VI
MISCELLANEOUS
22. Penalty for making false returns.
23. Penalties for obstructing an officer or member of the Board in the discharge of his
duties and for failure to produce books and records.
24. Penalty for contravention of order relating to control of price; etc.
25. Penalties for contravention of section 11 or any order made under section 17.
26. Other penalties.
27. Offences by companies.
28. Delegation.
29. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants.
30. Protection of Action taken in good faith.
31. Power to enter.
32. Power to make rules.
33. Power to make regulations.
34. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
35. Power to remove difficulties.
36. Amendment of Act 10 of 1986.
THE SCHEDULE.
(ii)

1
THE TURMERIC BOARD BILL, 2017
By
SHRIMA TI KA VITHA KALV AKUNTLA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of export of turmeric
and for the control of turmeric industry including the control of cultivation
of turmeric and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Turmeric Board  Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  50 of  2017
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED  IN  LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means the Turmeric Board constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 3;
(b) “certificate” means a certificate granted under section 8;
(c) “dealer” means a dealer in turmeric;
(d) “estate” means the area administered as one unit which contains land planted
with turmeric plants;
(e) “export” and “import” means, respectively, taking out of or bringing into
India by land, sea and air;
(f) “manufacturer” means a manufacturer of turmeric;
(g) “member” means a member of the Board appointed under sub-section (3) of
section 3;
(h) “owner”, in relation to any land planted with turmeric plants, includes—
(i) any agent of the owner; and
(ii) a mortgagee, lessee or other person in  actual possession of the land;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(j) "turmeric" means the rhizome or underground stem of turmeric plant and
includes all the varieties specified in the schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or
expedient in the public interest  to do so, by notification in the Official Gazette, add any
other turmeric variety to the Schedule; and
(k) "turmeric plant" means CURCUMA LONGA which the Board may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a turmeric plant for the purposes of
this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE TURMERIC BOARD
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute,
for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be called the Turmeric Board.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, and shall,
by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exceeding thirty-two, as
may be prescribed, and unless the rules made in this behalf otherwise provide, the Board
shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of
the People and one by the Council of States;
(c) three members to represent respectively the Ministeries of the Central
Government dealing with—
(i) Commerce;
(ii) Agriculture; and
(iii) Finance;
Definitions.
Constitution
and
incorporation
of the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(d) six members to represent turmeric farmers;
(e) eleven members to represent the exporters of turmeric;
(f) three members to represent major turmeric producing States;
(g) five members, of which three members/scientists to represent the Scientific
Research Institutes from turmeric producing States and two members/scientists
from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).
(4) The Office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen
as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board,
exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be delegated to him by
the Board and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed.
(7) The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice-Chairperson who shall exercise
such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairperson as may be prescribed
or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson.
(8) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidated merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;
(b) any defect in appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board;
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the
case.
4. (1) The Board may appoint the Secretary and such other officers and employees as
it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be
determined by regulations.
5. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Board may, from time to time,
constitute such committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.
(2) Every committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of such number
of persons as the Board may deem fit.
6. (1) The Board may—
(i) develop, promote and regulate export of termeric;
(ii) grant certificate for export of turmeric and register brokers therefor;
(iii) undertake programmes and projects for promotion of export of turmeric;
(iv) assist and encourage studies and research for improvement of processing,
quality, techniques of grading and packaging of turmeric;
(v) strive towards stabilization of prices of termeric for export;
(vi) evolve suitable quality standards and introduce certification of quality
through "Quality Marking" for turmeric for export;
(vii) control quality of turmeric for export;
(viii) give licences, subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed,
to the manufacturers of turmeric for export;
(ix) market turmeric, if it considers necessary, in the interest of promotion of
export;
Secretary and
other Officers.
Advisory
Committees
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(x) provide wearehousing facilities abroad for turmeric;
(xi) collect statistics with regard to turmeric for compilation and publication;
(xii) import, with the previsous approval of the Central Government, turmeric for
sale; and
(xiii) advise the Central Government on matters relating to import and export of
turmeric.
(2) Without prejudice of provisions of sub-section (1), the Board may also—
(i) promote co-operative efforts among  turmeric farmers;
(ii) Provide loans to farmers for sowing as well as ensuring a Minimum Support
Price (MSP) for Turmeric farmers and also facilitating insurance for the Turmeric crop
and ensuring timely storage of harvested crop in godowns/warehouses;
(iii) Provide Financial Assistance for improved methods of Research to create
better yielding varieties of Turmeric crop;
(iv) regulate the sale of turmeric and stabilization of prices of turmeric;
(v) provide training in turmeric testing and fixing grade standards of turmeric;
(vi) increase the consumption of turmeric and facilitating advertising and
marketing strategies for that purpose;
(vii) register and licence broken (including auctioneers) of turmeric and persons
engaged in the business of turmeric;
(viii) improve the marketing of turmeric;
(ix) collect statistics from growers, dealers and such other  persons as may be
prescribed on any matter relating to the turmeric  industry; publish statistics so collected
or portions thereof or extracts therefrom;
(x) secure better working conditions and the provision and improvement of
amenities and incentives for workers; and
(xi) undertake, assist or encourage scientific, technological and economic
research.
CHAPTER III
C
ERTIFICA TE FOR EXPORT OF TURMERIC
7. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall, after the commencement of
this Act, commence or carry on the business of export of turmeric, except under and in
accordance with a certificate:
Provided that a person carrying on the business of export of turmeric immediately
before the commencement of this Act, may continue to do so for a period of three months
from such commencement; and if he has made an application for such certificate within the
said period of three months till the disposal of such application.
Explanation.—The reference in this section to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed in relation to any variety of turmeric added to the Schedule by notification under
the proviso to clause (1) of section 2 as reference to the date with the effect from which such
variety of turmeric is added to the Schedule.
8. (1) An application for grant of certificate shall be made to the Board in such form and
shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a receipt
evidencing the payment of the prescribed fee.
(2) On receipt of such application, the Board shall—
(a) if the application is not in the prescribed form or does not contain any of the
prescribed particulars, return the application to the applicant; or
No person to
export
turmeric
without
certificate.
Grant of
Certificate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(b) if the application is in the prescribed form and contains the prescribed
particulars, grant the certificate subject to such terms and conditions as may be
determined by regulations.
9. (1) The Board may cancel any certificate on any one or more of the following
grounds, namely:—
(a) that the holder of the certificate has violated any of the temrs and conditions
of the certificate; and
(b) that in the opinion of the Central Government it is necessary in the interests
of general public to cancel the certificate.
(2) Where the Board, for reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied that pending
consideration of the question of cancelling the certificate on any grounds mentioned in
sub-section (1), it is necessary so to do, the Board may, by order in writing, suspend the
operation of the certificate for such period not exceeding forty-five days as may be specified
in the order and require the holder of the certificate to show cause, within fifteen days from
the date of receipt of such order, as to why the suspension of the certificate should not be
extended till the determination of the question as to whether the registration should be
cancelled.
(3) No order of cancellation of registration under this section shall be made unless the
person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the
grounds for such cancellation.
10. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 9 may prefer an appeal
to the Central Government within such period as may be prescribed.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefor:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed
therefor if the appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within the prescribed period.
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and shall be
accompanied by a copy of order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(5) The Central Government may confirm, modify or  reverse the order appealed against.
11. The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient, so to do,
in public interest, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, if any,
as may be specified therein, permit anybody or other agency to commence or carry on the
business of export of turmeric without a certificate.
CHAPTER IV
C
ONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
12. (1) The Central Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, fix in
respect of turmeric of any description specified therein—
(a) the maximum price or the minimum price, or the maximum and minimum prices,
which may be charged by a farmer turmeric or turmeric dealer, wholesale or retail,
whether for the Indian market or for export; and
(b) the maximum quantity which may in one transaction be sold to any person.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-section (1), any
order made thereunder may provide—
Cancellation,
suspension;
etc. of
certificate.
Appeal.
Power to
permit export
without
certificate.
Power to
control price
and
distribution of
turmeric.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(a) for requiring persons engaged in the production, supply or distribution of, or
trade and commerce in, turmeric to maintain and produce for inspection such books,
accounts and records relating to their business and to furnish such information relating
thereto as may be specified in the order; and
(b) for such other matters, including in particular the entering and search of
premises, vehicles, vessels and aircraft, and the seizure by a person authorised to
make such search, of turmeric in respect of which such person has reason to believe
that a contravention of the order has been, is being or is about to be, committed.
13. The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
provision for prohibiting restricting or otherwise controlling the import of turmeric, either
generally or in specified classes of cases.
14. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in
the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on
questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express
its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
15. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of opinion—
(a) that an account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying with any direction
issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions
and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such
default the financial position of the Board or the administration of the Board has
deteriorated; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render  it necessary in the public interest so to
do, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the
Board for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Board,—
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as
such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board, shall until the Board
is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or
persons as the Central Government may direct; and
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh
appointment and in such case any person or persons who vacated their offices under clause
(a) of sub-section (2), shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the
period of supersession, take action under this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( 1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such
action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
Power to
prohibit or
control
import of
turmeric.
Power of the
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power of the
Central
Government
to supersede
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
16. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums of money as it may consider
necessary.
17. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Turmeric Board Fund and
there shall be credited thereto—
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government under
section 16;
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of certificates granted under this Act;
and
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided
upon by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other
employees of the Board;
(b) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under section 6; and
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorized by this Act.
18. The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time each financial year, as may
be prescribed, its budget  for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.
19. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may
be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
20. The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner as may,
in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be prescribed and the
Board shall furnish to the Central Government before such date, as may be prescribed, its
audited copy of accounts together with the auditors' report thereon.
21. The Central Government shall cuase the annual report and auditor's report to be
laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
22. Any person who being required by or under this Act to furnish any return fails to
furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false and which
he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees.
23.  Any person who—
(a) obstructs any member authorised by the Chairperson in writing or any officer
or other employee of the Board authorised by it in this behalf or any person authorised
in this behalf by the Central Government or by the Board, in the exercise of any power
conferred, or in the discharge of any duty imposed, on him by or under this Act; or
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record, fails to
produce such book or record when required to do so by or under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Grants and
loans by the
Central
Government.
Budget.
Annual
report.
Accounts and
audit.
Annual
report and
auditors'
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
Penalty for
making false
returns.
Board Funds.
Penalties for
obstructing an
officer or
member of
the Board in
the discharge
of his duties
and for failure
to produce
books and
records.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
24. ( 1) If any person contravenes any order made under section 12, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; and the property in respect of which the
order has been contravened or such part thereof as the Court may deem fit, shall be forfeited
to the Central Government.
(2) Any person who attempts to contravene, or abets the contravention of, any order
under section 12 shall be deemed to have contravened that order.
25. If any person contravenes the provisions of section 7 or any order made under
section 13 he shall, without prejudice to any confiscation or penalty to which he may be
liable under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or
with both.
26. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder other than the provisions,
punishment for the contravention whereof has been provided for in sections 22, 23, 24 and
25, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention
with an additional fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which such
contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.
27. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed  with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals;
and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
28. The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson
or any other member or to any officer of the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations,
if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act.
29. All members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be deemed, when
Acting or purporting to Act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
30. No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, or the
Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the Board or such committee, or
Penalties for
contravention
of section 7
or any order
made under
section 13.
Other
penalties.
Penalty for
contravention
of order
relating to
control of
price, etc.
Offences by
companies.
Delegation.
Members,
officers and
employees of
the Board to
be public
servants.
Protection of
Action taken
in good faith.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other person authorised by
the Government or the Board, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
31. Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person, generally or specially authorised
by the Board in this behalf, may, whenever it is necessary so to do, for any of the purposes
of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or premises and make any inspection
or inquiry or do such other Act or thing as may be prescribed:
Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed courtyard or
garden attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof)
without previously giving such occupier at least twenty-four hours' notice in writing of his
intention to do so.
32. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the number of members of the Board under sub-section (3) of section 3;
(b) the salary and allowances payable and other conditions of service of the
members of the Board under sub-section (5) of section 3;
(c) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub-section (6) of section 3;
(d) the powers and functions of the Vice-Chairperson under sub-section (7) of
section 3;
(e) the constitution of committees  under section 5;
(f) the terms and conditions for giving licences to manufacturers of turmeric for
export under clause (viii) of sub-section (1) of section 6;
(g) the form of the application and the fees under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(h) the period of limitation for appeal under sub-section (1) of section 10;
(i) the form of appeal and the fees payable under sub-section (3) of section 10;
(j) the procedure for disposal of appeal under sub-section (4) of section 10;
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.
33. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules
generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the salary and allowances payable to, terms and conditions of service of the
Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board under sub-section ( 2) of
section 4; and
(b) the terms and conditions under which the certificate may be granted under
sub-section (2) of section 8.
34. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
Power to
enter.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
35. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, publish in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
36. In the Spices Board Act, 1986, in the Schedule, the entry namely, '5. Turmeric', shall
be omitted.
THE  SCHEDULE
[See section 2(b)]
 1. Amalapuram
 2.  Armour
 3.  Dindigam
 4.  Erode
 5.  Krishna
 6.  Kodur
 7.  V ontimitra
 8.  P317
 9.  GL Purm I
10.  GL Purm II
11.  RH2
12.  RH10
13.  Amruthapani
14.  Duggirala
15.  Tekurpeta
16.  Pattant
17.  Allepey
18.  Wayanad
19.  Rajapore
20.  Karhadi
21.  Waigon
22.  Chinnanadan
23.  Perianadan
in any form including powders, oil, oleoresins and other mixtures where turmeric content is
predominant.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Amendment
of Act 10 of
1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Turmeric is one of the oldest spices and has been used in India since ages. Turmeric is
the only spice in India that can be exploited commercially on a multiple scale apart from its
main use as a flavouring agent in food. The turmeric is mainly used as flavouring agent,
medicine for stomach disorders and food poisoning, Ayurvedic component in tooth paste
and facial powders and natural dye (colouring agent for the textile industry). To exploit the
inherent natural advantages that our country possesses in the production of turmeric, it is
imperative that a nodal agency on the lines of Coir Board, Rubber Board, etc. be created. The
need is to channelize efforts by bringing latest technology inputs, enhanced value addition
and again significant advantages in ensuring greater market access in developed nations
and brings in significant export earnings of turmeric  which can be beneficial for the country
in general and the farming community in particular. The Spices Board constituted under the
Spices Board Act, 1986 which has to look into the matters pertaining to almost fifty-two other
spices and related products will not be able to devote significant time and effort to strategically
develop the turmeric crop in India.
Turmeric is the only spice in India which has witnessed intellectual property infringement
by the United States of America. In the light of increasing tensions and deadlock at the
World Trade Organisation (WTO) meetings, the setting up of a Turmeric Board will be
extremely helpful to speed up the process of attaining a Geographical Indication (GI) tag for
Erode turmeric which is under consideration at the WTO as well as other region specific
turmeric varieties. This would be a significant step in increasing the brand value of Indian
turmeric globally.
The creation of the Turmeric Board is imperative for the following reasons:—
(1) for the past four years, turmeric is the second largest exported spice after chilly.
Even though it is behind chilly currently in terms of quantity exported, the crop is not being
able to be marketed effectively for its above mentioned multiple uses apart from being a
flavouring agent which almost all other spices are; and
(2) the quantity of rubber and silk exported was much lower than turmeric and these
two products have a dedicated board to look into the affairs.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for constitution of a Turmeric Board for the
development of export of turmeric and for the control of turmeric industry including the
control of cultivation of turmeric.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KA VITHA  KALV AKUNTLA
February 23, 2017.
11

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause  3 of the Bill seeks to provide for constitution of Turmeric Board. Clause 4
provides for appointment of Secretary and other officers and employees to the Board. Clause
5 provides for the constitution of Advisory Committees by the Board. Clause 16 provides for
the grants and loans by the Central Government. Clause 17 provides for the constitution of
a Turmeric Board Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one
hundred crore per annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crores is also likely to be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
12

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue orders to control price
and distribution of turmeric. Clause 13 empowers the Central Government to issue orders to
prohibit or control import of turmeric. Clause 14 empowers the Central Government to issue
directions. Clause 15 empowers the Central Government to issue notification to supersede
the Board. Clause 32 empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act. Clause 33 empowers the Board may, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to make regulations consistent
with this Act and the rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act. As the orders,
directions, notifications, rules and regulations will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
13

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE SPICES BOARD ACT, 1986
(10 OF 1986)
* * * * *
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2(n) ]
* * * * *
5. Turmeric
* * * * *
14

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of export of turmeric
and for the control of turmeric industry including the control of cultivation
of turmeric and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Kavitha Kalvakuntla, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4881LS(S3)—16.03.2017.