AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

290

Bill No. 50 of 2005

ur
a

THE STATES REORGANISATION COMMISSION BILL, 2005

By

SHRI SUBODH Mouite, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the constitution of a State Reorganisation Commission for
recommending reorganisation of the States of the country.

६ Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

.
——

1. (7) This Act may be called the States Reorganisation Commission Act, 2005. Short [716 and
commencemest.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by

tion in the Official Gazette, appoint


Definitions.

Constitution
of States
Reorganisation

Commission. .

Report of the
Commission.

Central

Government
to implement
the report of

Commission. |

Power to
make rules.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Commission” means the States Reorganisation Commission constit
under section 3

(5) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) “State” includes Union territory.

3. (7) The President of India shall constitute a States Reorganisation Comm ss
consisting of a Chairperson and four other members to consider and prepare ar
on the reorganisation of the States of the Country.

(2) The conditions of service of the Chairperson and other members of 1
Commission shail be such as may be prescribed. 4

(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Commission su
officers and staff, as may be deemed fit, to assist it in the discharge of its functiol

4, (1) The Commission shall, within a period of six months from the date
its constitution, submit its report to the President of India, who shall cause the sar
to be laid before each House of Parliament

(2) The Commission's recommendations shall be based on the following:-
(i) the area and population of a State;

(ii) the availability of infrastructure facilities like power, roads and
communication, state of agriculture, industries available in different areas of
the State and state of education;

(iii) the resources available .in the State;
(iv) the general index of growth of the State; and
(v) the total revenue collection in different areas of the State.

5. The Central Government shall, with such modification and alteration in the report
of the Commission, as it may deem fit, implement the recommendations made in the report
of the Commission, within such time as may be recommended by the Commission.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A Commission comprising three members was constituted six years after independence
for the reorganisation of States of India. The division of States was made on linguistic basis
in the light of the recommendations of the said Commission. Since then vast changes have
taken place in all sphere of activities and development in the country. There have been
demands from various parts of the country for creation of separate States. These demands
are culmination of experience undergone by the people since the creation of the States on
linguistic basis. Such demands for creation of new States should be given due consideration
before the situation becomes explosive. It is therefore, necessary that a Commission is
constituted to report on the reorganisation of the States. The Commission should take into
consideration all relevant facts before making its recommendations regarding creation of
new States.

Hence this Bill.

New Deiat; SUBODH MOHITE
March 11,2005


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

‘Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the President of India shall constitute a States ..
Reorganisation Commission consisting of a Chairperson and four other members to consider
and report on the reorganisation of the States of the country. It further provides that the —
Central Government shall make available such officers and staff, as may be prescribed, to
assist it in the discharge of its functions. Since the salaries and allowances to be paid to the —
members of the Commission and to the officers and staff appointed to assist the Commission
in the discharge of its functions are to be prescribed by the rules made under the Act, it is not |
possible to give an exact amount of expenditure that will be incurred in case the provisions —
of the Bill are brought into force.

However, it is estimated that a recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty lakh is
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. |

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
6 provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only, the
slegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A

BILL

to provide for the constitution of a States Reorganisation Commission for recommending —
reorganisation of the States of the country. 4

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—5479LS(S5)—06.04.2005.