1
THE UNIVERSAL PAYMENT OF DEARNESS ALLOWANCE
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of dearness allowance to all persons who are not being paid
dearness allowance and whose annual income from all sources does not
exceed rupees five lakh per annum and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Universal Payment of Dearness Allowance Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 50 of 2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of the State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) "dearness allowance" refers to the dearness allowance being paid to the
employees of Central Government;
(iii) "eligible person" means a person whose annual income from all sources
does not exceed rupees five lakh but does not include a person—
(a) employed in connection with the affairs of the Central Government or
a State Government including a person employed in a public sector establishment;
(b) employed in a private sector and entitled to dearness allowance by
whatever name called;
(c) engaged in any business activity including self-employment; and
(d) who is practising medicine, law or accounts;
(iv) "Authority" means the National Authority constituted under section 4; and
(v) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
3. All eligible persons shall be paid such percentage of their monthly income as
dearness allowance as is paid, from time to time, to the Central Government employees.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority to be known as the National Authority to deal with matters relating to payment
of dearness allowance to eligible persons.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson; and
(ii) twenty other members having experience of more than twenty years in
public sector in an administrative capacity.
(3) The Chairperson and every member of the Authority shall hold office for a term of
five years.
(4) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(5) The Central Government shall make available to the Authority such number of
officers and staff as may be required for efficient functioning of the Authority.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The Authority shall perform the following functions:—
(i) prescribe criteria for identification of eligible persons for payment of dearness
allowance under this Act;
(ii) maintain a list of persons who are being paid dearness allowance under this
Act;
(iii) lay down guidelines regarding receipt and disposal of complaints of eligible
persons relating to or arising out of payment of dearness allowance;
(iv) liaison with various banks and other such institutions to ensure that dearness
allowance is regularly deposited in the bank accounts of eligible persons;
Payment of
dearness
allowance to
eligible persons.
Constitution
of National
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(v) coordinate with appropriate Government for the purpose of regular updating
of the list of eligible persons; and
(vi) perform such other functions, as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
6. (1) The Authority shall coordinate with each District Administration for the purpose
of making such arrangements, as may be necessary, for payment of dearness allowance to
eligible persons.
(2) Every District Administration shall provide such information and assistance, as
may be necessary, to the National Authority, for discharging its functions.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide to the Authority by way of grants such sums of money as it may think
fit for being utilized for the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force in relation to any of the matters provide under this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised to one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Authority to
coordinate with
District
Administration.
Grant by the
Central
Government.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The economic disparity among rich and poor is continuously increasing in the country.
Common man is facing hardship for survival due to continuous rise in prices of consumer
goods. In the present scenario, except the Government employees and employees in certain
private sector, all are suffering due to rise in prices of essential commodities. The Government
pays dearness allowance to its employees to compensate for price rise twice in a year after
taking into account rise in consumer price index. There are millions of farmers, labourers and
small businessmen who are facing onslaught of inflation as they do not enjoy income security
and are unable to meet their daily requirements.
Farmers are not able to ensure their livelihood even after toiling hard in the fields. The
Government needs to provide necessary assistance to ensure sustainable livelihood to
them. The citizens other than Government employees have to struggle to meet their need due
to inflation as they do not get any support from the Government in the form of payment of
dearness allowance as is being paid to Government employees. It is felt necessary that the
Government should take steps to make provision of payment of dearness allowance to a
substantial chunk of population in order to protect them from onslaught of inflation.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for payment of dearness allowance to all persons
who are not employed in Government establishment or private sectors and whose annual
income from all sources does not exceed rupees five lakh per annum.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
February 5, 2015.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for payment of dearness allowance to eligible persons.
Clause 4 provides for constitution of a National Authority to deal with matters relating to
payment of dearness allowance to eligible persons. Clause 7 provides that the Central
Government shall provide funds to the Authority for the purposes of the Act. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-three thousand crore
will be involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—4747LS(S3)—02-03-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of dearness allowance to all persons who are not being paid
dearness allowance and whose annual income from all sources does not
exceed rupees five lakh per annum and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil,  M.P.)