As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

“4 DEC coy

Bill No. 50 of 2004.

| PUNJAB MUNICIPAL CORPORATION LAW (EXTENSION TO
CHANDIGARH) AMENDMENT BILL, 2004

By

‘Suri PawAN Kumar BansaL, MP,

A
BILL

ther to amend the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh)
Act, 1994.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
1, This Act may be called the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Short title
digarh) Amendment Act, 2004.

2, In the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994, in Amendment

Ti of the Schedule, — of the
Schedule.

(a) in section 5,—

(0 in sub-section (2), in the proviso, for the word "twenty", the words
“thirty and more than fifty" shall be substituted; and

(ii) sub-section (5) shall be omitted;


2
(6) after section 71C, the following section shall be inserted, namely: —

"71D. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 71, 71A and
71B, any officer or employee who is or has been transferred to the Corporation
from any department of Chandigarh Union territory Administration shall be
deemed to be and to have always been on deputation with the Corporation.

(2) Such Officers and employees on ‘deemed deputation’ with the
Corporation shall continue to be governed by the terms and conditions of service
which were applicable to them before their transfer or would have been applicable
if they had continued to work with the Administration but shall not be entitled to
any deputation allowance.".


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Punjab Municipal Corporation Act as extended to Chandigarh does not provide
for the protection of the status of officers and employees transferred to the Corporation from
Chandigarh Union territory Administration. Today such employees find themselves in a
disadvantageous position vis-a-vis their colleagues with whom they had worked as equals
before their transfer to the Corporation. It is imperative to undo any injustice that may have
‘crept in as a result of this and to assure them that they would continue to be governed by the
terms and conditions applicable to similar officers and employees of the Chandigarh Union
territory Administration.

Another point thrown up by the working of the Chandigarh Municipal Corporation is
that the present number of twenty wards is insufficient for an urban population of over 8
lakhs. To strengthen grass-root level democracy and ensure greater interface between the
people and their representatives for a vibrant and responsive local self Government, it is felt
that one Municipal ward should not exceed a population of thirty thousands. The five
villages included within the Corporation area also yearn for their separate representatives to
espouse their cause. Accordingly, it is felt that the number of elected Councillors should be
atleast thirty.

Thirdly, a mistake crept in while the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act was being
extended to Chandigarh. Though Chandigarh Union territory has no Legislative Assembly,
the provision conferring associate membership of the Municipal Corporation on every Member
of Punjab Legislative Assembly "representing the Constituency in which the city or any part
thereof is situate” was inadvertently retained in the Act as made applicable 10 Chandigarh.
This is redundant provision and needs to be omitted.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DeLit; PAWAN KUMAR BANSAL
July 7, 2004.


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE PUNJAB MUNICIPAL CORPORATION Law EXTENSION TO CHANDIGARH ACT, 1994

(Act No. 45 of 1994)
. * . . . . *

5. (7) Elected councillors shall be chosen by direct election on the ‘basis of adult
suffrage from various wards into which the City shall be divided in accordance with the
Provisions of this Act.

(2) This Government shall, from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette, fix
the number of elected councillors for a Corporation.

Provided that the total number of elected councillors for a Corporation shall in no case
be less than twenty.

* . * ’ * * *

(5) Every member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly representing the constituency
in which the City or any part thereof is situate shall be an associate councillor.

Provided that an associate councillor shall not be entitled to vote at, but shall, subject
to the other provisions of this Act have the right to speak in and otherwise take part in the
Proceedings of, and meeting of the Corporation or its committee of which he may be a
member.

Explanation |—If the constituency of a member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly
comprises more than one City he shall be an associate member in respect of the Corporation
of each such City.

Explanation 2.—If any City falls in more than one constituency the members
representing each such constituency shalll be the associate members of the Corporation of
such City.

Explanation 3.—A person who is elected as member of a Corporation shall not be
considered to be an associate member if he is a member of Punjab Legislative Assembly at
the time of his election or becomes such member at any time thereafter and such person shall
have all the rights and be subject to all the liabilities of an elected member.

* . * * * * *


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

further to amend the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to
Chandigarh) Act, 1994.

(Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, M.P.)
MGIPMRNO—1621LS—06.08.2004.