1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE COMPULSORY DONATION OF SURPLUS FOOD BILL,  2020
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory donation of surplus food packets by super markets, promotion
for reduction of food wastage and creation of an institutional mechanism for
monitoring and implementing the process and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Donation of Surplus Food  Act,  2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill  No. 50 of  2020
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "best before" means the date printed on the lable of packed food materials or
ingredients by which it may be consumed;
(c) "Office" means the Office of Food Waste Reduction constituted under
section 5;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "recipient" means any individual, charitable institution, food bank, orphanage
and such other institutions under the contract with super markets;
(f) "super market" means any undertaking, whether public or private, operating
for profit and carrying out activities relating to storage, distribution and sale of food or
food ingredients and having an annual turnover of rupees ten crore;
(g) "surplus food" means food packets that are approaching the best-before
dates but remain unsold at the super markets; and
(h) "unsafe food" means the food packets whose best-before date is over and
are not safe and suitable for consumption.
3. (1) Every person-in-charge of super market shall suo moto sign contract with the
nearest recipient within six months of the commencement of this Act to donate surplus food
which is consumable and not unsafe food.
 (2) No super market shall transport the unsold food to landfills.
 (3) If any super market does not donate the surplus food to recipient or donate unsafe
food for consumption, such super market shall be liable to be proceeded against and subject
to fine under sub-section (4).
 (4) Every super  market shall be liable to pay a fine of—
(a) rupees one lakh for not donating the surplus food to the recipient; and
(b) rupees fifty thousand for donation of inconsumable or unsafe food.
4. (1) Every super market shall submit an annual report containing details of quantities
of food reduction and amount of surplus food donated, amount of food wasted and the
progress made towards the target set up by the Central Government in such manner as may
be prescribed.
 (2) The report under sub-section (1) shall contain the details of the contract with the
recipient and amount of food donated by the supermarket.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Office to be known as the Office for Food Waste Reduction under the Union Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 (2) The Office constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of a Chairperson and six
other members, having experience of not less than ten years in the relevant field, representing
the Union Ministries of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Health and Family
Welfare, Commerce and Industry, Agriculture and Farmer's Welfare and Social Justice
and Empowerment to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Definitions.
Disclosure of
data on food
waste
reduction by
super markets.
Donation of
surplus food by
supermarkets.
Constitution
of an Office
of food waste
reduction.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Functions of
the Office.
 (3) The Chairperson and every member of the office shall hold office for a term of three
years from the date on which they assume office and shall be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that the Chairperson or any member shall not be eligible to hold office for
more than two terms.
 (4) The Chairperson or a member may resign from his office, by tendering his resignation
in writing to the Central Government, with a prior notice of not less than six months.
(5) The Salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and other members of the Office shall be such as may be prescribed.
6. The Office shall,—
(a) set up targets to reduce food wastage by the year 2030;
(b) set up State and District level monitoring system in coordination with local
Governments;
(c) maintain statistics related to food waste and documenting progress towards
the national food waste reduction goal set by the Office and submit a annual report to
the Central Government to present it to the each Houses of Parliament;
(d) conduct periodic inspection of the recipient for effective functioning of the
Act, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) promote research and implement new programmes in food waste reduction,
identify and recommend ways to amend existing programmes to better support food
waste reduction and identify ineffective regulations or redundancies that hinder food
recovery efforts and harm businesses;
(f) act as a liaison office between the appropriate Government and food industry
to help break down barriers to food donation and assist companies in understanding
and accessing tax incentives and other supports for donations;
(g) provide support for research, grants, education and other policies that aim
to prevent food waste;
(h) authorize an officer of the appropriate Government, if there is any reason to
believe that any provision of this Act has been or is being violated, to enter and search
such place and take action against the persons involved in unlawful activities according
to the provisions of this Act; and
(i) take such other action to ensure proper implementation of the provisions of
this Act including any breach of the rules made therewith.
7. ( 1) The Central Government, shall by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an External Advisory Council representing a diverse array of perspectives from
the private sector, non-profit organizations, business and food recovery organizations of a
varying sizes to provide inputs to the Central Government in setting up of targets, creating
awareness programmes to the private and other organisations about food waste reduction
and making rules to implement the targets set.
(2) The External Advisory Council constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of
six members having at least ten years of experience in the relevant field from the
organisations engaged in creating awareness programme for reduction in food waste
reduction and related areas and a co-ordinator to be appointed by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Every member appointed under sub-section (2) shall hold an office for a period of
three years.
Constitution
of External
Advisory
Council.
20
25
5
15
10
30
35
40
45

4
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the members and the co-ordinator shall be such as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Office and the External advisory Council, from
time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act;
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each house of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree  in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate
funds.
5
10
15

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In a country like India, where our nutrition and malnourishments levels are high, a step
towards food waste reduction is the need of hour. Around sixty-seven million tonnes of food
is waste in India every year and a significant share comes from the supply chain of
supermarkets, manufacturers etc. India ranks thirty-third among the sixty-seven countries in
Food Sustainability Index. It has also been found that the performance is poor in regard to
prevent food loss and waste.
Food waste, or unused, edible food, is a global issue. Each year, 1.3 billion metric tons,
or one-third of all the food prodcued, is thrown away, according to the United Nations' Food
and Agriculture Organization. Recovering just twenty five precent of that wasted food
could feed eight hundred seventy million hungry people—effectively ending world hunger.
We need to encourage food waste reduction, encourage individuals, businesses and public
bodies to reduce the amount of food they waste and able to give out millions more free meals
each year to people struggling to afford to eat.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to make it illegal for supermarkets to throw away edible food.
The big shops will no longer be able throw away good quality food approaching its best-
before date in bins. Such a step will also reduce their food waste by entering into formal
agreements with food redistribution organizations and other needed recipients. It also re-
quires large supermarkets and food manufacturers to disclose levels of food waste in their
supply chain.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE V ARUN GANDHI
January 16, 2020.

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution of an Office for Food Waste
Reduction under the Union Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. It also provides for the payment of salary and
allowances to the Chairperson and six other members of the office. Clause 6 provides for
setting up of State and District level monitoring system in coordination with local Governments,
maintaining statistics related to food waste and documenting progress towards the national
food waste reduction goal set by the Office, etc. Clause 7 provides for constitution of an
External Advisory Council representing a diverse array of perspectives from the private
sector, non-profit organisations, business and food recovery organisations of a varying
sizes to provide inputs to the Central Government in setting up of targets, creating awareness
programs to the private and other organisations about food waste reduction and making
rules to implement the targets set. Clause 8 provides for the Central Government to provide
adequate funds Office and the External advisory Council from time to time, for carrying out
the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore will be
involved as recurring expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  OF  DELAGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules and regulations will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory donation of surplus food packets by supermarkets, promotion
for reduction of food wastage and creation of an institutional mechanism for
monitoring and implementing the process and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5378LS(S3)—28-02-2020.