LOK Sl~BlU 
--
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE ALIGARH" MUSLIM UNIVERSITY (..~M.illN.DNENT) BILL, 1965 
(To be/Jf..8 introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
(i) in the marginal heading to clause 2 
for ": ac-otitln" read Its ection" -
(ii) line 8, for 'for being· I read' being, 
?age 3, line ,6,- !:2l: ". " , read ":" 
Page 6, line 3, for ftc laue e "1ilread "sub-clause" -
~age 13, line 15, for "statute" read "St atut as" -
Page 17, line 16, l.2£ "item" read "items" 
.Page 20, line 11 from bottom, omit "ly:-" 
NEW DELHI, 
August 15. 1965 ) Sravana 24, 1887(SBka 

1:0 
s/9 
16 AUG "65 
~ , 
BUI No. 5x of 9', :":. 
THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1965 
~ 
BILL 
.. fUrther t& mnend' the Aligarh MuaIim UniDerlity Ac:t, 1920. 
, . ' 
. ~ it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the B.epubUe 
0( Indi~ as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Aligarh Muslim University (Amend. Short 
; .". 
tnW) . Act" 1a65. 4Iltle. .. 
Z. In section 23 of the Aligarb Muslim University Act, 1.920 (here-
ine.fter referred' to as the principal Act),-
,(a). in. sub-section (1)" the words and bracbt8"aDd the Pro- AmeDd. 
Vice-Chancellor (ilf ,any) for the time being" shall be omitted; ment of. 
. (b) for sub-sections (2) and (3), the following sub-section lCet1cm. 
shall be substituted, namely: _ 2&, '" .... "' 
"(2) The functions of the Court shall be- . . 

Amend. 
mentof 
Matton 
N. 
. qfJ-' S 
2 
(4) to advise tha;Visitor in respect of any matter 
which may be referred to the Court for advice; 
(b) to advise any other authority of the University 
in respect of any maUer, which may be referred to the 
Court for advice; and S 
(e) to perform such other duties and exercise such 
other powers as may be assigned to it by the Visitor or 
under this Act.". 
3. For sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6) of section 28 of the 
principal Act, the following sub-section shall be substituted, name- 10 
ly:-
"(2) The Executive Council may make new or additional 
Statutes or may amend or repeal ~e Statutes; but every new 
Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal 
of a Statute shall require the previous approval of the Visitor IS 
who may sanction or disallow it or return it to the Executive 
Council for further consideration.". 
4. For sub-sections (4), (5), (6) and (1) of section 29 of the prin-
clpal Act, the following sub-sectioWl shall be substituted;. nam~:-
"(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected the draft of 20 
an Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council, the Academic 
Council may appeal to the Visitor who may pus such order 
thereon as he thinks fit. 
(5) 'Every Ordinance made by the Executive Counell shall 
be subJIlitted, as soon as mey be, to the Visitor who may within a, 
two months from the date of receipt thereof disallow any IUch 
Ordinance or return it to the Executive' Council for further con .. 
sideration. 
(6Y- The Visitor may, brorder, direct that the operation of 
any Ordinance shall be suspended until he has had an opportu- 30 
nity of' exercising his power of disallowance, and any order of 
suspension under this sub-section shall cease to have effect on 
the expiration of two months from the d ... .:e of such order.". 
5. In section 31 of the principal Act, the proviso to Iub..aection 
(3) shall he omitted. . 35 

a 
I. For aec:tion 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall SubRltu. 
be 8Ubs~i~~ted, namely:- tlon at new __ 
tlonfbr 
. ~, 
. u34~ The annual report of the University shall be prepared. MnUa! 
iitlder the direction of the Executive Council and 8hall be ~ repOrt . 
.5 mitted to the Visitor on or before such date as may be prescribed 
by the Statutes."; 
7. in section 35 of the prinCipal Act, 5ub-sectinn (3) shan be Amend.. 
omitted. ment of 
section 
35~ 
8. In section 38 of the principal Act, in. 8ub-section (2); the wor~ ~ .. 
10 beginning with ": provided that" and ending with "meeting of the ment ot 
15 
20 
.25 
Court" shall be omitted. seetion _ II. 
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act •. the Amend-
St.atutes of the University shall be amended as follows:- meDtot 
.l 
(i) in clause (2) of Statute 4, the word uordinarily'· shall be StatuteI. 
omitted; 
(ii) in Statute 5,-
(a) for clauses (1), (2) and (3), the following clauaes 
shan be substituted, namely:-
" (1) The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Execu-
tive Council and shalf be a whole-time officer of the 
University. 
(2) The tenns and conditions of serVice of the Trea-
surer shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordi-
nances."; 
(b) in clau-se (5) ,-
. (A) in Bub-clause (a), the words "and the Court" 
shall be omitted; 
(B) in sub-clause (d), for the word "convene", the 
word "attend" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in Statute 6, after clause (3), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(4) (a) The Registrar shan have power to take disci-
plinary action against the employees belonging to the minis-
terial staff and to suspend them pending inquiry, to .dmin-
ister warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure or the withholding ot increment; 

~' .. 
" 
The 'Court. 
4 
",Pro:1lided that DO such penalty shall be tulpolled UDlesa 
the person concemeci has been given a reasonable opport\l'-
nity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken 
-in regard to him. 
(b) An appeal &hall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against S 
any order of the Registrar bnpOsing the 'penalty of -the '\Vith-
holding of increment. 
, (c) In a case where the inquiry di3closes that a punish-
'Dlent beyond the powers of the Registrar is eIlled' for, .'the 
Registrar shall, upon conclu.,ion of the inquiry, make a -~ 10 
port to the Vice-C~cellor 8.Iong with his recommendaticma, 
l.orsuch-.ction as the Vice-Chancellor 'deems ,fIt~"; 
(iv) for Statute 8, the following Statute shall be ,substituted, 
namely:-
'~8. i(l) The C~urt shall consist of the 'follow!ngimem'ben, IS 
namely:-
(a) the Ch_ancellor, ez officio, 
(b) the Pro-Chancellor, u ojJido, 
(c) the members of the Execufure 'Council, u ofJicio, 
(d) ..three persons, being Heads of Departments of 20 
Studies or Principals of Colleges of 'the University, 
nominated by the Visitor, 
(e) two persons, being Professors from Departments 
of Studies or Colieges of the Uni~ersity, nominated by 
the Visitor, 2S 
(f) two persons from among te&chers of the Uni-
versity other than Profe.ors, nominated by the Visitor, 
(g) three representatives of Parliament, two to be 
nOminatF by the Speaker of the House of the People 
from among the members thereof and ,one to be nom!- 30 
nated. by the Chairman 01 the Council of States from 
among the members thereof, and 
(h) thirty -persons nominated by the Visitor from 
among persons who are men of standing in ~pupllc life 
or have speciallmowledge or practical aperieuce in edu- 3S 
-cation or have rendered eminent -services-in -UJe;cause of . _ 
educatiGn. 

" 
IS 
20 
3S 
e 
" . 1(2) An membenof the Court, other than ez oDf.cio 
members, ~ll hold office for a term of three years. 
(3) Seventeen members of the Court shall form a 
quorum."; 
(v) Statute 13 shall be omitted; 
, "(in) 'hi Statute 14, in clause (1) ,-
(4) for the word "Court", the words "Executive Council" 
·shall. be substitut~d; 
'(b) in sub-clause (4), the words "through the Executive 
Council" shall be omitted; 
'(c) in sub-clause (b), the words "on. fthe recommenda-
tion of the Executive Council," shall be omitted; 
(vii) for Statute 15, the following Statute shall be substitu-
ted, tnamely:-
"15. (1) The Executive Council shall consist of the fol- fte&x •• 
lowing members, namely: - ~:U. 
(4) the Vice-Chancellor, ez Officio, 
(b) ~ven persons nom~ted by the Visitor, and 
(c) one person nominated by the Chief Rector in 
his discretion~ 
(2) All members of the Executive Council, other than 
ie:t oDicio . members, . shall' hold oftlce for a term of three years. 
(3) Five members of the Executive Council shall form 
. a quorum."; 
(viii) in Statute 16,-
(4) in clause (1), for the word "Court", the word "Vlsi-
tor" shall be 8u·bstituted,· and the words "not otherwise pro-
vided for" shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (2) ,-
(A) for sub-clause (ii) , the following 8U~laU18 
ahe1l be substituted, namely:-
"'(ii) to appoint members 'of the administrative 
staff;"; 
(B) after sub-clause (ii-A) ,the following .sub-clauae 
shall be inserted, namely:-
" (ii-B) to regulete and -enforce 'd1IeipUne &mODI 
members of the teaChing, :admlnlstrative ana mfDfs.. 
·terlal std of theUniversfty'in 'm:ordanee with 
these Statutes' and the Ordinances;"; 

• (C> in sub-clause (mii), the worda, "otherwise than 
---. by an act of the Court" shall be omitted; 
. (D) in clause (xii), the word "and" occurring at 
the end shall be omitted' ' , 
. (E) after sub-cla~ (xii), the following lUb-clauae S 
shall be inserted, namely:-
It (xii-A) to delegate any of its powers to the 
Vice-Chancellor, the Registrar or such other officer 
or autbority of the University or to a Committee 
appointed by it as it may deem fit; and"; 10 
(i.r) in Statute 1~,-
(a) in item (i), the words '~the Court QrJJ ahall be 
omitted; 
(b) in item (x), for the word "Court", the words 
"Executive Council" shall be substituted; IS 
(x) in Statute 19A,-
(a) in clause (1),-
(A) for it~m (iv), the following item shall be .ubl-
tituted, namely: - . 
" (iv) one person w~o is not an employee of the 20 
University, appointed by the Executive Council;"; 
(B) item, (v) shan be omitted; 
(b) in clause (2), for the word "Three", the word "Two" 
shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (4), the words "In the abaence of the Vice- 2S 
Chancellor', the Treasurer shall preside at a meeting thereof." 
shall be omitted; 
(xi) in Statute 25A,-
(4), in clause (2), for the words "contained in the lerms 
of. his appointment,", the words "to the contrary contained 30 
in the terms of his contract of se~ce or of his appointment" 
shall be ~bstituted and the proviso shall be omitted; 

10 
15 
35 
, 
(b) after clause (2), the following clause shall be in-
lerted, namely:-
---- "(3) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the terms of his contract of service or of his appoint-
ment, the Executive Council shall be entitled to dismiss 
a teacher on grounds of misconduct, but save as afore-
said, the Executive Council shall not be entitled to deter-
mine the employment of a teacher save for. good cause 
and after giving three months' notice in writing or pay-
ment of three months' salary in lieu of such notice. 
(b) The determination of a teacher's employment 
shall require a two-thirds majority of the members of 
the Executive Council present and voting. 
(c) The Vice-Chancellor may suspend a teacher 
against whom any misconduct is alleged and shall report 
the case to the next meeting of the Executive CouncU, 
but before any orders for dismissal are pa3Sed, the 
teacher shall be informed of the allegations made against 
him and shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
making such representations to the Executive -Council 
or to any Committee thereof appointed for the purpose, 
as he may desire to make. 
(d) Any dismissal on the ground of misconduct 
sball take effect on the date on which the teacher wu 
ftrst suspended. 
(e) Before a notice is given or payment is made to 
the teacher under sub-clause (a), he shall be informed 
by the Executive Council of the cause of the action pro-
posed to be taken against him and shall be Riven a rea-
sonable opportunity of making such representations to 
the Executive -Council or to any Committee thereof ap-
pointed for the purpose, as he may desire to make. 
(f) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Statutes, the teacher may aJ any time terminate his 
employment by givin~ the Executive Council three 
months' notice in writing."; 
(ni) Statute 28 shall be omitted . 
. ' 10. (1) Every person holding office as a member of the Court or TrarW-
the Executive Council, as the case may be, immediately before the tiOll&l pro-
40 20th day of May, 1965, shall on and from the aaid date cease to hold visiODI. 
ofBce as wch: 

Repeal 
aDd! 
aaving. 
8 
• .,. Pnwided that. where any such per.son held,. ipUDediately 1De.fore .oJ 
such date, any other oflice in the University, notblng cQntained fa 
this sub-section shall be construed to affect his continuance in such 
'oth.-omce. 
(Z) Until the Court is constituted in accordance with the provi- 5-
&ions of section 2, tead with clause (iv) of section 9, or the Execu-
tive Council is constituted in accordance with the provisions of 
clause (vii) of section 9, the Visitor may, by general or special order, 
direct any officer of the University to exercise the powers and per-
form th~ duties conferred or imposed by or under the principal Act 10 
as amended by this Act on the Court or the Executive Councll, as 
the case may be~ . . 
11. (1) T~ AligaI:h MnsUm University (Amencblumt) Ordinance, 
1965 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action »5 
taJam· under the- said Ordinance shell be deemed to, have been done or 
taken I UDder this; Act, as it this Act had commenced on the 20th da,. 
of-~., 1986. 
20t loa. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On 25th April, 1965 grave disturbances I took place in the Aligarh 
Muslim University Campus in which the University students caused 
injuries to some members of the Court which was then in session. 
The Vice-Chancellor who was made the principal target of concen-
trated attack sustained seriou's injuries, providentially escaping more 
dire consequences. The University was indefinitely closed. 
Enquiries revealed that the disturbances were too well organised 
to be sporadic and seemed to flow from certain unhealthy in1ltie11&s 
which for some time had been adversely influencing the e1Bciency 
and the academic purposes of the University. 
After carefully considering the various factors which culmina-
ted in the aforesaid disturbGnces involving violence and closure of 
the University, Government came to the conclusion that the Univ9r-
sity could not reo.pen and' resume normal functioning without cer-
tain immediate measures being taken to change the admini!Jtrative 
set up of the University. As Parliament was not in session at the 
time and tlle Deed for administrative reorganisation was imperative, 
the President promulgated the Aligarh Muslim University (Amend-
ment) Ordinance, 1965 on the 20th May, 1965. The present Bill 
seeks to replace the Ordinance by an Act of Parliament. ( 
The principal objects of the Bill in the immediate future are \0) 
to provide an administrative structure within which the University's 
return to nornml functioning an~ pursuit of :basic academic purposes 
may be facilitated and ensured~nd (ii) further to ensure that, as 
an emergeIH:Y measure and pending long term legislation about the 
University to be brought in the near future before Parliament 
by Government, it makes the transition from chaos to order both 
brief and smooth. 
The maiD features of the Bill are=-
(a) the reconstitution of the Court. of the University as en 
advisory body and reduction in the number of 'its membership; 
fb) the reconstitution of the Executive Council; 
(c) vesting of certain powers in the Vice-Chancellor and 
the Registrar in the matter of discipline. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th August, 1965. M. C. CHAGLA. 
, 

" 
ShOl"t title 
andCOftl-
mtmce-
ment. 
The Court. 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIYBRSITY Acr, 1920 
40 OF 1920: 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Aligarh Muslim University 
Act, 1920. 
• • • • • 
23. (1) The Court shall consist of the Chancellor, the Pro-
Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor and the Pro-Vice-Chancellor (if 
any) for the time being, and such other persons as may be specified 
in the Statutes. 
(2) The Court shall be the supreme governing body of the 
University and shall exercise all the powers of the University, not 
otherwise provided for by this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances 
and the Regulations. It shan have power to review the acts of the 
Executive and the Academic Councils . (save where such Councils 
have acted in accordance with powers conferred on them under this. 
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances). 
(3) Subject. to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall exer-
cise the following powers and perform the following duties, 
namely:-
(a) of making Statutes and of amending or repealing the 
same; 
(b) of considering Ordinances; 
(c) of considering and passing resolutions on the annual 
report, the annual accounts and the financial estimates;: 
(d) of electing such persons to serve on authorities of the 
University and of appointing such officers as may be 
prescribed by this Act or the Statutes; and 
(e) of exercising such other powers and performing such 
other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by this Act 
or the Statutes. 
• • • • • 
10 • 

11 
21. (1) • • • • 
-- ... -~. - -~. 
(2) The Court may, from time to time, make new or additional 
Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes in the manner herein-
after in this section provided. 
(3) The Executive Council may propose to the Court the draft 
of an~ Statute to be passed by the Court, and such draft shall be 
considered by the Court at its next meeting. 
Statutes. 
(4) The Court may approve any such draft as is referred to in ~.!.: 
sub~ection (3) and pass the Statute or reject it or return it to the 
Executive Council for reconsideration, either in whole .or in part, 
together with any amendments which the Court may suggest: 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not propose the draft 
of any Statute or of any amendment of a Statute affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any existing authority of the University 
until such authority has been given an opportunity of expressing an 
opinion upon the propo~l, and any opinion so expressed shall be ~ 
writing and shall be considered by the Court. 
(5) Any member of the Court may propose to the Court the 
draft of any Statute and the Court may reject the proposal or refer 
such draft for consideration to the Executive Council, which may 
either xeject the proposal or submit the draft to the Court in such 
form as the Executive Council may approve, and the provisions of 
this section shall apply in the case of any draft so submitted as they 
apply in the case of a draft proposed to the Court by the Executive 
Council. 
(6) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amend-
ment or repeal of a Statute shall require the previous approval of 
the Visitor who may sanction, disallow, or remit it for further con-
sidera tion. 
29. (1) • • • • 
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected. the draft of an 
Ordinance proposed by tile Academic Council, the Academic Coun-
cil may appeal to the Central Government and the Central Govern-
ment may, by order, direct that the proposed Ordinance shall be laid 
Power to 
make 
Ordi-
nances. 

12 
~fore the next meeting of the Court for its approval and that pend-
mg such approval it shall have effect from such date as may be spe-
- ---------. cified in the order: 
RefUla-
tions. 
Annual 
Repor.t. 
Provided that if the Ordinance is Dot approved by the Court at 
such meeting, it shall cease to have effect. 
(5) All Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall be sub-
mitted, as soon as may be, to the Visitor and the Court and shall 
be considered by the Court at its next meeting and the Court shall 
have power, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than 
two-thirds of the members voting, to cancel any Ordinance made by 
the Executive Council, and such Ordinance shall, from the date -Cjf-
.uch resolution, cease to have effect. 
(6) The Visitor may, by order, direct that the operation of uy 
Ordinance shan be suspended until he has had an opportunity of 
exercising his powers of diaallowance, and any order of auspeaaion 
under this sub-section shall cease to have effect on the expiration 
of one month from the date of such order or on the expiratiDa Gf 
fifteen days from the date of consideration of the Ordinance by the 
Court, whichever period expires later. 
(7) The Visitor may, at any time after an Ordinance hu been 
considered by the Court, signify to the Executive Council his dis-
allowance of such Ordinance, and from the date of receipt by the Exe-
cutive Council of intimation of such disallowance, luch Ordinaace 
shall cease to have effect. 
31. (1) • • • • 
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment, in lUck 
manner as it may specify, of any Regulation made under thb section 
or the annulment of any such Regulation: 
Provided that any authority of the University which is dissatis-
fied with any such direction may apPEol to the Court, whose deci-
sion in the matter shall be final. 
• • • • • • • 
34. The annual report of the University shall be prepared under 
the direction of the Executive Council, and shall be submitted to 
the Court on or before such date as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes, and shall be considered by the Court at its annual meeting. 
The Court may pass resolutions thereon and communicate the same 
to the Executive Council which .ball take such action thereon u 
it thinks At. ,~ ;. . i 

--' 13 
35(1) • • • • 
(3) The annual accounts and the financial estimates shall be 
considered by the Court at its annual meeting, and the Court may 
pass resolutions thereon and communicate the same to the Executive 
Council which shall take such action thereon as it thinks fit. 
Annual 
account. 
38. (1) • • • • Fillln, of 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 18, =~~e. 
casual vacancies in allY office or in any authority shan be filled up ..-:-! -~,! • 
by the authority which has power to appoint to the 'office or autho-
rity: provided that when the Court is the appointing authority the 
casual wcancy shall be filled by th;.; Executive Council, and the 
person so appointed shall hold office till the next meeting of the 
Court. 
• • • • • 
THE STATUTE 
• • • • • 
4. (1) • • • • Pro-ViC8-
(2) The term of office of the Pro-Vice-Chancellar. shall ordinarily Chan~l1or. 
be co-terminous with the term of office of the Vice-Chancellor: 
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the term of his 
otftce, the Pro- Vice-Chancellor shall continue in office until his 
successor is appointed and enters upon his office . 
• • • • • 
5. (1) The Treasurer shall be elected by the Court T 
from among a panel of three persons nominated .by the Execu.tive reuurer. 
Council, and the election shall be subject to the approval of the 
Visitor. He shall hold office for a term of five years. 
(2) He shall be an ex otJieio member of the-- Court and the 
Executive Council. 
(3) A casual vacancy in the office of the Treasurer shall be 
filled by the Executive Council. The person appointed to flll such 
vacancy shall hold office until the election of his successor at the 
next annual meeting of the Court. 
• • • • • 
(5) The Treasurer shall:-
(a) aubject to the control of the Executive Councll, manage 
the property and investments of the UDiversity and be respon-

Court. 
14 
sible for the preparation of the annual accounts and the financial 
estimates and for their presentation to the Executive Council 
and the Court; . -
• • • • • 
(d) convene meetings of the Finance Committee; aDd 
• • • • • 
8. (1) The Court shall consist of the following members, namely:-
Ex Officio Members 
(i) Chancellor; 
(li) Pro-Chancellor; 
(iii) Vice-Chancellor; 
(iv) Plro-Vice .. Chancellor, if any; 
(v) Treasurer; 
(vi) All Ex-Vice-Chancellors; 
(vi-a) Librarian; 
(vii) Provosts; and 
(viii) Proctor. 
Representatives of the Departments a.nd Colleges 
(ix) Heads of Departments of Studies; 
(x) Principals of Colleges; and 
(xi) Professors who are not Heads of Departments of 
Studies. 
Representatives of University Teachers other than Pro!elBor, 
(xii) (a) Two Readers, by rotation according to seniority, 
who shall be members for a term of three years; 
(b) Three Lecturers, by rotation according to seniority, 
who shall be members for a term of three years. 
Representatives of Ex-Students 
(xiii) Fifteen Representatives to be elected by the Alumni 
(Old Boys) Association. 
Donor. 
(xiv) (a) Every person making to the Univeraity a dona-
tion of one lakh of rupees or upwards or transferring property 
of the like value, and 
(b) Representatives of persons making to the University 
a donation of Rs. 1,000 or upwards (excluding persons who 

have donated Rs. 1,00,000 or more), elected from among them-
selves. There shall be one representative far every flfty IUch 
donors, subject to a DlQximum .~( fifteen representatives. 
Explanation 1 
Every donor who makes to the University an annual grant 
of money, the payment of which is secured by mortgage of 
immovable property or in such other manner as the Executive 
Council may approve, shaU, subject to the provisions of Expla-
nation 3, have the same rights as to membership of, and repre-
sentation on, the Court as if he had been a donor of such sum 
as represents the capital value of such annual grant ascertained 
at a rate of interest of 3i per cent.: 
Provided that in the case of a body corporate, the Execu-
tive Council may dispense with any such security. 
Explanation 2 
The amounts of donations specified in sub-items (a) and 
(b) may, for the purpose of qualifying the donors within those 
provisions, be made up partly of· money or of capitaUIIf.1l grants, 
as provided in Explanation I or of property or partly of any two 
or more of these. 
Explanation 3 
When an annual grant is not fully paid up or falls in arrears, 
the donor shall not be entitled to exercise any of the privileges 
conferred on him by any of the foregoing provisions of thi. 
Statute, unless and until the said arrears are paid up. 
Explanation 4 
Where the donors of a sum· are more persons than one, who 
constitute a joint Hindu family or partnership firm or a com-
pany or corporation, the Registrar shall call upon such donors 
to elect, within a time to be fixed by him, one of their number 
to represent and act, for them in voting at the election. If such 
donors fail to elect and notify the name and address of the 
person so elected by them within the time specified in the 
notice, or within such further period of time as may be allowed 
,by the Registrar or are 4 unable to agree as to the person who 

16 
sh~uld represent them for the purpose of yoting at the election, 
the Registrar shall lay the matter for orders before the Vice-
Chancellor who may nominate anyone of -their number - to 
represent them at the election for the purpose of voting. The 
orders of the Vice-Chancellor in this regard shall be final. The 
na~e of the person so elected or nominated to represent such 
. donors shall be entered in the column of remarks against the 
names of such donors, and for purposes of serving all notices 
of elections, of making nominations of persons to be eleded 
and for voting at the election the person so noted as the repre-
sentative of such donor shall be deemed to be th1! person 
entitled to act as one of the electors. 
Explanation 5 
Where the donor is a minor, or a person 8uttering from a 
disability, or a ward of a court, the legal guardian of such per-
son shall be entitled to act for him at the election as a voter, 
so long as the minority or disability continues or so long as he 
is a ward of a court. Where the same person is not the It:gal 
guardian of the person and property of a minor, the legal 
guardian of the property shall be deemed to be the guardian. 
Persons Representing Learned PrOfession. and Indut'll 4Rdl 
Commerce 
(xv) Ten persons representing the learned professions, to 
be elected by the Court, of whom at least five shall be persons 
residing outside the State of Uttar Pradesh; 
(xvi) Three representatives of the All·1ndia .Muslim Edu· 
'cationa] Conference; 
(xvii) Five persons representing Industry and Commerce, 
to be elected by the Court. 
Representatives of Parliament 
(xviii> Three members of the Parliament, two to be elected 
by the Lok Sabha from among its own members in such manner 
as the Speaker may direct alld one to be elected. by the Raj)". 
Sabha from among its own members in such manner as. the 
Chairman may direct: 
Provided that until both Houses of Parliament are ~ .. 
tuted, the three members may· be elected by tire Provistorral 
hrliMJeSlt. 

17 
RepTesentatives of Muslim CultuTe and Leaming 
(xix) Five persons representing Muslim culture and learn-
ing to be elected by the Court. 
Nominated MembeTS 
(xx) (a) Not more than five persons to be nominated by 
the Visitor; 
(·b) Not more than two persons to be nominated by the 
Chief Rector; and 
(c) _Not more than three persons to be nominated by the 
Chancellor: 
Provided that in making nominations under sub-items (a) 
and (c) due regard shall be had to the representation of the 
different areas of the country, in view of the all-India character 
of the University: 
. Provided further that no employee of the Un;versity shall be 
eligible to be a member under any of the item (xiii), (xiv), 
(xv), (xvi), (xvii) I (xviii), (xix) or (xx). 
(2) If any bOdy of persons entitled to elect a member fails to 
do so within the time prescribed by the . Court, the Court may 
appoint as member any person whom that body of persons could 
have elected as a member: 
Provided that in the case of the first elections to the Court, the 
powers conferred upon the Court by this clause shall be exercisable 
by the Executive Council. 
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided, a member of the Court 
shall hold office for a period of five years. . 
(.) The method of election shall be as laid down in the Ordi-
nances. 
(5) The proceedings of the first meeting of the Court, including 
any adjourned meeting thereof, after the commencement of the 
Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act of 1951, shall be 
valid notWithstanding the existence of vacancies under items (xiii) 
to (xx), inclusive of clause (1) of this Statute . 
• • • • • 
13. (1) An annual meeting of the Court shell be beld on a date Meetinas 
to be fixed !by the Executive Council unless some other date has of the 
been fixed by the Court In respect of any year. At such annual Court. 

18 
~eeting, a report of the working of the University during the pre-
VIOUS year, together with a statement of the receipts and expendi-
ture the b~aJlce sheet,. _as audited, and the financial estimates shall 
be presented and any vacancies among the ofBcers of the University 
or among the members of the Court or the Executive Council or 
the Finance Committee which ought to be ftlled up by the Court 
shan ·be so ftlled up. 
(2) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the 
balance sheet and the financial estimates referred to in clause (1) 
shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days 
before the date of the annual meeting, and shall be open to inspec-
tion of aU members of the Court and the Academic Council' at the 
office of the University during the year following such annual 
meeting, at such reasonable hours and under such conditions as the 
Executive Council may determine. 
(3) Twenty-ftve members of the Court shall form a .quorum. 
(4) Special meeting of the Court may be convened by the Exe-
cutive Council or the Vice-Chancellor, or, if there is no Vice-
Chancellor, by the Pro-Vice-Chancellor or, if there is no Pro- Vice-
Chancellor, by the Registrar: 
Provided that a special meeting of the Cowt shall also b~ called 
if one-third of the members of the Court or fifty members,' which-
ever number is less, make a requisition in writing in this behalf. 
Powers in 14. (1) The Court may, by resolutions passed by a majority of Dot 
respect. less than two-thirds 0:": the members present and voting-
of grantmg 
and with~ 
drawing 
degree. 
Executive 
Council. 
(a) on the recommendation of the Academic Council, 
through the Executive Council make proposals to the Chancellor 
for the conferment of honorary degrees; . 
(b) on the recommendation of the Executive Council, with-
draw any ordinal! degree or diploma conferred by the Univer-
sity; and 
• • • • • 
15. (1) The Executive Council shall consist of the following 
members, namely:-
(i) Vice-Chancellor; 
(ii) Pro_Vic~hanceUor, if any; 
(iii) Treasurer; 
(iv) Three Deans, by rotatio~. accot:ding· to seniority; 

1. ..- -, 
(v) Principals of two Colleges, other tlian the Principal of 
the Women's College, to be members in rotation for a term of 
three years; 
(vi) Principal of the Women's College; 
(vii> One Provast, ·by rotation according to seniority; 
(viii) Proctor; 
(Ix) Five persons; none of whom shall be an employee of 
the University, elected by the Court from among its members, 
of whom at least three shall be persons residing outside the 
State of Uttar Pradesh: 
Provided that until such persons are elected by the Court 
their places shall be filled by persons nominated by the Visitor; 
(x) Two persons nominated by the Visitor; 
(xi) One person nominated by the Chief Rector; and 
(xii) One person nominated by the Chancellor. 
(2) Members of the Executive Council, referred to in items (v) 
and (ix) to (xii) of clause (1) shall hold office for a term of three 
years. 
(3) Eleven members of the Executive Council shall rorm a 
quorum. 
16. (1) The Executive Council shall, subject to the control of Powers. 
the Court, have the management and administration of the whole of the 
revenue and property of the University and the conduct of all E~ecuti~t 
administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for. OUDC1. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, in addition to all other 
powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely:-
. . .. . . 
(ii) to appoint members of ~he administrative staff or to 
delegate the power of appointment to such authority o.r 
authorities or officer as the Executive Council may, from 
time to time, by resolution, either generally or specially direct; 
• • • • • 
(viii) ·toentertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to 
redress' any grievances of the officers of the University, the 
teaching staff, the students and the University's servants, who 
may, for any reason, feel aggrieved, otherwise than by an act 
of the Court; '. . 
• . . . • • • 

Powers of 
the-Aca-
demic 
Council. 
20 
18. Subject to the Act, the Statutes and ,the Ordinances, the 
Academic Council sh~ll, in addition to all other powers vested in it. 
have the following powers, namely:-
(i) to report on any matter referred to or delegated to it 
by the Court or the Executive Council; 
• • • • • 
(x) to fix, subject to any conditionS accepted by the Court, 
the time, mode and conditions of competition fOl' Fellowships, 
Scholarships and other prizes, and to award the same; 
• • • • • 
Finance 19-A. (I) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following 
Commit. members, namely:-
tee. 
Removal 
ofMem-
bers and 
Oftleers. 
• • • • • 
(iv) Two persons, who are not employees of the University, 
elected by the Court, at least one of whom shan ·be a penon who 
is not a membea- of the Executive Council; 
(v) Treasurer (Convener). 
(2) Three members of the Finance Committee shall form a 
quorum. " 
• • • • • 
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall preside at the meetings of the 
Finance, Committee. In the absence of the Vice-Chancellor, the 
Treasurer shall preside at a meeting thereof . 
• • 
25-A. • • • • • 
• • • 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of his 
appointment, any offtcer of the University, salaried or otherw1le, 
may be removed from that office by the authority, which is compe-
tent to fill the vacancy on eith~r of the following grounds, namely:-
ly:-
(i) the officer has become incapable of perfo~ming his 
duties; 
(ii} the officer has been convicted by a court of law of an 
offence which, in the opinion of the Court, the ExecUtive Coun-
cil, or the Academic Council, as the case may be, Invol~ m~ral 
turpitude: , . ' . , 
. 'Provided that nothing in this clauae shall be deemed to 
affect ~y rightS accruing to an oftlcer appointed' oii" eoiit~act in 
accordance with the· tenns of that contract. l' 
• • • • • 

21 
28. No member of the Alumni (Old Boys) Association shall be 
entitled to vote or stand for the election to the Court unless-
--~ -- (1) he has been a member of the Association for at least five 
years continuously prior to the date of election; 
(il) he pays such subscription and satisfies such other con-
ditions, as may be prescribed by the Ordinances; 
(iii) he is a graduate of the Aligarh Muslim University; 
or 
an ex-student of the M.A.O. College or the M . .\.O. Collegiate 
School, Aligarh; 
if a non-graduate ex-student of the University has been a 
member of the Association for a continuous period of ten years: 
Provided not less than eight of the persons so elected shall 
be graduates. 
Ezplanation.-The word "graduate" in' the proviso ihall in-
clude a graduate of the Mohammadan Anglo-Ortental College, 
Aligarh. 
• • • • • 

A 
BILL 
fUrther to amend the Aligarh Muslim U w.versity Act, I920. 
(Shri M. C. CiuJ8la, 
Minister of EdU&ation.) 