8U1 No. 51 of 1"9 
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND 
BANK (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As DlTRODUCED IN ~ SABHA 
ON 6TH AUGUST, 1959) 

Bill No. 51 of 1959 
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND 
BANK (AM.ENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend th.e International Monetary Fund and Bank Ordi-
nance, 1945. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 01 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the International Monetary Fund and Short title. 
Bank (Amendment) Act, 1959. 
5 2. In the International Monetary Fund and Bank Ordinance, 1945 Sub stitution 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Ordinance), for the word ?,~~~ wf~~ 
"Ordinance", wherever it occurs, the word "Act" shall be substituted. the word 
"Ordi-
10 
nanoe". 
3. For the last paragraph of the p •• Odd ...... " the enacting for- Amendment 
mula, the words "BE it enacted _ folIDwa:-"IlbaiL,be-substituted. of preamble 
and eilact;Di 
fonnuIa. 
4. In sub-section (1) of section 2 of the principal Ordinance,- A d men ment 
(i) in the opening paragraph, for the words "revenues of the of IectioD 2. 
Central Government", the words "Consolidated Fund of India" 
.mall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (a), for the words, brackets and letter "to the 
International Bank under paragraph (a) ", the words, brackets 
and letters "to the International Bank under paragraphs (a) and 
(c) If shall be substituted. 
604 L.S.-l. 

Amendment 
of section 7. 
j 
5. Section 7 of the principal Ordinance shall be re-numbered as 
sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
the following sub-Iection shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while 5 
it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if be-
fore the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule 10 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so 
however, that any such modlification or .annulment shall be with-
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.". ..' IS 

STATEMENT· OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The In~ernational Monetary Fund and the International Bank for 
R~('onstruction and Developmen~ were brought into existence through 
an International Agreement concluded at the U.N· Monetary and 
Financial Conference held in December, 1945, and India became one 
of the original members of these institutions by signing the respective 
Articles of Agreements. An Ordinance called the "International 
Monetary Fund and Bank Ordinance, 1945" was promulgated in 
December, 1945 to implement the Agreements under which these two 
institutions were established. This Ordinance is still in force. 
Section 2 (1) (a) of the Ordinance requires the Central Govern .. 
ment to payout of Central revenues such sums as may from time to 
time be required for the purpose of paying India's original quota in 
the International Monetary Fund and its initial subscription to the 
capital stock of the International Bank. The section also requires 
the Central Government to make subscription towards an increase 
in the quota in the International Monetary Fund. The Ordinance, 
however, contains no provision empowering the Central Govern-
ment to sUQscribe towards additional shares in respect of an increase 
in the authorised capital stock of the Bank. 
The Board of Governors of' the International Bank has recently 
deo:ided on an increase in the authorised capital stock of the Intf:'r-
national Bank and a general 100% increase in the subscriptions of all 
member countries. Since the Ordinance does not authorise payment 
in respect of any increase in our subscription on account of an in-
crease in the authorised capital stock of the Bank, it has become 
necessary to amend the Ordinance and provide for such authority. 
Clause 4 (ii) of the Bill seeks to achieve this purpose. 
Opportunity has also been taken to convert the Ordinance into an 
Ac~. 
N!.w DELHI; MORARJI R. DESAI 
The 25th July, 1959. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill amends the International Monetary Fund and Bank 
Ordinance, 1945, with the chief object of empowering the Central 
Government to payout of the Consolidated Fund of India such sums 
as may from time to time be necessary for the payment of subscrip-
tion towards India's additional shares in the increased capital stock 
of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 
India's·present shares in the Bank are equivalent to $400 million and 
the additional ihares as contemplated at present will also be of the 
same amount. According to the decision of the Board of Governors 
of the Bank, the entire subscription towards the additional shares 
will remain unpaid. The Bank will have the right to call for this 
8ubecrlption only when it is required by it for meeting its obllgations 
and liabilities. The purpose of the increase in the authorized capi-
tal stock of "the Bank, towards which India, together with other mem-
ber countries, proposes to subscribe additional shares is to enable 
the Bank to borrow larger sums in the World capital markets, on the 
strength of its increased capital, and thus augment its resources for 
lending to member countries. India's additional subscription of 
$400 million will thus not be paid immediately, but only when a con-
tingency of this nature arises. Apart from this contingent payment 
at a future date, no expenditure is involved. 

ANNEXURE 
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND BANK 
ORDINANCE, 1945 
ORDINANCE No. XLVII OF 1945 
(24th December, 1945) 
An Ordinance to implement the International Monetary 
Fund and Bank Agreements. 
WHEREAS, at the United Nations Monetary and Financial Con-
ference held at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in July 1944, Articles 
of the following agreements were drawn up, and set out in the Final 
Act of the said Conference that is to say:-
(a) any agreement (hereinafter referred to as the Fund Agree-
ment) for the establishment l.lnd operation of an international body 
to be called the International Monetary Fund (hereinafter referred 
as the International Fund), and 
(b) an agreement (hereinafter referred to as the Bank Agree-
ment) for the establishment and opemtion of an international body 
to be called the International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment (hereinafter referred to as the International Bank): 
AND WHERJ!!AS an emergency has arisen which renders it necessary 
to make certain provision for the purpose of implementing the afore-
said Agreements; 
Now, THEREFORE, in exereise of the powers conferred by section 72 
of the Government of India Act, as set out in the Ninth Schedule 
to the Government of India Act, 1935 (26 Geo. 5. c. 2) the Governor 
General is pleased to make and promulgate the following Ordi-
nance:":" 
1. (1) ,This Ordinance may be called the Internoational Monetary Short title, 
Fund. aDd Bank Ordinance, 1945. ~~ 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. ment. 
(3) It .hall eome into force at once. 
2. (1) There shall be paid out of the revenues of the Central Payments lO 
Government all such sums as may from time to time be required for I~temlaFun' bona d 
the purpose of paying- IDd Bank. 
(a) the subscriptions payable by the Central Government, 
$ 

6 
to the International Fund under parairaph (a) of seetion 3, 
and peragraph (a) of section 4, of Article III of the Fund 
Agreement. and to the International Bank under paragraph (a) 
of section 3 of Article II of the Bank Agreement; . 
(b) any sums payable by the Central Government to the 
International Fund under paragraph (b) of section 8 of Article 
IV of the Fund Agreement, end to· the International Bank unde!' 
section 9 of Article II of the Bank Agreement; 
(c) any charges payable by the Central Government to the 
International Fund under section 8 of Article V of the Fund 
Agreement; 
(~) any sums required for implementing the guarantee of 
the Central Government referred to in section 3 of Article XIII 
of the Fund Agreement; 
(e) any compensation required to be paid by the Central 
Government to the International Fund or to any member 
thereof under Schedule D or Schedule E to the Fund Agreement. 
(2) The Central Government may, if it thinks fit so t.o do, create 
and issue to the Internation'.ll Fund or International Bank, in such 
form as it thinks fit, any such. non-interest bearing and non-negoti-
able notes or other obligations as are provided for by section 
5 of Article III of the Fund Agreement and section 12 of Article V 
of the Bank Agreement. 
Reserve 3. The Reserve Bank of India (hereinafter referred to as the 
Bank to be depository Reserve Bank) shall be the depository of the Indian currency hold-
for Intema- ings of the International Fund ana Internatioool Bank. 
tioDal Fllnd 
and Bank. 
Power to call 4. (1) Where under section 5 of Article VIII of the Fund Agree-
f~r informa- ment, the International Fund requires the Central Government to 
bon. furnish it with any information, the Central Government, or if 
generally or specially authorised by the Central Government in this 
behalf, the Reserve Bank, may by order in writing require any per-
son to furnish to such officer or other person as may be specified 
in the order such detailed information as the Central Government 
or the Reserve Bank, as the case may be, may determine to be essen-
tial for the purpose of complying with the request of the Internation-
al Fund; 'lnd any person so required shall be bound to furnish such 
inf8rmation. 
(2) Every officer or person to whom any information is required 
to be furnished under this section shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code 
(XL V of 1860). 

, 
(3) No information obtained under this section shall be furnished 
to the International Fund in such detail as to disclose the affairs 
of any person, and the provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) 
of section 54 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (XI of 1922) 
shall apply in relation to information obtained under this section 
as they apply to the p.uticulars referred to in that section. 
(4) A determination of the Central Government or the Reserve 
Bank under sub-section (1) as to the extent of detail in which infor-
mation is to be furnished shall be final, and in any prosecution under 
section 176 or section 177 of the Indian Penal Code in respect of any 
information required to be furnished under this section, it shall not 
be • .1' defence to assert that the information was required to be fur-
nished in greater detail than was essential for the purpose of com-
plying with the request of the International Fund. 
(5) No prosecution for an offence in respect of any information 
required to be furnished under this section shall be instituted except 
with the previous sanction of the Central Government. 
S. NotWithstanding anything to the contrary contained in uny ~e~tail1 pro-
th 1 h . . h F d B A VISIOns of o er aw, t e prOVISIOns of t e und an ank greements set out Agl'l"eJJlenti 
in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India: to have force of law. 
Provided that nothing in section 9 of Article IX of the Fund 
Agreement or in section 9 of Article VII of the Bank Agreement 
shall be construed as-
(a) entitling the International Fund or International Bank 
to import into India goods free of any duty of customs with-
out any restriction on their subsequent sale therein, or 
('b) conferring on the International Fund or International 
Bank any exemption from duties or taxes which form part of 
the price of goods sold or which are in i>3ct no more than charges 
for services rendered. 
6. Repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1952 (XL VIII Amendment 
of 1952), s. 2 and Sch. of section 17, Act U of 
1934· 
7. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Power to 
Gazette, make rules for giving effect to the provisions set out in the make rulrs. 
Schedule, and generally for carrying out the purposes of this 
Ordinance. 

i 
THE SCHEDULE 
See section 5 
PRovISIONS OF AGREEMENTS WHICH SHALL HA VB FORCE OF LA. W 
PART I 
FUND AGREEMENT 
Paragraph (b) of section 2 of Article VIII. 
Exchange contracts which involve the currency of any member 
and which are contrary to the exchange control regulations of that 
member maintained or imposed consistently with this Agreement 
shall be unenforceable in the territories of any member. 
ARTICLE IX 
STATUS, IMMUNITIES AND PRIVILECI'S 
SECTION 1. Purpose of Article 
To enable the fund to fulfil the functions with which it is entrust-
ed, the status, immunities and privileges set forth in this Article 
shall be accorded to the Fund in the territories of each member. 
SECTION 2. Status of the Fund 
The Fund shall possess full juridical personality, and, in parti-
cular; the capacity 
(i) to contract; 
(ii) to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable pro-
perty; 
(iii) to institute legal proceedings. 
SECTION 3. Immunity from judicial process 
The Fund, its property and its assets, wherever located and by 
whomsoever held, shall enjoy immunity from every form of judicial 
process except to the extent that it expressly waives its immunity 
for the purpose of any proceedings or by the terms of any contract. 
SECTION 4. Immunity . from other action 
Property and assets of the Fund, wherever located and by whom-
soever held, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation, 
expropriation or any other form of seizure by executive or legislative 
action. 

9 
SECTION 5. Immu.nity of archives 
The archives of the Fund shall be inviolable. 
SECTION 6. Freedom of assets from. restrictions 
To the extent necessary to carry out the operations provided for 
in this Agreement, all property and assets of the Fund shall be free 
from restrictions, regulations, controls and moratoria of any nature. 
SECTION 7. Privilege for communications 
The official communications of the Fund shall be accorded by 
members the same treatment as the official communications of other 
members. 
SECTION 8. Immunities and privileges of officers and employees 
All governors, executive directors, alternates, officers and 
employees of the Fund 
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts 
performed by them in their official capacity except when the 
"Fund waives this immunity; 
(ii) not being local nationals, shall be granted the same 
inununities from immigration restrictions, alien registration 
requirements and national service obligations and the same faci-
lities as regards exchange restrictions as are accorded by mem-
bers to the representatives, officials and employees of compar-
able rank of other members; 
(iii) shall be granted the same treatment in respect of tra-
velling facilities as is accorded by members to representatives, 
officials and employees of comparable rank of other members. 
SECTION 9. Immunities from taxation 
(a) The Fund, its assets, property, income and its operations and 
transactions authorised by this Agreement, shall be immune from 
all taxation and from all customs duties. The Fund shall also be 
immune from liability for the collection or payment of any tax or 
duty. 
(b) No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emolu-
ments paid by the Fund to executive directors, alternates, officers or 
employees of the Fund who are not local citizens, local subjects, or 
other local nationals. 
804 LS(B)-3. 

10 
(c) No ~.1xation of any kind shall be levied on any obligation 
or security issued by the Fund, including any dividend or interest 
thereon, by whomsoever held. 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security 
solely because of its origin; or 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the 
place or currency in which it is issued, made payable or paid, or 
the location of any office or place of business maintained by the 
Fund. 
PART II 
BANK AGREEMENT 
ARTICLE VII 
STATUS, IMMUNITIES AND PRIVILEGES 
SECTION 1. Purpose of ArticZe 
To enable the Bank to fulfil the functions with which it is entrust-
ed, the status, immunities and privileges set forth in this Article shall 
be accorded to the Bank in the territories of each member. 
SECTION 2. Status oJ the Bank 
The Bank shall possess full juridical personality, and, in parti-
cular, the capacity 
(i) to contract; 
(ii) to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable pro-
perty; 
(iii) to institute legal proceedings. 
SECTION 3. Position of the Bank with regard to judidal process 
Actions may be brought against the Bank only in a court of com-
petent jurisdiction in the territorles of a member in which the Bank 
has an office, has appointed an agent for the purpose of accepting 
service or notice of process, or has issued or guaranteed securities. 
No actions shall, however, be brought by members or persons acting 
for or deriving claims from members. The property and assets of 
the Bank shall, wheresoever located and by whomsoever held, be 
immune from all forms of seizure, attachment or execution before 
the delivery of final judgment against the Bank. 

II 
SECTION 4. Immunity of assets from seizure 
Property and assets of the Bank, wherever located and by whom-
soever held, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation 
expropriation or any other form of seizure by executive or legisla-
tive action. 
SECTION 5. Immunity of archives 
The archives of the Bank shall be inviolable. 
SECTION 6. Freedom of assets from restrictions 
To the extent necessary to carry out the operations provided for 
in this Agreement and subject to the provisions of this Agreement, 
all property and assets of the Bank shall be free from any restric-
tions, regulations, controls and moratoria of any nature. 
SECTION 7. Privileges for communications 
The official communications of the Bank shall be accorded by each 
member the same treatment that it accords to the official communica-
tions of other members. 
SECTION 8. Immunities and priviLeges of officers and empLoyees 
All governors, executive directors, alternates, officers and 
employees of the Bank 
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts 
performed by them in their official capacity except when the 
Bank waives this immunity; 
(ii) not being local nationals, shall be accorded the same 
immunities from immigration restrictions, alien registration 
requirements and national service obligations and the same faci-
lities as regards exchange restrictions as are accorded by mem-
bers to the representatives, officials, and employees of compar-
able rank of other members; 
(iii) shall be granted the same treatment in respect of tra-
velling facilities as is accorded by members to representatives, 
officials and employees of comparable rank of other members. 
SECTION 9. Immunities from taxation 
(a) The Bank, its assets, property, income and its operations and 
transactions authorised by this Agreement, shall be immune from all 
taxation and from all customs duties. The Bank shall also be immune 

I2 
from liability for the collection or payment of any tax or duty. 
(b) No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emolu-
ments paid by the Bank to executive directors, alternates, officials or 
employees of the Bank who are not local citizens, local subjects, or 
other local nationals. 
(c) No taxation of any kind shell be levied on any obligation or 
security issued by the Bank (including any dividend or interest 
thereon) by whomsoever held 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security 
solely because it is issued by the Bank; or 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the 
place or currency in which it is issued, made payable or paid, or 
the location of any office or place of business maintained by the 
Bank. 
(d) No taxation of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or 
security guaranteed by the Bank (including any dividend or interest 
thereon) by whomsoever held 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security 
solely because it is guaranteed by the Bank; or 
(i.i) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is th~ 
location of any office or place of business maintained by the 
Bank. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Ini.ernational Monetary Fund and Bank 
Ordinance, 1945. 
Tbe President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
article 117 and clause (I) of anicle 274 of the Constitution 
of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, thee introduction 
and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morar}i Desai, Minister of Finance.) 