10K SABRA 
OORR I GEN D\. 
to 
'mE LEVY SUGAR PRICE EQJALlSATION FUND (AMENIMENT) 
BILL, '19~4 • . , 
(TO lelAs intrOduced in 1ok'sabha) 
1. Page 1,-
against line 19, in the marginal ci tation,. 
for "1 of 1955." ~ "1" of 1955." 
2. Page 2, line 34,~ 
.. 
!.cl:. "extend" ~ "extent" 
3. Pa~e " line 12,-
o.m1i "as" 
4. Page 11,-
.. 
aga1ns~ section 13, insert the marginal heading,-
''P enal tie s. " 
NEW DELHI; 
Maya .1,84 

31 of 1978. 5 
to 
As IN'l'RODUCI!ID IN LoK SABHA ON 
.. Ii- . ~ 
. BiD ~o. 51 of 1984 
THE LEVY SUGAR PRICE EQUALISATlON FUND (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1984 
A 
BILL 
to ame1~d the Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976. 
BJ. it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-::- i __ ' , .......... ... 
1. This Act may be called the Levy Sugar Price Equalisation ~'und 
(Amendment) Act, ,1984. _'_' -.'~_: __ I _J..1. 
2. In section 2 of the Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),-
(a) in clause (b), the following e~lanation shall be inserted 
and shall be deemed always to have been inserted,namely:-
"E~lanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declar ... 
ed that wheJe in relation to levy sugar of any grade sOld by 
any prQ<iuctlr, the producer has realised towards duties of excise 
with respect to such sugar any amount in excess of the amount 
payable by way of such duties~. such excess ,shall also be deemed 
to be excess realisation within the meaning of this clause;"; 
(b) for clause (e), the following claUBe shall be substituted and 
shalf be deemed always to have been substituted, namely:-
, (e) "levy sugar" rneans' the sugar requisitioned by the 
Ct:lltral Government under clause, (f) of sub-~tion (Z) of 
'section' a of the. Essential Commodities Act. 1955.'. 
Short 
title. 
Amend-
ment of 
.ection 2: 

So' Inaection 3 of the principal Act.-
(0) in sub-section (2), in the epening portion, for the wOlda. 
brackets and figure "provided in sub-section ,(4) ... , the 'W'Ol'dI 
brackets and figure I!provided in sub-section ,(5)'t &hall be subStituted; 
,(b) in I)Llb-section ($) ,-
(i) in the opening portion, for the words, brackets and fiBu.re 
"provided in sub-section (4) ", the words, brackets and llg11~e 
"provided in sub-section (5)" shall ~ substituted; 
; 
.(ii) the following proviso shall be inJerted at the end, 
namely:- 10 
"Provided that-
,(0) the interest due on so much of any amount of 
any excess realisatlon' made before the date of commence-
ment of the Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund (Am-
endment) Act, 1984, as' is not credited to the FWld 15 
together with interest at the aforesatQ nht,: ul twelve 
and Ii balf per cent per annwn before the expiry of sixty' 
days from th~ ciate of such commencement; and 
(b) the interest due on so much of, the amount of 
any exce~ realisation made on or after the date of IUch 10 
commencement as is not. credited tQ the i'und 
together witt interest at the aforesaid rate of twelve 
and a half per cent. per annum within sixty days from 
the date on which such amount was realised, 
shall be at the rate 01 fifteen per cent. per annum from the 15 
date on which such amount was realisoo by the producer."i 
(c) sub-section (4) shall be omitted; 
(d) in sub-section (5) ,-
, ,. 
(i) in the opening portion, for the words, brackets and flaure 
"interim order referred to in sub-section (4) ", the words "interim 80 
order made by any court, whether before or after the couunence-
ment of this Act" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in the concluding portion, for the words lIor in &Dr. 
court of appeal or revision, credit such amount, to the extend It 
represents any excess realisation, to the Fund", the followiJli 35 
ahall be substituted, namely:- . 
I 
Provided tbat-
(i) the intere&t dae on so much of such amount as 
wd's realised before the 'date of cO~Wlcement of the 45 

5 
10 
'5 
10 
35 
45 
a 
Levy Sugar Price EquaUsation Fund (Amendment) .Act. 
1984 and is not credited to the Fund together with tnt. 
rest at the aforesaid rate of twelve and a half per.cent. 
per annum before the expiry of sixty days from th. date 
of. such commencement, and 
(ii) the interest due Oil so much of such amount as 
is realised after such commencement and not credlted 
to the Fund together with interest at the aforesaid rate 
of twelve and a half per cent. per annum within sixty 
c:Jays from the date on which such amount was realised. 
shall be at the rate of fifteen per cent. per anntml from the 
date on which such amount was realised by the producer."; 
(f!) after sub-section (5), the fonowing sub-section shan be inSert.. 
ed and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:-
"(SA) Notwithstanding anyth!ng contained b.. SUb-sectloll 
(5), the interest payable on the amount of any excess l"9alisatioll 
required to be credited· to the Fund under that su1).sectfon ill 
respect of any Period during which such amount was by reason 
of any order of any court held by the producer with ant other 
person or with any court, Government, bani or other authority 
referred to in clause (a) of that sub-section shall.be the fnterest 
which act.ually accrued on such amount in respect of such perfod. "; 
(f) after sub-sectfon (SA) as so inserted, the fonowlng sub-
seetions shall be inserted, namely:-
j (8)' Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (5), 
any amount r~presellting the difference between the controlled 
price and the interim price allowed by the court which-
(4) is held by any producer with any other per190n or 
with any court, Government, bank or other authority refer-
red to in clause (4) of that sub-section, or . 
(b) is under the cover of any guarantee referred to in 
clause (b) of that sub-section, 
shall. as soon as may be after the final disposal of the proceedings 
of the court aforesaid, b~ credited, to the extent such amount 
represents excess fealisation togeth~r with the intereet, if any, 
which has accrued thereon or been ~aranleed in respect thereof. 
to the FllDd. by such other person. the court, Government, bank 
or other authority aforesaid or. as the case may be, by the bank 
or other person furnishing such guarantee and the amount f;O 
credited shall be set off against the amount (including interest) 
. required to be credited by the producer under sub?section (5). 
(SC) The p~ovisions of sub-section (58) shlll1 npply in 
relation to every amount representing the difference between the 
controlled price and the interim price allowed by the court which. 
immediately before . the commencement of the L"!Yy Sugar Price 
Equalisation Fund (Amendment) Act. 1984-
(~ is held by any producer with any other person or 
with any court, Government, bank or other authorlty m'!n-
tioned in clause (a) of that sulrsection, or 

Amend.-
ment of 
aeetion ~. 
Amend. 
ment of 
il4Ction 6. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 11: 
4 
(b) is :under the cover of any guaran~ee mentioned in 
clause (b) of that'Su\)..section, 
notwithstanding that the final disposal' of the proceedings of the 
.eourt aforesaid took place before such commencement and for 
this purpose the reference in that sub-section to "final disposal ~ 
of the proceedings of the court" shall be construed as 'a reference " 
to such commencement. . 
(5D) Where any amount is credited to the Fund under sub-
section ($B), such. crediting shall,-
(a) in a C8Be faUil\g under clause· (a) of that sub-section, 10 
'operate as th~ discharge of the liability in relation to such 
amount of tbe person, court, Government, bank or other 
'authority so crediting the amount; . 
(b) in a case fallinJ;! under clause (b) of that sub-sec-
\ion, have effect as if it' had been made in accordance with 15 
the guarantee /riven by the bank or other person crediting. 
,the amount and for this p~rpose such guarantee shall be 
deemed to have provided for such crediting.'. 
.t. In . Beetion Ii of the principal Act, for the words "the produaer by 
whom surh amount is credited", .the words "the producer concerned" 20 
shall be substituted. 
5. In section 6 of ·the principal Act,-
(a) in Sub-section (1), in the proviso,-
(i) in claus~ (b), the word "or" shall be inserted at the end 
and shall be deemed always to have been inserted; ~5 
(ii) after clause (b). thp fonowin~ clause shall be inserted 
and shall be de'!!med always to hav{'! been inserted. namely:-
tc (c) beinlr a oerson who i'!!not a wholesale dealer or a 
retail aealel'. had l')8!1sed 0:0 the incidence of such 'excess over 
th~ control1P.ti or fail." nricp. 'of levy su~aT to anvother person go 
as part of the -Once of anv llrdduct in the manufacture of 
which such sU~ar has been URed ot'. A'S the ~A~e mav be. to 
the consumer by whom the pri('e of such Stt!!At' wa~ paid."; 
(b) In mb·sectioq (3). for fhl' worn" ''e~~ ""I11i~tton mqde 
frOnt 'hfm". fbI" worn" ""~~~4/ ,... .. lI!118t1on m ..... fton", hem tOP,0''h,.r 35 
. witlt int .. rPrl n,. anv) fhf>1'OOn (TPtfife" tn t'hp Fund" ~"Qn be mbstl. 
fnf .. t1 Rnd ",haD be deemed :Illwl1vS til 'hltVl' hP ...... q.~ff"tet1. 
R. Tn sPction 11 of the nrincioa1 Act. for the words "anv .excess realisa~ 
tion~ ma~(' bv h;m or :lntr '[lart thereof. such excess realisations or. such 
part~'. thp words. "an" ex('p~~ reaUsfltion made bv him, or any interest 40 
r.lue on such excess reali~a1ion or any oart of such excess realisation or 
interest. such. exces~ ·realisation or such interest or . such' nart" shall be 
substituted and ~hall be d~med always to hnv~ oeen substituted. 

7. In section 13 of the principal Act, in suh-section (1) ,in clause (II), 
after the words "any excess realisations made by him or any j>art thereof", 
the words "any excess realisation made by him or any in~erest due on 
such excess realisation or any part of -such excess realisation or interest" 
5 shall be substituted. 
8. (1) Notwithstat)ding any judgment,· decree dr order of any court, 
tribunal or other authority, any thing or action done or taken or pur-
porting to have been done or taken under the proVisions of. the principal 
Act before the commencement of this Act shall, for all JKl:l'POse8, be 
JO deemed to be, and to have aiways been, as validly ana eft'ectiv'ely done or 
taken a!'l if the amendments made to the principal Act by section 2, clause 
(e) of section 3, section 5 and section 6 had been in force at all material 
times. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or 
15 omission on the part of any person shall be punishable as an offence 
which would not have b~n so punishable if the provisions of section 2, 
clause (e) of section 3. section 5, section 6 and sub-section (1) of this 
flection had not come into force. . 
Amend. 
ment ot 
section 13, 
.. Valida-
tion'and 
saving. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ANI? REASONS 
The follow.ing are the important amendments which the Bill seeks 
t,o make in the Act: - . 
(a) The definition of "extess realisation" is being amended with 
retrospective effect to spell out expressly that excess realisation 
includes not only the excess price charged by the producer but also 
any amount charged by the pfooucer by way of duties of excise in 
excess of the amount payable by way of such duties [!'ide claUse 
2 (a) of the Bill]. 
(b) The definition of "levY sugar" contained in section 2 of the 
Act incorporates by reference the meaning assigned to that expres-
sion as in the Levy Sugar Supply (Control) Order, 19'12. It is proposed 
to make the definition s~lf-contained with retrospective effect [vide 
clause 2 (b) of the Bill]. 
(c) With a view to securing 8pe~y crediting of excess rea1i~ 
&ation to the Fund, the existing rate of interest of 12+ per cent. per 
annum is being allowed only in cases where the excess reallsatiolUl 
are deposited within the prescribed period of sfxty days from the 
date of excess realisation or. IU'I the case may be, the final disposal 
of a case by a court. In cases where the excess T'!alisations are not 
credited to the Fund within this period. provision is ~nl! made for 
chargiDJ~ interest at the higher rate of 15 per cent. per annum. The 
con~tonal rate of interest of 12+ per cent. per annum WOUld, 
h.owoever, apply for a period of sixty days from the commencement 
of the proposed legislation in respeet of excess realisations made 
before such Commencement rvide clause 3 (b) (ii) 'lid c}aUB~ S(d) (ti)' 
of the Bill. It is also bein~provided witli rAroSPeCtive effect 
that in respect of any period durincr which any excess realisation 
iB. by reason of any ord~ of court. held hv the Droducer wit.h ahv 
other penon 01" a bank or the Government. the nroducer will b~ liable 
to pay bv way of interest onlv sur.h amol1"'t. if anv. aR haR accrued 
bv way of interest in respect of such period [vide claus,! 3(e) of the 
Bil11. 
(d) Accordin~ to 81lb-section. (4) of seetio,., ~ of the Ad. durin~ 
the oendt"TIcY nf T>~dinItR in anv court ~hanenPinlt the nl'i,.e 
fixatinn order. it shall not be necesRarv for the t)l'orlu"~" to cTP.rlft 
the difference between the controlled nrice a1'l~ the hi~her nrice 
charlZed to the Fund unless the court which mad.,. the interim order 
so directs. This provision is merelv declaratory in nature. How-
ever. all ar~ts have been advanced on the basis of this nrovf-
slon that even after the disposal of the nroceedlnsrs. the exC!esB 
rea1isa~on as d4)termined in accordance with the deci~fon of the 
eourt need not be credited to the Fund unlesq a specific order to 
that ~ffect is made bv that court, it is nroposed to omit the sub-
section [vide sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of clause '3 of the Bill} 
. 6 

1 . 
(e) At present, the amounl representi,ng excess realisations held 
by a producer ,with a third party by virtue of an order of court can-
not be credited to the J!'und dlrectly by such third partY. as the lia-
bility is cast on the producer to credit to the Fund the excess reali-
sations. With a view to securing speedy credit.ng of such amounts 
to the Fund (whiCh inCidentally would also help the producers con-
cerned in reducing their liabillty towards interest) I provision is being 
made for crediting of such amounts by such third parties directly to 
the !t'und [vide sub-clause (f) of clause 3 of the BIll.] 
(f) Section 6 of the Act which provides for refund of excess 
reahsation to buyers of levy sugar is intended to be available only 
to such buyers as had not passed on the incidence of ex~s price to 
other persons. It is proposed to make this intention clear with retroe-
pective e1fect by providing that refund will not be allowed under 
the section to buyers of levy sugar who are not dealers but who had 
passed on the incidence of tile excess price as part of the price of any 
product in the manufacture of whi<:h the levy sugar purchased by 
them had been used or, as the case may be; to the consumer by whom 
the price of such sugar was paid. The section is also being amended 
"with retrospective effect to provjde that refund would be "made under 
the section not only of excess realisation but also of the interest, if 
any, thereon which has been credited to the Fund [vide clause :; of 
theBWl 
(g) Section 11 of the Act which provides for recovery of excess 
realisation as arrea.rs of land revenue is being amended to provide that 
interest on excess realisations which is required to be credited to the 
Fund can also be recovered in the same manner [vide clause 6 of the 
BW]. 
(h) Section 13 of the Act is being amended to provide for 
punishment for default in crediting to the Fund any interest on excess 
realisation [vide clause 7 of the Bill]. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
N:sw DELHI; 
The 5th May, 1984. 
BHAGWAT JHA AZAD. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1-lO/76..sPF, dated the 7th May, 1984 from ~~ 
Bhagwat Jha Azad, Minister of State of the Ministry of Food and Civil 
Supplies to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Levy s~gar Price Equalisation Fund (Amendment) Bill, 1~ 
recommends the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under article 
117 (1) of the Constitution. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANOUM' 
Sub-clause (b) of clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 6 of the 
Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976 to provide for the refund 
under that section of interest on excess realisations credited to the Fund. 
Such refund will be ordinarily made from the Fund itself and would not, 
therefore, involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
However, when the amount standing to 'the credit of the Fund is not suffi-
cient to enable the making of refund from the Fund itself, the refund will 
have to be made from the Central Revenues. Further, in the event of 
the dissolution of the Fund under section 12 of the Act, the amounts lying, 
to the credit of the Fund will have to be credited to the Central Revenues 
aI}.d any cla,ims for refund thereafter will have to be made from out of 
the Central Revenues. In these contingenci~, expenditure would be 
involved· from the Consolidated Fulld of India. As such contingencies 
. would be exceptional, it is not possible to estimate th~ expenditure, if 
any, which may be involved by way of refund from the Central Revenu~. 
The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure of 
a recurring or non-recurring nature. 
·8 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The Bill does not contain any specific provision for the delegation of 
legislative power. However, clause5(b) of the Bill, which seeks to 
amend section 6 of the Act relating to refund so as to provide also for 
refund of interest on excess realisations, will have the effect of exPand-
ing the scope of clause (b) of sub-:section (2) of section 16 of the Act 
relating to the power to make rules in respect of the form in which an 
application for refund will be made. As this relates only to a matter of 
detail, the delegation of additional legislative power involved is of a 
Donnal character. ': :'j:'"1 
•• 
9 

Defini-
tions. 
Levy 
Sugar 
Price 
Equalisa-
tion 
Fund. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE LEVY SUGAR PRICE EQUALISATIONFuN~ ACT, 1976 
(31 OF 1976) 
* * ... * 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "controlled price" means the price of the relevant grade of 
levy sugar, determined from time to time under sub-section (3C) of 
section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, or under the Defence 10 of 1955. 
and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971. in relation to any year of 
production; 
• ... ... • 
(e) "levy sugar" has the meaning assigned to it in the Levy 
Sugar Supply {Control) Order, 1972, published with the Order of 
the Government of lndia, in the late Ministry of Agri(:ulture 
(Department of Food), No. GSR' 310,(E) lEss. Com.ISugar, dated the 
15th June, 1972; 
• • • ... • 
3.(1) * * • * • 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (4), there shall be 
credited to the Fund, in such manner as may be prescribed.-
(a) the amounts representing all excess realisations made by the 
producers, irrespective of whether such excess realisations were made 
be(ore or after the commencement' of this Act; 
• • • 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (4), 
shall,-
• 
every producer 
'!' "I 
(a) in the case of an excess realisation made before the com-
mencement of this Act, within thirty days from such commencement, 
(b) in the case of an excess realisation made after such com-
mencement, within thirty days from the date on which such eXCe5s· 
realisation was made, 
credit to the ,Fund, the amount repre~nting such excess realisations, 
together with interest due thereon at the rate of twelve and a half per 
cent. per annum, from the date' on which such amount was realised by 
him. 
(~) Where, by virtue of any interim order made by any court, whe-
ther before or after the commencement of this Act-. . ' 
(a) amounts representing the difference between the controlled 
price and price allowed by any court by an order made in this behalf, 
have been, or are required to be,- . 
(i) kept with the producer himself, or 
(ii) kept deposited with, or in the custody of, any court, or 
(iii) kept deposited with, or in the custody of, any Govern-
ment, bank, authority or other person; or 
(b) any, amount in excess of the controlled price has been col .. 
lected and kept by the producer under the cover of any guarantee 
given in pursuance of such order, 
10 ;'1 I. ~. ' 
.' ... t 

II 
it shall not be necessary to credit such amounts ~o the Fund so long as 
the court which pa~sed the interim otder does not so direct. 
(5) Where, in pursuance of an interim order referred to in sub-section 
(4) any amount representing the difference between the controlled price 
and the interim price, allowed by the court is,-
(a) held by any producer either with himself or with any ot'lier 
person or with any court, Government, bank or other authority, or 
(b) collected. and kept by the producer under the cover of any 
guarantee, 
such producer shall, on the final disposal of. the proceedings of the court 
aforesaid, or in any court of appeal or revision, credit such amount, to the 
extent it represents any excess realisation, to the Fund. 
'" '" '" '" 5. Where any amount is credited to the Fund under section 3, the 
producer by whom such amount is credited shall, upon such' crediting, be 
discharged from the liability to make repayment of such amounts to the 
. persons entitled thereto and such discharge from liability to make repay-
ment shall be without any prejudice to any penalty which may be im-
posed on such producer for each ex~ess realisation made by him. 
", 
6. (1) Where any amount is credited to the Fund, a refund sruin be 
made from the Fund to the buyer of levy sugar from whom any excess 
rea]j~ation was made by the producer or dealer: .' 
Provided that no buyer shall be entitled to claim a r,fund under this 
su b-section if he,-
'" '" '" '" 
(b) being a retail dealer, had passed on the incidence of such . 
excess over the controlled or fair price of levy sugar to the consumer 
by whom the price of such sugar was paid . 
'" • • '" 
(3)The Central Government shall, if satisfied, on a scrutiny of the 
claim made under sub-section (1), that an excess realisation was made. 
frem the . claimant direct that re~und be made from the Fund to the 
claimant to the extent Qf the excess realisation made from him: 
Provided that if the amount standing to the credit of the Fund is not 
sufficient to enable the Central Gove.mment to make the refund, . sU'ch 
refund shall be made from the Central revenues. 
• • • • 
11. If any producer makes any default in crediting to the Fund any 
eXCE:ES realisations made by him or any part thereof, such excess realisa-
tions or such part, as the case may be, shall be recoveiabie by. the Cen-
tral Government from such producer as an arrear of land revenue. 
• • '" • • 
13. (1) If any producer- , 
(a)· make any default In creditIng to the Fund any excess reali· 
satio.D.S made by him or any- part thereof, or 
• 110 ltI • • 
Discharge 
ot per-
sons of 
liability 
In respect 
of amounts 
credited to 
thft Fund. 
Right of 
buyer to 
claim 
refund. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to· 
recover 
excess 
rl'alisa-
dons as 
arrears 
of land 
revenue. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976 . 
" 
I •• , 
• ---
0,1', (Shri BhagWat Jha Azad, 
Minister of State of the Ministry 
of Food and Civil Supplies.) 