As Dft'IIODUC!BD IN LOJt SABRA 0If 
.\. \J N\~fn 
...... I1 .. U77 
THE CARDAMOM (AMENDMEN'l') BILL, 107'1 
.A 
~ 
to 4mend the Card4mom. Act, 1985. 
BE it enacted by P8l"liament in the Twenty-eightb· Ye8l" of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Cardamom (Amendtne~t). Ac?: 18'1'7. Short 
title. 
42 of 1115. Z. In section 14 o£ the Cardamom Act, 1965 (hereinafter referred to Amend-
S as the principal' Act), in sub-section (1), f.or the words "Dot exceeding ment of 
two per cent ad valorem", the words "not exceedlng ftve ~r cent. aectIon 14. 
ad valorem'" shall be substituted. 
3. In seCtiOD 33 of the principal Act, in SUb-llectiOD (3), for the words 
"in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the seulon in 
10 which it is so laid or the session immediately followin,", t~ words "in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the sen10n 
immediately following the session or the successive sess101l8 aforesaid" 
shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment til 
section 33. 

'r :"j • : ':'1'" :.~~. ' ....... , 
STATEMENT OF OBJECts AND REASONS 
The Cardamom Act, 1965, provides for the development of the carda-
mom industry, under the control of the Union. Under sub-section (1) of 
section 14 of the Act, a cess on all cardamom exported from India is 
leviable at a rate not exceeding two per cent. ad vAlOrem, as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Offtcial Gazette, fix. A notifica-
tion was issued by the Central Government on the 5th March, 1966 fixing 
the rate of cess on cardamom exports at one per cent. ad ualorem. To 
meet the expenditure on increased development activities of the Carda-
mom Board, the rate of cess was increased from the 1st April. 1969 from 
one per cent. to two per cent. ad vGlorem. 
2. The expenditure incurred by the Cardamom BoaI'd during the re-
cent years has been steadily increasing due to the Introduction of deve-
lopment schemes for the betterment of the cardamom plantation indus-
try. The increased activities of the Board have caused an imbalance 
in the financial position of the Board since the fund from which the 
Board is financed cannot meet its gradually increasing expenditure on 
its. ~!4>IlW-:Jl~: ;f!hemes. It is, therefore, proposed to increase the 
maxim,urn rate of cess ~rom two per cent. to five per cent. ad valore", 
by amending auttabl)r .• ab.astkm ULof leqtioft 14 of ~e Act. , ' . 
3. Opportunity is being taken to ~ify 8ub-section (3) of section 33 
of the Act relating to laying of rules before Parliament to bring it in COb-
formity with the recommendation of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation. 
-II.: Tb~ BtU '~eelta to IchieYe'the aboVe obj". 
Nnr ,Da.Jnj MOHAN DHARIA. 
•. The iOth jUlie, 1m . 
.. ' 

• 
ANNEXURE 
ErraACTS FROM THE CAltDAMOM AI::r, 1965 
(42 OF 196G) 
• • • • 
14. (1) There shall be levied on all cardamom which is exported, 
a cess for the purposes of this Act at such rate not exceeding two 
per cent. ad valorem as the Central Government may by notification 
in the Ofticial Gazette, fix. -- ---- ' 
• • • • • 
33. (1) • • • • • 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this sec· 
tion shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of. the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately folloWing, both lI9uses agree in making any modi· 
ficatlon in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
madE., the rule shall thereafter have-.eftect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as,·~e ~ may. be; so, ~qwever, that any such modi-
ftcation or annulment shaIl' be without' prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
Imposi. 
tiOD of 
aces. 
on car. 
damom 
exported . 
Power of 
Central 
Govern. 
ment to 
make 
rules. 

,. 
BILL' 
to amend the Cardamom Act" 1985. 
(SJari JloJam DJImiG, 
Min.iate7' of Com.men:e atACl Civil Supplia au Coopet'ation.) 