THE INTER-STATE CORPORATIONS 
BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No.SI of 1957 
TUEINTER-STATE CORPORATIONS BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
t~ provide for the reorganisation of certain corporations func-
tioning in two or more States by virtue of section 109 of ·the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and for matters connected 
therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Inter-State Corporations Act, 1957. Short title. 
2. In this Act, "inter-State corporation" means any body corpo- D Ii .. • e natIOn. S rate constituted under r:ny of the Acts specIfied in the Schedule. and 
functioning in two or more States by virtue of section 109 of the 
of 19~6. State~ Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
3. If it appears to the Government of a State in any part of which'Power of 
an inter-State corporation is functioning that the inter-State corpo- State Govt -. . . emments 0 
10 ration should be reconstituted and reorganised as one or more intra- frame 
State corporations or that it should be dissolved, the State Govern- IChe~ea. 
ment may frame o scheme for such reconstitution and reorganisa-
tton. or weh dissolution, as the case may be, including proposals re-
ganiing the transfer of the assets, rights and liabilities of the inter-
IS State corporatioll to any. other corporations or State Governments 
and the transfer or re-employment of employees of the inter-State 
corporation and forward the scheme to the Central Government. 
.4. (J)Onreeeipt of a scheme forwarded to it under section 3, the Reorgani-
Central Govemment may, after consulting the State Governments latio,? of 
20 CODC(!rned, approve the scheme with or without modifications s7a~m c:~: 
and give effect to the scheme so approved by making such order as rations. 
it thinks fit. 
(2) An order made under sub-section (1) may provide for all 
~r .any of the following mattera, namely:-
25; J;;..... {a) the dissolution ~f the inter-State corporation; 

• 
? 
(b) the reconstitution and reorganisation in any manne.r 
whatsoever of the inter-State corporation including the constI-
tution, where necessary, of new corporations; 
(c) the area in respect of which the reconstituted ~orpora-
tion or new corporation shall function and operate; 5 
(d) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights 
and liabilities of the inter-State corporation (including the 
rights and liabilities under any contract made by it) to any 
other corporations or State Governments and the terms and 
conditions of such transfer; 10 
(e) the substitution of any such transferee for the inter-
State corporation, or the addition of any such transferee, as a 
party to any legal proceeding to which the inter-State cor-
poration is a party; and the transfer of any proceedings pend-
ing before the inter-State corporation to any such transferee; IS 
(f) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the 
inter-State corporation to, or by, any such -transferee. and 
subject to the provisions of section 111 of the States Reorgani-. 
sation Act, 1956, the terms and conditions of service applicable 
to such employees after such transfer or re-employment; 
(g) the adaptations or modifications of the Act under which 
the inter-State corporation was constituted, whether by way 
of .repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient to 
. give effect to the approved scheme; 
20 
(h) such incidental, consequential and supplementary 2!S 
matters as may be necessary to give effect to the approved 
scheme. 
(3) Where an order is made under this section transferring the 
assets, tights and liabilities of any inter-State corporation, then, 
31 or 19.56. 
by virtue of that order, such assets, rights and liabilities of the 30 
inter-State corporation shall vest in, and be the assets, rights and 
liabilities of, the transferee. 
(4) Every order made under this section shall be published in 
the Official Gazette and the Act under which the inter-State 
corporation was constituted shall have effect subject to the pro- 35 
visions of the order and the adaptations and modifications made 
thereby until altered, repealed .or amended by the competent 
Legislature of a State. • 
(5) Every order made under this section shall be laid before 
each House of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is made. 40 

3 
• 5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Power or 
Gazette, specify in the Schedule any Act under which a body Catra! Go-. ~mmmtro 
corporate constituted for a State is functioning in two or more add to the 
States by virtue of section 109 of the States Reorganisation Act, Schedule. 
37 ol 1956. S 1956, and on the issue of such notification, the Schedule shall be 
deemed to be amended by the inclusion of the said Act therein. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 2 and 5) 
1. The Bombay Medical Practitioners Act, 1938 (Bom. XXVI of 
10 ·1938). 
2. The Bombay Secondary School Certificate Examination Act, 
1948 (Bom. XLIX of 1948). 
3. The Bombay Housing Board Act, 1948 (Bom. LXIX of 1948). 
4. The Bombay Khar Lands Act, 1948 (Bom. LXXII of 1948). 
15 5. The Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 Bom. XXIX of 1950). 
6. The Bombay Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1953 (Born. XL of 
1953). 
7. The Bombay Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Act, 1954 
(Bom. XIV of 1954). 
20 8. The Bombay Village Industries Act, 1954 (Bom. XLI of 1954). 
9. The Hyderabad Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors' Regis-
tration Act, 1951 (Hyd. XIX of 1951). 
10. The Hyderabad Khadi and Village Industries Board Act, 
1955 (Hyd. XII of 1955). 
2, 11. Tile Madhya Pradesh Bhudan Yagna Act. 1953 (M.P. XV of 
1953) . 
• 

• 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
As a result of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, a number of'· 
corporate bodies constituted under State Acts before the commence-
ment of that Act (i.e., the 1st November, 1956) for the purposes of 
individual States found themselves transformed into inter-State 
corporations on that date. To meet the situation, it was provided in 
section 109 of the States Reorganisation Act that such a corporation 
shall continue to function and operate in those areas In respect of 
which it was functioning and operating immediately before 
1st November, 1956, subject to the directions of the Central Govern-
. 'ment, until other provision is made by law in respect of that ~orpora­
tion. This was only intended to be a transitional provision. 
2. It is proposed in this Bill to make a general provision for the 
reorganisation of any such inter-State corporation as one or more 
intra-State corporations at the instance of any of the State Govern-
ments concerned in that corporation. The State GovEtrnment would 
frame a scheme for the purpose, providing for the division of the 
assets and liabilities of the corporation, the transfer or re-employ-
.l1lent of its empl~yees and other incidental matters. The Central 
Government after consulting the other State Governments con-
cerned would give effect to the scheme by making a comprehensive 
order and· notifying it in the Official ·Gazette. 
"3. Eleven State. Acts are specified in the Schedule to the Bill on 
the basis of information supplied by the State Governments. Since 
it is possible that this list may not be complete, it is proposed in 
clause' 5 of the Bill to empower the Central Government to include 
in the Schedule by means of a notification any other State Act under 
.which a corporate body is now functioning in more than one State as~: . 
a result of the States Reorganisation Act . 
• 
NEW DELHI; A. K. SEN. 
The 18th July, 1957. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
an order to give effect to a scheme for the reorganisation of any 
inter-State corporation at the instance of any of the State Govern-
ments concerned in such corporation. The State Government would 
frame a scheme for the purpose and the Central Government, after 
consulting the other State Governments concerned, would give effect 
to the scheme by making an order and notifying it in the Official 
Gazette. Having regard to the cir-cumstances of the case, the dele-
gation of legislative power is of "a normal character. Moreover, 
every order to" be made ,under cia1,Jse 4 when enacted shall"be,l~id 
before both Houses of Parliament. " 
5 ' . . ~ 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the reorganisation of certain corporations func-
tioning in two or more States by virtue of section 109 of 
the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and for matters con-
nected therewith. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister oj Law.) 