As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
, . !.HJ~,19~6 
Bill No. 51 of 1966 
INAL LAW AMENDMENT (AMENDING) BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Criminal Law Amendment Act. 1952. 
, r' 
,-it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of t.he 
of India as follows:-
. Act may be called the Criminal Law Amendment (Amen- Short 
1966. title. 
iub-section (3A) of section 8 of the Criminal Law Amend-Amend_ 
, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the ment of 
~ figures "section 350". the words and figures "sections 350 section 8. 
" ' shall be substituted. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 11. 
:'vlilitary, 
na\'a1 and 
.. ir force 
laws not 
to be 
af'fedpd. 
Valida-
tion and 
;ndem-
nity. 
Pending 
ca~es. 
2 
~ 
3. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shan: 
be inserted, and shall be deemed always to have been insert
J' 
namely:- . 
"11. (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exe ". 
cisable by, or the procedure applicable to, any court or 0 \ 
authority under any military, naval or air force law. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
for the purposes of any such law as is referred to in sUn_gAI'T 
(1), the court of the special Judge shall be deemed to be a 
of ordinary criminal justice.". 
4. No trial or other proceeding held or taken before, and 
sentence passed by a court-martial or any other authority under 
military, naval or air force law before the 30th day of June, 
shall be called in question in any court merely on the ground 
the court-martial or other authority had no jurisdiction by virtue 
the provisions of the principal Act, and all such trials, 
and sentences shall, notwithstanding any judgment or order of 
court, be as valid and operative as if they had been held, taken 
passed in accordance with law; and accordingly no suit or 
legal proceeding shall be maintained or continued against 
person whatever on the ground that any such trial, proceeding. 
sentence was not held, tak~n or passed in accordance with law. 
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in 
principal Act as amended by this Act,-
(a) cases pending immediately before the 30th day of 
1966, before a special Judge in 'which one or more persons 
ject to military, naval or air force law is or are charged 
and tried for an offence under the principal Act together 
any other person or p~rsons not so subject. and 
(b) cases pending immediately before the said date 
a special Judge in which one or more persons subject to 
naval or air force law is or are alone charged with and tried 
an offence under the principal Act and charges haye a] 
been framed against such person or persons. 
shall be tried and disposed of by the special Judge. 
(2) Where in any case pending immediately before the 30th 
of June, 1966, before a special Judge. one or more persons sU 
to military. naval or air force law is or are alone charged with 
tried for an offence under the principal Act and charges have 
been framed against such person or persons. before the said 

3 
where. on appeal or on revision against any sentence passed by a 
special Judge in any case in which one or more persons so subject 
was or were alone tried, the appellate court has directed that such 
person or persons be retried and on such retrial charges have not 
been framed against such person or persons before the said date, 
then, in either case, the special Judge shall follow the procedure 
laid down in section 549 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1898, 
as if the special Judge were a Magistrate. 
, 
6. (1) The Criminal Law Amendment (Amendment) Ordinance, Repeal 
1966, is hereby repealed. and 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance or under the principal Act as amend-
ed by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or 
taken under this Act or under the principal Act as amended by this 
Act as if this Act had commenced on the 30th day of June, 1966. 
saving, 

',' I,' 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Criminal Law 
ment Act. 1952, the offences specified in sub-section (1) of sectfon' 
of that Act are triable by special Judges only. In Major E. G. 
ll. State of Bombay (AIR 1961 S. C. 1762). it has been held by , 
Supreme Court that in view of the language of section 7 of the 
minal Law Amendment Act, 1 w.>2 , the special Judge has exclusive' 
jurisdiction to try any such offence and the mere fact that any such 
offence might also be an utfence under the Army Act would not 
. li l 
of any relevance. ' . 
2. The military authorities have been, however, proceeding on 
assumption that the jurisdiction in respect of these offences COIDftl1t~ 
ted by military personnel is concurrently exercisable by the special' 
Judge and courts-martial and accordingly a number of cases ' ' 
been tried by courts-martial and other military authorities and 
a good number is pending before them. 
3. It was therefore considered necessary and expedient to amend 
the Criminal Law Amendment Act. 1952. so as to insert a new section 
therein (with retrospective effect from the commencement of the 
Act) to save the jurisdiction exercisable by a court-martial or other ~ 
authority under the military. naval or air force laws and to validatei 
the trials held, proceedings take, n and sentences passed by courts-,~' 
martial and other competent authorities under these laws and for .' 
this purpose, the Criminal Law Amendment - (Amendment) Bill, ',~ 
1965, was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 3rd December, 1965. ;. 
As the Bill could not be passed during the Budget Session of Parlia- :, 1 ment, it was considered that the trials pending before courts-martial ,,{ 
'j 
and other competent military authorities should be allowed to pro- .J 
ceed without any further delay in fairness to the affected service 
personnel, and it accordingly became necessary to have the provi-
sions proposed in the Bill promulgated in the form of an Ordinance, 
namely, the Criminal Law Amendment (Amendment) Ordinance, 
1966 (7 of 1966), promulgated by the President on the 30th June. 
1966. While promulgating the Ordinaoce, opportunity was taken to 
incorporate therein a suitable saving provision with respect to cer-
tain cases pending. immediately before the commencement of the 
Ordinance, before the special Judges. 
4. The Present Bill seek::: to replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; J AISUKHLAL HATH!. 
The 22nd July. ]960. 

8. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE CRIMINAL LAW AME~DMENI ACT. 1952 
(46 OF 1952) 
* * * * 
* * • • Procedure 
(3A) 'In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of and 
the provisions contained in sub-section (3), the provisions of section powers of 
350 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall, so far as may be, ~e:. 
apply to the proceedings before a special Judge, and for the purposes 
of the said provisions a special Judge shall be deemed to be a Magis-
trate. 
• * * • • 
!.: I' ;~J .. :~." ,.i; . i· I": ~ ~ 
~~ ~ , 
i.~··l' j . 
" 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952. 
(ShriJai Sukh La! Halhi, 
;.\1inister of State in the 
Minislry of Home Affairs) 