1
Bill No. 51 of  2018
Short title,
extent
and
commencement.
THE PREVENTION OF ENFORCED DISAPPEARANCE BILL, 2018
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide punishment for enforced disappearance of any person by public servants or
any person subjecting a person to an enforced disappearance with the consent or
acquiescence of any public servant and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
WHEREAS India is a signatory to the United Nations International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance:
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to ratify the said Convention and to provide
for more effective implementation.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Enforced Disappearance Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) words and expressions used but not defined shall have the same meanings
respectively assigned to them in the Indian Penal Code, 1860; and
(b) any reference to any enactment or any provision thereof shall in any area in which
such enactment or provision is not in force be construed as a reference to the corresponding
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law if any, if force in that area.
3. Whoever, being a public servant or being abetted by a public servant or with the
consent or acquiescence of a public servant, intentionally does any act which deprives any
person of his liberty, including arrest, detention, or abduction, which is followed  by a refusal
to acknowledge such deprivation of liberty or concealment of the fate or whereabouts of the
disappeared person, which place such a person outside the protection of the law is said to
effect an enforced disappearance:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any deprivation of
liberty or arrest or detention as aforementioned caused by any act, which is inflicted in
accordance with any procedure established by law.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, ‘public servant' shall, without prejudice
to section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, also include any person acting in his official capacity
under the Central Government or the State Government.
4. Where the public servant referred to in section 3 or any person abetted by or with
the consent or acquiescence of such public servant, subjects a person to enforced
disappearance for whatever purpose, shall be punishable with imprisonment of either
description for a term  which shall not be  less than three years but which may extend up to
ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
5. Whoever, being a public servant, was aware of or consciously disregarded information
of any enforced disappearance effected by subordinates under his effective authority, and
failed to submit the matter to the competent authority for investigation and prosecution,
shall be punishable for a term which shall not be   less than one year but which may extend
up to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
Enforced
disappearance.
Punishment for
enforced
disappearance.
Punishment for
disregarding
information of
an enforced
disappearance.
45 of 1860
45 of 1860
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
2

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India signed the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance (as drafted by the United Nations General Assembly on 29th June,
2006) on 6th February, 2007. To ratify the Convention, it is necessary to enable legislation to
reflect the definition and punishment for ‘‘enforced disappearance’’, and bring domestic
laws in conformity with the Convention.
2. The legislation fulfils India's commitment to the United Nations to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and to a legal system that offers remedies for human rights
violations by the State.
3. Enforced disappearances are human rights violations which not only cause an
unlawful deprivation of liberty of the individual, but cause psychological, economic and
social distress to the families of the ‘‘disappeared’’ individual who are unaware of the fate of
the person. The legislation recognises, as in the Convention, the ‘‘right of any victim to
know the truth about the circumstances of an enforced disappearance and the fate of the
disappeared person, and the right to freedom to seek, receive and impart information to this
end.’’
4. India's history is marred with violations of human rights and enforced disappearances.
A Human Rights Watch report in 2007 noted the revelation of 6,000 secret cremations by the
police in just one of the erstwhile districts of Punjab. A report by Association of the Parents
of Disappeared Persons indicated that more than 8,000 people have gone missing under
suspicious circumstances in Jammu and Kashmir between 1989 and 2008. As regularly reported,
the incidents are not limited to disturbed areas but affect people of all ages and professions
in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Rajasthan and
Odisha. It is necessary to enable legislation that prevents future enforced disappearances,
and protects the citizens from such crimes.
5. The proposed legislation, inter alia,  defines the expression ‘‘enforced
disappearance’’, and provides punishment for those involved in subjecting an individual to
an enforced disappearance.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH YADA V
February 9, 2018.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide punishment for enforced disappearance of any person by public servants or
any person subjecting a person to an enforced disappearance with the consent of
acquiescence of any public servant, and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4151LS(S3)—19-02-2018.