As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

रब ००

|

8॥ 1४०, 48 of 2001

os
THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2001
By
‘Suri RAMESH CHENNITHALA, M.P.
is
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
|
1. (/) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2001.

7 2. After section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the following section, shall
4. be inserted, ramely:—

“2A. The Central Government shall not withhold its approval under section 2
if the proposals of a State Government or any authority for use of forest land for non-
forest purposes also contains compensatory afforestation schemes.”

Short title,

Insertion of
new section
2A.

Government
not to
withhold
approval if
Proposals
contain
compensatory
afforestation
schemes.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Clearing of forest for non-forest use has always generated controversy. On the one
hand the precious forest has to be preserved in order to maintain the ecological balance and
on the other the developmental requirements have to be met. The forest land may have to be
used for meeting developmental needs in certain circumstances. A large number of |
in various States involving the use of Forest land have either been rejected or are lying
pending with the Central authorities which have seriously hampered the developmental
work.

This problem is crying for solution. Compensatory afforestation is a reasonable solu-
tion. Although, the guidelines issued by the Government stipulates this as one of the
conditions, the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 does not contain any provision in this
regard.

Hence an amendment is necessary in the Act to incorporate a provision regarding
compensatory, afforestation. पु

New हम; RAMESH CHENNITHALA.
June 25, 2001



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE FOREST (Conservation) Act, 1980.

* * * * * * *

2, Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force in
a State, no State Government or ‘other authority shall make, except with the prior approval
of the Central Government, any other directing—

(@ that any reserved forest (within the meaning of the expression “reserved
forest” in any law for the time being in force in that State) or any portion thereof, shall
cease to be reserved;

(ii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be used for any non-forest
purpose.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this section “qon-forest purpose” means the
breaking up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for—

(a) the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices, rubber, palms, oil-bearing plants,
horticultural crops or medicinal plants;

(b) any purpose other than reafforestation,

but do not include any work relating or ancillary to conservation, development and
management of forests and wild life, namely, the establishment of check-posts, fire lines,
wireless communications and construction of fencing, bridges and culverts, dams,
waterholes, trench marks, boundary marks, pipelines or other like purposes.”.

(iii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be assigned by way of
Jease or otherwise to any private person oF to any authority, corporation, agency oF
any other organization not ‘owned, managed or controlled by Government;

(iv) that any forest Jand or any portion thereof may be cleared of trees which
have grown naturally in that land portion for the purpose of using it for
reafforestation.”.

* * * * * *

Restriction on
the dereserva-
tion of forests oF
use of forest
land for non-
forest purpose.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—897LS—07-07-2001.