5 INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

J AUG 2001

Bill No. 51 of 2001,

oe ame

THE ADOPTION OF CHILDREN (REGULATION) BILL, 2001

By
Suet Iopat AHMED Saran, M.P.
rN
BILL
to regulate the adoption of children and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Adoption of Children (Regulation) Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government” means the State Government in case of a State
and the Central Government in all other cases; and

(b) “child” means a child irrespective of his sex who has not attained the age
of eighteen years.

3, No person shall indulge in sale or purchase in any form of 8 child in the country.

‘Short title,
extentand


Punishment.

Over riding
effect of the Act.

Power to make
rules.

2

4.No organization or institution shall indulge in dealing with cither taking or giving
in adoption of children in any form in the country except as provided for in this Act.

5. 0) The appropriate Government shall set up Centre to be known as the Centre
for welfare, rehabilitation and adoption of children in each district of the State,

(ii) The Centre set up under sub-section (/) shall take over all such organizations or
institutions working in connection with welfare, rehabilitation and adoption of children in
that district.

6. (i) Whoever desires to adopt a child shall apply in the manner as may be prescribed
by rules made under this Act to a Centre for adoption of such child,

(ii) Whoever adopts a child shall inform the respective centre about development
and welfare of the adopted child from time to time until such child attains the age of
eighteen years.

71, Whoever violates the provisions of the Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term of not less than six years and with a fine not less than one lakh rupees.

8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other Jaw for the time being force or instrumenv/instruction
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act.

9. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Recently, several cases of sale of children have been reported in newspapers. A
number of non-governmental organizations and institutions, set up for the purpose of
‘welfare and rehabilitation of orphans and helpless children have also reportedly involved
in dealings in children for monetary gains. There is no system of verifying the antecedents
of persons who seek adoption. The loopholes enable child-trafficking in the name of
adoption of children. At present there is no law to effectively tackle sale of children.

It is, therefore, necessary to enact a law to prohibit trafficking of children and
regulate adoption of children.

‘The Bill sceks to achieve the above objectives.

New De.ni, IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
June 21, 2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 provides for setting up of a centre for welfare, rehabilitations and |
of children in cach district of the State. The Central Government will bear expenditure
incurred in respect of Union territories and the State Governments will bear expenditure
incurred in respect of States from their respective funds. The Bill, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, It is estimated that annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees three crore is likely to be involved. ?

‘A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five lakhvis also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

~ Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL
to regulate the adoption of children and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—884LS—10-7-2001.