Short title 
extent and 
commencement.
5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
 Bill No. 51 of 2024
THE AIRFARE REGULATORY BOARD BILL, 2024
By
Shri Shafi Parambil, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Airfare Regulatory Board for monitoring and 
regulation of airfare and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as  
follows:–
1.(1) This Act may be called the Airfare Regulatory Board Act, 2024. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “airline” means all commercial flights operating in the country either on 
domestic or international routes;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(c) “Board” means the Airfare Regulatory Board established under section 3;
(d) “member” means a member of the Board; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official gazette, establish 
a quasi-judicial body to be known as the Airfare Regulatory Board (hereinafter referred 
to as the Board) to exercise the powers conferred on and to perform the functions 
assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by 
the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at New Delhi and the Board may establish 
such offices at other places in the country as it deems necessary for carrying functions under 
this Act.
(4) The Board shall consist of,–
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) two Members,
to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst person of ability and 
integrity and having extensive experience and adequate professional knowledge in the 
domain of civil aviation, consumer affairs, law, economics and public policy in such 
manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The Chairperson and members of the Board shall hold office for such period, not 
exceeding four years as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.
(6) The Central Government may appoint such number of officers and staff 
including experts to the Board as may be required for its efficient functioning. 
(7) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service 
of the Chairperson, member, officers, staff and experts of the Board shall be such as 
may be prescribed.
(8) The Board shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
4.The Board shall,—
(i) function as an apex quasi-judicial authority for regulating and monitoring the 
tariff of all airlines operating in the country;
(ii) design a regulatory environment for commercial airlines keeping into account 
the economic viability of airline operations, cost of operations, reasonable profits, rate 
and value of the services, cost of fuel and changes in existing tax structure; 
(iii) determine an upper limit of the airfare that can be collected from a passenger 
in each class and route;
(iv) monitor the tariff of airlines on a regular basis and issue directions and take 
disciplinary actions against any airline, if the Board is satisfied that the specific airline 
has charged excessive or predatory tariff;
(v) call for such information and records which are necessary for determining the 
upper limit or maximum airfare to be collected from passengers in each route and class;
(vi) hold due consultations with all the relevant stakeholders while determining the 
air tariff and any other matter as may be referred to it;
Definitions.
5
Establishment 
of the Airfare 
Regulatory 
Board.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Functions of the 
Board.
45

(vii) call upon the representative of any airline to furnish in writing any such 
information and explanation related to its functions and operations; 
(viii) direct any of its officers and staff to inspect the website, books of account and 
relevant document of the airline; and
(ix) advise the appropriate Government in any other matter as may be referred to 
it, from time to time.
5. The Board shall, while investigating any matter referred to it in section 4, have all the 
powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and, in particular in respect of the following matters, 
namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India 
and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discover and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witness and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
6. The appropriate Government shall consult the Board on all policies related to the 
monitoring and regulation of airfare in the country.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Board for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.
8. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, 
as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a true and full accounts of its activities 
undertaken under section 4 during the previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to 
the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid, as soon as may 
be after receipt of the report under sub-section (1), before each House of Parliament along 
with a memorandum explaining the reasons for not accepting any of the recommendations 
made thereto.
(3) Where the report or any of its part is related to any of the issues connected with a 
State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of that State, 
who shall in turn, along with an explanatory memorandum concerned with the action taken 
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations related to the State, if any, and reasons for 
not accepting any of the recommendations, cause to be laid such report before each House 
of the State legislature. 
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary for removal of 
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
Board to have 
powers of Civil 
Court.
Appropriate 
Government 
to consult the 
Board.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Annual Report. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect.
Power to make 
rules.
3
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
 
4
5

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The exorbitant increase in airfare has been recognized as a serious issue ever since 
the airline sector has been de-regulated. With the repeal of Air Corporations Act in March, 
1994, airlines are free to fix reasonable tariffs under the provisions of sub-rule (1) of Rule 
135 of Aircraft Rules, 1937. Therefore, there is no regulating and monitoring mechanism 
to rationalize the airfare without affecting the passengers. In some sectors, the Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation has created ‘Tariff Monitoring Unit’. But these units only ensure 
that the fares charged by the airlines are within the prescribed tariffs of the airlines displayed 
on their websites. As a result, the airlines often charge excessive rates particularly during 
festival or holiday seasons. 
The airfare is dynamic in nature and follows the principle of demand and supply. 
Besides, the airline companies are always influenced by shareholder interests and revenue 
management rather than passenger concern and affordability. All these issues seriously 
affect the passengers. The expatriates who work in the Gulf region are often the victims of 
this unscrupulous airfare charges as they are forced to pay three to four times of the regular 
fare during vacations reasons.
Realizing the gravity of the situation, the Parliamentary Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture have also expressed their concern on the self-regulating mechanism 
of the current airline monitoring regime which is inadequate to address the financial burden 
of the passengers on the one hand and the predatory tariff structure of the airline companies 
on the other. The Committee also suggested the establishment of a quasi-judicial entity to 
regulate and monitor the air tariff in an ethical and equitable manner. Since there is no such 
monitoring agency to regulate the airfare in the current context of liberalized economy, there 
is an urgent need to set up an apex authority with all the relevant powers and functions to 
regulate the airfare dynamics and fix an upper limit to the maximum tariff. The establishment 
of the Airfare Regulatory Board would be the right direction in this regard.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                                                                      SHAFI PARAMBIL 
July 2, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Airfare Regulatory Board. 
It also provides for the appointment of a Chairperson, members, officers, staff and experts 
to the Board. Clause 7 provides for the Central Government to provide funds to the Board 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that about rupees one 
hundred crore will be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved. 
 
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to the matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is, of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of an Airfare Regulatory Board for monitoring and 
regulation of airfare and for matters connected therewith.
_______ 
(Shri Shafi Parambil, M.P .) 