AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

= 3 DEC 2004

Bill No. 51 of 2004

THE WOMEN (RESERVATION IN SERVICE) BILL, 2004
By
Surimant Kriss TiRatH, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for reservation in posts and appointments for women in services under the
Central Government and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—

1, (7) This Act may be called the Women (Reservation in Service) Act, 2004. Short ttle,
extent ani
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commence-
ment.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
(a) "Government" means the Central Government;

(0) “service” means the service in connection with the affairs of the Central
Government and includes the services in any public sector undertaking or enterprise
or any authority under the control of the Central Government.


Reservation
for women in
service,

Relaxation in

eligibility
conditions,

Power to
make rules.

2

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(d) "public sector undertakings and enterprises” means and includes all public
sector undertakings, enterprises, banks and financial institutions wholly owned
managed by the Central Government or in which fifty-one per cent. shares are held by
the Central Government,

3. There shall be reserved thirty-three per cent. of all appointments and posts in
services under the Central Government including Public Sector Undertakings for women,

4. The Government shall make provision for relaxation in eligibility conditions, as may
be prescribed, for appointment of women in services under the Central Government.

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Women in India often find themselves so deeply engrossed in family affairs and
burdened with such heavy domestic responsibilities that despite their capabilities, education
and aptitude, they are unable to enter into Government services in due time.

‘Women have only marginal representation in services connected with the affairs of the
State. Even though they are capable of carrying out the responsibilities of the various
assignments efficiently, but sometimes they do not fulfil the requisite qualifications, experience
and other conditions of eligibility attached to that post/assignment.

It is, therefore, necessary to reserve thirty-three per cent. of posts for women in all
‘appointments in services under the State, including public sector undertakings. and enterprises
and to provide for relaxation in the matter of age-limit, requisite educational qualifications,
experience and other conditions of eligibility to ensure their due representation in Government
services,

Hence this Bill.

New 08; KRISHNA TIRATH
July 15,2004,


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for reservation in posts and appointments for women in services under
the Central Government and for matters connected therewith.

. (Shrimati Krishna Tirath, M.P)
MGIPMRNO—1603LS—06.08.2004.