Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL CROP INSURANCE COMMISSION BILL, 2020
By
SHRI NIHAL CHAND,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a National Crop Insurance Commission for insurance
of crops and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the National Crop Insurance Commission
Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 51 of  2020
5

2
2.  In this act unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Commission" means the National Crop Insurance Commission constituted
under section 3.
(b) "crop" includes all agricultural crops cultivated during kharif and rabi season
such as cereals, pulses including such other agricultural or horticultural produce
which may be notified, from time to time, by the Central Government, in the Official
Gazette;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute a Commission to be known as the National Crop Insurance
Commission for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consists of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson;
(c) five members;
(d) one representative from agricultural producer; and
(e) advisor associated with agriculture and agricultural research,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and
employees including technical experts to the Commission for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowance payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service payable to Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, members, advisor, officers,
employees and technical experts of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
4.  Every State Government shall provide the detailed information to Commission
in respect of the following:—
(a) total area under agriculture and horticulture;
(b) total production in agriculture and horticulture;
(c) weather and climate change conditions in the State;
(d) crops and farmers affected with natural disasters in the State; and
(e) data related to crop insurance and types of affected crop.
5. (1) The Commission shall, on the basis of information received from the
State Governments under section 4, appoint a Group of Experts to study the conditions
of weather, climate change and natural calamities, from time to time and recommend
to the State Government concerned to:—
(a) take measures to protect the crop from natural disasters and climate
change  and insurance thereto;
(b) specify selection of crop on the basis of regional weather climate;
(c) spread awareness regarding crop insurance among farmers;
(d) formulate  policies regarding prevention of losses to crop due to
climate change;
(e) maintain and preserve natural environment; and
(f) take measures for increasing the fertility of soil.
Definitions.
Functions of the
Commission.
Constitution of
National Crop
Insurance
Commission.
State
Governments to
provide
information to
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The Commission shall, based on the report presented by the Group of
Experts appointed under sub-section (1), release funds from the Crop Insurance
Fund constituted under sub-section (1) of section 6 to the State Government to
compensate the losses of agriculture and horticulture products.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Crop Insurance Fund for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and State Government shall contribute to the
Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Commission.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being applicable to crop insurance.
8. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution of
Crop Insurance
Fund.
Application of
other laws to
crop insurance.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the seventh largest country in the world in terms of area and is
agriculture based. Given the geographical location of India, farmers have to face
different weather conditions in each part of the country. The farmers of the country
take care of their crop like an army soldier standing on the border and produce
grain after facing the adverse weather, natural disasters and climate change.
Today, the country's farmers are becoming alienated from farming activities
as the risk in agriculture is increasing now a days and the farmers are not in a position
to cope up with the burden of these ever increasing risks. Agriculture credit is
increasing which has a negative impact on the country's agricultural production.
We have to educate farmers about crop insurance in order to protect them from
such risks so that the farmer can get benefits from it in their bad times. In the absence
of awareness the farmers are unable to understand the importance of crop insurance.
The farmers suffer the most from weather, climate change and natural disaster which
can be reduced to a great extent by crop insurance.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; NIHAL CHAND
January 30, 2020.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Crop Insurance
Commission for carrying out the provisions of this Act. It also provides for
appointment of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, officers and staff to the
Commission for efficient operation and functioning. Clause 5 provides for the
Commission to release funds from the Crop Insurance Fund to the States to
compensate the losses to agriculture and horticulture products. Clause 7 provides
for creation of a Crop Insurance Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted  would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees
five hundred crores may involve as recurring expenditure per annum from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees One Hundred Crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purpose of this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for constitution of a National Crop Insurance Commission for insurance
of crops and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nihal Chand, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5385LS(S3)—02.0 3.2020.