As Intropuced In Lox 5५88७

(28 yu 2006

Bill No. 51 of 2006
—_—_——

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
By

Suri Bacut Sincu Rawat, M.P.
A
BILL

2 Further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— -

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006.

2. In article 75 of the Constitution, after clause (1B), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—

“(1C) In the Council of Ministers, not less than three-fourths of the total number of
Ministers, shall be appointed from amongst the elected members of the House of the People.”.

3. In article 164 of the Constitution, after clause (1B), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—

“(1C) In the Council of Ministers, in States having Legislative Council, not less than
three-fourths of the total number of Ministers shall be appointed from amongst the elected
members of the Legislative Assembly of that State.”

i

Short title.

Amendment of
article 75.

Amendment of
article 164.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 75 of the Constitution lays down that the Prime Minister shall be appointed by
the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of
the Prime Minister. An analogous provision also exists in article 164 of the Constitution in
respect of Council of Ministers in the States. The said articles also lay down that the Council
of Ministers shall be collectively responsible, in the case of Union Government, to the House
of the People and, in the case of a State Government, to the Legislative Assembly of that
State.

The people of our country elect their representatives to the House of the People and
Legislative Assemblies with the objective not only that they would frame and assist the
Government in framing laws and policies for the betterment of the country but also with the
hope that their directly elected’ representatives would also be a part of the Government.
Various general elections held in the independent India have proved that people vote in
favour ofa party or alliance of, parties which they feel should form the Government, A natural
corollary that follows is that the parties or alliance of, parties, which the people of this nation
have voted to power, should give due representation to their elected representatives in the
formation of the Government. No one would dispute that the appointment of Ministers to the
Council of Ministers is the prerogative of the Prime Minister who may, in his discretion
appoint members of the Upper House in his Cabinet. The discretion, which the Constitution
has.vested in the Prime Minister, should be reasonably applied and should not be based on
whims and caprices. However, of late, a trend has developed wherein Ministers in the Council
of Ministers are being appointed from amongst the Members of the Upper House without
giving adequate representation to the Members of the Lower House who have been directly
elected by the People of the country. The representative character of our democracy and the
very objective for which General Elections are held for Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies
would be reduced to a farce and it would be a fraud on the Constitution if elected
representatives of the Party or alliance of, parties winning the majority of seats in the general
elections are not adequately represented in the Council of Ministers. Even on the basis of
strength of the two Houses at the Centre, the ratio of Members of Lok Sabha and Rajya
Sabha as Ministers in the Council of Ministers should be 2:1. 9

In order that the Members of the Lower House to which the Government is collectively
tesponsible are adequately represented in the Council of Ministers at the Union and State
level and to ensure that the constitutional provisions are not misused to appoint Ministers
from the Upper House on extraneous considerations, it is proposed to amend the Constitution
So as to provide that atleast three-fourths of the Ministers in the Government shall be from
amongst the elected Members of the Lower House.

Hence this Bill. é
New Detut; BACHI SINGH RAWAT.
January 31,2006


ANNEXURE
Extract from the Constitution of India:

* * * * * * *

75.(1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.

(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of
Ministers shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of members of the House of
the People.

(1B) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party who is
disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall
also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period
commencing from the date of his disqualification till the date on which the term of his office
as such member would expire or where he contest any election to either House of Parliament
before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is
earlier.

* * * * * *
164.(1) The Chief Minister shalkbe appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers

shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor:

Provided that in the States of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, there shall be a

Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may, in addition, be in charge of the welfare of the
Scheduled Castes and backward classes or any other work.

(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister, in the Council of
Ministers in a State shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of members of the
Legislative Assembly of that State:

Provided that the number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister in a State shall be
not less than twelve:

Provided further that where the total number of Ministers including the Chief Minister
in the Council of Ministers in any State at the commencement of the Constitution (Ninety-
first Amendment) Act, 2003 exceeds the said fifteen per cent. or the numbers specified in the
first proviso, as the case may be, than the total number of Ministers in that State shall be
brought in conformity with the provisions of this clause within six months from such date as
the President may by public notification appoint.

(1B) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State of either House of the Legislature
ofa State having Legislative Council belonging to any political party who is disqualified for
being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be dis-
qualified to be appointed as a Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period commenc-
ing from the date of his disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such
member would expire or where he contests any election to the Legislative Assembly of a
State or either a House of the Legislature of a State having Legislative Council, as the case
may be, before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is declared elected,
whichever is earlier.

* * * * * * *

Other
provisions as
to Ministers.

Other
provisions as
to Ministers.


LOK SABHA -

A
Z BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1656LS(S1)—30-06-2006.