1
THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment)  Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 109 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be added, namely:—
"(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision,—
(a) every manufacturer of a car or a motorcab shall ensure that there is an
option to open the rear door in the car or the motorcab from within as well as from
outside so as to ensure the exit of the passengers inside the car or the motorcab
in the event of an accident;
Bill No.  51 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section
109.
5
10
59 of 1988.

2
(b) every manufacturer of a heavy passenger motor vehicle or educational
institution bus or any other motor vehicle used to carry passengers shall ensure
that there is an option in that motor vehicle or the bus to open emergency exit
doors from within and as well as from outside so as to ensure the exit of the
passengers inside the motor vehicle or the bus in the event of an accident.".
3. After section 125 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"125A. No person driving a motor vehicle or in charge of a motor vehicle shall
play or cause to play or allow playing of music at such volume as may likely to result
in an accident by distracting the attention of the driver.
125B. Every driver of a motorcar and any other person seated on the front seat or
the rear seat shall wear a seatbelt while the vehicle is in motion.
125C. No person shall light fireworks or do any act on any public place so as to
cause impediment to the free flow of traffic or distract the attention of the drivers of
motor vehicles.".
4. After section 134 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"134A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, when any person is injured as a result of an accident in which a motor vehicle
is involved, no police officer shall make any enquiry from a person, other than the
driver of the vehicle or person in charge of the vehicle, who helped the injured in
securing medical attention by conveying him to the nearest medical practitioner or
hospital, unless that person himself desires otherwise.
134B. The Central Government shall, for the purpose of securing timely
medical attention to persons injured as a result of accident involving motor vehicles,
provide adequate financial assistance to the State Governments for—
(a) making available adequate number of ambulances in each district;
and
(b) setting up of round the clock helpline numbers which shall be
prominently displayed at various public places, national highways, State
highways and roads frequently used by motor vehicles.".
5. After section 177 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"177A. Whoever contravenes the provisions of sections 125A or 125B or 125C
shall be punished with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees.".
6. In section 183 of the principal Act, for sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Whoever drives or causes any person who is employed by him or is subject
to his control in driving to drive a motor vechile in contravention of speed limit referred
to in section 112 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than three years and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.".
Prohibition
on lighting
fireworks,
etc. on road.
Insertion of
new sections
125A, 125B
and 125C.
Prohibition
on playing of
loud music.
Compulsory
wearing of
seat belts.
Insertion of
new sections
134A and
134B.
No enquiry to
be made from
a person
conveying
accident
victim to
hospital.
Certain steps
to be taken by
the Central
Government
to secure
timely
medical
attention.
Insertion of
new section
177A.
Punishment
for offences
relating to
playing of
loud music,
non-wearing
of seat belts
and lighting
fireworks on
roads.
Amendment
of section
183.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. In section 185 of the principal Act, for the words "shall be punishable for the first
offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both; and for a second or subsequent offence, if
committed within three years of the commission of the previous similar offence, with impris-
onment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to three
thousand rupees, or with both", the words "shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three years and with fine which shall not be less than
ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
8. After section 199 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"199A. Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 109
shall be punished with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.
199B. Whoever being a medical practitioner nor a doctor on duty in the hospital
fails to immediately attend to the injured person and render him the medical aid or
treatment in contravention of the provisions of clause (a) of section 134 shall be
punished with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees."
9. In section 201 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Whoever —
(a) seeks alms or sells articles on any public place so as to cause impediment to
the free flow of traffic; or
(b) walks on the road or crosses the road instead of using the footpath or zebra-
crossing,
shall be punishable with a fine which may extend upto one thousand rupees:
Provided that a person seeking alms or selling articles under the influence of alcohol or
a drug to the extent specified under section 185 shall be liable to punishment prescribed
under that section.”
Amendment
of section
185.
Insertion of
new sections
199A and
199B.
Punishment
for not
keeping an
option to
open rear
door/
emergency
exit from
inside/outside
in motor
vehicle by
manufactur-
ers.
Punishment
for not
immediately
attending the
accident
victim.
Amendment
of section
201.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Road accidents have earned India a dubious distinction of having highest number of
road accident casualties in the world. Statistic reveals that death occurs every four minutes
on Indian roads. Causes for road accidents are many like the congested city roads, bad road
surfaces, flooding of roads, reckless driving, inadequate traffic management and so on. In
the years 2001 to 2011, more than a million people died in road accidents across India.
Road accidents are serious issues but little attention is being paid to this and road
accidents claim more lives than in terrorist activities. There is an urgent need to revamp the
road safety measures and traffic management system in order to ensure road safety and well
being of all road users.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 with a view to—
(i) prohibit playing of loud music while driving a vehicle;
(ii) make it compulsory to wear seat belts while the vehicle is in motion;
(iii) prohibit lighting fireworks, etc. on roads, which cause impediment to free
flow of traffic;
(iv) prohibit unnecessary harassment of persons who help in taking to the
hospital the victims of road accidents; and
(v) provide that the manufacturers shall ensure provision of opening rear door/
emergency exit from inside/outside in motor vehicle for exit of passengers.
The Bill also seeks to provide for enhanced punishment for certain offences under the
Act.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY  RAMACHANDRAN
June 26, 2014
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 134B in the parent Act so as to provide
that the Central Government shall provide adequate financial assistance to the State
Governments for—
(i) making available adequate number of ambulances for securing medical help to
victims of road accidents in each district; and
(ii) setting up of round the clock helpline numbers.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore
from Consolidated Fund of India will be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988
* * * * * * * *
CHAPTER VII
CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES
109. (1) Every motor vehicle shall be so constructed and so maintained as to be at all
times under the effective control of the person driving the vehicle.
(2) Every motor vehicle shall be so constructed as to have right hand steering control
unless it is equipment with a mechanical or electrical signalling device of a prescribed nature.
(3) If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do
in the public interest, it may by order published in the Official Gazette, notify that any article
or process used by a manufacturer shall conform to such standard as may be specified in that
order.
* * * * * * * *
183. (1) Whoever, drives a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred
to in section 112 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to four hundred rupees,
or if having been previously convicted of an offence under this sub-section is again
convicted of an offence under this sub-section, with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees.
(2) Whoever causes any person who is employed by him or is subject to his control in
driving to drive a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred to in section 112
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees, or, if having been
previously convicted of an offence under this sub-section, is again convicted of an offence
under this sub-section, with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
* * * * * * * *
185. Whoever, while driving, or attempting to drive, a motor vehicle,—
(a) has, in his blood, alcohol exceeding 30mg. per 100 ml. blood detected in a test
by a breath analyser, or;
(b) is under the influence of a drug to such an extent as to be incapable of
exercising proper control over the vehicle.
shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both; and for
a second or subsequent offence, if committed within three years of the commission of the
previous similar offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the drug or drugs specified by the
Central Government in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette, shall be deemed to
render a person incapable of exercising proper control over a motor vehicle.
* * * * * * *
201. (1) Whoever keeps a disabled vehicle on any public place, in such a manner, so as
to cause impediment to the free flow of traffic, shall be liable for penalty up to fifty rupees per
hour, so long as it remains in that position:
General
provision
regarding
construction
and mainte-
nance of
vehicles.
Driving at
excessive
speed, etc.
Driving by a
drunken
person or by
a person
under the
influence of
drugs.
Penalty for
causing
obstruction to
free flow of
traffic.
6

7
Provided that the vehicle involved in accidents shall be liable for penalty only from the
time of completion of inspection formalities under the law:
Provided further that where the vehicle is removed by a Government agency, towing
charges shall be recovered from the vehicle owner or person in-charge of such vehicle.
(2) Penalties or towing charges under the section shall be recovered by such officer or
authority as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise.
* * * * * * * *

GMGIPMRND—820LS(S3)—03.07.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P .)