1
THE PROHIBITION ON FORCED RELIGIOUS CONVERSION
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI A.T. NANA PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on religious conversion by use of force, allurement or
fraudulent means and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition on Forced Religious Conversion
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 51 of  2015
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "allurement" means offer of any temptation in the form of—
(i) any gift or gratification, either in cash or kind;
(ii) grant of any material benefit, either monetary or otherwise;
(b) "conversion" means renouncing one religion and adopting another
religion;
(c) "force" includes a show of force or a threat of injury of any kind
including a threat of divine displeasure or social excommunication;
(d) "fraudulent means" include misrepresentation or any other fraudulent
contrivance;
(e) "minor" means a person who has not completed eighteen years of
age; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. No person shall convert or attempt to convert, or abet the conversion of,
either directly or otherwise, any person from one religion to another by use of force,
allurement or any fraudulent means.
4. (1) Whoever contravenes the provision of section 3 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term, which may extend to three years and also be liable to a fine,
which may extend to rupees fifty thousand.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), whoever contravenes the
provisions of section 3 in respect of a minor, a woman or a person belonging to the
Scheduled Caste or the Scheduled Tribe shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years and also be liable to a fine which may extend to
rupees one lakh.
5. (1) Whoever performs conversion by performing any ceremony as a religious
priest or takes part, directly or indirectly, in such ceremony, shall give information
regarding such conversion to the District Magistrate concerned in such form and
within such period before performing of the ceremony, as may be prescribed.
(2) Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine
which may extend to rupees twenty-five thousand or with both.
6. No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted except by or
with the previous sanction of the District Magistrate or such other authority not
below the rank of a Sub-Divisional Magistrate as may be authorised by him in that
behalf.
7. (1) An offence under this Act shall be cognizable.
(2) An offence under this Act shall be investigated by an officer not below the
rank of an Inspector.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
Definitions.
Prohibition of
forced
conversion.
Prior permission
to be taken from
District
Magistrate with
respect to
conversion.
Punishment.
Prosecution to
be made with
the sanction of
District
Magistrate.
Offence to be
cognizable.
Act not to be in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Following the tenets of a particular religion is a matter of personal faith and
belief for an individual. Basically religious conversion itself causes hurt to faith and
belief of an individual when it is done through allurement or force or mischief or by
taking advantage of poverty of a person. Balance of society is disturbed when religious
conversion is done through the means of force, fraud or allurement. Religious
conversion performed through such means not only transgresses the freedom of
religion available to every citizen, but also creates law and order problem.
Therefore, it is necessary to take steps to keep a check on religious conversions
by force or fraudulent means.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
February 5, 2015

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on  religious conversion by use of force, allurement or
 fraudulent means and for matters connected therewith
—————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4763LS(S4)—02-03-2015.