‘FerBE INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Z Aly tue

Bill No. 51 of 2002
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
By
Sui G.M. Banarwal.a, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2002.
2. In the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, —

(@) in paragraph 1, in clause (8), the words “or paragrapt: 3 or, as the case may
be, paragraph 4”, shall be omitted;

(}) in paragraph 2, in sub-paragraph (1), for the words and figures “paragraphs
3, 4 and 5" the word and figure “paragraph 5” shall be substituted:

(©) paragraph 3 shall be deleted; and
(d) paragraph 4 shall be deleted.

Short title.

Amendment
of Tenth
Schedule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Tenth Schedule to the Constitution makes provisions as to disqualification for
membership of either House of Parliament or the Legislature of the State on ground of
defection. Paragraph 2 provides that a member shall be disqualified for being a member if
he voluntarily gives up the membership of his political party or if he votes or abstains from
voting contrary to any direction given by the party to which he belongs. The disqualification,
is however, made subject to paragraphs 3 and 4 according to which the disqualification on
ground of defection is not to apply in case of a spit in or the merger of the original party.

‘The concepts of ‘split’ and ‘merger’ simply facilitate mass defections and have, in
increasing number of Cases, brought disgrace to the functioning of Parliamentary democ-
racy in the country.

‘The Bill seeks to do away with the concepts of “split” and “merger” incorporated in
paragraphs 3 and 4 respectively of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution. This will lead to
disqualification in all cases of defection irrespective of the mathematical number.

‘The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.

‘New Det; G.M. BANATWALLA
July 1, 2002.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION ON INDIA

* * * * *

(TENTH SCHEDULE)
[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection
1. Interpretation. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) "House" means either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as
the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;

(b) “legislature party", in relation to a member of a House belonging to any
political party in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 or paragrah 3 or, as
the case may be, paragraph 4, means the group consisting of all the members of that
House for the time being belonging to that political party in accordance with the said
provisions;

(c) “original political party" in relation to a member of a House, means the
political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph
2; and

(d) “paragraph” means a paragraph of this Schedule.

2. Disqualification on ground of defection. (1) Subject to the provisions of paragraphs
3, 4 and 5, a member of a House belonging to any political party shall be disqualified for
being a member of the House—

(60 if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political party; or

(0) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction
issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any person or authority
authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in either case, the prior permission
of such political party, person or authority and such voting or abstention has not been
condoned by such political party, person or authority within fifteen days from the
date of such voting or abstention.

Explanation—For the purposes of this sub paragraph,—

(a) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to the political
party if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for election as such member;

(b) anominated member of a House shall,—

(i) where he is a member of any political party on the date of his
nominations as such member, be deemed to belong to such political party;

(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political party of which

he becomes, or as the case may be, first becomes, a member before tlie expiry of

~ six months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying with the
requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.

(2) An elected member of a House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a
candidate set up by any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the
House if he joins any political party after such election.

(3) A nominated member of a House shall be disqualifed for being a member of the
House if he joins any political party after the expiry of six months from the date on which

he takes his seat after complying with the requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be,
article 188.


4

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this paragraph,
a person who, on the commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act,
1985, is a member of a House (whether elected or nominated as such) shall,—

(i) where he was a member of a political party immediately before such
commencement, be deemed, for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph,
to have been elected as a member of such House as a candidate set up by such
political party;

(ii) in any other case, be deemed to be an elected member of the House who 185
been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up by any political party for the
purposes of sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph or, as the case may be, be deemed to
be a nominated member of the House for the purposes of sub-paragraph (3) of this
paragraph.

3. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of split. Where a
member of a House makes a claim that he and any other members of his legislature party
constitute the group representing a faction which has arisen as a result of the split in his
original political party and such group consists of not less than one-third of the members of
such legislature party, —

(a) he shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 on the ground—

(i) that he has voluntarily given up his membership of his original political
party; or

(ii) that he has voted or abstained from voting in such House contrary to
any direction issued by such party or by any person or authority authorised by
it in that behalf without obtaining the prior permission of such party, person or
authority and such voting or abstention has not been condoned by such party,
person or authority within fifteen days from the date of such voting or abstention;
and

(0) from the time of such split, such faction shall be deemed to be the political
party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to
be his original political party for the purposes of this paragraph.

4. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of merger. (7) A
member of a House shall not be disqualified under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 where
his original political party merges with another political party and he claims that he and
any other members of his original political party—

(a) have become members of such other political party or, as the case may be, of
anew political party formed by such merger; or

(8) have not accepted the merger and adopted to function as a separate group,

and from the time of such merger, such other political party or new politicals,
party or group, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to which
he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to be his original
political party for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.

(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger of the ori iginal
political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and only if,
not less than two-third of the member of the legislature party concemed have agreed to such
merger.

* * * * *

af © * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1912LS—1 1-07-2002.