Bill No. 51 of 2022
THE WIDOWS (PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE)
BILL, 2022
By
SHRI JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the measures to be undertaken by the State for the protection and
maintenance of neglected, abandoned and destitute widows by establishing
a Welfare Board for such widows and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Widows (Protection and Maintenance)
Act, 2022.
(2)   It extends to the whole of India.5
Short title,
and extent.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2
Establishment
of the National
Widows
Welfare
Board.
2.   In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “abandoned widow” means who has been deserted or thrown out
of the household by her relatives to fend for herself and who has no means to
support her and her dependent children, if any;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case  of State the
Government of that State and in other cases the Central Government;
(c)  “Board” means the National Widows Welfare Board established
under Section 3;
(d)  “destitute widow” means  a widow stricken with infirmity due to
old age, physical disability, chronic ailment, mental imbalance or who has no
source of income to support herself and her dependent children, if any;
(e)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f)  “widow” means a legally married woman whose husband has
expired.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Board to be called the National Widows Welfare
Board for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid
having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to
contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The Head Office of the Board shall be situated at such place
as may be decided by the Central Government and the Board may
establish its branches in the States and Union territories in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(4) The Board shall consist of,–
(a)  a chairperson, ex-officio, who shall be Minister in charge of
the Union Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment;
(b) a Vice-Chairperson preferably a widow to be appointed
by the Central Government;
(c) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be from
Lok Sabha and one from the Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the presiding
officers of respective Houses;
(d) two officers not below the rank of Joint Secretary in the Union
Ministry dealing with the administration of this Act to be appointed by
the Central Government;
(e) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Governments of States, by rotation
in alphabetical order, to represent the Governments of the States; and
(f) three members to be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst the Non-Governmental Organizations working for the
welfare of widows.
Definitions.

5
3
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
(5)  The Board shall follow such procedure in discharge of its agenda
and hold meetings in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6)  The Salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the
Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(7)   The Board shall have a Secretariat with such number of
officers and employees with such terms and conditions of service, as may
be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board as may be
prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be known
as the Widows Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall
contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the fund such other sums as may
be received by way of donation, contribution, assistance or otherwise by the
Board.
5. (1) The Board shall promote and provide, by such measures as it
thinks fit, for the protection, maintenance and welfare of neglected, abandoned
and destitute widows and for their dependent children.
(2) Without prejudice to the generally of the provisions of sub-section (1),
the Board shall,–
(a) maintain district-wise register of widows with such particulars
and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) collect and get verified the antecedents of every widow
covered under this Act to assess her need for assistance in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(c)  perform such other functions as may be assigned to it from
time to time.
6. The Board shall provide to the abandoned or destitute widows,
on an application prescribed for the purpose, the following facilities,
namely:–
(a) subsistence allowance of rupees two thousand per month in
case the widow is infirm and destitute or is having one or more dependent
children or rupees one thousand per month in case she has no dependent
child;
(b)  residential accommodation free of cost wherever necessary;
(c) free education including technical education to the dependent
children of the widows;
(d) gainful employment;
(e) vocational training wherever required;
(f) such other facilities as may be necessary and as may be
prescribed:
Constitution of
a Widows
Welfare Fund.
Functions of
the Board.
Facilities to
be provided
to the
widows.

5
10
15
20
4
Miscellaneous
provisions.
Power to make
rules.
Provided that if a widow covered under this Act gets gainful
employment or remarries, the facilities provided to her under this Act shall
stand withdrawn from the date such widow gets employment or remarries, as
the case may be:
Provided further that a widow residing with her in-laws or parents
according to custom or due to other circumstances shall not be denied the
facilities under this Act on this ground.
7.   Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any custom, a widow,
(i)  shall not be evicted or thrown out of the house of the in-laws or
parents, as the case may be, where such widow was residing at the time of
death of her husband;
(ii) shall be entitled to inherit the property or the share of her late
husband in case of joint ownership of the property from her in-laws; and
(iii) shall be entitled for maintenance from the heir or in-laws who
abandon a widow for subsistence.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law
for the time being in force, but save as aforesaid the provisions of this Act
shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time
being applicable to the widows.
10.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette,  make rules for carry out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
CentralGovernment toproviderequisite funds.
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country, there are millions of unfortunate widows who are
leading a miserable life. Their number is nearly three per cent of total
population. More than fifty per cent of these widows are old, infirm,
disabled and have no source of income or livelihood. Their position
becomes miserable for they have dependent children to support and bring
up.  They work as housemaids and take up other jobs for survival.
It commonly occurs that when a widow does not have any permanent
source of income or livelihood, she is driven out of her in-laws’ home or even
from her parental home.  Sometimes condition of such widows become
miserable and their problems increase manifold due to poverty and other
compelling reasons.  Many such widows can be seen begging in the streets
and public places.  Several women who become widows in their youth are
not only sexually exploited by their known ones but also forced into
prostitution.  At some places, widows are termed as witches and tortured
even by their own kith and kin or other persons from the community.  They
are treated as bad women by the society.
Ours is a welfare State.  It is the foremost duty of the State to initiate
welfare measures and to protect and provide maintenance to the hapless
widows so that they can live gracefully in the society.  It is, therefore, proposed
in the Bill to set up a Welfare Board to exclusively look after the welfare of
neglected, abandoned and destitute widows.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                          JANARDAN SINGH ‘SIGRIWAL’
10 February, 2022.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the National
Widows Welfare Board.  Clause 4 provides for the constitution of a
Welfare Fund.  Clause 6 provides for facilities like subsistence allowance,
free residential accommodation, medical facilities, gainful employment,
etc.  to widows.  Clause 8 provides that Central Government shall provide
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India.  It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees one
thousand crore approximately is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate
to matters of detail only,  the delegation of legislative powers is of a
normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the measures to be undertaken by the State for the protection and
maintenance of neglected, abandoned and destitute widows by establishing
a Welfare Board for such widows and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Janardan Singh ‘Sigriwal’, M.P .)