THE SMALL-HOLDER FARMERS (PROTECTION AND WELFARE)
BILL, 2016
By
ADV. JOICE GEORGE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection and welfare of small-holder farmers by constitution of a
Minimum Assurance Price Commission for their agricultural produce and a
Small-holder Farmers Welfare Fund and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Small-holder Farmers (Protection and Welfare) Act,
2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 51 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural produce" means agricultural produce specified in the schedule;
(b) "Commission" means the Minimum Price Assurance Commission constituted
under section 6;
(c) "Fund" means the Small-holder Farmers Welfare Fund constituted under
section 4;
(d) "mimimum assured price" means the price of the agricultural produces fixed
and declared by the Central Government under section 3;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "small-holder farmer" means a person possessing agricultural land measuring
not more than ten acres and who has no major income from any source other than
agriculture.
3. The Central Government shall, on recommendation of the Commission, at least one
month before every financial year, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare the minimum
assured price for each agricultural produce.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Small-holder Farmers Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The initial corpus of rupees one hundred crore of which rupees fifty crore shall be
provided by the Central Government, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, and rupees fifty crore shall be provided by the State Governments in such
proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute every year to
the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(4) There shall also be credited to the Fund moneys received under corporate social
responsibility from the corporate and other private individuals.
5. The Fund shall be utilized for—
(i) providing minimum assured price for agricultural produce;
(ii) payment of pension to every small-holder farmer who has attained the age of
fifty-five years;
(iii) financial assistance to the young small-holder farmers for innovative
proposals; and
(iv) establishing efficient institutional mechanism for fullfledged marketing
of agricultural produce.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as possible but not later than six months
of the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Commission to be known as the Minimum Price Assurance Commission.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner,
as may be prescribed, from amongst the persons having knowledge in the field of
agricultural operations in small-holder farming sector and expertise in agricultural
economics;
Central
Government
to declare
minimum
assured price
of agricultural
produce.
Constitution
of Small-
holder Farmers
Welfare Fund.
Utilization of
Fund.
Constitution
of the
Minimum
Price
Assurance
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) a Vice-Chairperson to be elected by and from amongst the members of the
Commission representing the small-holder farmers;
(c) two Members of Parliament, one each from Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, to be
elected by the respective Houses;
(d) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary, representing the Union
Ministry of Agriculture;
(e) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary, representing the Indian
Council of Agriculture Research; and
(f) five members representing small-holder farmers to be nominated by the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The term of office of the Commission shall be three years.
(4) The Commission shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and
common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both movable and
immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
7. The Commission shall recommend to the Central Government—
(a) the minimum assured price for agricultural produce after taking into
consideration the cost of cultivation including fifty per cent. margin on the cost of
cultivation; and
(b) the steps to be taken for the improvement of livelihood of small-holder farmers.
8. The Central Government may issue such directions to the State Governments as it
may think necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Functions of
the
Commission.
Power to issue
directions.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

SCHEDULE
[see section 3]
1. Fibre Coconut
2. Cereals Paddy
3. Oil seeds Coconut, Oil palm
4. Fruits Mango, Orange, Papaya, Guava, Banana, Grapes, Jack fruit,
Pineapple, Rambutan, Mangostin, Cocoa
5. V egetables Comm on pea, Gram, Tomato, Turmeric, Bitter gourd, Snake gourd,
Ash gourd, Elephant foot yam, Winter crops, Chilly
6. Tubers T opioca, Carrot, Beet root, Common taro, Elephant yam, Carrot,
Potato
7. Spices Pepper, Cardamom, Ginger, Nutmeg, Clove, Cinnamon
8. Cash crops Rubber, Tea, Coffee
4

5
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Agriculture plays a pivotal role in Indian economy and small-holder farmers owe a
considerable share in it. Small-holder farmers are farmers with a low asset base and limited
resource endowments and who depend on household members for most of the labour,
small-holder farmers are characterized by smaller applications of capital but higher use of
labour and other family-owned inputs, and generally higher index of cropping intensity and
diversification. Farmers, especially small-holder farmers fall in debt trap due to vagaries of
nature and lack of assured minimum support price for agricultural produce.
Currently, a farmer is born under debt and dies under the threat of its repayment. Due
to total negligence and non-remunerative profession, youngsters are not preferring
agriculture as promising and profitable. The pitfalls in farming policy and Free Trade
Agreements make the situation more assailable, especially in rural economies. The whole
proceedings result in social discontent, anarchy and turmoil which paves the way for terrorism
and naxalism.
In short, an immediate effective intervention is needed by the Government to safeguard
the dreams, hopes and aspirations of agrarian people. The constitution of the Small-holder
Farmers Welfare Fund and the Minimum Assurance Price Commission will lend a helping
hand in removing indebtedness and social insecurity from small-holder farming community.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; JOICE GEORGE
February 8, 2016

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Small-holder Farmers Welfare
Fund with initial corpus of fifty crore rupees to be provided by the Central Government.
Clause 6 provides for constitution of a Minimum Price Assurance Commission for the welfare
of small-holder farmers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees One
hundred crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection and welfare of small-holder farmers by constitution of a
Minimum Assurance Price Commission for their agricultural produce
and a Small-holder Farmers Welfare Fund and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Adv. Joice George, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4374LS(S3)—01.03.2016