As INTRODUCED In Lok SaBHA ON

Bill No. 52 of 1986
—___.

THE APPRENTICES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1986
A
BILL

further to amend the Apprentices Act, 1961.

| it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republie
of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Apprentices (Amendment) Act, Short

1986. title and

com.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government eRe

may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates ment,
may be appointed for different States.

5

2. In section 2 of the Apprentices Act, 1961 (hereinafter teferred to

i ; Amend-

as the principal Act), in section 2,— ment of
Mo (6) in clause (d), in sub-clause (1), for item (aa), the follow- sections.
हि ing items shall be substituted, namely: —

“(aa) the Regional Boards, or

(aaa) the practical training of graduate or technician
apprentices or of technician (vocational) apprentices, or”;

15 (ii) in clauses (९) and (k), after the word “technology” wher-
ever it occurs, the words “‘or any vocational course” shall be inserted;

66) in clause (1), after the figures, letters and word “2lst
August, 1956”, the words, brackets, letters and figures “and re-named


Insertion
of certain
expres.
sions.

Amend-
ment of
section
BA,

Amend-
ment of
section
6.

Amend-
ment of
section
21,

designated trade in an establishment, such training places shall be
reserved also on the basis of the total number of apprentices in all the
designated trades in such establishment” shall be inserted,

the words “trade tests”, the words “or examinations” shal] be inserted.

sub-section shall be substituted, namely: —

2
as the National Council for Vocational Training by the resolution of
the Government of India in the Ministry of Labour (Directorate-

General of Employment and Training) No. DGET/12/21/80-TC, dated
the 30th September, 1981” shall be inserted;

_ (iv) after clause (p), the following clause shall be inserted, 5
namely: --

“(pp) “technician (vocational) apprentice” means an
apprentice who holds or is undergoing training in order that
he may hold a certificate in vocational course involving two
years of study after the completion of the secondary stage of 10
school education recognised by the All-India Council and
undergoes apprenticeship training in any such subject field in
any vocational course as may be prescribed;”.

3. In Chapter ॥ of the principal Act—

(a) after the words “technician apprentice”, wherever they 15
cecur, the words and brackets ‘technician (vocational) apprentice”
shall be inserted;

(0) after the words “technician apprentices”, wherever they
occur, the words and brackets “technician (vocational) apprentices”
shall be inserted; 20

(c) after the word “technology”, wherever, it occurs, the words
“or vocational course” shall be inserted.

4, In section 3A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the
words “Scheduled Tribes”, the words “and where there is more than one

5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in clauses (a) and (aa), after

6. In section 21 of the principal Act, for sub-section (4), the following 39

“(4) Every graduate or technician apprentice or technician
(vocational) apprentice, who completes his apprenticeship training

to the satisfaction of the concerned Regional Board, shall be granted
a certificate of proficiency by that Board.”. 3


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

pprentices Act, 1961 provides for the regulation and control of
of apprentices.

le ~vocationalisation of higher secondary education has been
ted in this country as part of the efforts to provide meaningful
on leading to suitable employment opportunities at the appropriate
It is also hoped that this would relieve the pressure on our higher
ion system. Vocationalisation implies education through work ex-
and hence adequate facilities are to be provided for the vocational
im to learn the practical aspects of the subject through field studies
) supplement the institutional learning. Providing apprenticeship
s to the products of vocational stream assumes relevance in this

A pilot scheme called Special Vocational Education Training
ne to provide “on the job training” to the product of the vocational
m was launched in 1983-84 under the supervision of the Regional
of Apprenticeship Training under the control of the then Ministry
lucation. The scheme also provides for training of weaker sections,
cially the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, minorities,
ically handicapped and women.

In the light of the experience gained during the two years which
tes that the scheme has been welcomed by the States, training
ies and the products of the vocational stream, it is proposed to
id the Apprentices Act, 1961 to provide training for the products of
tional stream by creating a separate category of apprentices
d “the technician (vocational) apprentices” and administer the
e through the Regional Boards of Aprenticesship Training who are
implementing the apprenticeship training scheme for graduates and
cian apprentices.

The object, therefore, is to provide “on the. job training” to the
lucts of the vocational stream so that adequate competence and skill

‘ed for various occupations are acquired which would lead to
table employment or self-employment opportunity in organised
tries, agriculture and other service sectors of economic activity in-
8 agro and rural based industries, .

6. The opportunity is also being availed of to amend section 3A of the
et So as to remove difficulties in the working of the scheme of reserva-
8 of training places for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

_ 1. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deut; PURNO A. SANGMA.
he 18th April, 1986. ;


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The amendments to the relevant sections of the Apprentices Act, 1961
provide for creating a separate category of apprentices viz. “technician
(vocational) apprentice”, with a view to providing apprenticeship train-
ing to the students passing out pf the +2 vocational stream. The various
amendments proposed include inter alia payment of stipend to the
apprentices similar to those provided for the graduate and technician
apprentices, the scheme for which, is being implemented by the Ministry
of Human Resource Development (Department of Education) through
the Regional Boards of Apprentices Training. There is also a proposal to
increase the rates of stipend being paid to the apprentices in general and
this would also apply to the new category of apprentices which is being
proposed. The scheme envisages payment of a minimum rate of stipend
50 per cent. of which will be reimbursed by the Central Government to
the training establishments as in the case of the present category of
graduate and technician apprentices.

Under the present Special Vocational Educational Training (SVET)
Scheme, about 25 subject fields have been identified and 3000 stipendiaries
per annum are being offered training facilities. It is proposed under the
amended Apprentices Act to provide initially apprenticeship training in
these identified subject fields and later expand it in a phased manner
progressively to other subject fields depending upon the experience in
the implementation of the scheme. On this basis, it is estimated that
about 4,000 trainees will be benefitting from the scheme in the first year
of its operation. This number will progressively increase to around
12,000 by the end of the 7th Five Year Plan. The corresponding financial
implication (reimbursement of Central Government share of stipend)
would be as follows: —

Year

Number of trainees Amount reimbursible by
proposed. Central Government
1986-87 4000 96 lakhs
1987-88 6000 144 lakhs
1988-89 9000 216 lakhs

1989-90 12000 : 288 lakhs

(It is assumed that the rate of stipend would be Rs. 400/- p.m. for a

period of one year, training, 50 per cent. of which will be reimbursed by
the Government of India). ।

In case of increase in the vocational educational facilities in the 7th
Plan, it might be necessary to increase the number of training places for
the products of vocational stream. In that event, the financial estimate
will also require to be modified to take care of the payment of |
10 the increased number of trainees of the vocational stream.

4



In order to implement the scheme effectively throughout the country,
Regional Boards of Apprenticeship Training as also the Technical
ation Bureau of the Ministry of Human Resource Development
artment of Education) will have to be sufficiently strengthened for
iting additional posts to properly look after this additional responsi+
At present, the total non-plan administrative expenditure of the
Boards of Apprenticeship Training is about Rs. 28 lakhs per annum
he implementation of the present graduate and technician apprentices
me. The introduction of the technician (vocational) apprentices

me would involve an additional expenditure of about Rs. 10 lakhs per
nium in the initial stage, rising up to about Rs. 15 lakhs per annum by
the end of the Seventh Five Year Plan for the additional posts in the

w Regional Boards and the Technical Education Bureau of the Ministry.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause (pp) sought to be inserted in section 2 of the Apprentices Act,
1961 by clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to pres-
cribe the subject fields in vocational course in which the apprenticeship
training shall have to be undergone by technician (vocational) appren-
tices.

2. Since the subject fields may have to undergo change from time to
time, it would be- convenient to delegate the power to the Central
Government to prescribe by rules such subject fields. The delegation of
Legislative power is thus of a normal and routine character.



ANNEXURE

Extracts rRoM THE APPRENTICES Act, 1961

(52 oF 1961)

. * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions,
* * * * *

(d) “appropriate Government” means,—

(1) in relation to—
* * * * *

(aa) the practical training of graduate or technician
apprentices, or

* * * * *

(e) “designated trade” means any trade or occupation or any
subject field in engineering or ‘technology which the Central Goy-
ernment, after consultation with the Central Apprenticeship Council,
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify as a designated
trade for the Purposes of this Act;

* * * * *

(k) “industry” means any industry or business in which any
trade, occupation or subject field in engineering or technology may
be specified as a designated trade;

(1) “National Council” means the National Council for Training
in Vocational Trades established by the resolution of the Govern-
ment of India in the Ministry of Labour (Directorate-General of
Resettlement and Employment) No. TR/E.P.-24/56, dated the 215६
August, 1956,

* * = * *
CHAPTER II
APPRENTICES AND THEIR TRAINING

3. A person shall not be qualified for being engaged as an apprentice to Qualifica.

undergo apprenticeship training in any designated trade, unless he— tions for
(a) is not less than fourteen years of age, and ee sain
(0) satisfies such standards of education and physical fitness as ar. appren.
may be prescribed: tice,

Provided that different standards may be prescribed in relation to
apprenticeship training in different designated trades and for different
categories of apprentices,


Heser-
vation of
training
places for
the Sche=
duled
Castes
and the
Scheduled
Tribes in
designa-
ted trades.

Contract
of appren-
ticeship.

Novation
61 con-
tract of
appren-
ticeship,

8
3A. (1) In every designated trade, training places shall be reserved
by the employer for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(2) The number of training places to be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under sub-section (1) shall be such as
may be prescribed, having regard to the population of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the State concerned.

Explanation—In this section, the expressions “Scheduled Castes” and
“Scheduled Tribes” shall have the meanings as in clauses (24) and (25)
of article 366 of the Constitution.

4. (1) No person shall be engaged as an apprentice to undergo
apprenticeship training in a designated trade unless such person or, if he
is a minor, his guardian has entered into a contract of apprenticeship with
the employer.

(2) The apprenticeship training shall be deemed to have commenced
on the date on which the contract of apprenticeship has been entered into
under sub-section (1).

(3) Every contract of apprenticeship may contain such terms and
conditions as may be agreed to by the parties to the contract:

Provided that no such term or condition shall be inconsistent with any
provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder,

(4) Every contract of apprenticeship entered into under sub-section
(1) shall be sent by the employer within such period as may be prescrib-
ed to the Apprenticeship Adviser for registration,

(5) The Apprenticeship Adviser shall not register a contract of
apprenticeship unless he is satisfied that the person described as ari
apprentice in the contract is qualified under this Act for being engaged
as an apprentice to undergo apprenticeship training in the designated
trade specified in the contract.

(6) Where the Central Government, after consulting the Central
Apprenticeship Council, makes any rule varying the terms and conditions
of apprenticeship training of any category of apprentices undergoing such
training, then, the terms and conditions of every contract of apprentice-
ship relating to that category of apprentices and subsisting immediately
before the making of such rule shall be deemed to have been modified
accordingly.

5. Where an employer with whom a_ contract of apprenticeship has
been entered into, is for any reason unable to fulfil his obligations
under the contract and with the approval of the Apprenticeship Adviser
it is agreed between the employer, the apprentice or his guardian and
any other employer that the apprentice shall be engaged as an apprentice
under the other employer for the unexpired portion of the period of
apprenticeship training, the agreement, on registration with the Appren-
ticeship Adviser, shail be deemed to be the contract of apprenticeship
between the apprentice or his guardian and the other employer, and on
and from the date of such registration, the contract of apprenticeship
with the first employer shall terminate and no obligation under that
contract shall be enforceable at the instance of any party to the contract
against the other party thereto, |



9

8 period of apprenticeship training, which shall be specified in
of apprenticeship, shall be as follows: —

(a) in the case of trade apprentices who, having undergone
tional training in a schoo] or other institution recognised by

al Council, have passed the trade tests conducted by that
uncil or by an institution recognised by that Council, the period
renticeship training shall be such as may be determined by
Council;

(a) in the case of trade apprentices who having undergone
tutional training in a school or other institution affiliated to or
gnised by a Board or State Council of Technical Education or
other authority which the Central Government may, by notifi-
m in the Official Gazette specify in this behalf, have passed the
tests conducted by that Board or State Council or authority,
period of apprenticeship training shall be such as may be pres-
+

(b) in the case of other trade apprentices, the period of appren-
eeship training shall be such as may be prescribed;

(c) in the case of graduate or technician apprentices, the period
“apprenticeship training shall be such as may be prescribed.

(1) The contract of apprenticeship shall terminate on the expiry of
‘period of apprenticeship training.

(2) Either party to a contract of apprenticeship may make an appli-
to the Apprenticeship Adviser for the termination of the contract,
rhen such application is made, shall send by post a copy thereof to
ler party to the contract.

After considering the contents of the application and the objec-

in writing, terminate the contract if he is satisfied that the
es to the contract or any of them have or has failed to carry out
terms and conditions of the contract and that it is desirable in the
s of the parties or any of them to terminate the same:

vided that where a contract is terminated—

7 (a) for failure on the part of the employer to carry out the
terms and conditions of the contract, the employer shall pay to the
_ apprentice such compensation as may be prescribed;

(b) for such failure on the part of the apprentice, the apprentice
or his guardian shall refund to the employer as cost of training such
amount as may be determined by the Apprenticeship Adviser.

8. (1) The Central Government shall, after consulting the Central
enticeship Council, by order notified in the Official Gazette, deter-
mine for each designated trade the ratio of trade apprentices to workers
ther than unskilled workers in that trade

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall be deemed
prevent any employer from engaging a number of trade apprentices
excess of the ratio determined under this sub-section,

Period of
appren-
ticeship
training,

Termina-
tion of
appren-
ticeship
contract.

if any, filed by the other party, the Apprenticeship Adviser may, .

Number
of ap.
prentices
for a de-
signated
trade.


10

(2) In determining the ratio under sub-section (1), the Central Gov-
ernment shall have regard to the facilities available for apprenticeship

training under this Act in the designated trade concerned as well as to _

the facilities that may have to be made available by an employer for
the training of graduate or technician apprentices, if any, in pursuance
of any notice issued to him under sub-section (3A) by the Central
Apprenticeship Adviser or such other person as is referred to in that
sub-section,

(3) The Apprenticeship Adviser may, by notice in writing, require an
employer to engage such number of trade apprentices within the ratio
determined by the Central Government for any designated trade in his
establishment, to undergo apprenticeship training in that trade and the
employer shall comply with such requisition:

Provided that in making any requisition under this sub-section, the
Apprenticeship Adviser shall have regard to the facilities actually avail-
able in the establishment concerned.

(3A) The Central Apprenticeship Adviser or any other person not
below the rank of an Assistant Apprenticeship Adviser authorised by the
Central Apprenticeship Adviser in writing in this behalf shall, having
regard to—

6) the number of managerial persons (including technical and
supervisory persons) employed in a designated trade;

(i) the number of management trainees engaged in the estab-
lishment;

(iii) the totality of the training facilities available in a desig-
nated trade; and

(w) such other factors as he may consider fit in the circum-
stances of the case,

by notice in writing, require an employer to impart training to such
number of graduate or technician apprentices in such trade in his estab-
lishment as may be specified in such notice and the employer shall comply
with such requisition.

Explanation.—In this sub-section the expression “management trainee”
means a person who is engaged by an employer for undergoing a course
of training in the establishment of the employer (not being apprentice-
ship training under this Act) subject to the condition that on successful
completion of such training, such person shall be employed by the em-
ployer on a regular basis.

(4) Several employers may join together for the purpose of providing
practical training to the apprentices under them by moving them between
their respective establishments.

(5) Where, having regard to the public interest, a number of
apprentices in excess of the ratio determined by the Central Government
or in excess of the number specified in a notice issued under sub-section
(3A) should in the opinion of the appropriate Government be trained,
the appropriate Government may require employers to train the addi-
tional number of apprentices.



Ir

(6) Every employer to whom such requisition as aforesaid is made,
comply with the requisition if the Government concerned makes
available such additional facilities and such additional financial assistance
as are considered necessary by the Apprenticeship Adviser for the
training of the additional number of apprentices.

(7) Any employer not satisfied with the decision of the Apprenticeship
_ Adviser under sub-section (6), may make a reference to the Central
Apprenticeship Council and such reference shall be decided by a
Committee thereof appointed by that Council for the purpose and the
decision of that Committee shall be final.

9. (1) Every employer shall make suitable arrangements in his work-
shop for imparting a course of practical training to every apprentice
engaged by him in accordance with the programme approved by the
Apprenticeship Adviser.

_. (2) The Central Apprenticeship Adviser or any other person not
below the rank of an Assistant Apprenticeship Adviser authorised by the
Central Apprenticeship Adviser in writing in this behalf shall be given
all reasonable facilities for access to each such apprentice with a view
to test his work and to ensure that the practical training js being imparted
in accordance with the approved programme: ;

Provided that the State Apprenticeship Adviser or any other person
~ not below the rank of an Assistant Apprenticeship Adviser authorised by
the State Apprenticeship Adviser in writing in this behalf shall also be
given such facilities in respect of apprentices undergoing training int
establishments in relation to which the appropriate Government is the
State Government.

:

:

(3) Such of the trade apprentices as have not undergone institutional
training in a school or other institution recognised by the National Council
or any other institution affiliated to or recognised by a Board or State
Council of Technical Education or any other authority which the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this
behalf, shall, before admission in the workshop for practical training,
undergo a course of basic training.

(4) Where an employer employs in his establishment five hundred or
more workers, the basic training shall be imparted to the trade apprentices
either in separate parts of the workshop building or in a separate building
which shall be set up by the employer himself, but the appropriate
Government may grant loans to the employer on easy terms and repay-
able by easy instalments to meet the cost of the land, construction and
equipment for such separate building.

(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), if the
number of apprentices to be trained at any time in any establishment in
which five hundred or more workers are employed, is less than twelve the
employer in relation to such establishment may depute all or any of such
apprentices to any Basic Training Centre or Industrial Training Institute

. for basic training in any designated trade, in either case, run by the
Government.

(4B) Where an employer deputes any apprentice under sub-section
(4A), such employer shall pay to the Government the expenses incurred

Practi-
cal and
basic
train-
ing of
appren-
tices,


Related
instruc-
tion of
appren-
tices,

12

by the Government on such training, at such rate as may be specified by

the Central Government. \

(5) Where an employer employs in his establishment less than five
hundred workers, the basic training shall be imparted to the trade appren-
tices in training institutes set up by the Government.

(6) In any such training institute, which shall be located within the
premises of the most suitable establishment in the locality or at any other
convenient place, the trade apprentices engaged by two or more employers
may be imparted basic training.

(7) In the case of an apprentice other than a graduate or technician
apprentice, the syllabus of, and the equipment to be utilised for, practical
training including basic training shall be such as may be approved by the
Central Government in consultation with the Central Apprenticeship
Council.

(7A) In the case of graduate or technician apprentices the programme
of apprenticeship training and the facilities required for such training in
any subject field in engineering or technology shall be such as may be
approved by the Central Government in consultation with the Central
Apprenticeship Council.

(8) (a) Recurring costs (including the cost of stipends) incurred by an
employer in connection with practical training, including basic training,
imparted to trade apprentices other than those referred to in clauses (०)
and (aa) of section 6 shall be borne—

(i) if such employer employs five hundred workers or more, by
the employer;

(ii) if such employer employs less than five hundred workers, by
the employer and the Government in equal shares up to such limit as
may be laid down by the Central Government and beyond that limit,
by the employer alone; and

(b) recurring costs (including the cost of stipends), if any, incurred by
an employer in‘connection with practical training, including basic training,
imparted to trade apprentices referred to in clauses (a) and (qa) of sec-
tion 6 shall, in every case, be borne by the employer;

(c) recurring costs (excluding the cost of stipends) incurred by an
employer in connection with the practical training imparted to graduate
or technician apprentices shall be borne by the employer and the cost of
stipends shall be borne by the Central Government and the employer in
equal shares up to such limit as may be laid down by the Central Govern-
ment and beyond that limit, by the employer alone.

10. (1) & trade apprentice who is undergoing practical training in
an establishment shall, during the period of practical training, be given a
course of related instruction (which shall be appropriate to the trade)
approved by the Central Government in consultation with the Central
Apprenticeship Council, with a view to giving the trade apprentice such
theoretical knowledge as he needs in order to become fully qualified as a
skilled craftsman.

(2) Related instruction shall be imparted at the cost of the appropriate
Government but the employer shall, when so required, afford all facilities
for imparting such instruction.



ig

Any time spent by a trade apprentice jn attending classes on
instruction shall be treated as part of his paid period of work,

(4) In the case of trade apprentices who, after having undergone a
158 of institutional training, have passed the trade tests conducted by

(5) Where any person has, during his course in a technical institution,
become a graduate or technician apprentice and during his apprenticeship
training he has to receive related instruction, then, the employer shall
Telease such person from practical training to receive the related instruc-
tion in such institution, for such period as may be specified by the
Central Apprenticeship Adviser or by any other person not below the
tank of an Assistant Apprenticeship Adviser authorised by the Central
Apprenticeship Adviser in writing in this behalf.

HL. Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act, every employer
shall have the following obligations in relation to an apprentice, namely: —

i
|

(4) to provide the apprentice with the training in his trade in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, and the rules made there-
under;

(0) if the employer is not himself qualified in the trade, to ensure
that a person who possesses the prescribed qualifications is piaced in
charge of the training of the apprentice; and

(c) to carry out his obligations under the contract of apprentjce-
ship. =

12. (1) Every trade apprentice undergoing apprenticeship training
shall have the following obligations, namely: —

(4) to learn his trade conscientiously and diligently and endeavour
to qualify himself ag a skilled craftsman before the expiry of the
period of training; | |

(b) to attend practical and instructional classes regularly;

(c) to carryout all lawful orders of his employer and superiors in
the establishment; and i

(d) to carry out his obligations under the contract of apprentice-
ship. f

(2) Every graduate or technician apprentice undergoing apprentice.
ship training shall have the following obligations, namely: —

(a) to learn his subject field in engineering or technology con-
scientiously and diligently at his place of training;

(9) to attend the practical and instructional classes regularly;

(०) to carry out all lawful orders of his employer and superiors in
the establishment;

Obliga-
tions of
employers,

Obliga-
tions of
appren.
tices,


Payment
to appren-
tices.

Health,
safety
and
welfare

of appren-
tices,

Hours
of work,
over.
time,
leave
and iF]
holi-
days.

Emplo-
yer’s liabi-
lity for
compen-
sation

for

injury.
Conduct
and dis-
cipline,

Appren-
tices are
trainees
and not
‘workers,

14

(d) to carry out his obligations under the contract of apprenti
ship which shal] include the maintenance of such records of his |
as may be prescribed.

13. (1) The employer shall pay to every apprentice during the period
of apprenticeship training such stipend at a rate not less than the pres-
cribed minimum rate, or the rate which was being paid by the employer
on Ist January, 1970 to the category of apprentices under which such
apprentice fails, whichever is higher, as may be specified in the contract
of apprenticeship and the stipend so specified shall be paid at such intervals
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.

(2) An apprentice shall not be paid by his employer on the basis of —
piece work nor shall he be required to take part in any output bonus or
other incentive scheme.

14, Where any apprentices are undergoing training in a factory, the
provisions of Chapters III, IV and V of the Factories Act, 1948, shall apply
in relation to the health, safety and welfare of the apprentices as if they
were workers within the meaning of that Act and when any apprentices
are undergoing training in a mine, the provisions of Chapter V of! the
Mines Act, 1952, shall apply in relation to the health and safety of the
apprentices as if they were persons employed in the mine.

15. (1) The weekly and daily hours of work of an apprentice while
undergoing practical training in a workshop shall be such as may be
prescribed.

(2) No apprentice shall be required or allowed to work overtime except
with the approval of the Apprenticeship Adviser who shall not grant such
approval unless he is satisfied that such overtime is in the interest of the
training of the apprentice or in the public interest.

(3) An apprentice shall be entitled to such leave as may be prescribed
and to such holidays as are observed in the establishment in which he is
undergoing training.

16. If personal injury is caused to an apprentice by accident arising out
of and in the course of his training as an apprentice, his employer shall be
liable to pay compensation which shall be determined and paid, so far as
may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation
Act, 1923, subject to the modification specified ia the Schedule.

17. In all matters of conduct and discipline, the apprentice shall be
governed by the rules and regulations applicable to employees of the cor-
responding category in the establishment in which the apprentice is under-
going training.

18. Save as otherwise provided in this Act—
(a) every apprentice undergoing apprenticeship training in a

designated trade in an establishment shall be a trainee and not a
worker; and

(b) the provisions of any law with respect to labour shall not
apply to or in relation to such apprentice,


15

. (1) Every employer shall maintain records of the progress of
ling of each apprentice undergoing apprenticeship training in his
ishment in such form as may be prescribed.

(2) Every such employer shall also furnish such information and
in such form, to such authorities and at such intervals as may be
71060.

20. (1) Any disagreement or dispute between an employer and an
entice arising out of the contract of apprenticeship shall be referred
to the Apprenticeship Adviser for decision,

(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Apprenticeship
viser under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days from the date of
nication to him of such decision, prefer an appeal against the
ecision to the Apprenticeship Council and such appeal shall be heard and
“determined by a Committee of that Council appointed for the purpose.

(8) The decision of the Committee under sub-section (2) and subject
only to such decision, the decision of the Apprenticeship Adviser under
sub-section (1) shall be final.

21. (1) Every trade apprentice who has completed the period of
training shall appear for a test to be conducted by the National Council to
determine his proficiency in the designated trade in which he has under-
gone his apprenticeship training.

(2) Every trade apprentice who passes the test referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be granted a certificate of proficiency in the trade by the
National Council.

(3) The progress in apprenticeship training of every graduate or
technician apprentice shall be assessed by the employer from time to
time.

(4) Every graduate or technician apprentice, who completes his ap-
prenticeship training to the satisfaction of the Central Apprenticeship
Council, shall be granted a certificate of proficiency by that Council.

22, (1) It shall not be obligatory on the part of the employer to offer
any employment to any apprentice who has completed the peyiod of his
apprenticeship training in his establishment, nor shall it be obligatory on
the part of the apprentice to accept an employment under the employer.

|
1
|

(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), where there is a
condition in a contract of apprenticeship that the apprentice shall, after the
successful completion of the apprenticeship training, serve the employer,
the employer shall, on such completion, be bound to offer suitable employ-
ment to the apprentice, and the apprentice shall be bound to serve the
employer in that capacity for such period and on such remuneration as
may be specified in the contract:

Provided that where such period or remuneration is not, in the opinion
of the Apprenticeship Adviser, reasonable, he may revise such period or
remuneration so as to make jt reasonable, and the period or remuneration
so revised shall be deemed to be the period or remuneration agreed to
between the apprentice and the employer.

* * * ® *

Records
and
returns,

Settle-
ment of
disputes,

Holding
of test
and
grant of

' certi-

ficate and
conclu-
sion of
training.

Offer
and
accept-
ance of
employ-
ment,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Apprentices Act, 1961,

(Shri P. A. Sangma,
Minister of State in the
Ministry of Labour).