As INTftODUCID IN LoIC SAaRA ON 
Bill No. 52 .f un 
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MEMBERS OF 
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parlia~nt 
Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by ParliamenJt in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows;-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Members Sbmt 
of Parliament (Amend~ent) Act, 1969. title 
and 
5 (2) This section and section 2 shall be deemed to have come into force l'om-
on the 16th day of May, 1969 and the other provisions of this Act shall --;,--
come into force at once. m_ 
30 of 1964, 2. In the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliameat Act, 195" AIDeDd-
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 3, for tbe worcW -*CIf !u!!ction 3, 44thirty-one rupees", the words "fifty-one rupees" shall be substituted. 

Travel by 
air. 
" ... 
3. In section 6 of the principal Act, in the Explanation to sub-section 
(1), foI' the words "For the purposes of this sub-section", the words, 
bradr.etl, ft~s and letter "For the purposes of this sub-section and 
sub--seetion (1) of section 6A" shall be substituted. 
'" After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be " 
inserted, namely:-
'~A. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sectiOll 6, eYfIIr/ 
IDember shall be entitled to travel by air from any place iD IDdia to 
aay other plaee in India on paymeDt ef tbe difhreDce between the 
air fare and the first class railway fare for the journey between the I 
aforesaid placM. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to a journey of the nature 
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 4 performed by a member .... 

S'fATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the Bill is to amend the Salaries and Allowan~s of 
Members of Parliament Act, 1954, with a view to entitling the metnbers 
of Parliament to draw daiiy allowance at an increased rate of fifty.:obe 
rupees for each day during any period of resid~ on duty instead of 
thirty~ne rupees as admissible at present. Tb'e Bill alia seeks to entitle 
the members to travel by air by paying the difference between the ftrst 
class rail fare and the air fare. 
The above two amendments are being made after considering the 
recotnmendatioris of the Joint Committee on Salary, Allowances and 
other Amenities to Members of Parliament as contained in its report 
presented to Lok Sabha on the 7th August, 1968. 
NEW DBUU.; K. RAGHUI\AMAIAH. 
The 14th May, 1969. 
.j - •. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to enhance the rate of daily allowanc.e pay-
able to members of Parliament under section 3 of the Salaries and Allew-
Rncea of Members of Parliament Act, 1954 from thirty-one rupees to 
ftfty-one rupees per day. It is estimated that the financial effect on 
account of this increased daily allowance is likely to be Rs. 42'00 lakhs 
per year. Clause. of the Bill seeks to insert a new section SA in the Act 
under which members of Parliament will be entitled to travel by air trom 
any place in India to any other place in India on payment of the difference 
between the air fare and the first class railway fare for the journey 
between the aforesaid places. The financial effect on account of this faci-
lity cannot be estimated at present. 

S8 of 19S2. 
20 of 1953 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SALARIES AND ALLoWANCES OF Mi:MBas OF PARLIAMDn' 
AJ:r, 1954 
(30 OF 1954) 
• • • • • 
3. A member shall be entitled to receive a salary at the rate of tlve ..... 
hundred rupees per mensem during the whole of his term of ofIlee and at 
subject to any rules made under this Act an allowance at the rate of =-
thtrty-one rupees for each day during any period of residence on duty ..... 
• • • • • 
6. (1) Every member shall be provided with one free non-transferable .... 
ftrat class pass which shall entitle him to travel at any time by any rail- = 
way in India. WIIF. 
ErpZanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, a member shall 
include a Minister as deftned in ~e Salaries and Allowances of MmJsters 
Act, 1952, and an officer of Parliament as deflned in the Salaries and 
Allowances of OfBcers of Parliament Act, 1953, other than the Chairman 
of the Council of States. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to ammd the Salaries aad Allowances of Members of Parliament 
Act,1954. 
<, , I 
\ Shn K. ROIhuramaiah, 
Minisur of Parllt1lflllltary 
Affairs, and ShlPPirIK and 
Trans'/XW1. ) 