THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS 
OF SERVICE) AMENDMENT BILL" 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABBA 
ON 29111 AUGUST, 1961) 

!~520f 1"1 
THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS 
OF SERVICE) AMENDMENT BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the High Court Judges (Conditions Short title. 
of Service) Amendment Act, 1961. 
5 2. In section 2 of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment 
28 of 195.. Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub- of section 2. 
section (1) after clause (g), the following clause shall be, and 
shall be deemed always to have been, inserted, namely:-
'(gg) "pension" means a pension of any kind wha~ever 
10 payable to Or in respect of a Judge, and includes any gratuity 
or other sum or sums so payable by way of death or retire-
ment benefits;'. 
3. After section 17 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion of 
shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been inserted neW section , '17A. 
IS namely:-
"17A. Where any Judge who has elected to receive the Family 
pension payable to him under Part II or Part III of the First :rc:s~f~!.~nd 
Schedule dies, whether before or after retirement, In cIrcums-
tances to which section 17 does not apply, a famUy pension or 

2 
gratuity, if any, shall be payable to the person or persons entitled 
thereto under the ordinary rules of his service if he had not been 
appointed a Judge, his service as a Judge being treated as ser-
vice therein for the purpose of calculating that family pension 
. or gratuity.". 
Amen~ment 4. In section 24 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the 
of section 24· following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Par-
liament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 10 
which may be comprised in one session or in two successive. 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is 
- so laid or the session immediately follOWing, both Houses agree 
in makin,g any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule shoulrl not be made, the rule s11a11 thereafter have IS 
effect only in such modified form or be of no €.fleet, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modific.ltbn or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to. the validity of anything previous-
ly done under the rule.". 
... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the provisions of the High Court Judges (Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1954, os they stand at present a service Judge 
who does not elect to receive pension under Part I of the First Sche-
dule to the Act is entitled to the pension admissible to him under 
the ordinary rules of his service and an additional pension accord-
ing to the scale laid down in Part II or Part III of the First Sche-
dule, as the case may be. 
2. During the last few years, most of the State Governments have 
liberalised the pension rules applicable to the members of the State 
Judicial Services or the State Higher Judicial Services so as to 
provide for payment of other retirement benefits besides pension, for 
example, family pension and death-cum-retirement . gratuity. A 
question has been raised that the term "pension" as used in the 
High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, means only a 
periodical payment and does not include gratuity or any other re-
tirement benefits. As the intention was that such Judges should 
get all the retirement benefits admissible to them under the ordinary 
rules of their service, in additinn to the additional pension, it has 
become necessary to amend the Act suitably to make the position 
clear. It is also considered necessary to give retrospective effect to 
the proposed amendments to cover past cases· The Bill seeks to 
achieve this object 
NEW DELHI; B. N. DATAR. 
The 23rd August, 1961. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will involve some 
additioool expenditure on account of payment of death-cum-retire-
ment gratuity or family pension in respect of service Judgcs who 
elect to receive pension under Part II or Part III of the First Sche-
dule to the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 
and who may be entitled to such benefits under the ordinary rules 
of their service if they had not been appointed High Court Judges. 
The expenditure on account of payment of family pensions and 
death-cum-retirement gratuities will be first charged on the Consoli-
dated Fund of India and subsequently recovered from the States 
concerned. It is not possible to give any accurate estimate of the 
amount of expenditure involved. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACT 1'ItO~ TID HIGH COUBT J'UDGBS (CONDITIONS OF SERVICZ) 
Act, 1844 .. (.28 .• 01' 1954) 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
(.9) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less 
than thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon as may 
be after they are made and shall be subject to such modifications as 
ParU.ent ~. make during. the session in which they. are so laJd 
or the session immediately following. 
• • • • • 
PowC1'1O 
IIIIIke raleI. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of ServiCe) 
Act, 1954. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended 10 
Lok Sablia the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri B. N. Datar, 
Minister of State in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs.) 