As INTRODUCED IN LoE SABJL\ OK 
" • ~~" .,. .... .., ' •• -1>0 • _'. ., "..-." 
'j I 
Bill No. g oritz: 
THE COAL MINES (CONSERVATION AND SAFETY) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 1962. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the BepubUc 
of IndJa as follows:-
1. 'nrls Act may be called the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Short title. 
Amendment Act, 1970. 
12 of 1911. 5 Z. In the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 1952 (herein- AmIDCl-
after referred to as the principal Act), in the l0Dit title, for the wordl ment of 
"safety in", the words "safety in, and development of," shall be IUbltf- .. title. 
tuted. 
a. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (l), for the bractetI . Amead-
10 and worda "(Conservation and Safety) ", the brackets and worda If (Con- IfteDt of 
servatioft, Safety and Development)" shall be substJtuted. MCUoD 1. 
4. In section 2 of the principal Act, for the words "regulation 
the worc.ta "reJUlation and development or' .hall be substituted. 
01", 
5. In section 3 of the principal Act, ...... AmeDd-
(i) for clause <f), the folloWing clause .hall be substituted, :::!m~ 
namely:-
• (f) "Development Fund" meaD8 the Coal Development 
Fund constituted under section 12;'; 

Amend-
ment of 
lectionD. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 7. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 11. 
Payment 
to the 
Coal 
Board. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 12. 
1 
(it) after claWle (h1J.), the following clause shall be inserted, 
name1y:- · , 
, (hha) "Safety Fund" means the Coal Mines Safety 
Conservation Fund constituted under section 12;'. 
•. In section 5 of the principal Act,-
and 
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words "safety in coal mines", 
the words "or for development of coal mines" shall be inserted; 
(ti) in sub-section (2), for the words "safety in coal mines", 
the words "safety in, or development of, coal mines" shall be lubl-
tituted. 
7. In section 7 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1). after the words "safety in coal mines", 
the words "or for development of coal mines" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words "safety in coal mines", 
the words "or for development of coal mines" shall be inserted. 15 
8. For section 11 of the principal Act, the follOwing section shall be, 
and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
-tl. The CeDtral Government may, in each ftnancial year, pay 
to the Board • .... not exceedlng the aggregate of the net proceeds 
(c1etermlDed in such manner u may be prescribed) of the duties of 20 
ueiIe eo1lected, ander section 8, during the period eommencin, OIl 
the date of commencement of this Act and ending on the last day of 
the preceding flnanclal year, less the aggregate of the amounts a1. 
ready paid to the Boud, under this section, during that period.". 
•. In section 12 of the princi.pal Act,- 25 
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be IUbs-
tituted, naInely:-
" (1) The sum referred to in section 11 and any other money 
received by the Board shall be credited to,-
(a) where it relates to safety in coal mines or conser- 30 
vation of coal, a Fund to be called the Coal Mines Safety 
and Conservation Fund, 
(b) where it relates to the developing of coking coal 
mines, a Fund to be called the Coal Development Fund. 
(lA) The Safety Fund shall be applied by the Board, in 35 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be pres-
cribed, to-
(4) meeting the expenses in connection. with the admi-
nistration of the Board and the furtherance of the objects 
of this Act in 10 far as such objects relate to safety in coal 040 
mines or conservation of coal; 
(b) the grant of stowing materials and other assistance 
for stoWing operations to the owners, agents or maDB.geJ'I of 
coal mfne8; 

, 
10 
15 
:ao 
2S 
30 
3 
(c) the execution of stowing and other operations in fur. 
therance of the objects of this Act in so far u such objects 
relate to safety in coal mines or conservation of coal: 
(d) the prosecution of research work connected with 
safety in coal mines or conservation and utilisation of coal; 
(e) meeting the cost of administering the Safety Fund 
and the expenses in connection with Advisory Committees; 
(f) the grant to State Governments, research organi-
sations, local authorities and owners, agents or managers of 
coal mines of money in aid of any scheme approved by the 
Central Government in furtherance of the objects of this 
Act in so far as such objects relate to safety in coal mines 
or conservation of coal; 
(g) any other expenditure which the Central Govern-
ment directs to be defrayed out of the Safety Fund. 
(IB) The Development Fund shall 'be applied by the Board. 
In such manner and subject to such conditions u may be pil"AI-
crlbed, to-
(a) development of coal mines in a scientiftc manDer, 
(b) meeting the cost of the administration of any scheme 
for the development of coal mines."; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), fOT the words "aecounts of the lI'und", 
the words "separate accounts in relation to the Development Fund 
and the Safety Fund" shall be substituted. 
10. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3~ ,- Amencl-mentof 
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, I8CtIon 17. 
name1y:-
"(aa) the measures to be taken for the development of 
coal mines;": 
(if) in clause (f), for the words "Coal Mines Safety and Con-
servation Fund", the words "Development Fund or the Safety 
Fund, as the case may be," shall be substituted; 
(iii) in clause (g), for the word "Fund", the words "Develop-
ment Fund or the Safety Fund" shall ~ I\1bstitutf4 . 
... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the existing Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 1ge2, 
the Coal Board can exercise two functions, viz. "Conservation" and 
"Safety". The development of Coal Mines, especially those producing 
coking coal, has assumed importance in view of the searee resources on 
the one hand and growing needs of the metallUrgical industry on the 
other. The Coal Board, with its knowledge of coal industry, is best 
suited to discharge this function. The Bill seeks to amend the Coal 
Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 1952, toinelude "development 
of Coal Mines" also, as an additional function of the Coal Board 
NEW DBLliI; JAGANATPI RAO. 
The 9th April, uno. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER. ARTICLE 11' 0" THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of lette,r No. CVIII-I0(1)!69-CI, dated the 28th April, 1970 from 
Shri J~anath Rao, Minister of State in the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Chemic8ls, and Mines and Metals to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the Blll 
further to amene the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 1952, 
recommends introduction of the Bill in the·Lok Sabha.under clause (1) of 
IIl"t1cle 117 and its COnsideration under clause (3) of article 117 of the 
Constitution. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM: 
hdse duty @ &. 2'44 per tonne of cokiQi coal and 11& 1'68 
::. of. non-coking CQal raised and despatched from collierie:. in :: 
tzy 1& levied at present under section 8 of the 1"1 __ 1 '11." (Con servation and Sal ty) A \oAHU DoUnea • fi t in ta e ct, 1952. The collections are credited in the 
;: : 7:ce ~ the Consolidated Fund of Inaia. An additional excise 
fr ty 0 paISe per tonne is being leVied on coking coal with ejpect 
, am the 14th October, 1968. Its proceeds are to be utilised for deve-
lopment of eoal mines. Payments are being made to the Coal l\(iIUJI 
Ccmservatfon and' safety Fund of the Coal Board each year from the 
Consolidated Fund"of India by Parliamentary Appropriation. which the 
~ard utilises for conservation" and "safety" purposes. When the Bill 
mes an Act, payments wUl also be made to the Coal Deftlopment 
Fund which the Coal Board will utilise for the purpose of developmer:t 
of Coal Mines including the cost of administration of the scheme. Total 
payments to the two Funds ih each flnancial vear will, boweveraot 
exeeed the aggregate of the net procepds of the 'duties of excise coJ.iectecl 
up to the end of the preceding finanCial year less the aggregate of the' 
amounts already paid to the Coal Board till the pnd ot that financial 
rear ~ide clause 8 of the BUI. 
2. There is no non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated 
lI'und of Indip. Recurring exppndfture from the Consolidated Fund of 
India win be in the form of paymentc; which will he made to the Coal 
Board each year from the collection of E'xcf!'lE' d\1tv !!pp.cfftcal1v levied on 
coking coal for development purpo!'le. a!! such cnnection~ ,rill in the 
ftrst instance be credited to the ComlOlidatt>d Fund of India. Col1PCtfoa 
of , levy varies from year to year dependfn~ on the quantfty of e""l 
raised and despatched. The present annual collection work" out to 
about Rr. ] l' 25 crares, includin~ about Rs. ]. 25 cro~ relatable to devp.-
]opmental levy, which may Increase to About :RI!, 17 cr01"e!l nnd Rs. J 
crores. respectively. by 19'73-74. The t>xact Amount that ma,' bt! paid 
to the Coal Board each year on this account cannot be precf!lelv alllMlC!d·. 
but the payment to the two Funds wf11 in anv r.:!'1e be smb1ect to the-
restrictions 1~1d down in clau~e 8 of the ~f1l And h,. ,,1~0 "ubiPcl: tn the-
PfI.,.1fAmentarv apnrovRl, It is. howev".r. exnPctPd that. on an avera ... 
.. ueh payments durfn~ th,. Fourth "tv,. VPAr PlAn "",",orY "'.,,, mu""y 
bf. of the O1"deT· of Rs. 14 C'T01"f"" per annum. fnc1udfn~ :R.iII. "7~ (!!"OI'ft' 
relatabl,. to development levv. 
", Tn lHlnruance of the ]"P.(!ommpndatinns of the Admfnfstratiw R@-
fonns Commission. the whole "et un of thp. COAl BMm f" nniifOT l'evf~ 
and the administrative set UP sepal1ltelv for oneratfnp th,. Cna' neve-
10l)1'nent Fund in the re-orv.anfsed !'IE't un of thp COAl ROllrdcannot be 
Indfcated preciRelv nOW, Tt wfll howpver. hE' enc:ured that the addl-
ttonal SP.f: up for this plll"J)OlIe will be kent to the mfnlmum, havin( re-
I!'ard to the need for economv in admlnf!ltratfvf" expenditure. Tt Is esti-
mated that the expenditure ~f the Coal Board on thIs aCt'ount may 
I'OURhlv lMt of tJw Mder of Rs. l' 50 lakh .. ; per annum. 
~,.,.,Jt 1:. , 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill, which seeks to substitute a new section for sec-
tion 11 of the principal Act, empowers the Central Government to frame 
rules with regard to the manner in which the net proceeds of the duties 
of excise collected under section 8 shall be determined. 
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert new sub-sections (IA) and (IB) 
in section 12 of the principal Act. The said sub-sections seek to em-
power the Central Government to specify by rules the conditions sub-
ject to which the Safety Fund and the Development Fund shall be app-
lied by the Board. 
The matters with respect to which such rules may be made are mat-
ters of detail within the scope of the general proviSions of the Act· and 
it is not possible to provide for them in the Act. The delegation of the 
legislative power ii, therefore, of a normal character. 
6 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COAL MINES (CONSERVATION Am) SAnrr) Aer,1952 
(12 or 1952) 
An Act to provide for the conservation of coal and make lurth.er provi-
sion for safety in coal mines 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines 
Safety) Act, 1952. 
• • • • • 
(CoDiervation and Short title 
and_-
teDt. 
Z. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public inteNIt that 
the Central Government should take under its control the regulation of 
coal mines to the extent hereinafter provided. 
3. In this Act, unIeas the context otherwise requil'el,-
• • • • • 
(j) uFund" means the Coal Mines Safety and Conaervation Fund 
constituted under section 12; 
• • • • • 
Deelara. 
UODUto 
expedI. 
ency of 
CODtrol 
byCeDt-
ralOov-
emment. 
DeftD1-
tlODa' 
5. (1) The Board may, for the purpose of maintenance of .fety in I\mctionJ 
coal mines or for conservation of coal, exercise such powers and dJJ. of the 
charge such duties as may be assigned to it by or under this Act. Board. 
(2) The Central Government may, by general or specJal order, dele-
gate to the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations (if any) 
as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and duties under tbfI 
Act or under any other law for the time being in force u it may deem 
necessary for e1fectively dealing with problems relating to aatety in eoa1 
mines or conservation of coal and matters connected therewith or incl-
dental thereto. 
• • • • • 
7. (1) The Central Government may, for the Purpo8e of maintenance 
of safety in coal mines or for conservation of coal, exercise IUCh powel'l 
and take or cause to be taken all such measures as it may deem necel-
sary or proper or as may be prescribed. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the 
Central Government may, by order in writing addreaed to the owner, 
agent or manager ot a coal mine, require him to take such me8lUr81 .. 
it may think necessary for the purpose of maintenance of safety tn coal 
mines or for conservation of coal, including-
(4) in any coal mine, stowing for safety: or 
(b) without prejudice to any order under claU8e (4), in the cue 
of any coal mine producing coking coal or produdng coal which on 
7 
~.l'tI 
of Central 
Govem. 
meot in 
l'IIPICt of • 
..tetT ill 
eoalmiDel 
and COD-
Ift'Vat1oD 
of coal. 

Payment 
to the 
Coal 
Board. 
Mone'}' 
received 
by the 
Board to 
be cre-
dited te 
the !'undo 
'Power to 
mae 
rut •• 
8 
beneficiation is likely to yield coking coal or producing coal 1Ult-
able for blending, stowing for conservation; or 
(e) washing of coal with a view to beneficiating and reducing 
the ash contents of coal and improving its coking qualities . 
• • • • • 
11. The Central Government may. in each ftnancial ye8ll', pay to the 
Board a sum not exceeding the net proceeds (determined in such manner 
as maYbe prescribed) of the duties of excise collected under section 8 
during the preceding financial year. 
12. (1) The sum referred to in section 11 and any other money re-
ceived by the Board shall be credited to a Fund to be called the Coal 
Mines Safety and Conservation Fund which shall be applied by the 
Board, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be pres-
CIi,bed, to-
(a) meeting the expenses in connection, with the administra-
tion of the Board and the furtherance of the objects of this Act; 
(b) the grant of stoWing materials and other assistance for 
stowing operations to the owners, agentc; or managers of coal mines; 
(c) the execution of stowing and other operations in furtherance 
of the objects of this Act; 
(41) the prosecution of research work connected with safety in 
coal mines or conservation and utilisation of coal; 
(e) meeting the cost of administering the Fund and the expen-
ses in connection with AdVisory Committees; 
(f) the grant to State Government!';, researeh organisations, local 
authorities and owners, agents or managers of coal mines of money 
in aid of any scheme approved by the Central Government in fur-
therance of the objects of this Act; 
(g) any other expenditure which the Central Government directs 
to be defrayed out of the Flmd. 
(2) The Board shall keep accounts of the Fund, and mch accounts 
shall be examined and audited bv the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India at such times and in such manner as he deems fit and the report 
of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shan be laid, as soon as 
may be, before Parliament. 
• • • • • 
1'1. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, sueh 
rules may proVide for all or any of the. follOWing matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(f) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to whieh. 
sums at the credit of the Coal Mines Safety and Conservation Fund 
may be appUed; 
(g) the form in which the accounts of the Fund shall be kept; 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
Bn..L 
further to aunend the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 1952. 
(SIri JilIl/IIIMh &10. 
M'" Dj St. in till 
MiniIIry of P"""" tIfItl 
C".".." aNd MiIw tIIId 
MIIala.) 