BID No. P of 1'51 
THE DELHI JOINT WATER AND SEWAGE BOARD 
(AMENDMENT) BILL,1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the DeLhi Joint Water and Sewage aoard Act, 
1926, for certain purposes. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. Short title and commencement.-(1) This Act may be called 
the Delhi Joint Water and Sewage Board (Amendment) Act, 1954. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- S 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. Amendment of section 12, Act xxm of 19Z8.-The proviso to 
sub-section (1) of section 12 of the Delhi Joint Water and Sewage 
Board Act, 1926 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) shall 
be omitted. 10 
3. Amendment of section 13, Act XXDI of 1926.- The proviso to 
sub-section (4) of section 13 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
4. Amendment of section 14, Ad XXIII of 19Z6.-In section 14 of 
the principal Act,-
(i) in· sub-section (l), the words "or, in the case of an ex- IS 
cess over the three annas rate payable by the Delhi Municipal 
Committee, from the Central Government" shall be omitted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), the words, figures and brackets "or, 
in the case of any amount recovered in excess from the Central 
Government under sub-section (4) of section 13, to the Central 20 
Government" shall be omitted; 
(iii) sub-sections (3) and (4) shall be omitted. 
5. Omission of section 14B, Ad XXIII of 19Z6.-Section 14B of 
the principal Act shall be omitted. 

2 
6. Insertion of new section 10' in Ad XXUI of 19Z6.-After 
section 14E of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"Manner of recovery of certain sums due to the Board 
5 14F. Recovery of eertain~ SqDlS due to the Board as arrears of 
land revenue.-Any sums due under an agreement entered into 
under section 14A or in respect of the sale of any effiuent or sludgle 
under sub-section (2) of section 14C may, on a certificate issued by 
the President of the Board to the effect that the sums are due and 
10 have remained unpaid for not less than three months, be recovered 
by the Collector of the Delhi District in the same manner as an 
arrear of land revenue, from the person with whom the agreement 
was made or from any other person who has benefited from the 
supply of water or, as the case may be, from the person to whom 
IS the effluent or sludge was sold." 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The proviso to sub-section (1) of section 12 of the Delhi Joint 
Water and Sewage Board Act, 1926, makes the Central Government 
responsible in certain circumstances for payment of a part of the 
dues of the Delhi Municipal Committee to the Delhi Joint Water and 
Sewage Board in respect of filtered water supplied by the latter to 
the former. It is considered that there is no justification for Govern-
ment undertaking an indefinite and recurring liability of this kind 
in the case of the Delhi Municipal Committee alone, especially, 
when other local bodies in Delhi pay their full dues to the Delhi 
.Toint Water and Sewa~e Board. The present Bill seeks to relieve 
the Government of India of this liability by deleting the proviso to 
sub-section (1) of section 12 of the Act. It also makes certain other 
consequential changes in the Act. 
The Act also requires amendment for another purpose. Sewage 
effluent is supplied to a number of private individuals for cultiva-
tion purposes at certain rates by the Board. In recent years· a nwn-
ber of these persons have defaulted payment to the Board. The Blll 
proposes to recover arrears from such defaulters as arrears of land 
revenue. 
AMRIT KAUR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 11th November, 1954. 

4 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI JOINT WA'l'ER AND SEWAGE BoARD ACT, 1926 
(No. XXIII OF 1926). 
• • • • 
12. Constituent bodies to pay actual cost of lupply of water.-(l) 
. Each constituent body shall pay for the water supplied to it the 
.actual cost of supplying such water at a rate in respect of each 
thousand gallons of water supplied (hereinafter referred to as the 
final issue rate) calculated in the manner prescribed in this 
section: 
Provided that the Delhi Municipal Committee shall be required 
to pay, in respect of each financial year, for the actual water suppli-
ed to it or for one thousand four hundred and sixty million gallons 
of water, whichever amount is greater, at the final issue rate or at 
the rate of three annas per thousand gallons, whichever is less, and 
any. amount by which the price at the final issue rate of the supply 
actually taken by the Committee exceeds the sum so payable by 
the Committ.e~ shall be payable to the Board by the Central Go-
vernment. 
• • • 
13. Provisional collecting rate. 
• • • • 
(4) Each constituent body shall pay on demand after the close 
of each quarter of each financial year the cost of the water supplied 
to it in that quarter calculated at the collecting rate: 
Provided that, in the ease of the water supplied to the Delhi 
Municipal Committee, if the collecting rate exceeds the rate of three 
annas per thousand gallons, the difference between the amount 
payable at that rate and the amount payable at the collecting rate 
shall be payable to the Board by the Central Government. 
• • • • 
14. Final settlemeat of account.-(l) If the final issue rate for 
any financial year exceeds the collecting rate determined for that 
year, the balance due shall be recovered from each constituent body, 
or, in the case of an excess over the three annas rate payable by the 
Delhi Municipal Committee, from the Central Governmel:'t. 
(2) If the final issue rate is less than the collecting rate, the ex-
cess collection shall be refunded to the constituent bodies from whom 
it was collected or, in the case of any amount recovered in excess 
from the Central Government under sub-section (4) of section 13. 
to the Central Government. 
(3) If the total amount of water supplied during any financial 
year to the Delhi Municipal Committee is found to have been less 
than the minimum prescribed in sub-section (1) of section 12, the 
payment for the deficiency calculated at the final issue rate or at the 
rate of three annas per thousand gallons, whichever is less, shall 
be recovered from the Delhi Municipal Committee. 

5 
(4) Where any amount has been recovered under sub-section (3) 
from the Delhi Municipal Committee, then, if any recovery has 
been made from the Central Government under sub-section (4) of 
section 13, the amount so recovered from the Committee or such 
portion thereof as is equal to the amount recovered from the Central 
Government, shall be refunded to the Central Government. 
• • • • 
140. Recovery of payment due otherwise than from constituent 
bodies.-Any sums due under an agreement entered into under 
section 14A may, on a certificate issued by the President of the 
Board to the effect that the sums are due and have remained un-
paid for not less than three months, be recovered by the Collector 
of the Delhi District from the person with whom the agreement 
was made or from any other person who has benefited from the 
supply, as if they were arrears of land revenue . 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Delhi Joint Water and Sewage Board 
Act, 1926, for certain putposes . 
• 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article I 17 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to the Lok Sabha 
the introduction of the Bill. • 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Rajkumari Amn't Kaur, 
Minister for Health.) 
~ IPD-LAD-J054LS-Z5-1 1-54-1 750 