BiU No. sa of 195! 
THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS COMMIS-
SION BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 7TH AUGUST, 1959) 

THE OIL AND NA ruRAL GAS COMMISsioN BiLL, 1959 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS COMMISSION 
3. Establishment and incorporation of the Commission. 
4. Composition of the Commission. 
5. Term of office and conditions of service of members. 
6. Disqualifications for being appointed, or for continuing, as 
member of the Commission. 
7. Temporary absence of member. 
8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings of the 
Commission. 
9. Meetings of the Commission. 
10. Temporary association of persons with the Commission for 
particular purposes. 
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Com-
mission. 
12. Staff of the Commission. 
13. Transfer of service of existing employees to the Commission. 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
14. Functions of the Commission. 
15. Powers of the Commission. 

•• 11 
CHAPTER IV 
:FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS 
16. Capital of the Commission. 
17. Vesting of property in the Commission. 
18. Commission to have rights, liabilities and obligations of the 
Central Government in certain cases. 
19. Fund of the Commission. 
20. Borrowing of money. 
21. Budget. 
22. Annual report. accounts and audit. 
23. Returns and reports. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Commission. 
25. Power of entry. 
26. Delegation of powers and duties. 
27. Members and employees of the Commission to be public 
servants. 
28. Protection of action taken under Act. 
29. Liability of Commission to pay taxes and fees. 
30. Dissolution of the Commission. 
31. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
31. Power of Commission to make regulations. 

BID No. e oI1U' 
THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS COMMISSION BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a Commission for the develop-
ment of petroleum resources and the production and sale of 
petroleum and petroleum products produced by it and for matters 
connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMIN ARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called: the Oil and Natural Gas Com- Short title, 
" A 1959 extent and miSSion ct, . commence-
. menr. (2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
10 ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "chairman" means the chairman of the Commission; 
(b) "Commission" means the Oil and Natural Gas Commis-
sion established under section 3; 
IS (c) "existing organisation" means the body set up in pursu-
ance of the resolution of the Government of India, No. 22/28/55-
ONG, dated the 14th August, 1956; 
(d) "Fund" means the fund referred to in section 19; 
(e) "member" means a member of the Commission and 
20 includes the chairman; 
DefiJlitiom. 

,0 of 1934-
2 
<f) "petroleum" has the same meaning as in the Petroleum 
Act, 1934, and includes natural gas; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
CHAPTER II 
THE On. AND NATURAL GAS COMMISSION 
Establilh- 3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
ment and 1; iocorpora- may, by notifica ion in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, 
tion of the there shall be established a Commission to be called the Oil and 
5 
Commillioa. N t I G C .. a ura as ommlSSlon. 10 
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property and to contract and shall by the said name sue 
and be sued. 
~~~~_n 4. The Commission shall consist of a chairman and not less than IS 
mission. two other members appointed by the Central Government and the 
members may be required to render whole time or part time service, 
as the Central Government may direct: 
Provided that one of the members shall be a whole-time Finance 
Member in charge of the financial matters relating to the Commis- 2.0 
sion. 
Provided further that the Central Government may, if it thinks 
fit, appoint one of the members as vice-chairman of the Com-
mission. 
Term of . 5. (1) The term of office and conditions of service of the 2.5 
Offi~ . and r chairman and other members shall be such as may be prescribed: COndItIOns 0 
aervice of Provided that the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, 
members. terminate the appointment of any member before the expiry of his 
term of office, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against the same. 30 
(2) Any member may resign his office by giving notice in 
writing to the Central Government, and on such resignation being 
notified in the Official Gazette by that Government, shall be deemed 
to have vacated his office. 
(3) A casual vacancy created by the resignation of a member 3S 
un~r :'iub-section (2) or for any other reason may be filled by fresh 
appointment. 

3 
6, A person shall be diSQualified for being appointed or for I?isqualifica-
t ' , b 'f -, " tlon fOf con mumg as a mem er, I he has, dIrectly or IndIrectly, any interest being appo-
in a subsisting contract made with, or in any work being done for, inte~, ?f fOf 
th C " contInumg. 
e ommISSIon except as a shareholder (other than a director) in as member 
S an incorporated company: of the Com-mission. 
Provided that where he is a shareholdet, he shall disclose to the 
Central Government the nature and extent of the shares held by 
him in such company. 
7, If any member is by infirmity or otherwise rendered tempo- Temporary 
10 '1' bI f ' t h' d t' . b 1 abserocc of rarl y Incapa e 0 carryIng ou IS u les or IS a sent on eave or member. 
otherwise in circumstances not involving the vacation of his 
appointment, the Central Government may appoint another person 
to act in his place during his absence, 
8. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid by Vacal'cies,. , etc.,not to m-
IS reason only of the existence of any vacancy among Its members or validate acta 
any defect in the constitution thereof. ~ proceedf th -mg80 e 
Commission, 
9. (1) The Commission shall meet at such times and places and ~:ti~m~f 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), observe mission, 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at 
20 its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided 
by regulations made under this Act. 
(2) The chairman or, in his absence, the vice-chairman, if any, 
or in the absence of the chairman and of the vice-<:hairman, if any, 
any member chosen by the members from among themselves, shall 
2S preside at a meeting of the Commission, 
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Commission shall be 
decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and 
voting, and in the case of an equality of votes, the chairman or, in 
his absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting 
30 vote: 
" '\ ,. '!~, 
Provided that the person presiding may, in his discretion, reserve 
any matter for the consideration of the Central Government. 
10. (1) The Commission may associate with itself in such Tem~~ary 
b ' , aSSOCiation 
manner and for such purposes, as may e prOVIded by regulations of pt.f80ns 
made under this Act, any person whose assistance or advice it may with t~e. 
3S d ' rf' f 't f t' d th' A t CommISSion esire In pe ormIng any 0 I S unc Ions un er IS C, for particu-
(2) A person associated with it by the Commission under sub- lar purposes, 
section (1) for any purpose shall have a right to take part in the 
discussions of the Commission relevant to that purpose, but shall 

not have a right to vote at a meeting of the Commission, and shall 
not be a member for any other purpose. 
~uthefntiCda- 11. All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenti-tlOn 0 or en . . 
and other cated by the signature of the chaIrman or any other member 
inf8thrumeoCI\ts authorised by the Commission in this behalf, and all other instru- S o t e m-
mission. ments issued by the Commission shall be authenticated by the 
signature of an officer of the Commission authorised in like manner 
in this behalf. 
Seotaffofts~ 12. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 15, the Commission nurua ..... n. . 
Trarsfer of 
s~rvice of 
existing em-
ployees to 
the Com-
miosio4 • 
may, for the purpose of enabling it efficiently to perform its func- 10 
tions or exercise its powers under this Act, appoint such number of 
employees as it may consider necessary. 
(2) The functions and the terms and conditions of service of 
such employees shall be such as may be provided by regulations 
made under this Act. IS 
13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person em-
ployed by the existing organisation immediately before the date of 
establishment of the Commission shall, on and from such date, 
become an employee of the Commission with such designation as the 
Commission may determine and shall hold his office or service 20 
therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon 
the same terms and conditions as he would have held the same on 
such date if the Commission had not been established and shall 
continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Commis-
sion is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and 25 
conditions are duly altered by the Commission: 
Provided that-
(a) the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of 
service of any such person shall not be altered to his disadvant-
age without the previous approval of the Central Government; 30 
(b) any service rendered in the existing organization by 
any such person shall be deemed to be service under the Com-
mission; and 
(c) all persons employed by the Commission on the date of 
its establishment. who immediately before such date, hold, in a 3S 
permanent or quasi-permanent capacity, posts in connection 
with the affairs of the Union or of any State, but not posts 
in the existing organisation, shall be treated ~ Government 
servants on foreign service with the Commission. 
(2) The Commission may employ any person who has become 4C' 
its employee under sub-section (1). in such capacity as it thinks fit, 

& 
and every such employee shall be bound to discharge his functions 
accordingly. 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
5 14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functionR of Functions of 
~he Commission shall generally be to plan, promote, organise and ~is~~­
lmplement programmes for the development of petroleum resources 
and the production and sale of petroleum and petroleum products 
produced by it and to perform such functions as the Central Govern-
10 ment may, from time to time, assign to the Commission. 
15 
20 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing provision, the Commission may take such steps as it 
thinks fit-
(a) for the carrying out of geological and geophysical 
surveys for exploration of petroleum; 
(b) for the carrying out of drilling and other prospecting 
operations to prove and estimate the reserves of petroleum; 
(c) to undertake, encourage and promote Ruch other acti-
vities as may lead to the establishment of such reserves; 
(d) to undertake, assist or encourage and promote the 
production of petroleum from such reserves and its refining; 
(e) for the transport and disposal of natural gas and re-
finery gases produced by the Commission: 
Provided that no industry, which will use any of these 
gases as a raw material, shall be set up by the Commission 
without the previous approval of the Central Government; 
(f) to undertake, encourage and promote geological, 
chemical and other scientific investigations whether in or 
outside the laboratory; 
30 (g) to undertake, assist or encourage the collection, mainte-
nance and publication of statistics, bulletins and monographs; 
(h) to perform any other function which is supplemental, 
incidental or consequential to any of the functions aforesaid or 
which may be prescribed. 
(3) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Commis-
35 sion shall be bound by such directions as the Central Government 
may, for reasons to be stated in writing, give to it from time to 
time. 
15. The Commission may exercise all such powers as may be Powen of 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out its functions ~~:=-
40 h' A under t IS ct: 

Capital of 
the Com-
mission. 
Vesting of 
property in 
the Com-
mission. 
6 
Provided that before exercising 
following matters, it shall obtain 
Central Government, namely:-
its powers in respect of the 
the previous approval of the 
(a) the creation of any post the salary or honorarium of 
which would be rupees two thousand a month or more or S 
would be on a scale the maximum of which is rupees two 
thousand a month or more, and the appointment of any person 
to any such post; 
(b) the implementation of any scheme or proposal which 
will involve a capital expenditure exceeding thirty lakhs of 10 
rupees; 
(c) the disposal of any property, right or privilege, the 
original or book value of which exceeds ten lakhs of rupees. 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS 
16. (1) All non-recurring expenditure incurred by the Central 
Government for or in connection with the existing organisation up 
IS 
to the date of establislunent of the Commission and declared to be 
capital expenditure by that Government, shall be treated as capital 
expenditure provided by that Government to the Commission, and 20 
shall be brought into the books of the Commission. 
(2) The Central Government may, after due appropriation matle 
by Parliament in this behalf, provide any further capital that may 
be required by the Commission for the carrying on of the business 
of the Commission or for any purpose connected therewith on such 25 
tenns and conditions as that Government may determine. 
17. All property acquired and all works constructed or under 
construction by or on behalf of the Central Government for the 
purposes of the existing organis.ation up to the date of establish-
ment of the Commission shall, on such date, vest in the Commission 30 
and all income derived and all expenditure incurred in this behalf 
shall be brought into the books of the Commission. 
Commission 18. All rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central Govem-
: hts l~t~~ ment which, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, were 
li~C:S '. and acquired or incurred by it "in connection with the existing organi- 35 
~~hgau~he sation or for any of the purposes referred to in this Act, before the 
Central Go- date of establishment of the Commission shall be deemed to have 
v:rnI?ent in been acquired or incurred by the Commission and shall be the rights, ccrtam cases . liabilities and obligations respectively of the Commission. 

7 
it. (1) The Commission shall have its own Fund and all receipts ~~( .the 
of the Commission shall be carried thereto and aU payments by the ,u,on. 
Commission made therefrom. 
(2) The Commission may expend such sums as it thinks fit for 
S performing its functions under. this Act and such sums shall be 
treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund. 
(3) All monies of the Commission shall be deposited in the 
Reserve Bank of India or with the agents of that Bank or where 
there is neither an office of that Bank, nor an agent of that Bank, 
10 in a Government Treasury, or be invested in such securities as may 
be approved by the Central Government. 
ZOo The Commission may, with the previous approval of the Borrowiul 
Central Government, borrow money in the open market or otherwise of morleY. 
for the purposes of carrying out its functions under this Act. 
IS 21. (1) (a) The Commission shall, by such date in each year as Budget. 
may be prescribed, submit to the Central Government for approval 
a budget in the prescribed form for the next financial year, showing 
the estimated receipts and expenditure, and the sums which would 
be required from the Central Government, during that financial 
20 year. 
(b) If any sum granted by the Central Government remains 
wholly or partly unspent in any financial year, the unspent sum may 
be carried forward to the next financial year and taken into account 
in determining the sum to be provided by the Central Government 
25 for that year. 
30 
35 
... 
(2) Subject to the provisi ;os of sub-section (3), no sum shall be 
expended by or on behalf of the Commission unless the expenditure 
is covered by provision in the budget approved by the Central 
Government. 
Provided that, except with the previous approval of the Central 
Governmen t-
(a) no re-appropriation from the head "loan" to another 
head of expenditure and vice versa in the budget shall be sanc-
tioned by the Commission; 
(b) no re-appropriation which has the effect of augmentm, 
the provision under any head of expenditure u approved by 
the Central Government by more than ten per cent. or ftve 
lakhs of rupees, whichever is less, shall be made. 

\nnull 
reports, 
accounts 
I11d ludit. 
Jtetu~ Ind 
reports. 
.' S 
22. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, 
including the profit and loss account and balance sheet in accordance 
with such general directions as may be issued, and in such form as 
may be prescribed, by the Central Government in consultation with S 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited annually 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expendi-
ture incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable 
by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 10 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts 
of the Commission shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General has in conne ction with the audit of Government 15 
accounts, and in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other docu-
ments and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission. 
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed 20 
by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall 
be forwarded ~nnually to the Central Government and that Govern-
ment shall cause the same to be laid before each House of ParHa-
ment. 
23. (1) The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government 25 
at such time and in such form and in such manner, as may be pres-
cribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and 
statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing 
programme for the development of petroleum resources and the pro-
duction and sale of petroleum and petroleum products produced by 30 
the Commiasion as~e Central Government may, from time to time, 
require. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
Commission shall, as soon as possible after the commencement of each 
financial year, submit to the Central Government a report in such 3' 
form and before such date as may be prescribed, giving a true and 
full account of its activities, policy and programme during the pre-
vious financial year and an account of the activities likely to be 
undertaken during the current financial year. 
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be 4a 
laid before each House of Parliament. 

045 of J860. 
t 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. Any land required by the Commission for carrying out its Compul-. 
functions under this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public '?~ acqw- . SItlOD of land 
S purpose and such land shall be acquired for the Commission as if the for the Com-
provisions of Part VII of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, were appli- million. 
cable to it and the Commission were a company within the meaning 
of clause (e) of section 3 of the said Act. 
25. Any employee of the Commission, generally or specially Power of 
10 authorised by it, may at all reasonable times enter upon any land enfry. 
or premises and there do such things as may be reasonably neces-
sary for the purpose of lawfully carrying out any of its works or of 
making any survey, examination or investigation preliminary or 
incidental to the exercise of powers or the performance of functions 
15 by the Commission under this Act. 
26. The Commission may, by general or special order in writing, Delegation 
direct that all or any of the powers or duties which may be exercised ofdPOWd e~ 
. . h b' h 11 . d d an utles. or elise arged y It sa, In such circumstances an un er such condi-
tion~, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercised or dis-
20 charged also by any person specified in this behalf in the order. 
27. All members and employees of the Commission, shall, when Members 
acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act, :! ~fP~he 
or of any rule or regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public Commission 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. :~:!t:.blie 
25 28. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against Protection of 
the Commission or any member or employee of the Com-::on ~eD 
mission for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be er t. 
done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or regulation made 
thereunder. 
30 29. The Commission shall be deemed to be a company within the Liabili ty of 
meaning of any enactment for the time being in force providing for ~::~: 
the levy of any tax or fee by the Central Government or a State and feu. 
Government and shall be liable to pay such tax or fee accordingly. 
30. (1) The Central Gowrnment may, by notification in the Di8solution 
35 Official Gazette, direct that the Commission shall be dissolved from ~!!i~~­
such date as may be specified in the notification and thereupon the 
Commission shall be deemed to be dissolved accordingly. 
(2) On and from the said date-
(a) all assets, liabilities and obligations acquired or incur-
red by the Commission for purposes of the Commission or for 
any of the purposes referred to in this Act shall vest in the 
Central Government, and 

18 
(b) all members shall vacate their oftices as members of 
the Commission. 
31. (1) The Central Government may,by notification in the Otll-
cial Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the s 
foregoing provision, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the term of office of, and the manner of filling casual 
vacancies among, the members, and their conditions of lervice 
including the salaries, remuneration and allowances to be paid to 10 
them and the travelling and daily allowances to be drawn by 
them when they are on tour; 
(b) the disqualifications for membership of the Commission 
and the procedure to be followed in removing a member who is 
or becomes subject to any disqualification; 15 
(c) the procedure to be followed in the discharge of func-
tions by members; 
(d) the date by which, and the form in which, the budget 
shall be submitted in each year under sub-section (1) of section 
21; 20 
(e) the procedure to be fol1owed for placing the Commis-
sion in possession of funds; 
(f) the procedure to be followed and the conditions to be 
observed in borrowing moneys or in granting loans; 
(g) the conditions subject to which, and the mode in which, 25 
contracts may be entered into by or on behalf of the Com-
mission; 
(h) the form and manner in which the accounts of the 
Commission shall be maintained under sub-section (l) of 
section 22; 
(i) the form and manner in which returns, reports or 
statements shall be submitted under section 23; 
W any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it il!l 35 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised m 
one session or in two successive l!Iessions, Blld if before the expiry 
of the leSBion in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing, both Houses agree in making any modiftcation in the rule or 
both Houses agree tlw.t the rule should not be made, the rule shall.fO 
thereafter have effect only in such modified fono or be of no e1!eet, 

s 
11 
18 the ease may be; so however that any such modification or alU1ul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anythin, previou.-
Iy done under that rule. 
32. (1) The Commission may, with the previous approval of POW« of 
the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make ~"iOQ 
regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made ;.r~caa. 
thereunder, for enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act. 
(Z)In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing provision, such regu.letions may provide for all or any of 
ze the following matters, namely:-
(a) the terms and conditions of appointment and service 
and the scales of pay of employees of the Commission, includ-
ing payment of travelling and daily allowances in respect of 
journeys undertaken by such employees for the purposes of this 
1, Aet; 
(b) the time and place of meetings of the Commission, the 
procedure to be followed in regard to the transaction of business 
at such meetings and the quorum necessary for the transaction 
of business at a meeting; 
20 (c) the maintenance of minutes of meetings of the Com-
mission and the transmission of copies thereof to the Central 
Government; 
(d) the persons by whom, end the manner in which pay-
ments, deposits and investments may be made on behalf of the 
zS Commission; 
(e) the custody of moneys required for the current expen-
diture of the Commission and the investment of moneys not so 
required; 
(f) the maintenance of accounts. 
10 (3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend. vary or rescind any regulation which it has approv-
ed; and thereupon the regulation shall have effect accordingly but 
without prejudice to the exercise of the powers of the Conimiasion 
under sub-section (1). 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The establishment of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission in 
August, 1956, was the first concrete step taken by Government to 
carry out inter alia geological and geophysical surveys for discover-
ing petroleum resources in the country and developing them in the 
public sector. The Commission was organized, in the first instance, 
as an ordinary Government departmentj but even within this short 
period of less than three years, the size of this organisation and the 
volume of work handled by it have increased very rapidly. The 
magnitude of its programmes and activities is likely to increase fur-
ther in the near future. In the light of the experience gained so far, 
it is felt that the powers already delegated to the Commission or a 
mere amplification of these powers would not suffice. Exploration 
work in the public sector has reached a stage where for efficient and 
expeditious progress much more autonomy and elasticity are required 
tl1an would be possible if the Commission continued to work as a 
Government Department. Oil industry being a highly integrated 
one, exploration work and exploitation should more appropriately 
be entrusted to an agency which can function more or less as a com-
mercial agency in the private sector. The Bill accordingly proposes 
to convert the existing organisation into a statutory corporate body 
with the same nomenclature. 
Under the Bill the Commission will consist of not less than three 
members including the Chairman and one of these members will be 
exclusively in charge of the finances of that body. The Commission's 
main functions will be-(i) to organise and implement programmes 
for the development of petroleum resourceSj (ii) to carry out 
necessary surveys for the exploration of such resources and the drill-
ing and other prospecting operations required for this purpose; (iii) 
to promote the production of petroleum and its refinement and the 
sale of petroleum and petroleum products produced by it; and (iv) 
to advise Government as and when advice is sought. The Commis-
sion will generally have full powers to carry out its functions under 
the Bill. ' 
The Bill makes adequate provision for the exercise of suitable 
control over the Commission. It has been provided that the previous 
approval of the Government should be obtained by the Commission 
before exercising its powers in respect of certain specific matters. 
The Commission will also be subject to the directions of Government 
in the discharge of its functions. Provision has also been made for 
12 

ia 
ftnanciai control over the Commission. The submission of an annual 
statement of the programme and activities undertaken and likely to 
be undertaken by the Commission, and of financial estimates in res-
pect thereof has been made obligatory. In addition, the funds of the 
Commission are required to be deposited in the Reserve Bank or a 
Government Treasury or to be invested in securities approved by 
Government; and the scrutiny of the accounts of the Commission by 
the Comptroller and Auditor",General of India has been ensured. 
Parliament also will be kept in touch with the working of the Com-
mission as the Bill requires copies of its annual report and the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General's audit report to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament. 
The Bill also contains ancillary provisions in respect of various 
other matters like the transfer of staff, the vesting of properties in 
the Commission, etc. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 1st August, 1959. 
K. D. MALA VIYA. 

, 
FINANCIAL MEMORANbtiM 
The Bill provides for non-recurring and recurring expenditure 
by the Central Government on the following items:-
Non-recurring expenditure.-After the Commission is establish-
ed, it may be necessary for the Central Government to make 
payments to the Commission to finance any approved schemes involv-
ing capital outlay. These will be submitted to Parliament in the 
normal course as Budget Demands. 
Recurring Expenditure.-The Bill provides that each year the 
Central Government may pay to the Commission such sums as may 
be considered necessary for the performance of the functions of the 
Commission under the Bill. 
All property acquired and all works constructed or under construc-
tion for the purposes of the existing organisation up to the 
date of establishment of the Commission shall vest in the Commis-
sion and all income derived and expenditure incurred in this behalf 
shall be brought into the books of the Commission. The expendi-
ture incurred by and for the Oil and Natural Gas Commission up to 
the end of 1958-59 amounts to about Rs. 562 lakhs. 
On the basis of the schemes approved by the Planning Commis-
sion, the total expenditure on Capital Account of the existing orga-
nisation and the Commission may be about Rs. 23 crores durini the 
years 1~59-60 and 1960-61. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to give effect to its provisions. The matters in respect of which 
such rules may be made relate inter alia to the term of office and 
the conditions of service of the members of the Commission, the dis-
qualifications for such membership, the date by which and the form 
in which the budget is to be submitted, the procedure to be followed 
for placing the Commission in' possession of funds, the procedure 
and conditions to be observed in borrowing money or granting loans, 
the conditions and mode in which contracts may be entered into 
by the Commission, the maintenance of accounts and the submission 
of returns; etc., by the Commission. All these matters are com-
paratively ofa minor importance and are normally the subject-
matter of delegated legislation. These rules will also be laid before 
Parliament. 
2. Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Commission to make regula-
tions not inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill and the rules 
made thereunder. The power of making regulations is confined 
mainly to procedural matters, such as the calling of meetings, the 
maintenance of the minutes thereof, the custody, payment, deposit 
and investment of the moneys of the Commission, etc. Regulations 
may also be made in respect of the terms and conditions of service of 
the employees of the Commission. Thus, the power of making regu-
lations is confined to matters of detail only ancPall such regulations 
will be made 'with the previous approval of the Central Government. 
y. 
. , .... , 15 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a Commission for the develop_ 
ment of petroleum resources and the production' and sale 'at-
petroleum and petroleum products produced by it and fur 
matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of the 
Constitution, recommended to Lok Sabha the cmsideratkm 
of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
SecrelQry .. 
(SIrr; KesheaD(JfJ(l Malaf)iya,. 
; Minister of M.s" Oil.), 