Bill No. 52 of 1953 -,-----
THE DHOTIES (ADDITIONAL EXCISE DUTY) BILL, I953 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of an additional excise duty 
on dhoties issued out of mills in excess oj the quota ~d JOT the 
purpose. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title, extent andcommencement.-(l) This Act may be 
called the Dhoties (Additional Excise Duty) Act, 1953. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu '" 
and Kashmir. U 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day 
()f October, 1953. 
2. Deflnitions.-In this Act,'-:: 
(a) 'dhoti' means any type of grey or bleached cloth of plain 
weave which- 10 
(i) is manufactured by a mill either wholly from cotton 
or partly from cotton and partly from any other material; 
. (ii) contains coloured yarn on its borders; 
(iii) has a width ranging between twenty-eight inches 
and fifty-four inches; and 15 
(iv) is commonly known by that name; 
(b) 'mill' means any building or place in which cotton yarn 
is spun and dhoties are manufactured by machinery moved other-
wise than by manual labour, and includes every part of such 
building or plaee; 20 
(c) 'permissible quota' means the quota referred to in 
:section 3; 
(d) 'quarter' means the period of three months ending on the 
last day of March, June, September and December. 

2 
3. Permissible quota.-(l) The permissible quota of dhoties which· 
may be issued out of any mill during any quarter, whether the' 
dhoties were manufactured during that quarter or at any time 
p~vious thereto, shall be one-fourth of sixty per cent. of the tatal 
5 quantity of dhoties packed by that mill during the relevant period. 
Explanation I.-For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central 
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix for all 
mills any period of twelve months which has expired before the com-
mencement of this Act as the relevant period, and where any such 
10 period has been so fixed, the total quantity of dhoties packed by any 
mill during that period shall be determined with reference to the 
returns furnished in that behalf by the mill to the Textile Commis-
sioner to the G::>vernment of India under the Cotton TeX',i!e3 (Con-
trol) Order, 1948: 
15 Provided that where, in the case of any mill, the relevant period 
so fixed is not applicable by reason of the fact that the mill came 
into existence or commenced working only during or after the 
expiry of the relevant period, the Central Government may, by a 
like notification, fix the permissible quota in respect thereof to be 
20 such quantity as, in its opinion, is reasonaBle, having regard to the 
machinery and other equipment installed therein and to the other 
circumstances of the case. . 
Explanation n.-The permissible quota for the quarter of the year 
1953 remaining unexpired at the commencement of this Act shall 
25 bear the same proportion to one-fourth of the said sixty per cent. or, 
as the case may be, to the permissible quota'fixed under the proviso 
to Explanation I as the total number of days remaining unexpired 
bears to the total number of days in the quarter. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in s.b-section (1), if, in 
30 the case of any mill or class of mills, the Central Government is of 
opinion that due to economic reasons connected with the nature of 
the machinery or other equipment installed therein a higher percefl-
tage than that specified in sub-section (1) should be fixed in respect 
thereof, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the per-
35 missible quota for a quarter for the mill or class of mills as one-
fourth of such higher percentage as it may think fit, and where any 
such r.otification has been issued, the quota so fixed shall be deemed 
to be the permissible quota for the mill or class of mills within the 
meaning of this Act. 
40 4. Levy' of additional duty of excise on dhoties.-(1) Where the 
quantity of dhoties issued out of any mill on or after the 26th day 
of October, 1953, exceeds in any quarter the permissible quota for 
that quarter, there shall be levied and collected on that quantity of 
·dhoties so issued which is in excess of the permissible quota a duty 
45 of excise at the rate or rat,es which may be applicable thereto as 
specified in the Schedule. 
(2) The duty of exeise referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in 
addition to the duty of excise chargeable on cloth under the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (I of 1944), and the Khadi and other 
50 Handloom Industries Development (Additional Excise Duty on 
Cloth) Act, 1953 (12 of 1953), and shall be levied and collected in the 
same manner as the duty of excise on cloth is levied and collected , 

3 
under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and the provisions of 
that Act and the rules thereunder, as far as may be applicable in 
this behalf, shall apply accordingly. 
5. Power to make rules.-The Central Government may, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the pur- 5 
poses of this Act, including, in particular, the submission of returns 
or other information relating to the manufacture or issue of dhoties 
by mills to such authority as may be specified in this behalf. 
6. Repeal of Ordinance 6 of 1953.-The T)hoties (Additional Ex-
cise Duty) Ordinance, 1953 (6 of 1953) is hereby repealed. 10 

4 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 4) 
Where the ,quantity of dhotlel IBlued ou t 
.(i of any m.llI duriDg any quarter il In el:cell 
of the permillible quota for that quarter-
10 
15 
20 
(I) in relpeet of the quantlty~whlch 
doel Dot ezc::ed the permllBlble quota 
by more than 121% thereof 
(2) In relpect of the quantity which 
aceedl the permillible quota by more 
than uJ% thereof but doel not aceed 
It by more than 25% 
(3) in respect of the quantity which 
el:ccedl the permlsdble quota by more 
than 25% thereof but doel Dot exceed it 
by more than 50% 
(of) In "spect of the quaDtity which 
aceecil the permlllible quota by more 
thaD 50% thereof 
Rate of duty 
Two aDD.I per yard 
ThftC 1IDIl81 per yard 
Four IUlIlaI per yard 
Elaht aDDU per yard. 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With a view to assisting the handloom industry, the Govern-
ment of India in January, 1953 passed orders resfricting the pro-
ductiO'Il of dhoties by mills to 60 per cent. of their average monthly 
production during the period April, 1951 to March, 1952. 
While mills have, by and large, conformed to this restriction, 
certain units have produced dhoties in excess of their quota. 
Government have, therefore, been considering what would be the· 
mast suitable method of achieving their objective, namely,to put a 
check on the production of dhoties by all mills and it has been de-
cided that the levy of an additional excise duty on dhoties issued 
from a mill in excess of its permissible quota would serve the pur-
pose in view. The dnty would be on a graduated scal.i ranging 
fram two annas per yard to eight annns per yard on the quantity 
of dhoties so issued. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARL 
NEW DELHI; 
Th.e ]4th N01'embe r , ]953. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL .. 
to provide for the levy and colleotion of an additional excise duty 
on dhoties it;8ued out of mills in excess of the quota fixeJ 
for the purpose. 
, The President has, in pursuance of clause (1) of 8!ticle 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to the House or 
the People the introduction of the Bill . 
• 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary . 
.(Skri T. T. K ri8knamackari, 
Minister Jor Oommerce and IndtUtry) 