As INTRODUCED' IN LOK SABUA ON 
1;. ,IJ'" • ~ ~ 'f \ ' " '. ,,,f; ,. jh! .. }. Iz r ,;..~ . ~." 
\ ~ " ,., ~ \. 
• 
' .. 
Bill No. 52 of 1184, 
THE DOWRY PROHIBITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1984 
A 
- .... 1" .'t~~.,.-, ... ' ". 
BILL 
to amend the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. 
BB .it enacted by Parliament, in the Thirty-fifth Year ,of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dowry Prohibition (Amendment} 
Act, 1984. 
',5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Omcial Gazette, appoint. 
• 
28 of 1961. 2. In section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition ,Act, 1961 (bEll-einafter refer~ 
l'ed to as the pr,incipal Act) ,...... . 
(a) for the words "as consideration for the marriage of. the said 
10 parties, but does not include", the words ";'in connection with the 
marriag~ of the said parties, but does not include" shall be substituted; 
(b) ExPlanation I shall be omitted. 
3. Section 3 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-s<;!ction 
15 (1) of that section and,- • 
. (a) in sub-section {1) as so renumbered, tor the words "with 
imprisOnment w:~ich m.~y extend to six months, or' with . fine which 
short 
title 
and 
commence-
ment. . 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 
2. 
• ,Amend-
ment of 
section 
3. 

Penalty 
for' 
demand-
inc dowry. 
Amend-
ment of 
eectlon 6. 
2 
may extend to f\ve thousand rupees, or with both", the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
, "with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
six months, but which may extend to two years, and with 
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or the amount 5 
of the value of such dowry, whichever is more: . " 
Provided that the COUTt may, for adequate and special-, 
reasons to be recorded in the judgme,nt, impose a sen-
tence of imprisonment for a term of less than six mtJnths."; '. . 
(b) after sUb-section (1) as so renumbered, .the following sub. 10 
.section shall be inserted, namely: - . 
"(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to, or in relation 
to.- ' 
(a) presents which are given at th~ time,of a marriage 
to the bride (without any demand having been ~de in 15 
that behalf)': i 
Provided that' such presents' are enteroo in a list main-
tained in accordance' with the rules made under this hct; 
, (b) presents which are given at the time .of a marriage 
to the brid~groom (without any demand having been made 20 
in that behalf): . 
Provided that such presents are entered in a list main-
tained in accordance with the rules made under this Act: 
Provided further that where such presents are" made by 
Or on behalf of the bride or any person related to the bride, 25 
such presents are of a customary nature and the value ther~-
of is not excessive having regard to the financial status of 
the person by whom. or on whOSe behalf, such presents are 
given .. •. 
4. For seCtion 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be ~o 
subRtituted, namely:-
• . ' 
"4. If any person demands, directly or indIrectly, from the parents 
or other relatives or guardian of a bride or bridegroom as the case 
may be, any dowry" he shall be punishable, with imprisonment for 
a term which shall.not be less thaT} six months, but w"hlch may extend 35 
to two years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees: 
Provided. that the Court may, for adequate and RPeeinl reasons 
to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment 
for a t'l!TJnof less than. six months.", 
5. I~ section 6 of the prin~ipal Act,-. 
(a) in sub-s~tion (1). for the wor~~ "one year", wherever they-
!>c~ur, t~ word:; Cltb~~' months" !';halJ be substituted; . 

2 of 1974. 
• 
5 
10 
15 
20 
3 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
, "(2) If any person fails to transfer any property as required 
by sub-section (1) within the time limit specified therefor, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than sit: months, but which may extend to two years 
or with fine which may extend to ten'thousand rupees or with 
both."; 
(c) after sub-sect'ion (3),. t!he folllbwing sub-section shall ~ 
inserted, namely:-! . 
"(3A) Where a person convicted under sub-section (2) for 
failure to transfer any property as required by sub-sec1;i.on (1) 
, has not, before his conviction under that sub-section, . transfer-
red such property to the woman entitled thereto or, as the 
case may be, her beirs, the Court shal1, ill addition to award-
ing punishment under that sub-secttion, direct, by order in 
writi~, that such person shall transfer the property 'to such 
woman or, as the case may be, her heirs within such period 
as may be specified in the order, and if such person fails to 
comply with the direction within the period so specified, an , 
amount equal to the value of the property may be recovered 
from him! as if it were a fine imposed by such Court and paid 
to such woman or, as the case m~y be, her heirs!'. . 
# 
6. For section 7 of the principal Act, the' following section shall be . Subati-
25 substituted, namely: -' tution 
of 
sMion 
'1. 
35 
'7. (1) Notwithstanding anything coq.tained in the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure, 1973,-
(a) no court inferior .to that of a MetropoUtan Magistrate or 
. a Judicial Magistrate of .the first class shall try any offence·un • 
this Act; 
(b) no. court -shall take cognizance of an offence W?-~er this 
Act 'except upon- . 
(i) its own knowle,dge or a police report orthe facts 
which constitute such offence, Or 
(ii) a complaint by the person aggrieved by the. offence 
or a -parent or other relative of such person" or b, any 
recognized welfare institution or orgarrisation; 
(c) it shall be lawful' for a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class to pass any sentence autho-
. rised by -this Act on any pe!"SOn convicted of any, offence under 
this Act. 
~ 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this . sub-section, "recognized. 
welfare institution or organisation" means a social welfare institu-
tion .or organisation recognized in this behalf by the Central or 
State Government. 
Cogni-
zance Of 
o1fences, 

~ubstitu­
tion of 
section 8. 
Ofte)lCCS 
to be 
cogniza-
blefor 
certain 
purposes 
and to 
be bail-
able &nd 
non-
compound-
~ble. 
At"end· 
1J.(~nt of 
,ec:io.l IJ. 
4 
(2) Nothing in Chapter' XXXVI of the Code I>f Criminal Pto-
cedure, 1973, shall apply to, .. any offence punishable under this Act.'. 
. ' 
7. For section 8 of the principal Act, the .following section shall be 
substituted, namely: - '\ 
.~ 
., 
"8. (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shtll apply to 5 
. offences under this Act as if they were cognizable offences-
(a) for the purposes of investigation of such offences; 8l?-d 
(b) for the purposes of matters other than~ 
(i) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code; and . 
(ii) the arrest of a person without a warrant or without 10 
an order of a Magistrate. 
(2) Every offence under this Act shall be bailable and non-
compoundable.". 
2 ot 1974 . 
8. In seepon 9 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) shall be renumber-
ed as sub-section (3) thereof, and,- 15 
(4), before sub-section (3) as so renumbered, the following 
sub-section shal1 be inserted, namely:-
/I (2) In partic~lar, and without prejudice to the gener8'lity 
. of the foregoing power, such rules may proide for-
(a) the form and manner in which, and the persons by 
whom, any list of presents referred to in sub-sectipn (2) of 20 
section :3 shall be maintained and all other matters con-
nected therewith; and 
(b) the better co-ordination of policy and action with 
respect to the aOministration of this Act."; !l5 
(b) in SUb-section (3) as so renumbered, for the words "two 
successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which 
it is so laid or the session immediately 'following", the words "two 
?f more successive sessions, and if, before the, expiry of the session 
Immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
,said" shall be substituted. go 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
'l'he evil of dowry system has been a maner' of serious concern to 
every 'one in view of its evel'l4ncreasing and disturbing proJ?ortions. 
The legislation on the subject enacted by Parliament, i.e., the Dowry 
Prohibition Act, 1961 and the far-reaching amendments which have 
'been made to the Act by a number of States dUring the seventies have 
not succeeded in' containing the evil. As pointed out by the Committee 
,on the Stabus of Women in India, the educated youth is grossly in-
sensitive to the evil of dowry and unashamedly contributes to its per-
,petuation. Governm~nl has been making various efforts to deal with 
the problem. In addition to issuing instructions to the State Govern-
ments and Union territory administrations with regard to the making of 
thorough and compulsory investigations into cases of dowry deaths and 
stepping up anti-dowry' publicity, Government referred the' whole 
matter for consideration by a: Joint Commit'tee of both the Houses of 
Parliament.. The Committee went into the whole matter in great depth 
and its proceedings have, helped in no small measure in focussing 'the 
attention of the public and rOUSing the consciousness of the public 
against this evil. 
2. The following observations made by late Pandit Jawaharlal 
Nehru which have been quoted by the Commit'tee indicate the role 
,which legislation can play in dealing with the evil:-
;'~gis1ation cannot by .tself normally solve deep-rooted social 
problems. One has to approach them in other ways too, but legis-
lation is necessary and essential, so that it may give that push and 
have that educative factor as well as the legal sanctions behind it 
which helppuhlic opinion to be given a certain shape.": 
The recommendatIons made by the Joint Committee of the Houses 
to examiue the question of working of thE! Dowry Prohibition Act, 
1~61 have been considered keeping in view these observations and after 
,taking· into consideration the comments received on the Report from 
the ~tate Governme1Jts, Union territory administrations and the diffe-
rent administrative Ministries of the Union concerned with the matter. 
One, of the impol'tant r~mmendations of the Committee for dealing 
with cruelty to a married woman' by the husband or the relatives of 
the husband on the ground of non-receipt of dowry or insufflcient 
dowry has· already been given effect to by the Criminal Law (Second 
Amendmellt) Act, 1983. This Act amended, inter alia, the Indian Penal 
Code to include therein fl'. ~visjon fOT pw:Qshment for cruelty to 
married women and was aimed at dealing directly with' the problem of 
dowry suicides' and dowry deaths. 
3,. The J<lint C~mmittee has il"€Commended that '.the definition of 
"dowry" contained in section 2 of the 1961-Act should be modified by 
omitting the expression "as consideration for the marriage" used therein 
on the ground that it is well nigh impossible to prove that anythin'g 
given were a. consideration for the marriage fOr the obvious and simple 
reason that the giver, i.e., the parents who are usually the victims would 
be reluctant and unwilling to set the law in motion. The omission of 
., , . 
..... t, "ir-.... ".', , 

6 
the words "I;\S consideration for the marriage" would make the definition 
not only wide bUl also unworkable, for, if these ,words are omitted, 
anything given, whether before or after or at the time of marriage by 
anyone, may arnOtint to dowry. The Supreme Court has also placed 
a liberal construction o1'lthe word "dowry" as used' in section 4 of the 
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, relating to demanding dowry. In the 
circumstances, it is proposed to substitute the words "in connection with 
the ma1Tiage" for the words "as consiaeration for the marriage'll instead 
of omitting Ihose words. ' 
4'. Section 3' of the Dowry Prohibition Act relating to file offences of 
giving or taking of dowry is being 'amencied in accordarice with the 
recommendatiuns of the Joint Committ.ee to make ,the 'punishment far 
the offence more st!'ingent. AU presents given at the time of marriage 
to the bride and certain types of presents given at the time of marriage 
to the bridegroom are propoSea to be excluded from the purview of the 
offences under the section. However, the recommendations of the Com-
mittee for exempting the giver of dowry from punishment is not· being 
given effect to as such exemption may only prove to be counter-productiye. 
5. Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibhian Act relating to penalty for de-
manding dowry is proposed to be amended .to make the punishment 
thereun'ier more stringent on the lines recommended by the Joint Com", 
mittee. . 
6. Section 6 or the Act is being amended in a~card~nce with the re-
commendation of -the Joint Commi~tee, to reduce the time limit within 
which dowry received in. connection with the marriage of a woman by 
any other person should be restored to the woman from, one year to three 
months. Likewh:e, the ,punishment for failure to restore such dowry 
within the said time.ljmit is behlg ~de more stringent'on the lines re-
commended by the Committee. Under a special provision Which is being 
included in section 6 where a person is convicted for failure to restore 
the dowry to' the woman concerned within the period ,specifted in the 
section, the court may, in addition to a)Varding runi&'hment, issue a 
direction requiring him to restore the property to the woman within 
the period specified in the direction. In case of non-compliance with 
the direction, ~he value at the property would be recoverable from such 
person as if it were a fine and the amount so recovered'may be paid 
to the woman concerne!i or, as the caSe may be, her heirs. 
7. Sections 7 and 8 of the Dowry Pro1}ibition Act are proposed to be 
amended to give effect to the recommendations of the Committee as to 
cognizance of offence!" under the Act and making offences under the Act 
cognizable. .--
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the. above objects. 
NEW DEuu; 
The 9th May, 1984. 
JAGANNATH KAUSHAL. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 of 'the Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961 relating· to the power of the central Govemme'ht to make 
rules for the purpose of specifying in particular certain matters in respect 
of which rules may be made under the section. These relate to the 
form and manner in which, and the person by. whom, any li~t of presents 
referred to in suh-section (2) of section 3 shall be maintained and all 
. other matters connect~d therewith and the better co-ordination of policy 
and action with respect to the administration of the Act. These are 
matters of detail.· The delegation of legislative power involved is. the~ 
fore, of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
i 
( 
I 
BILL "'. 
to amend the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. . \ .. ",' 
, . 
i . (Shri JClgClnnClth Kaushal, 
Minist~r of.Law, Justice 
4?"d CO'I'np4n.y AI4irs.) 