THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
2. Article 130 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (1) thereof and after
clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) There shall be established a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at
Nagpur, consisting of such number of judges of the Supreme Court as the Chief
Justice of India may from time to time determine, but not less than nine in number,
to exercise the powers and jurisdiction for the time being vested in the Supreme
Court in respect of cases arising in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Puducherry.".
Short title.
Amendment
of article 130.
Bill No. 52 of 2008
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 124 of the Constitution provides for the establishment and constitution
of the Supreme Court. The seat of the Supreme Court is in New Delhi and there is no
bench of the court in any other part of the country. Litigants from all parts of the
country have to come to Delhi in connection of their cases in the Supreme Court.
Delhi is the capital city located in North India. Litigants approaching the
Supreme Court from the States of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Puducherry and Andaman
and Nicobar Islands have to undergo lot of hardships due to long distance and a
very high cost in terms of time and money involved in it. Moreover, there has been
a constant demand for setting up of a division bench of the Supreme Court in the
central or southern part of the country.
Keeping in view the hardships being faced by the litigants coming from Central
and Southern India to Delhi and the demand of people of these regions, it will be
appropriate to set up a bench of the Supreme Court at Nagpur, which is in the central
part of India. Nagpur is well connected with all other parts of the country through
road, rail and air. As its location is ideally suited for the people of both central and
southern India, the people of these regions would be able to take advantage of it. If
a permanent bench of the Supreme Court is established at Nagpur it would not only
save the time and money of the litigants but also help in speedy disposal of the
cases. Therefore, there is an urgent need to set up a permanent bench of the Supreme
Court at Nagpur so that people in the central and southern States shall have easy
access to justice in a convenient manner. The Bill accordingly seeks to amend the
Constitution with a view to establish a permanent bench of the Supreme Court at
Nagpur.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;  HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR.
September 10, 2008.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for establishment of a bench of the Supreme Court
at Nagpur. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be
involved.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such other place or places, as the
Chief Justice of India may, with the approval of the President, from time to time, appoint.
* * * * *
Seat of
Supreme
Court.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3039LS(S5)—30.09.2008.