“92 nov 202

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 52 of 2002

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

By
‘Struma ReNuKA CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL

Surther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2002.

2, In article 124 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be
5 added at the end, namely:—
"Provided that one-third of such Judges shall be appointed from amongst eligible
women."

3. In article 216 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—

10 “Provided that one-third of such Judges shall be appointed from amongst eligible
women."

Short title.

Amendment of
article 124. ._

Amendment
of article 216.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Women in India constitute the weakest section of the society and have been ill-
treated, insulted and ignored for ages. However, attempts are being made to prevent atrocities
against women and to empower them by the Government.

The Supreme Court in a recent judgement stressed the need for sensitising the courts
in respect of crimes against women, such as kidnapping, rapes and sexual abuse of women
and girls and emphasised for appointing adequate numbers of women judges in the courts
throughout the country.

Many steps taken by the Government to provide due status to women in the male
dominated society have shown little results. Moves have been made for reservation in their
favour in Government jobs and also in educational institutions. However, their
representation is limited. Demands have been made from several quarters for reservation in,
favour of women in judiciary also. As such it is proposed to amend the Constitution with a
view to making provision for reservation in their favour in appointments of Judges in
Supreme Court and in High Courts.

New Deut, RENUKA CHOWDHURY
July 2, 2002.


ANNEXURE,
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * * *

124, (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Establishment
Justice of India and until Parliament by law prescribes a large number, of not and Constitu-

ti f
more than twenty-five other Judges. Supreme
en ‘ 2 Pi . * a Court.

216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such other Judges Constitution

as the President may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint. of — High

Courts.
* * * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A

BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1928LS—1 1-07-2002.