1
THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS (AMENDMENT)
 BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to amend the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986.
BE it enacted by  Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Indian Standards (Amendment)
Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in the long title,—
(i) after the words "establishment of a Bureau", the words "to be a national
standards body" shall be inserted;
(ii) for the word "goods", the words "goods, articles, processes and services"
shall be substituted.
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of long title.
63 of 1986.
Bill No. 52 of 2012
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(fa) "Hallmark" means the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark
specified by the Bureau to represent a particular Indian Standard in relation to
precious metal article;';
(ii) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ia) "jeweller" means a person selling precious metal articles;';
(iii) after clause (m), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ma) "precious metal" means gold, silver, platinum and palladium;
(mb) "precious metal article" means any article made entirely or in part
from precious metals or their alloys;';
(iv) after clause (p), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(pa) "registration" means the registration granted by the Bureau for self
declaration under sub-section (1A) of section 15;
(pb) "registered user" means a person who has been granted registration
or self declaration of conformity by the Bureau under sub-section ( 1A) of
section 15;
(pc) "self declaration of conformity" means a declaration by a manufacturer
of his product in conformity with the Indian Standard;';
(v) in clause (t), for the words "includes any", the words "includes Hallmark or
the mark of an international body or institution or any" shall be substituted.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that a member of the Executive Committee as may be prescribed, may,
authorise any person to represent him in the Committee.".
5. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(da) grant, renew, suspend or cancel, registration or self declaration of
conformity;";
(ii) in clause (e), for the word "licence", the words "licence or registration or self
declaration of conformity" shall be substituted;
(iii) after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ja) recognise with the prior approval of the Central Government the mark
of any international body or institution in relation to any article or process at par
with the Standard Mark for such article or process;";
(iv
) in clause ( l), for the words "inspection, testing", the words "inspection,
collection of samples, testing" shall be substituted;
(v) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(na) carry out survey of any article or process relating to Indian
Standard;".
6. In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(3) No person, other than a registered user in possession of a valid registration
or self declaration of conformity, shall, on and after the commencement of the Bureau
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment of
section 11.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
of Indian Standards (Amendment) Act, 2012 display on and after such commencement
in relation to any article or process, the words "Self declaration — conforming to
IS.............." on an article or packaging, as the case may be, or make a public claim,
through advertisements, sales promotion leaflets, price lists or the like, that his article
conforms to the Indian Standard or make such a declaration on the article.'.
7. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘14. If the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion that
it is necessary or expedient so to do, in the public interest, it may, by order published
in the Official Gazette,—
(a) notify any article or process of any industry which shall conform to the
Indian Standard; and
(b) direct the use of the Standard Mark under a licence as compulsory on
such article or process:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to an article or process meant
only for export.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and section 14B, the expression
"article" includes an article imported into India which is of the same nature or description
as an article manufactured in India.’.
8. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
'14A. Where the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the
opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, make it compulsory for such jewellers selling such
precious metal article in such geographical areas and having such minimum turnover,
as may be specified by regulations, to use Hallmark under a licence and that such
article shall conform to the Indian Standard.
14B. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 14, where the Central
Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion that it is necessary or
expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by order, published in the Official
Gazette,—
(a) notify any article or process which shall conform to the Indian Standard;
and
(b) direct registration or grant self declaration of conformity with the Bureau
as compulsory for the purpose of self declaration on such article or process as
under:
‘‘Self declaration—Conforms to IS.............."
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), a person may, in respect of any
article or process notified under sub-section ( 1), exercise an option for making
registration or grant of self declaration of conformity with, or taking licence from, the
Bureau.
(3) When an article or process notified for registration or in respect of which self
declaration of conformity has been granted under sub-section ( 1), is subsequently
notified under section 14, then, in addition to such registration or self declaration of
conformity, a licence shall be compulsorily taken from the Bureau for such article or
process in place of such registration or self declaration of conformity.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 14.
Compulsory
use of
Standard
Mark for
articles and
processes of
any industry.
Insertion of
new sections
14A, 14B and
14C.
Compulsory
use of
Hallmark for
precious
metal
article.
Compulsory
registration
for self
declaration.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
14C. The Central Government may, by order, authorise any authority to be
enforcement authority for enforcement of any order issued by it under section 14, or
section 14A or  section 14B, in such manner as may be specified in the order.’.
9. In Chapter V of the principal Act, for the Chapter heading "L
ICENCE" the following
Chapter heading shall be substituted, namely:—
"LICENCE  AND REGISTRATION OR SELF DECLARATION OF CONFORMITY".
10. In section 15 of the principal Act,—
(a) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(1A) The Bureau may, for the purpose of self declaration under
sub-section ( 1) of  section 14B, by order, grant, renew, suspend or cancel
registration or grant self declaration of conformity in such manner as may be
determined by regulations.";
(b) in sub-section ( 2), after the words, brackets and figure "under sub-
section (1)", the words, brackets, figure and  letter "or as the case may be, registration
or allow self declaration of conformity or renewal thereof under sub-section (1A)" shall
be inserted.
11. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words and
figures ‘‘section 11 or section 12’’, the words,  figures and  letters ‘‘section 11 or  section 12
or section 14 or section  14A or section  14B or section  15’’ shall respectively be substituted.
12. In section 33 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 11 or section  12 or
section 14 or section 14A or  section 15 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which shall not be less than two lakh
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, any offence punishable under this Act, not being an offence punishable with
imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, either before or after
the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by an officer of the Bureau, not
below the rank of Scientist G or Additional Director General of the Bureau appointed
by the Director General in the Bureau in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the sum so specified shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum
amount of the fine which may be imposed under sub-section ( 1) for  the offence so
compounded:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to an offence
committed by a  person for the second time or thereafter on which a similar offence
committed by him has been compounded.
(1B) Every officer referred to in sub-section ( 1A) shall exercise the powers to
compound an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Bureau.
(1C) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(1D) Where any  offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution,
no prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in
relation to whom the offence is so compounded.
(1E) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any
prosecution, such composition  shall be brought by the officer referred to in
Enforcement
of orders.
Substitution
of Chapter
heading.
Amendment
of section 15.
Amendment
of section 26.
Amendment
of section 33.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
sub-section (1A) in writing, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecution is
pending and on such notice of the composition of the offence being given, the person
against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.
(1F) Any person who fails to comply with an order made by the officer referred
to in sub-section (1A) shall be  punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine not exceeding ten lakh rupees, or with both.’’.
13. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words “recognised in this
behalf by the Central or State Government’’ shall be omitted.
14. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(d) the number of members of the Bureau who will be members of the
Executive Committee and the power of a member to authorise a person to represent
him under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4;”;
(ii) after clause (n), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(na) the manner of compounding of offence under sub-section ( 1A) of
section 33;
(nb) the application for compounding of an offence under sub-section
(1C) of section 33;”.
15. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) the jewellers, precious metal article, geographical areas and minimum
turnover for jewellers under section 14A;’’;
(b) for clauses (d) and (e), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(d) the manner of grant, renewal, suspension or cancellation of licence
under sub-section (1) and the manner of granting registration, or allowing self
declaration of conformity, its renewal, suspension  or cancellation  under
sub-section (1A) of section 15;
(e) the conditions subject to which a licence may be granted or renewed or
registration or allowing self declaration of conformity may be granted or renewed
and the fees payable therefor under sub-section (2) of section 15.”.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of section 37.
Amendment
of section 38.
5
10
15
20
25
30

6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (BIS Act, 1986) provides for the
establishment of a Bureau for the harmonious development of the activities of
standardisation, marking and quality certification of goods and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto. Section 10 of the said Act provides that the  functions of the
Bureau of Indian Standards, inter alia, are  to establish, publish and promote Indian
Standards, to grant, renew, suspend or cancel licence for the use of the Standards Mark and
to specify a Standard Mark to be called the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark.
The Bureau of Indian Standards have, so far, formulated over 18,500 standards for about
9,500 article or process of industry.
2. Under the aforesaid Act, it is not compulsory  to obtain licence  from the Bureau by
the producer or dispenser of a product or service  for the use of the Standard  Mark even
after a standard for a product or service has been established and published by the Bureau,
unless the Central Government, under section 14 of the Act, after consulting the Bureau, by
order published in the Official Gazette,  directs that the use of Standard Mark under a licence
is compulsory. However, any person may apply to the Bureau of Indian Standards for
licence if a standard has been established and published by the Bureau of Indian Standards
only when an article or process  is of any scheduled industry specified in the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.
3.  In view of the  provisions of section 14 of the BIS Act, 1986, no one can declare that
his article or process conforms to the  Indian Standard  unless he obtains a licence from the
Bureau and the article or process is of the scheduled industry.
4. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the aforesaid  Act, inter alia,—
(a) to amend the long title of the said Act to name the Bureau of Indian Standards
to be  a national standards body and  to include the articles, processes and services
in addition to goods for the purpose of marking and quality certification;
(b) to amend section 11 of BIS Act, 1986 so as to allow  any person who is a
registered user of  a self declaration of conformity  to  display  or make self declaration
on an article or process that his article conforms to the Indian Standards  or make  a
public claim through advertisements, sales, promotion   leaflets, price lists or like that
his article conforms to the Indian Standards;
(c)  to amend section 14 of BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Central
Government, after consulting the Bureau, by order published in the Official Gazette,
to notify that any article or process of any industry (other than an article or process
meant for export) shall conform to the Indian Standard and direct that the use of the
Standard Mark under a licence shall be compulsory;
(d) to insert a new section 14A in BIS Act, 1986 so as to  empower the Central
Government, after consulting the Bureau, by order published in the Official Gazette,
to make it compulsory for the jewellers selling the precious metal articles  in such
geographical area and having such minimum turnover as may be specified by regulation
to use Hallmark under a licence and that such article conforms to the Indian Standards;
(e) to insert a new section 14B in BIS Act, 1986 so as to,—
(i)  empower the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, by
order published in the Official Gazette, to notify that any article or process shall
conform to the Indian Standard and to direct  registration or grant self declaration
of conformity with the Bureau as compulsory;

7
(ii)  provide an option to any person in respect of any article or process
notified by the Central Government for making  registration or grant of self
declaration of conformity with, or taking licence, from the Bureau;
(iii)  provide that when an article or process notified for registration or in
respect of which self declaration of conformity has been granted is subsequently
notified, which shall conform to the Indian Standard, then, in addition to such
registration or self declaration of conformity, it shall be  compulsory to obtain a
licence for such article or process in place of such registration or self declaration
of conformity;
(f) to insert a new section 14C in BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Central
Government to authorise any authority to be enforcement authority for enforcement
of orders issued under section 14 or section  14A or section 14B  of that Act;
(g) to amend section 15 of BIS Act, 1986 so as to empower the Bureau to grant,
renew, suspend or cancel registration or grant self declaration of conformity;
(h)  to amend section 33 of the BIS Act, 1986 so as to,—
(i) provide for enhancement of quantum of fine from rupees fifty thousand
to rupees two lakhs for contravention of section 11 or section  12 or section 14
or section  14A or section 14B  or section  15 of the  BIS Act, 1986;
(ii)  provide for compounding of the offences punishable with fine except
when  a person has  committed offence of similar nature for the second time or
thereafter on which a similar offence committed by him has been compounded.
5.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI;
The 13th April, 2012. K.V . THOMAS.

8
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 of the Act to empower the Central
Government to make rules to empower a member to authorise any person to represent him in
the Executive Committee of the Bureau.
2. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert three new sections 14A, 14B and 14C. New
section 14A  seeks to empower the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, by
order published in the Official Gazette, make it compulsory for the jewellers selling the
precious metal articles  in such geographical area and having such minimum turnover, as
may be specified by regulations to use   Hallmark under a licence  and that article conforms
to the Indian Standards, new section 14B  seeks to empower the Central Government, after
consulting the Bureau, by order published in the Official Gazette, to notify any article or
process which shall conform to the Indian Standard and direct registration or  grant self
declaration of conformity with the Bureau  as compulsory while new section  14C seeks to
empower the Central Government by order to authorise any authority to be  enforcement
authority for enforcement  of any order issued by it  under the new section 14 or section 14A
or section 14B in such manner as may be specified in the order.
3. Clause 10 of the Bill  seeks to insert a new sub-section ( 1A)  in section 15 and to
amend sub-section ( 2) thereof  to empower the Bureau to make  order to grant, renew,
suspend or cancel registration or grant self declaration of conformity in accordance with
the regulations and subject to the condition and on  payment of fees for grant or renewal of
self declaration of conformity in accordance with the regulations in this behalf, respectively.
4. Clause 12 of the Bill proposes to amend section 33 of the Act to empower the
Central Government to make rules to provide for the manner of compounding of offences
and making application therefor.
5. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made, or orders to
be issued are matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of the legislative power is,
therefore, of a  normal character.

9
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS ACT, 1986
(63 OF 1986)
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Bureau for the harmonious development
of the activities of standardisation, marking and quality certification of goods and for matters
connected therewith or incidential thereto.
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(t) “Standard Mark” means the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark
specified by the Bureau to represent a particular Indian Standard; and also includes
any Indian Standards Institution Certification Mark specified by the Indian Standards
Institution;
* * * * *
4.  (1) The Bureau may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, by notification
in the Official Gazette, constitute an Executive Committee which shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
* * * * *
(b) such number of members, as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BUREAU
10. (1) The Bureau may exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be
assigned to it by or under this Act and, in particular, such powers include the power to—
* * * * *
(e) levy fees for the grant or renewal of any licence;
* * * * *
(l) appoint agents in India or outside India for the inspection, testing and such
other purposes as may be prescribed;
* * * * *
14. If the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion that it is
necessary or expedient so to do, in the public interest, it may, by order published in the
Official Gazette,—
(a) notify any article or process of any scheduled industry which shall conform
to the Indian Standard; and
(b) direct the use of  the Standard Mark under a licence as compulsory on such
article or process.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “scheduled industry”
shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Industries (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1951.
Definitions.
Functions of
the Bureau.
Compulsory
use of
Standard
Mark for
articles and
processes to
certain
scheduled
industries.
65 of 1951.
Constitution
of Executive
Committee.

10
CHAPTER V
LICENCE
15. (1) * * * * *
(2) The grant or renewal of the licence under sub-section (1) shall be subject to such
conditions and on payment of such fees as may be determined by regulations.
* * * * *
26. (1) If the inspecting officer has reason to believe that any article or process in
relation to which the contravention of section 11 or section 12 has taken place are secreted
in any place, premises or vehicles, he may enter into and search such place, premises or
vehicle for such article or process.
(2) Where, as a result of any search made under sub-section (1), any article or process
has been found in relation to which contravention of section 11 or section 12 has taken place,
he may seize such article and other things which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevent
to, any proceeding under this Act:
Provided that where  it is not practicable to seize any such article or  thing, the  inspecting
officer may serve on the owner an order that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise deal
with, the article or things except with the previous permission of the inspecting officer.
* * * * *
33. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 11, or section 12 or
section 14 or section 15 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one year or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * *
34. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, save
on a complaint made by or under the authority of the Government or  Bureau or by any officer
empowered  in this behalf by the Government or the Bureau, or any consumer  or any
association recognised in this behalf by the Central or State Government.
* * * * *
37. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(d) the number of members of the Bureau who will be members of the Executive
Committee under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4;
* * * * *
38. (1) * * * * *
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(d) the manner of grant, renewal, suspension or cancellation of licence under
sub-section (1) of section 15;
(e) the conditions subject to which a licence may be granted or renewed and the
fees payable therefor under sub-section (2) of section 15.
* * * * *
Power to make
rules.
Penalty for
improper use
of Standard
Mark, etc.
Cognizance of
offences by
courts.
Grant of
licence.
Power to
search and
seizure.
Power to make
regulations.

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to amend the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986.
—————
(Shri K.V . Thomas, Minister of State for Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution)
GMGIPMRND—429LS(S3)—27.04.2012.