5
Short title and 
commencement.
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Definitions.
Bill No. 52 of 2024
THE OVERSEAS WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2024
By
Shri K. Na v askani, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of Indian citizens employed outside the country  
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows :—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Overseas Workers (Welfare) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “Fund” means the Overseas Workers Welfare Fund constituted under  
section 7; and

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Obligations 
of the Central 
Government.
Formulation 
of welfare 
schemes.
Maintenance 
of Register 
of Overseas 
workers.
Overseas 
Workers’ 
Welfare Fund.
Assessment 
study.
(b) “overseas worker” means and includes any Indian citizen who is employed 
outside India by a person who is not an Indian citizen or any company or any enterprise 
or any vessel which is not registered in the territory of India but does not include Indian 
citizens working in the organs or agencies of the United Nations Organization (UNO).
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall prepare and maintain a Register of all overseas 
workers containing names and such other particulars including the country in which 
they are employed, in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government may, from time to time, undertake or cause to be 
undertaken, using agencies as it may consider necessary, studies in the countries where 
there are substantial number of overseas Indian workers with a view to assess the 
following in regard to overseas Indian workers:—
(i) access to basic human rights;
(ii) access to health facilities;
(iii) access to legal remedies; and
(iv) ability to live in a safe and secure manner.
5. (1) The Central Government shall formulate and implement welfare schemes 
for overseas workers in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such schemes 
shall also provide for, —
(a) insurance and disability cover;
(b) old age protection including pension to those who returned to India in their 
old age;
(c) orientation and skill upgradation; 
(d) meeting expenditure on airlifting of mortal remains of deceased overseas 
Indians to India or for cremation/burial of such persons if the employer is unable 
or unwilling to do so and the family is unable to meet the cost;
(e) welfare of persons who become victims of human trafficking;
(f) emergency medical care to overseas Indians in need; and
(g) such other provisions as the Central Government may consider necessary.
6. The Central Government shall—
(i) take such measures as it may deem necessary including entering into bilateral 
agreements to generate international co-operation to check human trafficking of Indian 
citizens; and 
(ii) enter into social security agreements with other countries for ensuring protection 
and welfare of Indian citizens working overseas.
7. ( 1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Fund to be known as the Overseas Workers’ Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 

5
10
15
20
3
Punishment.
Compulsory 
registration 
of recruiting 
agencies.
Act to have 
overriding 
effect.
Power to make 
rules.
by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the Fund as the Central Government 
may think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. It shall be mandatory for all persons or agencies involved in the recruitment or 
placement of Indian citizens for employment with foreign nationals or companies outside 
the country to get themselves registered with such authority, as may be designated by the 
Central Government for the purpose.
9. Whoever, in contravention of section 8 recruits any person for employment outside 
the country, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years and with fine which may extend to rupees ten lakh or with both.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while  it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,  before the expiry 
of the session immediately following  the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,  both 
Houses  agree in making any modification in the rule  or both the Houses  agree that the  rule 
should not be made,  the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such  modification or annulment  shall 
be without  prejudice  to the validity  of anything  previously done under that rule.

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Around 50 Lakh Indians are overseas worker. More than ninety per cent. of this work 
force is in the Gulf countries.  There has been a consistent and steady increase in the number 
of persons going abroad in search of employment. There are about five million Indians 
employed outside the country. Indian workers who migrate for work legally also face many 
problems like non-payment or delay in payment of wages, harsh working and inhuman 
living conditions, retention of passport by owners, cheating by intermediaries, incidents of 
physical abuse and sexual exploitation, etc. In most of the countries access to legal recourse 
is denied to such workers. Moreover, in some countries legal recourse is so expensive that 
in most cases employees are not able to afford such options. The Central Government is 
required to take care of those who contribute to Indian economy by sending their hard 
earned money to their family members in India.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for a legislation providing for the management and 
welfare of Indian citizens working abroad.  The Bill, inter-alia, seeks to provide for:—
(i) registration of all Indian citizens who migrate from the country in search of 
employment;
(ii) entering into bilateral agreement with other government of other nations to 
safeguard the interest of Indian workers in those respective countries;
(iii) compulsory registration of recruitment agencies for overseas employment;
(iv) insurance and disability cover;
(v) old age protection including pension to those who returned to India in their  
old age;
(vi) orientation and skill upgradation;
(vii) meeting expenditure on airlifting of mortal remains of deceased overseas 
Indians to India or for cremation/burial of such persons if the employer is unable or 
unwilling to do so and the family is unable to meet the cost;
(viii) welfare of persons who become victims of human trafficking; and
(ix) emergency medical care to overseas Indians in need and other welfare measures 
as are required to meet the needs of Indian workers abroad.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; K. NA V ASKANI
July 8, 2024.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the maintenance of a register of overseas workers.  
Clause 4 provides for an assessment study in the countries where there are overseas Indian 
workers. Clause 5 provides for formulation and implementation of welfare schemes for 
welfare of overseas workers.  Clause 7 provides for constitution of a Overseas Workers’ 
Welfare Fund for welfare of overseas workers. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.  At this stage, it is difficult to give an 
exact estimate of expenditure likely to be involved as the exact amount of expenditure likely 
to be involved will depend upon the number of schemes formulated by the Government.  
However, it is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two thousand 
crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for welfare of Indian citizens employed outside the country  
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri K. Navaskani, M.P.)