1
Bill No. 64 of 2015
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. (1) In article 123 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—
“Provided that an Ordinance shall not be promulgated if it contains, in
substance, all or any of the provisions of—
(a) a Bill, which, having been introduced by a Minister, is pending in
either House of Parliament;
Short title.
Amendment
of article 123.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) a Bill, which, having been introduced in either House of
Parliament by a Minister, has been rejected by either House; or
(c) an earlier Ordinance, which has ceased to operate or withdrawn
in terms of clause (2) of this article.";
(ii) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A). Nothing in the proviso to clause (1) shall prevent the promulgation
of an Ordinance containing, in substance, all or any of the provisions of a Bill
rejected by either House, or an earlier Ordinance, after the expiry of one year of
the date of rejection of the Bill, or the date of cessation or withdrawal of an earlier
Ordinance, as the case may be.”; and
(iii) in clause (2), in sub-clause (a), for the words “six weeks”, the words “three
weeks” shall be substituted.
3. In article 213 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (1), after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be added,
namely:—
“Provided further that an Ordinance shall not be promulgated if it contains,
in substance, all or any of the provisions of—
(a) a Bill, which, having been introduced by a Minister, is pending in
the Legislative Assembly of the State or where there is a Legislative Council
in the State, in either House;
(b) a Bill, which, having been introduced in the Legislative Assembly
of the State by a Minister, has been rejected by the Legislative Assembly,
or where there is a Legislative Council in the State, having been introduced
in either House of the Legislature of the State by a Minister, has been
rejected by either House; and
(c) an earlier Ordinance, which has ceased to operate or withdrawn
in terms of clause (2) of this article.”;
(ii) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A). Nothing in the second proviso to clause ( 1) shall prevent the
promulgation of an Ordinance containing, in substance, all or any of the
provisions of a Bill rejected by the Legislative Assembly of the State, or where
there is a Legislative Council in the State, by either House, or an earlier Ordinance,
after the expiry of one year of the date of rejection of the Bill, or the date of
cessation or withdrawal of an earlier Ordinance, as the case may be.”; and
(iii) in clause (2), in sub-clause (a), for the words "six weeks", the words "three
weeks" shall be substituted.
Amendment
of article
213.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 123 of the Constitution empowers the President to legislate by promulgating
ordinances. However, this power, which was conceived of by the framers of the Constitution
as a measure of last resort, have often been misused by the Executive. Ordinances have been
promulgated when there was no urgency and the Government could have waited till
commencement of the session for approval of legislative measure in normal course. Similarly,
ordinances have been issued when Bills containing same provisions are pending in Parliament
or have been rejected by a House of Parliament.
To address the above concerns, the Bill seeks to amend the Constitution to provide
that an Ordinance shall not be promulgated if it contains, in substance, all or any of the
provisions of—
(a) a Bill, which, having been introduced by a Minister, is pending in either
House of Parliament;
(b) a Bill, which, having been introduced in either House of Parliament by a
Minister, has been rejected by either House; and
(c) an earlier Ordinance, which has ceased to operate or withdrawn in terms of
clause (2) of article 123 of the Constitution.
It is also being proposed that an Ordinance shall cease to operate at the expiration of
three weeks from the reassembly of Parliament instead of present period of six weeks.
The Bill also seeks to make corresponding amendments in article 213 in relation to
promulgation of ordinances by the Governor of a State.
N
EW DELHI; BHARTRUHARI  MAHTAB
November 19, 2014

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
123. (1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the
President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take
immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to
require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as
an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to operate at
the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before the expiration
of that period resolutions disapproving it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing
of the second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.
Explanation.—Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned to reassemble on
different dates, the period of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the
purposes of this clause.
* * * * * *
213. (1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a State is in session, or
where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses of the Legislature
are in session, the Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary
for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances
appear to him to require:
Provided that the Governor shall not, without instructions from the President,
promulgate any such Ordinance if—
(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have
required the previous sanction of the President for the introduction thereof into the
Legislature; or
(b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the same
provisions for the consideration of the President; or
(c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same provisions would
under this Constitution have been invalid unless, having been reserved for the
consideration of the President, it had received the assent of the President.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same force and effect as
an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the Governor, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or where there is a
Legislative Council in the State, before both the Houses, and shall cease to operate at
the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the
expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative
Assembly and agreed to by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the passing of the
resolution or, as the case may be, on the resolution being agreed to by the Council; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.
Explanation.—Where the Houses of the Legislature of a State having a Legislative
Council are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period of six weeks shall be
reckoned from the later of those dates for the purposes of this clause.
* * * * * *
Power of
President to
promulgate
Ordinances
during recess
of
Parliament.
Power of
Governor to
promulgate
Ordinances
during recess
of
Legislature.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4750LS(S3)—03-03-2015.