TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE NA TIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the National Rural Employment Guarantee (Amendment)
Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 6 of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005,
in sub-section (1), in the second proviso, for the words “sixty rupees per day”, the words,
“one hundred fifty rupees per day” shall be substituted.
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of section 6.
Bill No.  52 of 2007
42 of 2005.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 is being implemented in the
selected districts of the country wherein every household in rural areas is being provided
with unskilled manual work for not less than one hundred days in a financial year. Under
section 6(1) of the chapter III of the Act, the wages has been fixed at not less than rupees
60 per day. Any worker who is provided with work for one hundred days in a financial year
can earn a maximum wages of rupees six thousand only. It means that the family of the worker
would be living only with rupees five hundred per month.
Keeping in view the rising prices of essential commodities and changing lifestyle, it is
virtually impossible for any household to have a decent standard of living on a monthly
income of five hundred rupees. It is imperative to increase this amount. It is impossible to
ensure nutritious diet etc. at such a meagre wages for the poor families of agricultural workers,
tribals engaged in agricultural work. For want of nutritious diet, 75 per cent of children are
underweight in the country. Further, in the absence of nutritious diet, the rural populace is
becoming victim to infectious diseases. Hence, the wages provided under the National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 appears meagre and there is an urgent need to increase the
wages so as to enhance their purchasing power and intake of nutritious food. In order to
enable a respectable livelihood and an increase in the intake of nutritious diet of the rural
household, it appears reasonable that the daily wages be fixed at least at rupees one hundred
fifty per day under this Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR
April 18, 2007.
2

FINANCIAL   MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for increasing the daily wages from rupees sixty to rupees
one hundred fifty. The Bill, therefore, if  enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten
thousand crore. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be
involved.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT, 2005.
(ACT NO. 42 OF 2005)
CHAPTER III
* * * * * * *
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the
Central Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that different rates of wages may be specified for different areas:
Provided further that the wage rate specified from time to time under any such notifica-
tion shall not be at a rate less than sixty rupees per day.
* * * * * * *
4
Wage rate.11 of 1948.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—1814LS(S1-2007)—07.05.2007.