AS eRe ७॥।

Bill No. 52 of 2006

THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2006
B
Suri Bacut Sincu Rawat, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as

follows: —
1. This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2006. Short title.
of 1972 2. Section 9 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, shall be renumbered as sub- Amendment

$. section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section थी section 9.
shall be inserted, namely:—

"(2) Nothing in sub-section (J) shall apply to the hunting of the wild pig (Sus scrofa)
~ in relation to the State of Uttaranchal.".


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 has been enacted with the purpose of preserving
and protecting the wild life in the country. Section 9 of the Act prohibits hunting of wild
animals specified in the Schedules to the Act. At the same time, section 11 of the Act permits
hunting of wild animals in certain cases. Clause (b) of sub-section (7) of section 11 empowers
the Chief Wildlife Warden or the authorized officer to permit any person to hunt such wild
animal or cause such wild animal to be hunted as has become dangerous to human life or to
property including standing crops on any land.

Wild pigs are found in the forests in the State of Uttaranchal and they have become a
great threat to the human life and cause a great damage to the agriculture. As the wild pigs
multiply quickly, their numbephas increased alarmingly. The Wild Life Protection Act prohibits
the hunting of wild pig. Therefore, the villagers in the State of Uttaranchal are helpless when
these pigs enter their fields and damage their crops. In many cases, when villagers tried to

~ shoo away these pigs out of their fields, the pigs attacked them thereby putting their lives to
threat. It is, therefore, necessary that the Act should be amended so as to permit hunting of
wild pigs in the State of Uttaranchal.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; BACHI SINGH RAWAT
January 31,2006.



ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE WILD LiFe (Protection) Act, 1972

* * * * * * *

9. No Persons shall hunt any wild animal specified in Schedules I, I, I and IV except
as provided under section 11 and section 12.

* * * के

Prohibition
of hunting.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, MP)

MGIPMRND—1058LS—30.06.2006.