Bill No. 52 of 2022
THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2022
By
DR. S UJAY R ADHAKRISHNA V IKHE P ATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mental Healthcare (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title
and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

5
10
15
20
25
30
2
Amendment of
section 2.
2. In section 2 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),–
(a) in clause (r), after sub-clause (iii) the following sub-clause shall
be inserted, namely:–
“(iv) a psychotherapist, counsellor or psychoanalyst who has a
degree in psychology and is eligible to provide therapy or
counselling;”.
(b) for clause (s), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(s) “mental illness” means a disorder of thinking, mood,
perception, orientation, personality or memory that grossly impairs
judgement, behaviour, capacity to recognise reality or ability to meet
the ordinary demands of life, but does not include mental retardation
which is a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind
of a person, specially characterised by subnormality of intelligence;”.
3.  In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:
“Provided that the determination of whether the person has the
capacity to make decisions regarding their mental healthcare or treatment
shall be ascertained only by a psychiatrist or psychotherapist who is a qualified
practitioner of modern medicine.”.
4. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (10), after the first
proviso, the following proviso be inserted, namely:
“Provided further that the  essential medicines prescribed under
ayurveda, yoga, unani, siddha, homoeopathy or naturopathy systems shall
have the prior necessary approval from the appropriate Government.”.
5. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the first
proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:
“Provided further that before sharing such information with the
nominated representative, consent shall be obtained from the person with
mental illness, unless he has been determined incapable to consent in
accordance with section 3.”.
Amendment of
section 3.
Amendment of
section 18.
Amendment of
section 22.
10 of 2017.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mental well-being is an essential part of being healthy. The World
Health Organization defines health as a state of complete physical, mental
and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.
Poor mental health is an issue in itself, but more often than not, also
gravely impacts physical health and well-being. Mental health conditions
reduce the life expectancy of men and women by 20 and 15 years
respectively. Thus, a healthy body can only be one that has a healthy mind.
The right to health is a fundamental human right as per both article 21 of
the Constitution of India and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
Mental illnesses have been predicted to be the next epidemic, with one in
seven Indians suffering in some degree. A report by the National Crime
Records Bureau titled the ‘Accidental Deaths and Suicides in India 2019’
states that in 2019, a staggering 1.39 lakh Indians died by suicide and these
are only the cases that were reported. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has estimated, in its report, that mental health
conditions affect one in four people throughout their lifetime, and even then,
almost two thirds of persons affected do not seek treatment due to stigma or
lack of resources.
Thus, with such a large chunk of the population susceptible to mental
illness, it becomes essential to take steps to combat this problem. India ratified
the United Nations Convention for Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(UNCRPD) in 2008, marking a paradigm shift at how mental health issues
are viewed, making them a human rights issue that should be addressed based
on equality and dignity.
In this context, the Mental Healthcare Act of 2017 is a step in the right
direction, that attempts to move mental health away from stigma by making
mental healthcare a right available to all, sans discrimination by way of its
definition of a mental health professional and mental illness under section 2.
However, the parent Act takes a step back, it defines a mental illness as only
those disorders that are ‘substantial’, excluding many supposedly mild but
still significant illnesses. The parent Act also includes substance abuse within
its ambit, which has the effect of further stigmatizing mental illness, and does
not do either the mentally ill or those caught in a cycle of substance abuse
any good. Experts have deemed it necessary that alcohol and drug abuse not
be included within the scope of a mental illness and be dealt with separately.
Amending the definition is thus essential.
The definition of a mental health professional in the parent Act is also
very restrictive, leaving out of its ambit qualified psychotherapists, counsellors,
psychoanalysts, who have a degree in psychology and are eligible to provide
therapy or counselling. It reduces mental healthcare to only advanced medical
intervention, that requires medication. Consequently, assistance can be
provided to the mentally ill at an advanced stage only, defeating preventive
3

care. This is a flawed understanding of mental health, of which counselling
and therapy are both inalienable components. Thus, it becomes imperative to
amend this definition, widening its ambit.
Furthermore, the parent Act provides for determination of whether
a person is capable to make decisions regarding their mental illness under
section 3. However, it casts too wide a net by not stating that only trained
professionals can do so, defeating the purposes of the Act. Including
a safeguard as to who can make this determination is necessary to prevent
misuse and further scientific diagnosis. Thus, this section should be amended
to state that capacity can be ascertained by a psychiatrist or psychotherapist
who is a practitioner of modern medicine only.
The parent Act, under section 18, further provides that essential medicines
must be made available for all persons with mental illness free of cost, at
health establishments run or funded by the appropriate Government starting
from Community Health Centres and upwards in the public health system.
This provision also applies to medicines prescribed by practitioners of the
ayurveda, yoga, unani, siddha, homoeopathy or naturopathy systems. In the
absence of a safeguard, this section has the scope of promoting quackery and
unsafe and unscientific practices, under the garb of medication or treatment.
Therefore, it is important that such medications as prescribed by ayurveda,
yoga, unani, siddha, homoeopathy or naturopathy systems must necessarily
have obtained approvals from the Government as mandated and applicable to
modern, allopathic medicines.
Lastly, while the scheme of the entire parent Act is grounded in the
mentally ill persons agency and rights, section 22 makes all of their confidential
medical information accessible to their nominated representative, who has
been placed on the same footing. In the absence of a provision as to consent,
the mentally ill persons right to privacy gets endangered. Thus, until and
unless they have been determined incapable to consent as under section 3 of
the parent Act, the mentally ill person’s consent with respect to sharing of
their information must be obtained.
The objective of this Bill, is therefore, to enable the intent of the parent
Act to be fulfilled by truly creating a person-centric and rights-based mental
healthcare ecosystem that fosters equality and dignity, by making the
amendments suggested above.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;                  SUJAY RADHAKRISHNA VIKHE PATIL
16 February, 2022
4

ANNEXURE
 EXTRACT FROM THE MENTAL HEALTHCARE ACT, 2017
(10 OF 2017)
* * * * * *
2. (1) * * *                *
(r) “mental health professional’’ means:—
(i) a psychiatrist as defined in clause (x); or
(ii) a professional registered with the concerned State Authority
under section 55; or
(iii) a professional having a post-graduate degree (Ayurveda) in
Mano Vigyan Avum Manas Roga or a post-graduate degree
(Homoeopathy) in Psychiatry or a post-graduate degree (Unani) in
Moalijat (Nafasiyatt) or a post-graduate degree (Siddha) in Sirappu
Maruthuvam;
(s) “mental illness” means a substantial disorder of thinking, mood,
perception, orientation or memory that grossly impairs judgement, behaviour,
capacity to recognise reality or ability to meet the ordinary demands of life,
mental conditions associated with the abuse of alcohol and drugs, but does
not include mental retardation which is a condition of arrested or incomplete
development of mind of a person, specially characterised by subnormality of
intelligence;
* * * * * *
CHAPTER II
MENTAL ILLNESS AND CAPACITY TO MAKE MENTAL HEALTHCARE AND
TREA TMENT DECISIONS
3. (1) Mental illness shall be determined in accordance with such
nationally or internationally accepted medical standards (including the
latest edition of the International Classification of Disease of the World
Health Organisation) as may be notified by the Central Government.
* * * * * *
18. (1) Every person shall have a right to access mental healthcare and
treatment from mental health services run or funded by the appropriate
Government.
* * * * * *
(10) Without prejudice to the generality of range of services under
sub-section (3) of section 18, the appropriate Government shall notify Essential
Drug List and all medicines on the Essential Drug List shall be made available
free of cost to all persons with mental illness at all times at health
establishments run or funded by the appropriate Government starting from
Community Health Centres and upwards in the public health system:
Definitions.
Determination
of mental
illness.
Right to
access
mental
healthcare.
5

6
Provided that where the health professional of ayurveda, yoga, unani,
siddha, homoeopathy or naturopathy systems recognised by the Central
Government are available in any health establishment, the essential medicines
from any similar list relating to the appropriate ayurveda, yoga, unani, siddha,
homoeopathy or naturopathy systems shall also be made available free of
cost to all persons with mental illness.
22. (1) A person with mental illness and his nominated representative
shall have the rights to the following information, namely:––
* * * * * *
     (2) In case complete information cannot be given to the person with
mental illness at the time of the admission or the start of treatment, it shall be
the duty of the medical officer or psychiatrist in-charge of the person’s care
to ensure that full information is provided promptly when the individual is in
a position to receive it:
Provided that where the information has not been given to the person
with mental illness at the time of the admission or the start of treatment, the
medical officer or psychiatrist in charge of the person’s care shall give the
information to the nominated representative immediately.
Right to
Information.

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to amend the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
(Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil, M.P .)