THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 2009
BY
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory V oting Act, 2009.
(2) it extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Representation of the People Act, 1951
or any other law for the time being in force, every citizen, who is eligible to vote at an election,
shall exercise his right to vote compulsorily when called for by the Election Commission in an
election to the House of the People or Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be:
Provided that a voter may be exempted from exercising his right to vote if he is physically
incapacitated due to an illness of a serious nature and produces a certificate from a registered
medical practitioner certifying such incapacity.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Compulsory
voting by
every eligible
citizen.
Bill No. 52 of 2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
43 of 1951
5
10

2
2
3. The Election Commission shall arrange for adequate number of mobile polling
booths in each constituency for casting of votes by citizens who are unable to cast their
votes in polling booths due to illness or such reasons, as may be prescribed by rules made
under this Act.
4. Any citizen, who fails to cast his vote, shall be liable to—
(i) a fine of rupees one hundred, or one day's imprisonment or both;
(ii) forfeiture of his ration card; and
(iii) be rendered ineligible for contesting any election for a period of six years
from the date of his conviction, in case of deliberate avoidance:
Provided that if such citizen is an employee of the Central Government or any public
sector undertaking owned or controlled by the Central Government, he shall also be punished
with—
(a) forfeiture of four days salary; and
(b) delay in promotion for a minimum period of one year.
5. Any citizen who inspite of his illness or physical incapacity, exercises his right to
vote at an election or any citizen who has exercised his right to vote at all elections held
during a period of twenty years preceding the commencement of this Act without any break
or who exercises his right to vote at all elections for a period of not less than fifteen years
without break after the commencement of this Act, shall be—
(i) given a cash reward of rupees one thousand;
(ii) given preference in jobs in services under the Central Government; and
(iii) given preference in admission to the institutions of higher technical
education.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Mobile polling
booths for
casting votes
by certain
citizens.
Punishment.
Incentives for
voting.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is a very sad feature of our democracy that in most of the elections the number of
voters who cast their votes is far less than those who are eligible to vote. The average
number of votes polled is around fifty per cent. It does not reflect well on the responsibility
of the citizens that the fate of the country's democratic institutions is left to be decided by
only fifty per cent of the electorate. Since the trend of voting during elections has not so far
shown any appreciable increase in the number of voters who exercise their franchise, the
time has come to bring forward a legislation making it compulsory for every voter to exercise
his right to vote in order to ensure that all the citizens exercise their sovereign right to choose
their representatives so that the elections reflect the will of the whole electorate and not
merely a part of it.
With a view to increasing the voting percentage, the present Bill proposes to make it
compulsory for every eligible voter to vote during elections and provides for exemption only
in cases where the voter is physically incapacitated due to illness of serious nature and
produce a certificate to this effect from a registered medical practitioner. The Bill also provides
for arrangement of mobile booths for those who are unable to go to polling booths due to
illness or certain other reasons.
Since casting of vote is being made compulsory, punishment is also sought to be
given to those who do not vote at elections. However, cash reward and other incentives are
also proposed to be given to those persons who vote at elections inspite of their illness or
have been voting in successive elections without any break.
Hence the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
June 30, 2009

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Election Commission shall make arrangements for
mobile polling booths for the purpose of casting of votes by those persons who are not in a
position to cast their votes at polling booths in each constituency. Clause 5 of the Bill
provides for cash reward of rupees one thousand to those persons who inspite of their
illness or physical incapacity exercise  their right to vote at an election or to those  who
exercise their right at all elections held during a period of twenty years without any break.
This Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one lakh is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill, which will  relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2710LS (S5)—10-07-2009.