As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

११ Nie १003

Bill No. 52 of 2003

ee S| oe जय स ] |
’ ”

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
By
SHRI P.H. PANDIAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal C ode, 1860.

ee ee ee ee

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-Fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:— |
1. (7) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act,
2003. | - :
5 (2) It shall come into force at once.

45 of 1860. | 2. After section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the following proviso
shall be added at the end, namely:—

3 "Provided that punishment of death sentence shall be awarded
a only under the following circumstances:—
10 (a) if the murder is premeditated and involves extreme

= brutality; or | |

(b) if the murder involves exceptional depravity; or

; (c) if the murder is of a member of any of the armed forces of

the Union or of a member of any police force or of any public servant
15 and was committed—

Short title and
commencement.

Amendment of

- section 302.



2 है

(i) while such member or public servant was on duty; or

(ii) in consequence of anything done or attempted to be
done by such member or public servant in the lawful discharge of
his duty irrespective of whether at the time of murder he was such
member or public servant, or had ceased to be such member or

public servant; or | |

(d) if the murder is of a person who had acted in the lawful
discharge of his duty under section 43 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 or who had rendered assistance to a Magistrate or a police officer
demanding his aid or requiring his assistance under section 37 and section
129 of the said Code; or | ;

(e) any murder of a rape victim; or

(f) if the accused has committed murder more than once; or

(g) if murder of the victim has been committed after gang

rape; or , 1 oma
(h) if murder has been committed after robbery or dacoity; or
(i) in case the death of a victim Is due to demand of dowry; or

(j) if murder has been committed while indulging in subversive
or anti-national activities.

10

15

20194 99

-


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Supreme Court by majority in its judgments in Rajender Prasad's
case, Edigma's case, Jagmohan's case, and in Bachan Singh Vs State of Punjab
(Reported in AIR 1980 SC) has listed out the aggrieving factors for a
commission of murder and mitigating circumstances to enable the judge to
pass a lesser sentence and asked the Parliament to supply clear euldelines for
the sentencing judge to award the death sentence or life imprisonment. The
Parliament by an Act of 1926 of 1955 has amended Section 367, clause (v) of
Criminal Procedure Code of 1898. The amendment reads as follows:

"(5) If the accused is convicted of an offence punishable with death,
and the Court sentences him to any punishment other than death, the Court
shall in its judgment state the reason why sentence of death was not passed."

Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code provides for punishment of death
sentence or life term imprisonment in case of murder. But no criteria have
been laid down for award of death sentence. There has been an intense debate
in and outside Parliament over many years regarding awarding of capital
punishment. Some legal luminaries have advocated abolition of capital
punishment while some have advocated laying down criteria for awarding this
highest punishment. In murders involving serious and severe crimes, the
accused ought to be given death sentence. An exception, however, should be
made in murders involving less serious crimes. Life imprisonment is a rule
and death sentence is an exception under section 354(3) of Criminal Procedure
Code. Therefore, it is proposed to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 to provide
guidelines for award of death sentence.

New DELHI; P.H. PANDIAN
July 22, 2003.



ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860

* Ok है * _ ह * * *
Punishment for murder 302. Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. |

* ae * o £2 * ह मंः *



LOK SABHA Ls

A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

(Shri P.H. Pandian, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2053LS—30-07-2003.