17 DEC A

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SanHA

ill No. 52 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
‘SHRI SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1, This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004.
2, After article 21 A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

"21B. All persons shall have a right to clean, safe and sustainable environment
in such manner as Parliament may by law determine.

Explanation: For the purpose of this article, "Environment" means pollution
free air, water and land.",

Short title.

Insertion of
new article
2B

Right to
clean, safe
and
sustainable
environment


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS:

Rapid Industrialisation has no doubt accelerated the economic growth in the country
but has also resulted in environmental degradation. Industrial effluents and emission of
poisonous gases endanger the environment. Development without environmental
considerations can cause serious environmental damage affecting the quality of life of the
population—present and future. A number of studies reveal that air and water pollution are
taking a heavy toll of human lives through ill health and premature mortality. Protection of
environment is assuming a major challenge in the country. People are continuously raising
their voice against environmental pollution and demanding protection of air, water and land
from every kind of pollution so that they can get opportunity to live in a clean and healthful
environment.

There is an urgent need to take necessary steps to protect the peoples' right to live in
aclean and healthful environment. The Supreme Court has observed in several environment
related cases that right to live in a clean and healthful environment is an integral part of the
‘Right to life’ mentioned in article 21 of our Constitution.

It is, therefore, necessary to include the ‘Right to live’ in a clean, safe and sustainable
environment in the category of fundamental rights of the citizens which are enumerated in
part III of the Constitution.

Hence this Bill.

New Dei; SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY
July 21,2004,


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
. * . * * . .
21. No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except accordingto Protection of
procedure established by law. ie: and personal
iberty

21A. The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of Right w
the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine, education

. . . . . . .


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.