९; AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

160 me200

Bill No, 52 of 2001.

‘THE COMPUTER TRAINING CENTRES (REGULATION) BILL, 2001
पु By
‘Suet IQBAL AHMED SARADGI, MP.
A
BILL
to regulate computer training centres and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifly-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1, (J) This Act may be called the Computer ‘Training Centres (Regulation) Act,
2001.
5 (2) ॥ extends to the whole of India,
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “appropriate Government” means the Central Government or the State
10 Government as the case may be;

Short title
‘extent and

‘commence-
ment.


Computer
contres not to
function
without
registration,

Computer
centres (७
apply for
registration.

Secutiny of an
application,

Issue of
registration
certificate,

Syitabus and
fees,

‘Complaint to
be investigated.

Cancellation of
registration.

Punishment

Power to make
rules.

(0) "computer training centres" means and includes a centre in which |
including advanced course in computer is imparted or training is provided to per-
sons already knowing computer operations or where training is given to those who
are aspiring for jobs in computer industry; and

(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no person shall run any
computer centre without prior registration.

4, The in-charge or the head of the affairs of a computer centre, whether set up prior
to or after the commencement of this Act shall apply to the appropriate Government
within one month from the date of commencement of this Act, for obtaining registration
in such form as may be prescribed.

5. The appropriate Government shall, on receipt of an application under section 4
cause to be scrutinized as to the genuineness of the computer centres and shall carry out
such investigation as it may deem fit to ensure that the particulars furnished by the com-
puter centres for registration are in order and that the institute has fulfilled all the mini-
mum requirements.

6. On being satisfied that the particulars furnished by the computer centre are in
order, the appropriate Government may issue a registration certificate in favour of the
computer centre for such period as it may deem fit.

7. The appropriate Government shall prescribe syllabus and fees for each course
imparted by a computer education centre,

8. If, on receipt of a complaint regarding the functioning of a computer centre, the
appropriate Government shall cause to be investigated and take a decision within one
month from the date of the receipt of the complaint.

9. If on the investigation if is found that the complaint has been found in order, the
appropriate Government shall forthwith cancel the registration accorded to the computer
centre against which a complaint has been lodged.

10. If any person violates the provisions of this Act, he shall be liable to punishment
for a term not less than three years and a fine of rupees one lakh.

11. The Central Government by notification in the official Gazette may make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

10

15.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

A large number of computer training centres are functioning in the country without
proper registration. These centres charge exorbitant fees from students. They do not have
proper facilities or course content to impart quality training. Recently, there have some
instances in which the institutes closed down their operations without completing courses
after enrolment of students and after collection huge amount of money from them. The
students have been left in the lurch. In order to protect the interest of students community,
there is a need to regulate the functioning of the computer institutions in the country.

‘The Bill seeks to provide for the due registration of all computer training centres
and also provide for punishment to those who are running training centres without regis-
tration,

Hence this Bill.

New Detar, IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
June 21, 2001.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for | |!
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only, —
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to regulate computer training centres and for matters
connected therewith or incidental: thereto.

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—886LS—10.7.2001.