1
THE  RIGHT  OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION ( AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Right of Children to Free  and Compulsory
 Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 52 of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5

2.  In section 12 of the  Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education  Act, 2009,
in sub-section (1), in clause (c), after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely: —
" Provided further that a school specified in sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) of clause
(n) of section 2, for the purposes of admission to the extent of at least twenty-five
per cent. of the strength of class I of children belonging to weaker section and
disadvantaged group in the neighbourhood, shall decide inter-se priority of admission
in the following order:—
(i) household having two child both being girl child;
(ii) household having only single girl child;
(iii) household having only single male child;
(iv) household having one girl child and one male child;
(v) other household."
2
Amendment of
section 12.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (RTE Act) is a
landmark legislation to implement the Fundamental right enshrined in the article 21A of the
Constitution. However, after a decade, there is a need to review and update it, specially in the
light of the present day challenges.
There is a limited availability of seats and high demand for the twenty-five per cent.
reserved seats for the disadvantaged and weaker section. It is, therefore, essential that these
seats are rationed properly. Giving priority to the girl child and to families complying with the
two child norm would not only help in achieving the goal of population stabilization but also
help in improving the child sex ratio.
Moreover, there is a need to bring a uniform priority order to reduce ambiguity in
selection for admission.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANJAY JAISWAL
February  11, 2020.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009
ACT NO. 35 OF 2009
*******
12. (1) "For the purposes of this Act, a school,—
( a ) *******
(c) specified in sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) of clause (n) of section 2 shall admit in
class I, to the extent of at least twenty-five per cent.  of the strength of that class, children
belonging to weaker section and disadvantaged group in the neighbourhood and provide
free and compulsory elementary education  till its completion:
Provided further that where a school specified in clause (n) of section 2 imparts
pre-school education, the provisions of clauses (a) to (c) shall apply for admission to such
pre-school education.
*******
Extent of
school's
responsibility
for free and
compulsory
education.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009.
————
(Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5384LS—25.02.2020.