 Bill No. 52 of 2023
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
By
SHRI PARVESH SAHIB  SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In section 267 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter
referred to as the Code), in sub-section (1), for the words “before the court”
wherever they occur, the words “ before the court physically or with the
permission of the court through video conferencing” shall be substituted.
3. In section 273 of the code, for the words “shall be taken in the presence
of the accused”, the words “shall be taken in the presence of the accused in
normal circumstances or with the permission of the court through video
conferencing” shall be substituted.
5
Amendment of
section 267. 2 of 1974
Amendment of
section 273.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The law must adapt to new advancements in science and other social
trends as they occur. As a result, the Supreme Court correctly stated in the
case of Som Prakash vs. State of Delhi that “in our technological age
nothing more primitive can be conceived of than denying discoveries and
nothing cruder can retard forensic efficiency than swearing by traditional
oral evidence only thereby discouraging the liberal use of scientific aids to
prove guilt”. Laws must be changed in order to deal with the investigators’
and judges’ excessive workloads and to more completely implement a
problem-solving approach to criminal proceedings. The introduction of the
idea of video conferencing in the Indian criminal justice system is one
illustration of this kind of transformation.
The idea of video conferencing has been used as a tool in two different
ways, first for gathering evidence in unique situations and then for bringing
the undertrials before the court from the prison itself for reasons of an
extension of remand or other purposes. For video conferencing to be
permitted, the courts in India similarly used a purposeful interpretation.
By using the advance technologies Indian judicial system can increase
its efficiency in delivering justice and giving important verdicts, in case of
criminal cases courts can hold trial of dreaded gangsters through video
conferencing from prison itself, so that cops don’t have to ferry them to
courts. Presently it is the case that only remand hearings are conducted by
video conference. Criminals find various ways to carry out crime or escape
when they are brought to the court as there has been various Instances of
undertrial convicts escaping which would also be reduced if all prisoners’
remand and trials were conducted by video conference. It also happens that
during their presence in court for trial, criminals may threaten witnesses or
plan to commit crimes with the assistance of their assistants. Video
conferencing can help catch these actions.
Video conferencing is greatly required since it enhances the
administration of justice by saving both the Court and undertrials’ time.
The concept’s introduction will make it possible to record evidence and
eliminate the risk associated with transporting high-risk inmates who are
being tried in various courts across the nation. This will also make it
possible to record the testimony of foreign-based experts and witnesses
without having to pay the exorbitant transportation costs to get them to the
trial court. Modern times’ complexity necessitates that the law be updated
at the same rate as technological advancements.
Justice would undoubtedly benefit from the idea of video conferencing
since it would enable judges to be as accurate as possible and comprehend
the case with the aid of all video recordings. These cutting-edge techniques
for connecting the prison and the court via video linkage will guarantee a
quick trial and eliminate the difficulties of undertrials. Additionally, it
3

4
should be remembered that the Law Courts would lag behind other
industries if they did not accept technological advancement in court
processes.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                           PARVESH SAHIB SINGH
January 17, 2023.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
(2 OF 1974)
* * * * *
267. (1) Whenever, in the course of an inquiry, trial or proceeding under
this Code, it appears to a Criminal Court,—
(a) that a person confined or detained in a prison should be brought
before the Court for answering to a charge of an offence, or for the purpose
of any proceedings against him, or
(b) that it is necessary for the ends of justice to examine such
person as a witness,
the Court may make an order requiring the officer in charge of
the prison to produce such person before the Court answering to the charge
or for the purpose of such proceeding or, as the case may be, for giving
evidence.
(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made by a Magistrate of
the second class, it shall not be forwarded to, or acted upon by, the officer in
charge of the prison unless it is countersigned by the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
to whom such Magistrate is subordinate.
(3) Every order submitted for countersigning under sub-section (2)
shall be accompanied by a statement of the facts which, in the opinion of the
Magistrate, render the order necessary, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate to
whom it is submitted may, after considering such statement, decline to
countersign the order.
* * * * *
273. Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken in the
course of the trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the
accused, or, when his personal attendance is dispensed with, in the presence
of his pleader:
Provided that where the evidence of a woman below the age of eighteen
years who is alleged to have been subjected to rape or any other sexual offence,
is to be recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to ensure that such
woman is not confronted by the accused while at the same time ensuring the
right of cross-examination of the accused.
Explanation.— In this section, “accused” includes a person in relation
to whom any proceeding under Chapter VIII has been commenced under
this Code.
* * * * *
Power to
require
attendance of
prisoners.
Evidence to be
taken in
presence of
accused.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
————
(Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh, M.P .)