As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
Dill No. 53 of 1987 
THE GOA, DA[\IAN AND D,IU REORGANISATION BILL, 1987 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PART I 
PRELIMIN ARY 
Clauses 
1. Short title. 
2. Definitions. 
. PART II 
REORGANISATION OF THE UNION TERRITORY OF GOA, DAMAN AND DIU 
3. Formation of the State of Goa. 
4. Formation of Union territory of Daman and Diu. 
5. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution. 
PART III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 
THE COUNCIL OF STATES 
6. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. 
7, Election to fill the seat allotted to the State of Goa. 
HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
8. Allocation of sents in the House of the People. 
9. Election to fill the seat. 
10. Parliamentary Constituencies. 
11. Provisions as to sitting members. 
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
12. Provisions as to Legislative Assembly. 
13. Provisiona~ Legislative Assembly., 
14. Amendment of Delimitation Order. 
15. Speaker and Deputy Speaker. 
16. Rules of Procedure. 

(ii) 
Delimitation of constituenci\!s 
CLAUSES 
17. Delimitation of (·onstituencies. 
18. Power of Election Commission to maintain delilI)itation orders 
uptodate. 
19. Amendment of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders. 
PART IV 
HIGH COURT 
20. Common High Court for Maharashtra, Goa, Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
and Daman and Diu. 
21. Provision as to advocates. 
22. Practice and pro~edure in the common High Court. 
23. Custody of seal of the common High Court .. 
24. Form of Writs l>'lld other processes. 
25. Powers of Judges. 
26. Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High 
Court. 
27. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court. 
28. Transfer of proceedings to the common High Court. 
29. Interpretation, etc. 
30. Saving. 
PART V 
AU'fIlCRISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DnmuBUTION OF REvENUES 
31. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature. 
32. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory. 
33. Distributi'ln of Revenues. 
PART VI 
ASSETS AND LIAB:ILITIES 
34. Definition. 
35. Land anti Goods. 
36. Cash balances. 
37. Arrears of taxes. 
38. Right to recover loans and advances. 
39. Investments in and 10,ans, etc. to certain corporate bodies. 
40. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings. 
41. Refund of taxes collected in excess. 
42. Certain deposits. 
43. Provident fund. 
44. P~nsicn!l granted by tho Administrator, etc. 

(iii) 
CLAtrSES 
45. Contract.s. 
46. Liability in respect of actionable wrong. 
4'/. Liability as guarantor of Co-operative Societies. 
48. Items in suspense. 
49. Residllary provision. 
50. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement. 
51. Power of Central Government to order allocation Or adjustment In 
certain cases. 
PART VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO ARRANGEMENTs, CORPORATIONS AND INTER-STATE 
AGREEMENTs 
52. Continuance of certain arrange~ents. 
5-3. Provhion as to co-operative banks. 
54. General provisions as to statutory corporations. 
55. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain 
transport permits. 
existing read 
I 
56. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in celtain 
cases. 
57. Special provision as to income-tax. 
58. Continuance of existing facilities in certain institutions. 
PART VIII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERvICES 
59. Provisions relating to All India Services. 
60. Provisic,ns relating to other services. 
61. Provisions as to continuance of officers in the same posts. 
62. Powers of Central Government to give directions. 
PART IX 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
63. Amendment of articles 210, 239A, 239B and 240. 
64. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956. 
65. Amendment of Act 20 of 1963. 
66. Territorial extent of laws. 
67. Power to adapt laws. 
68. Power to construe laws. 
69. Provi:>ions as to continuance of courts, etc. 
70. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws. 
71. Power to remove difficulties. 
72. Power to make rules. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. 53 of 1»87 
THE GUA, DAMAN AND DIU REORGANISATION BILL, 1987 
A 
BILL 
to provide Jor the reorganisation of the Union territory of Goa, Daman 
«114 Diu and for matters connected therewith. . . 
BE·it ep~cted by ·Parliament· in the Thirty~ighth Year of the 
Republic of lndia' as follows: -' . 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. This Act may be called the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Short 
Act, 1987. title 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:-
(a) "Administrator" .. means the administratOr appointed by the 
President under article 239; 
10 (b) "apPointed day,j.means the day which the Central Govern-
ment may, .~ notification, appoint; 
(e) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
. (~) "assembly const,ituency" and "parliamentary constituency" 
have the same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 
1950; 43 of 1930 IS 
Defini. 
tions 

Forma-
tion of 
the 
State 
ot Goa. 
Forma-
tion ot 
Union 
territory 
ot Da. 
man 
and Diu. 
Amend-
ment 
ot First 
Schedule 
to the 
Consti-
tution. 
(e) ICElection Commission" means the Election Commission 
appointed by the President under article 324; 
(f) "existing Union territory" means the Union territory of Goa, 
Daman and Diu as existing immediately before the appointed day; 
(g) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, S 
bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instru.ment having, 
immediately before the aRPointed day, the force of law in the 
whole or any part of the existing Union territory; 
(h) "notification" means a notification published in the Offtclal 
Gazette' 10 , 
(i) "population ratio", in relation to the State of Goa and the 
Union, means the ratio of 42: 3.25; 
(j) ICsitting member", in relation to the House of the People 
or of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory, 
means a person who, immediately before the appointed day, is a IS 
member of that House or that Assembly; 
(k) "treasury" includes a sub-treasury. 
PART II 
REORGAN1SATION OF THE UNION TERRITORY OF GOA, DAMAN AND DIu 
3. On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed a Dew State 20 
to be known as the State of Goa comprising the territories which imme-
diately before that day were comprised in the district of Goa of the 
existing Union territory. 
,4. On and from the appointed· day, there shall be formed' a new 
Union territory to be known as the Union territory of Daman and Diu 2S 
comprising the territories which, immediately before that day, were 
comprised in the Daman and Diu districts ot the existing Union 
territory. 
5. On and from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the 
Constitution,- 30 
(a) under the heading "I. THE STATES", after entry 24, the 
following entry shall be inserted, namely:-
"25. Goa The territories specified in ~ 
tion 3 of the Goa, Daman and Diu 
Reorganisation Act, 1987.'·; 3' 
(b) under the heading "II. THE UNION TERRITORIES", for 
entry 5, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"S. Daman and Diu The territories specifted in Me-
tiOD 4 of the Goa, Daman and Diu 
Reorganisation Act, IINJ7.". «) 
" ". ~ 

<43 of 19$0. 
.. 
PART DI 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEc!sLA.TUR!'8 
The Council of Stdtes 
8. ?n. and from the appointed. day, in the Fourth Schedule to the 
! Constitution, in the Table,-
(a) entries 4 to 26 shall be renumbered 8S entries Ii to 27 
respectively; . 
(b) after entry 3, the following entry shall be inserf:OO, namely:-
. ,114. Goa ................ 1"; 
10 (e) for the figures 11232", the figures "233" shall be substituted. 
7. As sOl)n as may be after the appointed day, election shall be held 
to fill the seat allotted in the Council of State::; to the State of Goa. 
Home of the People 
I. On and from the appointed day, there shall. be -'1lotted two ~.t.s 
IS to 'the State of Goa, and one seat to the Union territory ot Daman and 
.Diu In the House ot the People and the First Schedule to the Represen-
tation of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed to be amended aeeord-
ingly. ' I 
t. As soon as may be after the appointed day, election shall be held 
20 fill the seat allotted in the House of the People to the Union territory 
of' Daman and Diu, which shall form one parliamentary constituency. 
'18. On and from the appointed day,-
(a) the Panaji parliamentary constituency, excluding the 
Daman and Diu Assembly constit~ncies, and the Mormugao parlia-
mentary constituency in the existing Union territory shall be deen:a-
. ed to be the parliamentary constituencies ot the State of Goa and 
accordingly, in Part A of Schedule XXVI to the Delimitation ot 
Par:liamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, for the 
figures and words "12-Cumbarjua, 13-Santo Andre, 29-Daman and 
ao-Diu", the figures and words "12-Cumbarjua and 13-Santo Andre" 
shall be substituted; 
·(b, the Daman and Dil1 Assembly constituencies in the ~xisting 
Union territory shall be deemed to comprise the parliamentary 
constituency of the Union territory' of Daman and Diu; 
Amend. 
ment of 
the 
Fourth 
Schedule 
to the 
Conati-
tution . 
.-
Election 
to ftll 
the .eat 
allotted 
to the 
Stf,te of 
ao.. 
Alloca-
tion Of 
Beata iD 
the 
HoUle of 
the 
People. 
Election 
to fiU 
the .eat. 
Parlla. 
mental')' 
Conatl-
tuenclee 
35 11. (1) The sitting member of the HoUSe of the People representing 
the Panaji parliamentary constituency which, on the appointed day, by 
virtue of the provisions of clause (a) of section 10 stands altered and 
beeomes a parliamentary constituency of the State of Goa shall, ~s from 
Provi-
Bklns u 
to sitting 
m.em-
beN. 

that day, be deemed to have been duly elected to that House by that 
constituency as so altered. 
(2) The sitting member of the House of the People representing the 
Mormugao parliamentary constituency which, on the appointed day, by 
virtue of the provisions of clause (a) of section 10 becomes a parliamen- S 
tary constituency of the State of Goa shall, as from that day, be deemed 
to have been duly elected to that House by that constituency in that 
State. 
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
Provi- 12. On and from the appointed day, the total number of seats in the 10 
slone ~ Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa to be filled by persons, chosen 
to Legis. by direct election from assembly constituencies, shall be forty and the lative 
ABsem- Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, shall be 430t 1950. 
bly. deemed to be amended accordingly. 
Provi-
sional 
Legisla-
tive As. 
seinbly. 
Forma-
tion of 
the 
State 
ot Goa. 
Forma-
tion of 
Union 
territorY 
nf -
13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act (including 15 
provisions relating to the strength of the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Goa), on and from the appointed day and until the Legislative 
Assembly of that State has been duly constituted and summoned to meet 
for the first session, there shall be a provisional Legislative Assern.bly 
which shall consist of,- ' 20 
;,. 
(a) me&bers elected by the territorial constituencies nf the 
Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory, other Ithan 
those members elected by the territorial constituencies of Daman 
and Diu; and . 
(b) members nominated to that Assembly. 25 
to be k. 
diately ~e period of five years referred to in clause (1) of article 172 
existing 1 the case of provisional Legislative Assembly referred to in 
jon (1), be deemed to have commenced on the date on which 
tation of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territoI'Y 
.~urlenced under section 5 of the Government of Union Territories 30 20 of 1963 
U{ct, 1963. 
(3) For so long as the provisional Legislative Assembly constituted 
under this section is in existenoe,-
(a) it shall be deemed to be the Legislative ~mbly of the 
State of Goa duly constituted under the Constitution and shall be 35 
competent to discharge all the functions of a Legislative Assembly 
of a State under the Constitution; and 
(b) the members thereof, referred to in clause (a) of sub~ 
section (1), shall be deemed to be the members of the ,Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Goa duly elected under the Constitution. 40 
Amend- 14. In Part B of Schedule XXVI to the Delimitation of Parliamentary 
ment of and Assembly constituencies Order, 1976, the headings "DAMAN, 
Delimfta· DISTR1CT" ~nd "DIU DISTRICT" Imd ell tries thereunder IIhl\l1 ~ 
tlon omitted. 
Order 

I 
IS. The persons who immediately before the appointed day are the 
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the 
existing Union territory shall on and from that day, be ~ Speaker and 
the Deputy Speaker, respectively, of the provisicmal Legislative 
S Assembly. 
16. The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
Assembly of the existing Union territory, as in force immediately be-
fore the aPPointed day shall, until rules are made under clause (1) of 
article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of tv.e 
10 provisional Legislative Assembly, subject to such modifications and 
adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof. 
Delimitation of constituencies 
17. (1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein prov\ded, 
distribute, whether before or after the appointed day, the seats assig.1ed 
15 to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa under section 12 to 
single-member territorial constituencies and delimit them having regard 
to the provisions of the Constitution and to the follOwing provisioIl'i, 
namely:-
20 
2~ 
30 
35 
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographi-
cally compac't areas, and in delimiting them regard shall be had to 
physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communication and convenience to the public; and 
(b) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be 
located in areas where the proportion of their populatiop to the 
total population is the larsest. 
(2) For the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functi'Jns 
under sub-section (1), the Election Commission shall associate with 
itself as associate members,-
(a) the sitting members of ~ House of ih~ People referred to 
in section 11; and 
(b) such six of the members of the Legislative Assembly of the 
existing Union territory or, as the aase may be, the provisional Legis-
lative Assembly referred to in section 13 as the Speaker thereof may 
nominate; 
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to 
vote or to sign any decision of the Election Commission. 
(3) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate mem-
ber falls vacant, it shall De filled if practicable, in accordance with the 
40 provisions of sub-section (2). 
4~ 
(4) The Election Commission shall-
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies 
together with the dissenting proposals, if any of any asSOCIate , 
member who desires publication thereof, in the Ofticial Gazette and 
in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together 
with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the 
proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will 
be further considered by it; 
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have 
been received by it before the date so specified; 
Speaker 
·and De-
puty 
Speaker. 
Rules of 
proce-
dure. 
Delimi-
tation 
of con. 
stituf!n-
til'S. 

Power 
of Elec-
tion 
Com-
milaion 
to main-
tain de-
limita-
tion or-
ders up-
to-date. 
Amend-
ment of 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
and 
Sche-
duled 
Tri:bee 
Orden. 
Common 
High 
Court for 
Mahara-
shtra, 
GOa 
Dadra and 
Nagar 
Haveli 
and 
Daman 
and Diu. 
6 
(c) after considering all abjections and suggestions which may 
have been received by it before the date so specified, determine by 
one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon 
such publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law 5 
and shall nat be called in question in any court. 
(5) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order 
relating to assembly constituencies shall be laid before the ~gislative 
Assembly of the existing Union territory or as the case may be, the 
provisional Legislative Assembly re~erred to in section 13. 10 
18. (1) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette,-
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under 
section 17 or any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or 
omission; 
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division 
mention£'d in any such order are or is altered, make such amend-
ments as appear to it to De necessary or expedient for bringing such 
order up-to-date. 
15 
(2) Ev.ery notification under this section relating to an assemblJ 20 
constituency shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the 
Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory, the provisioDaJ 
Legislative Assembly referred to in section 13 or the Legislative Assem-
bly of the State of Goa, as the c~ may be. 
19. On and from the appointed day,- 25 
(a) 'the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and the 
Constituti-on (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 
shall stand amended as directed in the First Schedule and the 
Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Castes Order, 1968, 
shall stand repealfld; 30 
(b) the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 and the 
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 
shall stand amended as directed in the Second Schedule and the 
Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1968, 
shall stand repealed. 35 
PART IV 
HIGH COURT 
20. (1) On and from the appointed day,-
(a) there shall be a common High Court for the States ot 
Maharashtra and Goa and for the Union territories of Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli, and D~n and Diu, to be called the High Court of 40 
Maharashtra and Goa (hereinafter referred to as the Common High 
Court); 
(b) the Judges of the High Court of Bombay (hereinafter re-
ferred to as the existing High Court), holding office immediately be-
fore that day shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become, on 
that day, the Judges of the common High Court. 

2S of 1961. 
., 
~. 
(2) The expenditure in respect of 'the salaries and allowances ot the 
.fudges of the common High Court shall be allocated amongst the States 
of Maharashtra 'and Goa and the Union in such proportion as the Presi-
d~nt '"may, by order, determine. " 
!5 (3) On and from the appointed day, the common High Court shall 
have, in respect of the territories comprised i}l the States of Maharasbtra 
an"d' Goa- and the Union territories of"Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman 
and' DiU, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under the law 
in-force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect 
lOot thOse territories by the High Court of Bombay. . 
.. 21: (1) On" and from the appointed day.- Provision 
as to ad-
(a) in the Advocates Act, 1961, in section 3. in sub-section vocates. 
(1), of or clause (ccc) , the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
15 "(ccc) for the States of Maharashtra and Goa and the Union 
territories of Dadra, and ,Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. to 
be known as the Bar Council of Maharashtra and Goa;"; 
(b) the Bar Council of Maharashtra shall be deemed to be the 
Bar Council of Maharashtra and Goa with the Advocate-General . . 
20 of the State of Goa also as an ex..officio members. 
(2) Any person; who, immediately before the appointed day. is an 
advocate entitled to practise in the extisting High Court shall be 
entitied to practise as an advocate in the comlI!on High Court. . 
{S) All· persons who, immediately before the- appointed,' day, are 
25 adlJocateson the roll of the Bar Council of Maharashtra, shall as from 
tha1; day_ become advocates ont the roll of the Bar Council of Mahara-
.Mra aDd·Goa· 
(4) The ritJht of audience in the common High Court shall be regulat-
ed in accordance with the li~ principles as, immediately before the 
30 appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audience in the 
existing High Court: 
PrOvided that as between the Advocates-General of the States of 
Maharashtra and Goa, the. right of audience shall be determined with 
reference to their dates of enrolment as advocates. 
35 22. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediate-
ly before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in 
the existing High Court shall, with the necessarY modifications, apply in 
relation to the common High Court. 
Practice 
and pro-
cedure in 
the com-
mon 
High 
Court. 

Custody of seal 
of the 
common 
High 
Court. 
,",arm of 
Writs 
lind 
other 
pro-
cesses. 
powers 
of Judl(e8. 
Principal 
seat and 
other 
places 
ot sitting 
of the 
cornman 
High 
Court. 
l'rocedure 
as to ap-
peals to 
Supreme 
Court. 
Transfer 
of pro-
ceedings 
to the 
commOn 
High 
Court. 
Interpre_ 
tation, etc. 
, 23. The ~w in force immediately before the appointed. da'y' -Nidi 
respect to the custody of the Seal of the existing High Court shall. 
with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody o~. 
the Seal of the common High Court. 
U. The law in fOrce immediately before the appointed day' with S 
respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded 
by the existing High :Court shall, with necessary modifications, apply' 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or 
awarded by he common High Court. 
25. 'Ihe law in force immediately before the appointed day with 10 
respect to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division 
CoUI~ of the existing High Court and wi.th respect to all matters, 
ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall. with the necessary modi-
fications, apply in relation to the: common High Court. 
26. (1) The principle seat of the common High Court shall be at the IS 
same place at which l;he principal seat of the existing Hiih Court is 
lvcated immediately before the appoiilteQ day. 
(2) The President may, by notified order, provide for the establish .. 
ment of a p.ermanent bench or benches of the common High Court at 
one or more places within the terrItories to which the jurisdiction of 20 
the High Court ex~ends, other than the principal seat of the High Coun. 
and for any matters connected therewith: . 
Provided that before issuing any order under this iub-section. 'the 
President shall consult the Chief Justice of the common High Court, 
and the Governor of the 'State in which the bench or benches is or are 2S 
proposed to be established· 
(3) Notwit~tanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or a\l~ 
section (2), the Judges and division courts of the common High Court 
may also sit at such other place or places within the territories to which 
the jurisdiction of that High Court extends as the Chief Justice of that 30 
High Court may. with the approval of the Governor of the State or 
the Administrator of the Union territory concerned. appoint. 
.' , 
27. The law in force, immediately before 'the appointed day relating 
to appeals to the Supreme Court from the existing High Court and the 
Judges and division courti thereof shall, with the necessary modiflca- 3~ 
tions, apply in relation to the common High Court. 
28. (1) All ptoceedings pending in the existing High Court iznme.. 
diately before the appointed day shall, from such day, stand transferred 
to the common High Court. 
(2) Every proceeding transferred under sub-section (1) shall be 40 
disposed of by the common High Court as if such proceeding was enter-
tabled by that .High Court. 
29. (1) For the purposes of section 28,--: 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until 
that court has disposed of all issues between the parties. inc1ud.ine 4S 
any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceed-

9 
Ings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to 
the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revlsion 
and petitions for writs; and I 
<b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including 
5 referencE's to a Judge or division court thereof and references to an 
order made by a court of a Judge shall be construed as including 
referet'~c('s to a sentence, judgement or decree passed or made by that 
court or Judge. 
.. (2) Any person who, immedia'tely before the appointed day, is an 
10 advocate entitled 'to practise in the existing High Court and was autho-
rised to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred from that High 
Court to the common High Court under section 28 shall have the right 
to appear or to act. as the case may be, in the common High Court in 
relation to those proceecUngs. 
15 30. Nothing; in this Part shall affect the application to the common "-' -n.q. 
High Court of any provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall 
have effect subject to any provision that may be made on or after the 
appointed clay with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or 
other authority having power to make such provision. 
20 PART V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES 
31. (1) The President may, at any time before the appointed day, 
authorise by order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of. thE." 
State of Goa as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six 
25 months beginning with the appointed day, pending the sanction of 8u<:h 
expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa: 
Provided that the Governor of Goa may, after the appointed day, 
authorise by order such further expenditure as he deems necessary 
from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Goa for any period not 
30 extending beyond the said period of six months. 
(2) The President or. as the case may be, the Governor of Goa shall 
make separate orders under sub-section (1) in respect of periods faUlng 
in different financial years· 
(3) The President may at any time, before Or after the appOinted 
35 day, authorise by order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months 
beginning with the appointed day for the administration of the affairs 
of the Union territory of Daman and Diu pending the sanction of such 
expenditure by _ Parliament. 
40 
32. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
r(:ierred to in section 49 of the Government of Union Territories Act. 
1963, relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory in respect 
to of 1963. of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be submitted to the 
Governor of the State of Goa and the President who shall cause them 
4S to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of that State or the HOUle 
of the peopJe, as the case may be. 
:Author .... 
tion of. 
expendi-
ture 
pendiq 
its AIle· 
tioD by 
the 
Le,WI-
ture. 
Report. 
relatm, 
to the 
ICCOWltl 
of the 
ezJatJq 
UnlOa 
temtory 

Cash 
Balan~. 
10 
(2) The Governor man by order,-
I (a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated·· 
Fund of the existing Union territory on any service in respect of 
any period prior to the appointed day during the ftnaneial year 
19&7-88 or in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the 5 
amount granted for that service and for that year as disclosed in 
the report referred to in sub-section (1) to have been duly autho-
rised; and 
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising 
out of the said reports. 10 
33. The President shall, by order, determine the grants-in-aid of the 
revenues of the State of Goa and the share of that State in the Union 
duties of excise, estate duty and taxes on income and for that purpose 58 of 1957. 
amend thereby the relevar.t provisions of the Additional Duties of 
Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, the Union Duties of 15 24 of 1979. 
Excise (Distribution) Act, 1979. the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962 
and the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Greer. 1!J35 in such 9 of 1962. 
manner as he thinks fit. 
PART VI 
AsSETS AND LIABILI'IlES .. I 
34. In this Part "Union purposes" mean the purposes of Government 
relatable to any of the matters mentioned in List I in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution. 
20 
35. (1) Subject to 'the other provisions of this Part, all land and all 
all stores. articles and other goods held immediutely before the 2S 
appointed day, by the Union for the purposes of the governance of the 
existing Uninn territory, on artd from that day, pass to the State of Goa, 
shall, unless any such land, stores, articles or goods are situate in the 
di&tricts of Daman and Diu of the existing Union territory or are held 
for Union purposes: 30 
Provided that where the Central Government is of the opinion that 
any goods or clas.'! of goods should be distributed otherwise than a:cord-
ing . to the situation of the good.s. the Central Government may issue 
such directions as it thinks fit for a just and equitable distribution of "ue 
goods. 35 
(2) The stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation 
in particular institutions, workshops or undertakings or on particular 
works under construction, s~all be retained by the Union if such instit.u-
tion, workshop, undertaking or work is situated in the districts of Daman 
and Diu of the cxistmg Union territory. 40 
(3) In this section, the expression "land" includes immovable pro-
perty of every kind and any rights in or over such property. 
36. The total of the cash balances in all treasuries, the Reserve 
Bank of India, the State Bank of India and any nationalised Bank, of 
the existing Union territory immediately before the appointed day shall 45 
be divided between the Stlte of Goa and the Union according to the 
population ratio: 
Provided that for the 'lurposes of such division there shall be no , 
transfer 01 cash balances from any treasury to any other treasury and 

11 
. the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the balances in the boob 
of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Ezpla7UZtion.-In this section,. "balance" includes a debit balance. 
37. (1) The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty (including 
5 arrears of land revenue) on any property situated in the district of Goa 
of the existing Union territory shall belong to the State of Goa. 
(Z) Tne right to recover arrears of any tax or duty, other than a 
tax or duty specified in sub-section (1), shall belong to the State of Goa 
if .the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included in the distrlet 
10 of Goa of the existing Union territory. 
38. The right to recover any loans or advances made by the Unton 
before the appointed day to any local body, sC'ciety, agriculturist or other 
person in the district of Goa of the existing Union' territory shall telong 
to the State of Goa: 
l' Provided that the right to recover loans or advances of pay and 
travellinglilloVl'ance to a Government servant made before the appoin. 
ted day hy the Administrator shall pass to the State of Goa if such ,Gov· 
ernrnent servant is allotted to 'that State. 
39. Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act or a 
20 State Act for the existing' Union territory, or any part there.-
of, halil. by virtue of the provisions of Part IT, become an inter-state body 
corporate. the Investments in, or loans or advances to, any such body by 
the Umon mRde before the appointed day shall be divided between toe 
State of Goa and the Union in such manner as may be agreed between 
25 them hefore the ('xpiration of one year from the appointed day, or in 
default ot such agreement in such manner as the Central Government 
may, by order, direct. 
40. The R~sets and liabilities relating to sny commercial undertaking 
of the existing Union territory shall-
301/1) if the undertaking is located in the district of Goa of the 
exi!'lttng Union territory, pass to the State of Goa; 
(b) if the undertaking is located in the district of . Goa, as 
well as the districts of Daman and Diu, of the existing Union terrltory, 
be. divided in such manner as may be agreed upon between the 
35 StAte of Goa and the Union before the expiration of one year from 
thl" appOinted day, or in default of such agreement, as the Central 
Government may, by order, direct. 
41. The liability of the Union to refund-
(a) any tax or duty on property, il"cluding land revenue, col-
40 • lerted tn excess shall go to the State of Goa if the property is situat-
ed in the district of Goa of the existing Union territory. 
(b) any other tax or duty collected in excess shall go to the 
Stata of Goa if the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included 
in the di .. trict of Goa of the existing Uni'Jn territory. 
Inl1ell-
mellt. 
III .,." 
loa,.., 
etc. 1#1 
certa/II 
corr»-
rate 
bodln. 
A.1Ie" 
and 
liabfll· 
tie, 01 
lIate 
under-
1411"",. 
RelufUI 
01 taru 
collectetl 
m~ 
45 42. The liability of the Union in respec't I)f any civil deposit or local Cmal,. 
fund shaU, on and from the appointed day, he the liability of the State depOlll,. 
of Goa, if the deposit has been made in the district of Goa of the exist-
ing Union territory. 

I'f1IIIoI&s 
fMItIH 
"". 1Itbrti .. ... INI.,;· 
. ~IC. 
12 
43. (1) The liability of the Union in respect of the provident fund 
a~count of a Government servant employed in connection with the 
administration of the existing Union territory and in service on the 
appOinted day shall, all and from that day, be the liability of the State 
of ('tO~ if that Government servant is permanently allotted to that Statp.. 5 
(2) The liability of the Union in respect of the provident fund 
account of a Government servant employed in connection with the 
administration of the existing Union t~rritory who has retired from 
service before the appointed day shall be the liability of the State of 
Goa in the first instance and shall be adjusted between the State of Goa 10 
and the Union according to the population ratio. 
44. (1) Subje::-t to the adjustments mentioned in sub-section (4), the 
State of Goa snaIl, in respect of pensions granted before the appointed 
day by the Administrator, pay the penSions drawn in the treasuries in 
the Goa district of th~ existing Union territory. 15 
(2) SubJpct to the adjustments mentioned in sub-section (4), ihe 
liability in TPSp<.!ct of pensions of Government servants employed in 
connection with the affairs of the existing Union territory who retire or 
proceed on leave J:re~'aratory to retirement before the appointed day, 
but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before that 20 
d~y; shall bE" the liabmty of the State of Goa. 
(3) The li2bility of the Union in re~pect of pensions granted before 
the appointed dav bv the Administrator and drawn in any treasury out-
side the existing Uni('n territory shall be the liability of the State of 
Goa subject to adiustments to be made in accordance with sub-section 25 
(4), as if su"h pensions had been drawn in the treasuries referred to til 
sub-~tion (1'. 
(4) In re'3pect of tLe period commencing on the appointed day and 
enrling on thp 3] st day of March, 1988, and in respect of each subsequent 
financial year, the total payments made by the State of Goa in respect 30 
of penSions referred 10 in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall be 
apportioned betwee!1 the State of Goa and the Union in the population 
ratio. 
(5) The liability in respect of the pension of any Governdient ser-
vant employed immediately before the appointed day in connection with 35 
tnc affairs of the existing Union territory and retiring on or after ·that 
day, shaH be that of the State of Goa On the Union, as the case may be, 
but the portion of the pension in respect of the period of service ot any 
such Government servant before the appointed day shall be apportioned 
cetween the two State of Goa and the Union in the popUlation ratio. 40 
(6) Any reference in this section to a pension shall be construed' as 
including a reference to the commuted value of the pension. 
45. (1) Where before the appointed day, the Union has made any 
contrnct in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the 
ex:sting Union territory that contract shall be deemed to have been 45 
made in the exercise of the executive power of the State of Goa.-
(4) jf the purposes of the contract are, on and from the appoint-
ed day, exclusively purposes of that State; and ., 

13 
(b) if the purposes of the contract are, on and froItl'that ci?y. 
not exclusively purposes of any area in the districts of Daman and 
Diu of the existing Union territory; 
and all rights and liabilities which have a::crued, or may accrue, und~r 
5 any such contract shall. to the extent to which they would h<!Je be~n 
rights or liabilities of the Union, be rights or liabilities of the State of 
Goa ' ' ~~ ~ . .' \ 
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause (b), tk' initial 
allocation of rights and liabilities made by this sub-section shall be sub-
10 ject to sueh financial adjustments as may be agreed upon between the 
State of Goa and the Union or in default of 'such agreement,. as th~ 
Central Government may, by order, direct. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be 
included in the liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any 
15 contra('t-
(a) any liabiHty to satisfy an order. or award made by any 
court or other tribunal in proceedings relating to the contra,:t: and 
(b) any liability in: respect of expenses incurred in, or in ('on-
nection with, any such proceedings. 
20 (3) This section shall have effect subject to the other prJVlSlOn'l 
of this part relating to the apportionment of liabilities in respe.:t of loans, 
guarantees and other financial obligations. 
. 4& Where. immediately before Ithe appointed day, the Union in 
connection with the governance of the existing Union territory i~, subject 
25 to any liability in 1 espect of an actionable wrong. other than breach of 
contract, that Uability. shal1 , 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the district of 
Goa of the existing Union territory. be a liability of the State of 
Goa; and 
30 (b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the Stale of Goa 
but subject to such financial adjustments as may be agreed upon 
between the State of Goa and the Union, or in default of stich agree-
ment, as the Central Government may, by order, direct. 
47, Where, immediately before the appointed day. the Union in con-
3S nection with the governance of the existing Union territory is liable a~ 
guarantor in 1"E"spect of any liability of a registered co-operathe societ.y 
or other person, that liability of the Union shall be a liability of the State 
of Goa- ' 
Liability 
in res-
pect of 
action-
able 
wrong 
Liability 
as gua-
rantor 
of co-
opera-
tive 
(a) if the tlrea of the operations of such society or person is societirs. 
40 limited to the territories in the distri"t of Goa of the existing Uniun 
territory; and 
(b) if the area of the operations of such society or perso1 extends 
to the whole of the existing Union territory: . 
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause (b), the 
45 initial allocation of liabilities under this section shall be subje"1, to such 
finaneilll adjustments as may be agreed upon between the Stale' of Goa 
and the Union or in default of such agr~ement, as the Central· C-;'{wern-
ment may, by order, direct. 

Heme in 
8UlpeIl8e 
Resi-
duary 
proVi_ 
sion 
Appor-
tion-
ment of 
asset!! 
or liabi_ 
lities by 
agree-
ment 
Power 
of Cen-
tral Go-
vern-
ment to 
order 
alloca-
tion or 
adjuat-
mentln 
certain 
cases. 
Oon-
tinuance; 
of cer-
tain ar-
range-
ments. 
Provi-
sion as 
to co-
opera-
tive 
banks. 
14 
.s. If any item in IUSpeD18 it ultimately found to affect' an aaet or 
liability of the nature referred.to in any of the foregoing provisioDa of this 
Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance with that provision. 
49. The benefit or burden of any assets or labilities of the Union in 
connection with the governance of the existing Union territory not dealt 5 
with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be retained by the 
Union for the purposes of the lovernance of the Union territory of Daman 
and Diu. 
50. Where the State of Goa and the Union agree that the benefit nr 
burden of any particular asae't or liability should be apportioned between 10 
them in a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provi-
sions of this Part, then, notwithstanding anything contained therein, the 
benefit or burden of that asse~ or liability shall be apportioned in the 
manner agreed UI-on. 
51. Where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part. the U 
Union becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or the 
State of Goa bf'Comes subject to any liability, and the Central Govern-
ment is of opi~ion on a reference made within a period of three yellrs 
from the appointed day by the State of Goa that it is just and eqUitable 20 
that that propt"rty or those benefits should be transferred to. or shared 
with. the State of Goa or that a contribution towards that liability 
should be made by the Union the said property or benefits shall be allo-
cated in such manner, or the Union shall make to the State of Goa such 
contribution in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after 
consultation with the Government of the State of Goa by order determine. 25 
PART VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO ARRANGEMENTS, CORPORATIONS AND INTER-STATE 
AGRUMENTS 
5%. Where any arrangement in regard to the supply of electric power 
or the supply of water for any area in the districts of Daman and Diu of 
the existing Union territoy or in regard to the execution of any project 30 
for such supply from an area included in the State of Goa by 'the provi-
sions of Part II exists, such arrangement will be continued, unless termi-
nated by agreement, between the State of Goa and the Union in accordance 
with such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon by the 
State Government of State of Goa and the Union within a period of one 35 
year from the appointed day, and, where no such agreement is arrived at 
within such period, the Central Government may ~ve such directions as 
it deems fit to 'that State Government or the authority concerned for the 
continuance. so far as is practicable, of the previous arrangement. 
040 
53. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 22 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949, where by virtue of the provisions of Part II, a c0-
operative bank is newly formed 01" the appointed day or within three 
months thereof in the State of Goa or the Union territory of Daman 
and Diu, it may commence and conduct banking business without 
obtaining a licence under that sectIon from the Reserve Bank of India, 45 
until it is granted such a licence or until it il informed by the Reserve 
Bank of India that such a 1tcence cannot be granted ttl it: 
10 of 
1940 

Provided that such bank applies to the Relerw Bank of India for such 
• licence withbl a per~od of three months from the date otformation of 
the Bank. 
54. (1) Where any body corporate constituted. under any Central Act, 
5 State Act or Provincial Act for the existing Union territory or any part 
thereof has, by virtue of the provlsions of Part II, become an inter-State 
body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, on and from the appointed 
day, continue to function and operate in those areas in respect of which it 
was functioning and operating immediately before that day, subject to 
10 such directions as may from time to time be issued by the Central Gov-
ernment until other provisions is made by law in respect of the said body 
corporate. 
(2) Any direction issued by the Central Government undetsub-section 
(1) in respect of any such body corpprate may include a direction that any 
15 law by which the said body corporate is governed shall, in its application 
to that body corporate, have effect, subject to sueh exceptions and modi-
fications as may be specified in the direction. 
55. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 63 of the Motor 
.. of 1939. Vehicle Act, 1939, a permit granted in the existing Union territory shall, 
20 if such permit was immediately before the appointed day, valid and effec-
tive in any area therein, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective 
in that area up to the 31st day of March, 1988, subject to the provisions of 
that Act as for the time being in force in that area and it shall not be 
necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by any State or 
25 Regional Transport Author.ity for the purpose of validating it for use in 
such area: 
Provided that the Central Government maYt after consultation with 
the State Government of Goa add to, amend or vary the conditions atta-
ched to the permit by the authority by which the permit was granted. 
30 (2) No toll, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be 
levied for a period upto and inclusive of the 31st day of March, 1988, in 
respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in either the State of 
Goa or the Union territory of Daman and Diu under any such permit, 
if such vehicle was immediately before that day exempt from the pay-
35 ment of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges for its operations 
within the existing Union territory: 
Provided that the Central Government may, after cOMultation with 
the State Government of Goa authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance 
fees or other charges, as the case may be. 
56. Where, by virtue of the PTovisions of Part II, any body corporate 
40 constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co-opera-
tive society registered under any law relating to co-operntive societies or 
any commercial Or industrial underta-king is reconstituted or reorganised 
In any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other body cor-
45 porate, co-operative SOCiety or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in conse-
quence of such reconstitution, reorganisation, amalgamation or dissolUtion, 
any workman employed by such body corporate or any such co-operative 
society or undertaking. is transferred to, or in any other co-operative 
I'OC1ety or undertaking, then, notwitbstandlng anything contained in sec-
General 
provi. 
sions 
list<> 
statu-
tory 
corpora-
tions. 
Tempo-
rary 
provi-
sions 
as to 
con-
tinuanc~ 
of cer-
tain 
existing 
road 
trans-
port per-
mits. 
Special 
provi-
sion 
relaUtlS 
to re-
trench-
ment 
compen_ 
sation 
in cer-
tain 
calles. 

Special 
provi-
sion as 
to in-
come 
tax. 
Con-
tlnuante 
of exist-· 
itl' faci-
tiC's in 
certain 
institu-
tions. 
provi-
sions re-
lating to 
All 
India 
Services. 
16 
tiun 2!iF, section 25FF or section 25FFF, of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947, such transfer or, re-employment shall not entitle him to any com-
pensation under that section: . 
Provided that-
(a) the terms and conditil.lns of service applicable tu the w9rkman 5 
tlfter such transfer or re-employment are not less favourable to Lhe 
workman than thoc;e applicable to him immediately before the transfer 
or re-employment; and 
(0) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co-opera-
tive society or the undertaking where the workman transferred or re- 10 
employed, is by agreement or otherwise, legally liable to pay to the 
workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation under sec-
tion 25F, section 25FF or section 25FFF of the Industrial Disputes 
1<4 of l~.7. 
Act, 1947, on the basis that his service has been continuous and has 14 of 1947. 
not been interrupted by the transfer or re-employment. J 5 
57. Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body corporate carry-
ing on business are, under the prov;sions of this Part, transferred to any 
other bodies corporate which after the transfer carry on the same business, 
the lo,ses of profits or gains sustained by the body corporate first mention-
ed which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried 20 
forward and set off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of 
the l1L'ome-tax Act, 1961 shall be apportioned amongst the transferee 
bodies corporate in accordance with the rules to be made by the Central 
Government in this behalf and, upon such apportionment, the share of loss 
allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance 25 
with the provisions of Chapter VI of the said Act as if the transferee body 
corporate had itself sustained such 1\)SS in a business carried on by it in 
the years in which these losses were sustained. 
~. On and from the appoiated day, the Government of Goa shall, in 
respe_ t of the technica'! institutions located in the State of Goa continue 30 
to provide facilities to the persons resident in the territories comprising 
the Union territory of Daman and D!u which shall not in any respect be 
less favourable than those which were being provided to them immediate-
ly before that day upon such terms and conditions (including those relat-
ing to any contribution or payment to be made for the provisions of such 35 
facilities) as may be agreed upon between the State of Goa and the Union 
before the 1st day of April, 1988, or if no such agreement is reached by 
the said date, as may be fixed by the order of the Central Government. 
PART VIII 
PROVJSIONS AS TO SERVICES 
59. (1) In this section, the expression "State Cadre",-
(a) in relation to the Indiau Administrative Service, has the mean-
ing assigned to it in the Indian Administrative Servil.:e (Cadre) Rules, 
HJ54; 
40 
(0) in relation to the Indian 'Police Service, has the meaning 4S 
assigned to it in the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rule" 1954,' ind' . 
43 of 1961. 

(c) in :relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning 
assigned to it in the Jndian Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966-
(2) The strength and composition of the State Cadre of Goa shall, on 
and from the appointed day, be such as is determined by the Central Gov-
~ enunent in consultation with the State Government. 
(3) The memllers of each of the said Services borne on the Union 
territories cadre immediately before the appointed day shall continue to 
be in the cadre of the same service of the Union territory in which they 
stand allocated before the appointed day. 
JO (4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on 
81 of 19~1 or after the appointed day, of the All India Services Act. 1951, Or the 
rules made thereunder, in relation to the State cadres of the said services 
and in relation to the members of those services borne on the said cadreL 
GO. (1) Every person employed in connection with the atTain of the 
15 Union territory or the State of Goa and serving, immediately before the 
appointed day, in the district of Goa of the existing Union territory shall, 
on and from that day,-
(a) continue to serve in connection with the aifairs of the State of 
Goa; and 
20 (b) be deemed to be provisionally allotted to serve in connection 
25 
With the affairs of the said State: 
Provided that nothing in clause (b) shall apply to a person to whom 
the provisions of section 60 apply or to a person on deputation from any 
State. -
(2) AB soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Govern-
ment shall by general or special order, determine whether every person 
referred to in cIauae (b) of sub-section (1) shall be finally allotted tor 
aervice in the State of Goa or under the Union in connection with the 
affairs of the Union territory of Daman and Diu and the date with effect 
30 from which such allotment shall take etTect or be deemed to have taken 
e1feot. 
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of su}). 
Mction (2) to the State of Goa or the Union shall, if he is not already' 
serving therein or thereunder be made available for serving in that State 
ls or under the Union from such date as may be agreed upon between the 
State of Goa and the Union or in default of such agreement, as may be 
d.etermined by the Central Government. 
(4) As soon as may be after the Central Government passes orders 
1inally allotting an employee in terms of sub-section (2), the State of Goa 
or the Union shall take steps to integrate him into the servicetl 
.0 under its control in accordance with such special Or general orders or 
iDltructions as may be issued by the Central Government from time to 
time in this behalf. 
'(5) The Central Government may, by order. establish one or more 
4~" Advisory Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to-
(a) the division of the services between the State of Goa and .. 
UDion; and 
PraYI-
siofte 
r('latiD, 
to oth_ 
.ern.. 

Ptovt- i 
SioDil 81 
to con-
tinuance 
of offi-
cera ia 
the 
same 
postll. 
Powen 
of CeD-
tral 00. 
vern .. 
ment 
to "'''f diree-
ti ... 
(b) the ensurini of fair and equitable treatment to ail persons 
affected by the provisions of this section aDd the proper coneideMti 
of any representations made by such persons: 
Pmvided that notwithstanding anything to the contruy contained in 
any law or rule for the time being in forre, no representation shall lie 5 
against any order passed by the competent authority on matters arising. 
out of the division and integration of services under this Act, on the expiry! 
of three months from the date of publication or service, whichever iS~1 
earlier, of such order: I 
Provided further that, notwithstandmg anything contained in tbel' 0 
preceding proviso, the Central Government may 8UO moto or otherwise I 
and for reasons to be recorded, reopen any matter and pass such orden l 
thereon, as may appear tu it to be appropriate if it is satisfied that it is" 
necessary so to do, in order to prevent any mi90alTitge of justice to .a:my: 
affected employee. 15 
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, on or after the 
appointed day, the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Pa,rt XIV 
of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions 
of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the State 
of. Goa or the Union: 2Q 
Pro~ that ~e conditions of servi~ applicable j m m.t1eJtely' 
before the appointed day; to the case of any person refer:red to in sub. 
llection (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage 
except with the previous approval of the Central Government. 
(7) All service prior to the appointed day rendered by a person allotted 2' 
unde,r su1>-seetion (Z) in connection with the affairs of the existing Union 
territory shall for purposes of the rules regarding his conditions of service, 
be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the aifairsof the ... 
State or the Union to which he is finally allotted. 
(8) The provisions of this section other than cla1Ue (a) -Gfaub McUOI1 30 
(1) ahall not apply in relation to any pwson to whom the provisions of 
~B 60 apply. 
8L Every person who immediately before the appointed day ia holding 
or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the 
aftaiIs of the existing Union. territory shall continue to hold the same post 3' 
or ofB.ce and shall be deemed, on and from that day, to have been d.1.J.l¥. 
appointed. on the &a.me terms and conditions ofappointmant an.d on .the 
s8me tenure to that post or office by the Gove.rnm.ent of, or the other 
appropriate authority, in the State of Goa Or of the Union, as the cue 
may be: .. 'ia;- !" '.It., 40 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a 
competent authority, on or after the appointed day, from passing in 
relation to such person any order affecting. his c:ontinUance in 8uchpost 
o.r oft1ee.', I 
62, The Cent1tal . Govermnent may give su.chdirectiol1s to the Siatf 4; 
Government as may appear to it to be necessary for the ~Ulpale of giving 
eftect to the foregoing provisions of thia Part and the said GovemmeJlt 
.ball comply with sueh dtredlo~ I 

1. 
PART IX 
LBaAL AND MISCJlU.ANJIOUS PBOVIBION • 
•. On and trom the appointed day,-
(4) in article 81, in clause (1), in sub-clause (4), for the words 
'ftve hundred and twenty·five members'. the words "five hundred 
and thirty members" shall be substituted; 
(b) in article 210, in clause (2). in the second proviso, for the 
words "Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram", the words "Arunachal 
'Pradesh, Goa and Mizoram" shall be substituted; 
(e) in article 239A, in clause (1), for the words "for any at the 
10 Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry", the 
words "for the Union territory of Pondicherry" shall be substituted; 
(d) in article 239B. in clause (1), for the words, brackets. figures 
and letter "a Union territory referred to in clause (1) of article 239A". 
the words "the Union territory of Pondicherry" shall be substituted; 
IS (e) in article 240, in clause (1),-
(i) for entry (d). the following entry shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(d) Daman and Diu;"; 
(ii) in the provisos, for the words "Goa, Daman and Diu or 
.0 Pondicherry", the word "Pondicherry" shall be substituted. 
25 
64, On and from the appointed day, in section 15 of the States Re. 
oganisation Act. 1956, for clause (d), the following clause shall be sUD-
stituted, namely: - ' . . "", -, 
II (d) the Western Zone, comprisin~ the States of Gua, Gujarat 
and Maharashtra and the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman and Diu: and", 
Amend. 
mellt of 
celt. 
articlt'W 
Amend. 
ment of 
of Ad 
3'1 of 
11158. 
65. On and from the appointed day. in the Government of Union tern- Amend-
30 
tortes Act, 1963,- ment of 
(4) throughout the Act, for the words "a Union territory", "any ~~:, 
Union territory" or "evet'v Union territory", wherever they occur, 
the words "the Union territory" shall be substituted; 
'(b) in section 2, in sub-section (1), for clause (h), the following 
, dause shall be substituted, namely:-
'(h), "Union tel'ritory" means the Union tenitory of Pondi-
cherry,'; , 
. , 
(el' in section 3,- i 
(0 for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall tie 
substituted, namely:-
"(4) Seats shall be reserved for the ScheCfuled Castes in 
the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory."; 
"(ii) for sub-section '(6), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely: _ ,. " 
"(6) Notwithstanding anything in sub.gection (4) , the 
reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes in the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory shall cease to have effect on 
the same date on which the reservation of seats for the 
Scheduled Castes in the House of the People shall cease to 
have effect under article 334: 

pron-
8IOIW .. 
to con-
tinuance 
of courtI. 
etc. 
II 
Provided that nothing in this iUb-sectiOl1 shall affect 1D7 
repretlentation in the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly." 
•. The provisions of Part n shall not be deemed to have eft'ected 
any change in the territorie. to which any law in force immediately 5 
before the appointed day extends or applies, and the territorial references 
in any such law to the existing Union territory shall, until otherwise 
provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority. be 
construed as meaning the tenitories within the existing Union territory 
before the appointed day. I I 10 
67. For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the 
State of Goa Or the Union territory of Daman and Diu of any law made 
before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, within two 
years from that day, by order. make such adaptations and modificatIons 
of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary IS 
or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to 
the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, renealed or 
amended by a rompetent Legislature or other competent authority. 
Exptanation,-In this section, the expression "appropriate Govern-
ment" means, as respects anv law relating to a matter enumerated in the 20 
Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the CentraJ Gov-
ernment, and as respects any other law, . 
(i)' in its application to the State of Goa, the State Government. 
and : 
(ii) in its application to the Unio1') territory of Daman Diu. the 25 
Central Government. ' . ". 
68. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has 
been made under section 68 for the adaptRtion of a law made before the 
apoointed day, anv court. tribunal 0.. authorihr reauired or empowered 
to enforce such law may. for the purpose of facmtatinp its anplication in 30 
relation to the State of Goa, or the Union territory of Daman and Diu 
construe the law in such manner not affecting the substance as may 'ti'e 
necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or 
authority, as the case may be. l 'co 1 
.: All courts and tribunals and all autnorlties dischar¢n~ lawful 3S 
functions throughout the existin". Union territory O,r any part thereof 
immediately before the appointed dav shall unless their continuance Is 
inconsistent with the nrovb;ions of this Act or untiJ other provision ftll 
made by a ('om;petP.nt Let'i!'!latuTe or other competent authority,continue 
to enJl'cige. their .~ctive functions. 40 
'10 .. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law. 

'Ir 
n. (1) It any difticulty an.. in IiviDC 6ct to tlll! pIl'OViatoaa of tb!I 
Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with IUCb 
provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of removing the difficulty: i 
5 Provided that no such qrder man be made after the apiry of three 
years from the appointed day. ! 
(2) Every order made under thia .ection Ihall be laid before each 
House of Parliament 
TZ. (1) The Central Government may. by 
give etTect to the provisions of this Act. 
notification. make rules to Power 
10 " to make rut. ~ 
. (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
De after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in sefsion, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one IleSsion 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
15 session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall then!after 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect. as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification. Or annulment ~hall be without 
80 prejudice to the validity of anything previously done uMer that role. 
THE FIRST SCHEDut;E 
[See ~on 19(i)] 
PART I 
AMENDM"!NTs TO THE CONS'l'I'roTION . (SCHEDULED CASTES)' ORDl'lII, 19S0 
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1930~ 
(1)' in para~aph 2, for the figures "XXI", the figures ''XXII'' shall 
be substituted; 
(2) in the Schedule, after Part xxr. the following Part shall 
30 be inserted. namely:- .~ 
"PART XXII-GOA 
1. Bhang{ 'madlY 
" Chambhar 
. 3. Mahar 
•. Mahyavanshi (Vanor)' 
5. Mang .... I 
PART IT 
A~ TO 'I'R'1!: CONS'tliOllON (ScHzrmLzD, CAS'l'ZSr 
(UNION T!:m1rroRIPS) ORDn, 1951 
4D • ..!n the Constitution (Sched~1~~,. ~a~~~r-~~~~ _, T~~ri_~)~ ~:<!«;, 
UI".,.- I 
tJ)" in para~J)h 2. for the words ant! figures "Parts I and ,Ir', 
the words and fl~ree "Parts I to tI" shan be sul>stftuted; , 

22 
(I) ... ~ ., .. followiq,~ -.u .,. aWi""':' 
~:-
"4. Any reference in this Order to a Union territory in Part I 
of the Sc~dule shall be construed as a referenee to the territory 
constituted asa Union territory as from the first day of November, S 
1956, any referencE to a Union territory in Part II of the Schedule 
shall be construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a 
Union 'territory as from the first day 'of November, 1966 and any 
reference to a Union territory in Part m of the Sehedule shan be 
construed ¥ a x:eference to the territory constituted as a Union terri- 10 
tory as from the day appointed under clause (b) of section 2 of the 
Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Aet, 1987.". 
<S) in the Schedule. after Part II· the following Part aha1l be 
iDIerted,. namely:-
"PART m-DAMAN AND Dru 
Th1"oughout the Union territory:-
1. Bhangi (Hadi) 
1.. Chambhar 
3. Mahar 
4. Mahyavanshi (VankaI') 
50 Mang.". 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 19 (ii) ] 
PART I 
~" 
15 
20 
AMENDMENTS TO TI'IE CONSTITUTION (5cm:DULED TRIBES) Olamt, 1.. li 
In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,-
(1) for the figures '"XVIII", the figures "XIX" shall be substituted; 
(2) in the Schedule, after Part XVIII, the funowing Part shall be 
mserted, namely:-
"PART XIX.-GOA 
1. Dliodia ........ --2. Dubla (Halpati) 
3. Naikda (Talavia) 
4. Siddi (Nayaka) 
5. VarU .... . .............. . 
PARTn 
A1f1JNDMDrI'S '1'0 THE CON8111 O'l'tON {Scmamu:[) TltIlml) (UNTO,," 
T!:imLTORIES) ORnER, 1951 :;..,. 
In the Oo~stitution (Scheduled Tribes)" (Union 'l'emtori") Order," 
1951,- ,,:." ..... f'·· ,., : ........ :~ .. '". - . • "-.-
" . 41; 

(1) in paragraph 2, for the word and figure "PART I", the word. 
and figures "PARTS I AND IT" shall be substitute.ij 
(2) in paragraph 3, the words, figures and brackets uand an, 
reference to a Union territory in Part II of the Schedule shall be 
, construed as a referenee to the territory constituted as a Union terri-
tory as from the day appointed under clause (b) of section 2 of the 
Goa, DamaR and Diu Reorganisation Act, li87" shall be added at 
I the end; 
(3) in the Schedule, after Part I, the following Part ,ball be 
18 inserted, nam.ely:-
"PART II-DAMAN AND DIU 
Throlliboot the Union territory:-
1. Dhodia 
2. DubIe (Halpati) 
3. Naikda (Talavia) 
.. Siddi (Nayaka) 
5. Varli.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
With a view to satisfying the desires and aspirations of the people 
of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, the Government have 
decided to undertake legislative measures to confer statehood on the 
Goa District of the Union territory and make Daman and Diu a separate 
Union territory. This Bill is intended to give effect to this decision and 
will come into force on a date to be notified by the Central Government. 
It seeks to form a new State of Goa comprising the Goa District of the 
Union territory and the new Union territory of Daman and Diu compri&-
ing the Daman and Diu Districts of the Union territory. It also seeks 
to make the necessary supplemental, incidental and consequential 
provisions . 
NEW DEl.JD'; BUTA SINGH. 
Til. 6th May, 1987. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
. Clauae 17 of the Bill seeks to empower the Election Commission of 
; India t{J de1imit the assembly constituencies of the new state of Goa. 
: For this purpose, a non-recurring expenditure of about Rs. 50,000 will 
·have to be incuITed. This exeenditure will be met from the Consolida-
:ted Fund of India. I 
2. According to the Budget Estimates of the Union territory of Goa, 
. Daman and Diu for the current year, the domestic revenue receipts of 
:the Union territory are Rs. 1,0072.60 lakhs while non-expenditure 
pn revenue accounts is Rs. 1,7053.60 lakhs. The gap is met by the 
grants-in-aid given by the Central Gov~rnment. As a State, Goa wHl 
be entitled to a share in the income-tax and additional excise duties of 
the Central Government to the extent of about Rs. 80 crores. The 
~new State's share in the basic excise duty of the Central Government 
wJlI be determined by the Finance Commission. Consequently, the 
·"State's revenue would be augmented and non-plan revenue deficit re-
duced correspondingly. In the past, Finance Commission has taken 
note of such deficits and recommended suitable grants-in-aid under article 
275 (1) of the Constitution. It is, therefore, proposed to provide for 
such quantum of grants-in-aid to the new State as may be considered 
.necessary until the recommendations of the next Finance Commission 
.become available, by suitably amending the provisions of the Conrnitu-
:~Qn (DisLribution of Revenues) Order, 1985 in exercise of the powers 
sought to be taken 'in clauSe 33 of the Bill. Such grants-in-aid are expected 
to be about Rs. 34 crores in the current ye')r and Rs. 20 crores in the next 
year. 
3. Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Governmf'nt 
to establish one or more Advisory Committees for the purpose of aSi;sting 
it in regard to the discharge of its functions in relation to allocaHon of 
members of the services and the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment 
to all persons affected. Some expenditure not exceeding Rs. 20,000 
per annum for two or three years may have to be incurred out of the! 
Consolidated Fund of India on account of travelling allowance of Mem-
bers of the Committee. 
• 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the President to determine by order 
the grant-in-aid to the new State of Goa and its share of Central taxes 
and amend for that purpose the relevant prOvisions of the Additional. 
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, the Union 
Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1979, the Estate Duty (Distribution) 
Act, 1962 and the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1985. 
2. Clause 67 provides for the adaptation of existing laws to facilitate 
their application to the new State. The power to adapt is being con-
ferred on the Central Government in the case of laws relating to matteR 
enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitu-
tion and on the Government of the new State in the case of all other laws. 
3. Clause 72 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to give effect to the provisions of the Bill when enacted. The 
rules, if any, will be confined to matters of procedure and other mattelY 
of minor detail relating to the enforcement of the various provisions in-
cluded in the Bill. 
4. The various provisions aforementioned are modelled on identical 
or analogous provisions in the States Reorganisation Acts passed by the 
Parliament earlier. Besides, they are mainly of a consequential nature 
or pertain to matters of detail and procedure. As such, the proposed 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character . 
• 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the reorganisation of the Union territory of Goa, Daman 
and Diu and for matters connected therewith. 
(Sht'i Buta Singh, Minister of Home· A6cirs.) 