BiU No. &3 01 1963 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1953 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
, 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the lndustriid Disputes Act, 1947. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called 
the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1953. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24th day of 
October, 1953. 5 
2. Amendment of section 2, Act XIV of 1947.-In section 2 of the 
lndustrial Disputes Act, 1947, (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act),-
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 10 
"(aa) 'average pay' means the average of the wages 
"aid or payable to a workman-
(i) in the case of monthly paid workman, in the 
three complete calendar months, 
(ii) in the case of weekly paid workman, in the 15 
four complete weeks, 
(iii) in the case of daily paid workman, in the 
twelve full working days, 
preceding the date on which the average pay becomes pay-
able if the workman had worked for three comolete calendar 20 
months or four complete weeks or twelve full working days, 
as the ca~e may be. and where such calculation cannot be 
made. the average pay shall be calculated as the average of 
the wages paid or navable to a workman dl,lrtn~ the pey;iod 
he actually worked;"; gij 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
40 
45 
:.I 
(ii) after clause (ee), the tol19'Wing clause shall be inserter 
namely:- . ~~"i(~ 
"(eee) 'continuous service' means uninterrupted servik-
~ and includes service which may be interrupted merel.y 0 
CYn account of sickness or authorised leave or an accident or 
strike which is not illegal or a cessation of work which ; 
L~ not due to any fault on the part of the workman;"; 
(iii) after clause (kk), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(kkk) 'lay-off' (with ns grammatical variations and 
cognate expressions) means the failure, refusal or inability 
of an employer on account of shortage of coal, power or 
raw materials or the accumulation of stocks or the break-
down of machinery or for any other similar reason to give 
employment to a workman whose name is borne on the 
muster rolls of his industrial establishment and who has 
not been retrenched; \I: 
Explanation.-Every workman whose name is borne on 
the muster rolls of the industrial establishment and who 
presents himself for work at the establishment at the time 
appointed for the purpose during normal working hours and 
is not given employment by the employer within two hours 
thereof shall be deemed to have been laid-oft within the 
meaning of this clause;"; 
(iv) after clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(00) 'retrenchment' means the termination by the em-
ployer of the service of a workman for any reason whatso-
ever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of 
disciplinary action, but does not include-
(a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or 
(b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age 
of superannuation if the contract of employment between 
the employer and the· workman concerned contains a 
stipulation in that behalf;"; 
(v) after clause (r), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(rr) 'wages' means all remuneration capable of being 
expressed in terms of money, which would, if the terms of 
employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable 
to a wor'~~man in respect of his employment or of work done 
in such employment, and includes-
(i) such allowances (including dearness allowance) 
af> the workman is for the time being entitled to; 
(ii) the value of any house accommodation, or of 
supply of light, water, medical attendance or oth~r 
amenity or of any service or of any concessional supply 
of foodgrains or other articles; 
(iii) any travelling concession; 

J' 
3 
but does not inc1ude-
(a) any bonus; 
(b) any contribution paid or payable by the 
employer to any pension fund or provident fund or 
for the benefit of the workman under any law for 5 
the time being in force; 
(c) any gratuity payable on the termination of 
his service.". 
3. Insertion of new Chapter VA in Act XIV of 1947.-After 
Chapter V of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be insert- 10 
ed, namely:-
"CHAPTER V A 
LAy-oFF AND RETRENCHMENT 
25A. Application of sections 25C to 25E.-(1) Sections 25C to 
25E inclusive shall not apply- 15 
(a) to industrial establishments in which less than fifty 
workmen on an average per working day have been employed 
in the preceding calendar month; or 
(b) to industrial establishments which are of a seasonal 
character or in which work is performed only inter- 20 
mittently. 
(2) If a question arises whether an industrial establishment 
is of a seasonal character or whether work is performed therein 
only intermittently, the decision of the appropriate Govern-
ment thereon shall be final. 25 
25B. Definition of one year of contin'uous ~rvice.-For the 
purposes of sections 25C and 25F, a workman who, during a 
period of twelve calendar months, has actually worked in an 
industrial establishment for not less than two hundred and forty 
days shall be d~emed to have completed one year of continuous 30 
service in the establishment. 
Explanation.-In computing the number of days on which 
a workman has actually worked in an establishment, the days 
on which-
(a) he has been laid-oft' under an agreement or as 35 
permitted by standing orders made under the Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (XX of 1946), 
(b) he has been on leave with wages, earned in the pre-
vious year, and 
(c) in the case of a female. she has been on maternity 40 
leave; so however that the total period of such~. maternity 
leave shall not exceed twelve weeks. 
shall be 'included. 

5 
JO 
15 
20 
25 
() 
35 
40 
45 
60 
4 
25C. Right of worlemell laid-off for compensation.-(l) 
Whenever a workman (other than a badli workman or a casual 
workman) whose name is borne on the muster rolls of an indus-
trial establishment and who has completed not less than one 
year of continuous service under an employer is laid-off, he 
shall be paid by the employer for all days during which he 
is so laid-off, except for such weekly holidays as may intervene, 
compensation which shall be equal to fifty. per cent. of the 
total of the basic wages and dearness allowance that would have 
been payable to him had he not been so laid-off: 
Provided that the compensation payable to a workman 
during any period of twelve months shall in no case be for more 
than forty-five days. 
ExpZanation.-'Badli workman' means a workman who is 
employed in an industrial establishment in the place of another 
workman whose name is borne on the muster rolls of the estab-
lishment, but shall cease to be regarded as such for the purposes 
of this section, if he has completed one year of continuous 
service in the establishment. 
25D. Duty of an employer to maintain muster rolls of 
workmen.-Notwithstanding that workmen in any industrial 
establishment have been laid-off, it shall be the duty of every 
employer to maintain for the purposes of this Chapter a muster 
roll, and to provide for the making of entries therein by work-
men who may present themselves for work at the establishment 
at the appointed time during normal working hours. 
25E. Workmen not entitled to compensation in certain cases.-
No compensation shall be paid to a workman who has been 
laid-off-
(i) if he refuses to accept any alternative employment 
in the same establishment from which he has been laid-off, 
if, in the opinion of the employer, such alternative employ-
ment does not call for any special skill or previous experi-
ence and can be done by the workman, provided that the 
wages which would normally have been paid to the work-
man are offered for the alternative employment also; 
(ii) if he does not present himself' for work at the 
Qstablishment at the appointed time during normal working 
hours at least once a day; 
(iii) if he works elsewhere, for the days on which he so 
works; 
(iv) if such laying-off is due to a strike or slowing-down 
• of !:lroduction on the part of workmen in another part of the 
establishment. 
25F. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.-No 
wOl'kman who has been in continuous service fdr not less 
than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that 
empl~er until-
(a) the workman has been given one month's notice in 
writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the 

5 
period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid 
in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if the 
retrenchment is under an agreement which specifies a date 
for the termination of service; 5 
(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrench-
ment, gratuity which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of service or any part 
thereof in excess of six months; and 
(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the 10 
appropriate Government. 
25G. Procedure for retrenchment.-Where any workman, 
who is a citizen of India, is to be retrenched and he belongs to a 
particular class of workmen, in the absence of any agreement 
between the employer and the workman in this behalf, the em- 15 
pI oyer shall ordinarily retrench the workman who was the last 
person to be employed in that class, unless for reasons to be 
recorded the employer retrenches any other workman. 
25H. Re-employment of ~trenched workmen.-Where any 
workmen are retrenched, and the employer proposes to take 20 
into his employ any persons, he shall, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, give an opportunity to the retrenched workmen to 
offer themselves for re-employment,-and the retrenched worlonen 
who offer themselves for re-employment shall have preference 
over other persons. 25 
251. Effect of laws inconsistent with this Chapter.-(l) The 
provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law [includ-
ing standing orders made under the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (XX of 1946)]: 30 
Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall have 
effect to derogate from any right which a workman has under 
any award for the time being in operation or any contract with 
the employer. 
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that any 35 
industrial dispute relating to any of the matters referred to in 
this Chapter shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act and not in accordance with any other law." 
4. Repeal of Ordinance 5 of 1953.-Tne Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1953 (5 of 1953) is hereby repealed. 40 

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 1953 seeks to proVide 
fCfr payment of compensation to workmen in the event of their lay-
off or retrenchment. The provisions included in the Bill are not 
new and were discussed at various tripartite meetings. Those re-
lating to lay-off are based on an agreement entered into between the 
representatives of employers and workers who attende.d the 13th 
session elf the Standing Labour Committee. In regard to retrench-
ment, the Bill provides that a workman who has been in continuous 
employment for not less than one year under an employer shall not 
be retrenched until he has been given one month's notice in writing 
or dlle month's wages in lieu of such notice and also a gratuity 
calculated at 15 days' average pay for every completed year of 
service or any part thereof in excess of six months. A similar 
provision was included in the Labour Relations Bill, 1950, which 
has since lapsed. Though compensation on the lines provided for 
in the Bill is given by all progressive employers, it is felt that a 
common standard should be set for aU employers. 
V. V. GIRL 
NEW DELHI; 
1"he 16111 November, 1953. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
• 
A 
BII.JL 
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 . 
• 
(Shri V. V. Giri, 
_ Minister for Labour). 
Gll'D-LAD-597 M of L-18.11.53-1.750. 