As INTRODUCFD IN LOK SABtIA ON 
BIU No. 53 of 1f61. 
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL,.I964 
A. 
BILL 
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year 01 the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Aet;'li64. Short 
title. 
2. After section 635A of the Companies Act, 1956, the following Insertion 
S sub-heading and section shIBll be inserted, namely: - ~~:'d. 
10 
20 
"Temporary Protection of Employees 
635B. (I) If-
inl and 
sl!ction 
a'lter 
.ection 
635A of 
Act 1 of 
1956. 
Protection 
of em-f 
ployee.8 
(a) during the course of any investigation of the affairs ?urill4L 
h f 1 t · t b d InvHtl •• -end ot er matters 0 or re a mg 0 a company. 0 y or tlon by 
person under section 235, section 237 or st!Ction 239. or, of .the lnapeclor 
membership and other matters of or relating to a comp~, :::1-
or the ownership, of sharea in or debentures of a company Cceedinl 
or body corporate, or the affairs and other matters of or Trib~l 
relating to Q company, body or person, under section 247. in certain 
section 248 or section 249; or Cuell. 
(b) during the pendency of any proceeding against any 
person concerned in the conduct and management of the 
affairs of a company under Chapter IV A of Part VI, 
such company, body or person proposes-
(i) to discharge. or 

Repeal' 
and saviqf 
, . 
" 
(ii) to punish, whether ,by dismissal, removal, reduction 
in rank or otherwise, 
any employee, the company, body or person, as the case may 
be, shall send by ,post to the Company Law Board previous 
intimation in writing of the action proposed against the S 
employee and if the Company Law Board has any objeetion to 
the action proposed, it shall send by post notice thereof in 
writing to the company, body or person concerned. 
(2) If the- oompany, ,body or person concerned does not 
:·iitetW'wftliM"·thirty days of the sending of the previous inti- 10 
mati~ ,of ,~. actifn' p1'Qpc'se~tapinst; the, empJGy~_ al;l~ notice 
of the' oojection from the Company Law Board, then and only 
then, the company, body or person concerned may proceed to 
take against the empJoyee tbe'~ion proposed. 
. (3) If the' company, body,' or person co~cernedis dissatisfied 15 
, "with tlte objee1fOnraised 'by the Company L,aw Board, it may, 
within thirty days of the receipt of the notice of the objection, 
,prefer an appeal to··the Tri'bunal in the prescribed manner, and 
on payment of the prescribed fee. 
(4) The decision. of. the Tribunal, on ~uch appeal shall be 20 
final and be binding on the Company Law Board and on the 
company, body or person concerned. 
(5) For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that the 
provisions of this section shall have effect without prejudice to 
the provisions o~ any other law for the time ,being in force.". 25 
3. (1) The Companies (Amendment) Ordinance. It64 is hereby 3 til 1984. 
re~ 
(2,' Notwithltanding S\lch' r~peal. anything done or any action 
tann 'under' the' sa\d Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or tam unlier this Act, as if this Act had commenced on the 
5th day of July, i964. 30 

-ST Ai'EJil2NT OF OBJECTS -AND BEAsaNS' 
Investigations. of th\e· affai,rs; trueowuership and other related 
: mattel'Sj at co~ eiltuIot .be- eJfectively. conducted unless there 
ia,full di8elosul'e!:'by their e~eea~ofijadllal iDfo~ion in teprd 
to varioUs' matte!nl' to be 1117mtiai8lld'J.by -the: ID.,.ctorB' appointed by 
:the' Centmr'GovernllUllitl ~ : In oider: to,1 tLye to the' employees: of the 
afferted- companies . terapGI:ary protactiGn'·a,._ victimisation in 
such cases it has been considered necessary to make a suitable', pro-
vision in the Companies Act that no company can discharge or take 
any other action against any of ita employees during the investiga-
tion of its affairs and true ownership, etc., by Inspectors or during 
the pendency of proceedings against any of its managerial personnel 
before the Tribunal, unlees it has given previous intimation to the 
Company Law Board of the proposed action against the employees 
and the Company Law Board has not raised any objection to such 
action. 
As it was apprehended that some of the companies whose affairs 
were under investigation might take action against their employees 
if they disclosed full information to the Inspectors, the amendment 
of the Companies Act on the lines indicated above was considered 
to be a matter of extreme urgeney and the Companies (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1964 was therefore, promulgated by the President on the 
5th July, 1964. The present Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance 
without any modification in the prOvisions thereof. 
NEW D&In; 
The 13th August, 1964. T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
3 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-section (3) of the new section635B empowers the Central 
Government to make rules providina for the manner in which, and 
the fee on payment of which, an appeal may be preferred to the 
Tribunal under that section. . The mattera in. respect of whieh such 
rules may be made are matters of procedure ar administrative 
detail. The delegation of legUllative power is thus of a nonnal 
charaeter. . 
4 

, .. LOK SABHA 
A 
BIll 
~.\.' 
-~' 
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 