LOI SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE COMPANmS (Alo1Ei'IDMENT) BILL, 1968 
(~-2...J,-eJM .:In..trQ.d''laq in Lok 5abha) 
1. Page 2,-
~ lines 1 and 2, r~-
"(2) If a company contravenes the provisions of sub-section '(1), then - " 
2. Page 5. line 2,-
for "Extract" read "Extracts" 
'NEW DELHI; 
~l 9. 1968 Va1sakha 19, 1890 (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
BID" NO. 5J of 1MB 
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 196 • 
• BILL 
furt;1tM M 41MM tJl,e COMpcw.ia Act, 11M 
.; .it. aacted· by Parliameat in th., NiHt.eeath Year- fill the 
tt.public ,of India .. follows: - . 
1. 'l.'h.t. Ad may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1988. Shftt" 
title: 
Z. In thiI Aet, unl.eee the context otherwtee requinls, "appoint- Debt· 
5 It! day" Dl81Jl8 the 3rd day of April, 1170. tIml. 
S. For eeet:lon Z93A. of tlae Companies Act, 1_ (laereiDafte.r Sulllti· 
retwred 10 al the priftctpal Aet), tfte fol1OWi~ Heilioa ah&11 be :::. .t 
aubMttu1led, !l8JU1,y: - 2IIIA. 
"_A (1) Notwithatandirll anyth.iq contained in this Act, Prel&1lN-
10 1le!tl1er a company in general m_ing nor its Board of directors ::~~ 
lIhall, aft1l!'l" the commencement of the Companies (Amendment) makin, 
Act, 1968, contribute any amount or amounts- otpoU-
. uc~ 
(a) to any political party, or contriw.. 
(lb) for any poUtica1 p~ to any individual or body. tIonI. 

lDIerUOIl 
elDIW 
HCtioa 
1M 
A. 
AlaeU· 
tioDet 
mjnalfn, 
..-ncies 
and 
Here-
tart_ 
and 
tnuur-
erl. 
Amwt-
JIleDtot 
aectioa 
SIS. 
•• t t 
Ceuerof 
certain 
pro~­
MJIII 
ot the 
Aft. 
Z. In thia Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "appoint--
tlon (1) I then-
(i) the company shall be punishable with fine which 
may mend to five thousand rupees; and 
(ti) every ofDcer of the company who is in defualt shall S 
be punllhable with imp:r!aonment for a term wb1ch may 
extend to three years and- shall allO be liable to fine.". 
t. After aectlOll 324 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
11324A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act 10 
or in the memorandum or articles of assoclation or in any COD-
tract to the COJl'trary, where any company has, on the appointed 
day, a managing agent or seeretaries and treasurers, the term 
of oftlce of such managing agent or, as the case may be, the 
lI!C1'etaries and treasurers shall expire, jf it does not expire ear- IS 
lier, on the appointed day. 
~2) No company shall appoint or re-appoint any managing 
atent or secretarfe-s and tl'E'asurers on Or after the appointed 
day.". 
I. In section 365 of the principal Act, in clause (c). after th. 3o 
word and figurH "section 32~,", the flgures and letter "324A," shall 
~ i~rted. 
•. On and from the appointed day, so much of the provisions 01 
the principal Act as relate to managing agents and secretar188 and 
treasurel'l shall cease to have effect except as respects thin. done 35 
or omitted to be done under those provisions before such cesser. 

i1'tATEMENT or OBJEC'l'S AND REASONS 
On the 1st December, 1967, an assurance was given to the Lok 
Sabha that Government woulti bring forward during the next fol-
lowing bud,et session of Parliament a Bill to ban contributions by 
companies to any political party, or for any political purpose to any 
individual or body and to abolish the system of management of com-
panies by managing agents. The Bill seeks to fulfil the assurance. 
It also seeks to abolish simultaneously the system of management of 
companies by secretaries anti treasurers which is akin to the system 
of management of companies by managing agents. 
2. The propriety of companies making contributions to any politi-
cal party, or for any political purpose to any individual or body has 
for some time been the subject of discussion both inside ami outside 
the Parliament. A view has been expressed that such contributions 
have a tendency to corrupt political life and to adversely a1!ect 
healthy growth of democracy in the country, and it has been gaining 
ground with the passage of time. It is, therefore, proposed to ban 
such contributions. . , ,~ 
3. Section 324 of the Companies Act, 1956 empowers the Central 
Government to notify that companies engaged in specified cl ..... 
of industry or business shall not have managing agents. Under the 
Rules framed thereunder, Government appointed the ManaliDl 
Agency Enquiry Committee to enquire into the desirability of apply-
in, the said provisions to companies engaged in established indus-
tries or any other imiustry or bUsiness as may be deemed fit by the 
Committee. In pursuance of the Report of the Committee submit-
ted on the 16th March, 1966, Government issued a notification to the 
effect that the term of office of a managing agent of any company in 
the specified industries shall expire at the end of three years from 
the 2nd April, 1967. 
The Monopolies Inquiry Commission observed that the system of 
managing agencies was one of the mOlt important cauaee wblch 
hastened the process of concentration of economic power in. India. 
Taking all the factors into consideration, it is proposed to aboUah 
the system of management of companies by managing agents alto-
gether at the same time as in the cue of specified industrrel ref .. -
red to above. 

.. 
to The Managing Agency Enquiry Committee obterved that. at 
one time, the institution ot secretaries and treasurers was thought 
of as a suitable alternative ~o the managing, agency system but for 
all practical purposes secretaries and treasurers exist only in those 
cases where managing agents already in existence had to ~ed some 
of 'the managed companies in view of the limit of ten on the total 
number of companies that a managing agent can manage. The Com· 
mittee did not see any particular gain in such a change. Secr&tariea 
and treasurers can be given all the powers and privileges of a 
managing agent except that they (i.e. the former) cannot appoint 
their representative on the Board of' Directors of the managed com-
pany, and cannot \:!raw more than 71 per cent. as their commission 
while the managing agents can draw up to 10 per cent. of the net 
profit. It would thus be obvious that no useful purpose would be 
served by abolishing the managing agency system alone if the 
resultant ,void is to be filled up by the secretaries and treasurers. 
Hence the Goverrunent proposes to abolish'the system of manage-
~ent of companies by secretaries and treasurers simultaneously 
with the abolition of the system of management of companies by 
managing agents. 
NEW Dl:unj 
The 3n1 .GI/,- 1868. 
K. V. RAGHONATRA REDDY. 

• 
ANNEXt1RE , . ~ . . -," ,.. : 
EXTRAcr FROM THJl COKPA!fDS Acr, 1958 
(lor 1956) 
• • • 
CHA.P.XER U._~ 
• 
• • • • • 
Board's pcYWers and reBtrlCtiOnl thereon 
· . . . ~ 
e&ofl960. 
293A. (1) Notwithstanding anythin'g contained. in section" ...... 
neither a company in general meeting nor its Board of directol'll shall, t1oDa_ 
after the commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 1860, :'-WU to 
contribute- make 
(a) to any political party, or 
(b) for any political purpose to any individual or bod" 
any amount or amounts which or the aggregate of which will, in 8D1 
financial year, exceed twenty-five thousand rupees or five per cen'-
of its average net profits as tletermined in accordance with the pro-
visions of sections 349 and 350 during the three ftNodal 7MZ'1 
immediately preceding, whichever bJ greater. 
Ezplanation.- Where a portion of a ftnancia1 year of the compIDJ 
falls before the commencement of the Companiel (Amendment) 
• of IHO. Act, 1960, and a portion falls after IUch commencement, the latta 
portion shall be deemed. to be a financial year within the maNdaI. 
and for the purposea. of thia su.lMecUon. 
~) Every company Ihall d1Icloee in ita pro.flt aucl loa ~t 
any amount or amount. contributed by it under aub-eectf.on (1) to 
any political party or for any political purpose to any individual or 
body during the financial year to which that account relates, SivinJ 
particulars of the total amount contributed! and the name of the 
party, individual or body to which or to whom such amount baa baeD 
contributed. 
(3) If a company makes default in complying with the provision. 
of sub-section (;2), the company. and every officer of the comP01 
who is in default, shall be punishable with fine which may eztea4 
to five thousand rupees. 
• • • • • 
• 
pol1ta1 
contrl· 
butl.oDl. 

~hibi­
tioa of 
payDllllt 
of COIIl-
pematioa 
for lou of 
offtce fa 
eertaiD 
-. 
6 
COMpeuatift for ttrminction ef alice 
365. A compaay sha.U aot payor be liable to pay to ita menaing 
qent allY eompansation for tm. loss of his office in tlle followinl 
cues:-
... ... ... ... • 
(e) where the manaIbiI ateftt vacates his of8ee 1. 
punUIDC8 of aeet10n S24. DO or 132; 
• • ... ... ... 

LOK SABHA 
• 
BILL 
Iunhor to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
(~hrl K· V. Ra,hufllltha Rlddy, 
Minister 01 State in tIN 
Ministry 01 Industrial Deo,. 
lopment and Company Affairs) 