OORRIGENDA. 
to 
THE SW.ADFSHI OOTTON MILIB CJMPANY LIMn'ED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER Ol~' UlillFRTAKINGS) BILL, 1986. 
(To bel As intI'Q~uced in LOk Sabha) 
I. Page (i), against clause No.11 ,-
[Q! ItDutj.es" ~§.<1 "Dl.lt yo" 
2. Page (ii), against clause No.27,-
[Qr 111'elH;.litteg H ~~.a.q "l:'ena1~· 
-, 
~. Page 6, line 2,-
for "he" ~ "the" 
~. Page 1 5, lin e 1 5 , -
£2.r. "1'Reglllations tl ~ "Regulation" 
1~ DELhI; 
~ti 2 1986 f s&a 12, ";)08 (saka) 

'~. '''~. 
,', 
As INTRODUCED IN !.oK SABHA ON 
THE SWADESffi COTTON MILLS COMPANY LIMITED 
(ACQUISmON AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL, HI86 
CLAUsrs 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPl'ER I 
PBE.lMINABY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE TEXTILE 'UN'Dl!ilft'AKnI'GS 
3. Transfer and vesting of the textile undertakings. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities. 
6. Transfer of any textile undertaking or part thereof to a Subsi-
diary Textile Corporation. . 
7. Shares to be'issued by National Textile Corporation for the value 
of assets transferred to it by the Central Governlllflllt. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
8. Payment of amount. 
9. Payment of further amounts. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAOIIIMENT, E'l'C •• 01' THE TEXTILE t1NDDlTAKINGS 
10. Management, etc., of the textile undertakings. 
11. Dutiel ot persona in charp of manageme'llt of the textile under-
takinrs to deliver all assets, etc. 
CHAPTER V 
PiovIsIONs aELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS 
12. Continuance of employees of the textile undertakings. 
13. Provident and other funds. 
14. Transfer of employees to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation. 

(i~ ) 
CHAFFER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
CLAUSES . 
. 15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
16. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
17. Certain powers of the National Textile Corporation. 
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
19. Prio.rities of claim'S. 
20. Examination of elaims. 
21. Admission or rejection of.o!aims. 
22. Disbursement of maney by' the Commissioner to claimants. 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed aMBnt to be deposited with the 
general revenue account. 
CHAPI'ER VII 
MlscELLANIlOUS 
24. Act to have overriding effect. 
25. AasWJlption of liability. 
26. Ccmtracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by National 
Textile Co.rporation. 
27. Penalities. 
28. Offences by companies. 
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
30. De1egationof powers. 
31. Power to make rules. 
32. Power to remove difficulties. 
33. Repeal and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE 

Bill No. 53 of 18&6 
THE SWADESHI CO'M'ON MILLS COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISI-
TION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acqu.!Bition anci'tran8jer of certain textile unclertakim.gs 
of the Swades11.i Cotton Mills Company Limited, with a t.i:ew to 
securing the proper mGna.gement of such undertakings so as to sub-
serve tne ';nterests of the. gene'ltll public by ensuring the conti-n'tled 
5 manufacture, production and di.'1trilb1Ltion of different varieties of 
cloth and yarn and thereby to give effect to tile pdlicy of the State 
towards securing the principles specifU!d in clauses (0) and (c) of 
article 39 of the Constitutbn and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thef4eto. 
JO WHEREAS the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Limited has, throuf,h 
its six textile undertakings, been engaged in the manufacture and pro-
duction of different varieties of cloth and yarn; 
AND WH.ERF~~S the managem~nt of the said textile undertakings was 
taken over by 'the Central Government ,under section 18AA of the 
86 of 1951. 15 Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951; 
. AND WI:lER&\S large sums of money have been invested with a view 
to ma~ing the said textile. underta~s viable; 
ANn WHEREAS further investment of very 1arse sums of money i. 
neeessary for the purpose of securing the optimum utilisation of the 
!lO available facilities for the manufacture, produetion and distribution of 
cloth ana ¥.I!~. br t!l~ ~a~~ textil~ Ynd~~,s "f the Com~; ....... 

Short 
title and 
~­
mence. 
ment. 
Defini-
tions. 
2 
AND WHBREAS such investment is also necessary for securing the conti-
nued employment of the workmen employed in the said textile llnc:ler. 
takings; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary in the public interest to acquire the said 
textile undertakings of the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Limited to 5 
ensure that the interests of the general public are served by the conti. 
nuanCe by the said undertakings of the Company of the manufacture, 
production and distributiO'l1 of different varieties of cloth and yarn which 
are vital to the needs of the country; 
AND WHEREAS such acquisition is for giving effect to the policy of the 10 
State towards securing the principles specified in clauses (b) and (c) of 
arUcIe 39 of the Constitution; 
Bz it enacted. by Parliament in the . Thirty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as foUows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRl:I..n.nNARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company 
Limited (Acquisition and Tra'llsfer of Undertakings) Act, 1986. 
15 
(2) The provisions of sections 27 and 28 shall come into force at once, 
and the remaining provisions of this -Act shall be deemed to have come 20 
into force on the 1st day of April, 1985. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a.) "appointed day" means the 1st day of April. 1985; 
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 
appointed under section 15; 
(c) "Company" means the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company 
Limited. Kanpur, a company within the meaning of the Companies 
Act,' 1956, and having its registered office at Swadeshi House, CiviJ 
Lines. Kanpur, in the State of Uttar Pradesh; 
(d) "date of taking over" means the date on which the manage- 30 
ment of the textile undertakin~s of the Company was taken over bv 
the Central Government by virtue of the order of the Government 
of India in the late. Ministrv of Industrial Development No. S.O. 265 
(E). dated t.he 13th April. 1978, made under clause (a.) of sub-section 
(1) of section 18AA of the Industries (Development and Regulation) 35 
lof 1956. 
Act, 1951; 65 of 11151. 
(e) "National Textile Corporation" means the NatIonal Textile 
Corporation Limited, a company formed. and registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
(n "notification" means a notification published in the Official 40 
Gazette; . 
(g) "Ordinance" means the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company 
1 of 11118. 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaki'ngs) Ordinance, 1986; 5 of 1988. 
'(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
~; 45 
. m _,"specified date", in r~lation, to any· provi8ion of thl" ·.,Ad • 
. " ~~.!; !,!c~ ~1t. 's t~, 9'n.tr.~·:C}9y,nun.nt inay"by J\otlftoatt. 
• " I •• ' .,' 01' • • '. 
...... ~-f', .. ·· J 
, , . 
·.r .. : •• :.,!1~ .•.. ~ ...•.•.... : •.• ~.,;.:~ O":, ', •. : ' .. 'i ," 
,. .~':" '" " ,.' :' • .,J ,. .,' • 
, 

.' of 1956. 
5 
10 
in the Official Gazette and in the newspapers circulating in, the 
locality in which the registered office of the Company is situated. 
specify for the purposes of that provision and different dates may be 
specified for different provisions of this Act; 
(;) "Subsidiary Textile Corpw:ation" means a textile corporation 
formed by the National Textile Corporation as its subsidiary; 
(k) "textile undertakings" means the six textile undertakings ot 
the Company specified below:-
(,) the Swadeshi Cotton Mills, Kanpur; 
(ii) the Swadeshi Cotton Mills, Pondicherry; 
(iii) the Swadeslti Cotton Mills, Naini; 
(iv) the Swadeshi Cotton Mills; Maunath Bhanjan; 
(v) the Udaipur Cotton Mills, Udaipur; 
(vi) the Rae BareH Textile Mills, Rae Bareli; 
(1) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meanings respec-
tively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION A.ND TRANSFER OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS 
20 .3. (1) On the appuinted day, every textile UIldertaking and the riaht 
t:tle and interest of the Company in relation to every such-.textUe under. 
taking shall. hy virtue of tid!; Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest iu, 
the Central G011crUntCnt. 
(2) Every such textile undertakinl' which Itands vested in the Central 
25 Government by virtue of sub·sectiOD (1) shall, immediately after It has' 
so vested, dand transferred to. and ,-.sted ·jn. the National Textile 
Corporation. 
4. (1) The textile undertakin~s referred to in section 3 shall be 
deemed to include all assets, rights. lease-holds, powers, authorities and 
30 privileges and all property, movable and immovable. including lands.. 
buildings. workshops, stores, instruments, machinery, and equipment, cash 
balances. cash on hand, reserve funds, investments and book debts per-
taining to 'the textile unvcrtakings and all other rights and interests in. 
or atising out of, such property as 'were immediately before the 'appointed 
35 dav in the ownership, possession, power or control of the 'Company in 
relation to the said undertakings. whether within or outside India, and 
all books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature 
relating thereto. 
(2) All property as aforesaid which have vested in the Central 
40 Government under sub-section (1) of section 3 shall. by force of such 
vesting, be freed and dischar~d from any trust, obligation, mortgage. 
charge. lien and all other incumbrances affec~g it, and anv attachment, 
injunction· or decree or order of any court Or othe.r authority restricting 
the use of such property in any manl'ler shall be deemed to have been 
",5 withdrawn, ' .. , ., .. 
Tunsfer 
and vest-
ing of the 
textile 
under-
takings. 
General 
effect of 
vestin'g. 

Company 
to be 
liable for 
certl!in 
Pri~ 
liabilities. 
I 
(3) Where any licence or ot~r instrument had been granted at any 
time before the appointed day to the Company in relation to the textile 
undertakings by the Central Government or a State Government or any 
local authority, the National Textile Corporation shall" on and from such 
day, be deemed to be substituted in such licenCe or other instrument in j 
place of the Company as if such licence or other instrument had been 
granted to the Natipnal Textile Corporation and that Corporation shall 
. hold it for the remainder of the period for which the Company to which 
it was granted would have held it under the terms thereof. 
(4) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Ifl 
Act in the Central Government and every person holding any charJ:!e, 
lien or other interest· in, or in relation to, any such property shall give 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intima-
tion to the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort- 15 
gagee of any property referred to in sub-section (2) or any other person 
holding anv charge. lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and 
interests, payment of the mortgaJ;(e money Or other dues. in whole or 
in part, out of the amounts specified in section g and section 9, but no 20 
such mortgage. charge. lien or ot~~r interest shall be enforceable ~gainst 
any property which has vested in the Central Government. 
(6) If, on the appointed day. any suit, appeal or other proceeding 
of whatever nature in relation to any property which has vested in the 
Central Governmenlf:. under section ~. instituted or preferred by or against :.15 
the Company is pendi~g. tqe sam~ shall nqt ~b.at~. be discontinued or be. 
in any way. prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the t~xtilp 
undertaking!': or of anythin~ contained in this Act. but the suit. appeal 
or other pvoceedinli/: MaV be conttnU$l,prosecuted or enforced by or 
against the National 'textile CorporatiQn., 30 
5. (1) Every liability of the Company in relation to the textile under-
takings in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be the 
liability of Ute Comonny apct shall be enforce~ble against it . and not 
against the Central Govern!OelJt or the National Textile Corporation. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,- 35 
(a) sav~ as otherwise expressly provided in this section .or in any 
other section of this Act, no liability of the Company in relation to 
the texti~~ unde~~kings, in resoect of any period prior to the 
appointed d~y sh~l be enforceable against the Central Governme'rit 40 
or the N~tional Texti~e Corporation; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal !lr other 
authority in relation to any textile undertaking, oassad after the 
appointed day, in resped of any matter. claim or dispute which arose 
before that day shall be enforceable against the Central Government 
or the National Textile Corporation; 45 
(c) no liability incurred by the Company 'in relation to any 
texiUe ·undertak.ing before the appOinted day, for ·the contravention 
of . any proviSion of law for the time beirig in force, shall be enforce-
able against the Central Government or the Nationa} Textile Cor-
poration, 50 

86 of 1951. 
6 .. (1) The National Textile .CorporatiOil may, by' order iDwritiDg, 
transfer any of the .textile .. un ..... s't .. ori}*'t.theDeofto • SUb 'MI"1 
Textile Corporation and any such transfer shall be subject to such tenns 
and conditions as may be specified' in the said order. . 
5 (2) The Subsidiary Telttile Cor-PGration thall, on a lid from the' cW.e 
Qf such transfer, be deemed to be substituted in the liceace or other 
instrument referred to in sub-section (3) of section 4 in place of the 
National Textile Corporation as if 'such licence or other insulIDMJlt bad 
been granted to the Subsidiary Textile Corporation, and shall boldSllch 
I C) licence or other instrument for the remainder of the period for which 
the National Textile Corpo.ration would have held such licence or other 
instrument. 
(3) Save as otherwise expresSly provided in this Act, .reference'$ in 
this Act to the National Textile Corporation shall, in respect of any 
15 textile und~rtaking or part thereof which is transferred to a Subsidiary 
Textile Corporation, be construed a'S references to the' Subsidiary Textile 
Corporation. 
7. An amount equal to the value of the assets of the textile undertak-
ings transferred to, and vested in the National Textile Corporation under 
20 sub-section (2) of section 3 shall be deemed to be the contribution made 
by the Central Government to the equity capital of the National Textile 
Corporation; and for the contribution so made', the National Textile Cor-
poration shall issue (if necessary after amending its memorandum and 
articles of association) to the Central Government paid up shares, in its 
2 5 equity capital hnving a face value equal to the amount specified in 
section 8. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
8. For tbc transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under 
30 section 3, of thc textile undertakings of the Company, and the!! right, title 
and interest of the Company in relation to such undertakings, there shan 
be given by the Central Government to the Company in cash and in the 
manner specified in Cbapter VI, an amount of rupees twenty.four cro1'88 
and thirty-two lakhs. 
35 9. ,(1) For the deprivation of the 'Company of the management of the 
textileundertaidngs, tbel'e .... 11 'he atwa"by the Cent.! Gov .......... t to 
the Company, in cash, an amount calculated at the rate of rupees tea thou-
sand per anuum for thep.,riod eommeneing on the date on whim the 
manogelllent of the tcxt:le undftta1dDgs of the Company WIl8 taken over 
40 in pursuance of the order made by the Central ~overnment under !*=tlon 
18AA of the IDdustries (Development and Replation) Ad, 11111 and 
eDcIing on the appointed day. 
(2) In conslder.at .... of die _~e opeI'atiOll of.. ,."...... 
of sections 3· and 4, there sbldl ahe be ci".n . by tile Ceatral Gov ___ t 
45 to the Campany,m cash, all amount calculated at th~ rate of I'll,.. teD 
Tranafe'r 
of any 
textUe 
under-
taking. 
Oi' part 
thereot 
to a 
Subsi. 
diary 
Textile 
Corpora,. 
tion. 
Sha'res 
to be 
issued 
by 
National 
Textile 
corpora. 
tion for 
the valUe 
of a..etl 
kans-
ferred to 
it by the 
CeDtral 
Govern-
ment. 
Payment 
ot 
amouD. 
Payment 
ot 
further 
amounts. 
, 

Manqe. 
ment, 
etc., of 
the 
textile 
under· 
takings. 
Duty of 
peraons 
in 
charge 
of 
manage-
ment of 
the 
textile un_. 
taJdDp 
todeUver 
all .. se1II, 
etc. 
Continu. 
ance of 
employees 
of the 
textile :un. 
dertak_ 
inp. 
tho ..... d pel' 8DDamio. tile .-tad COIIUDeaeiDa'OD the appointed day .... 
..... OD be date OD which the OftIiuDce was pNIIUIIpted. 
. (3) The amouat specifled in MdiOD 8 aDd the BlDouatsdetermlaed iD 
aecordanee ",ith the proviBions of sUb-seetioDs (l)' and (2) shall e..., 
8bapIe interest at the rate of four per ceIlt. per aDIlam. for the period 5 
eommenein, .. the appointed day aDd ea.u.. OIl the date on which 
payment of sueh amounts . is made by the Central Govemment to the 
Comm ....... 
(4) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall be given by the Central Government 10 
to the Compmy in addition to· t'he amount specified in section 8. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities 
of the Company in relation to the textlle uncJ.ertakings which have vested 
in the Central Government under sedion 3 shall be discharged from the 
amount referred to in section 8 and also from the amounts detcmniJ)ed 15 
under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), in accordance with the rights and 
inte~ests of the creditors of the Company. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, 1ft'C., OF THE TZXTILE UNDERTAKINGS 
10. The National Textile Corporation or any person which that Cor- liO 
poration may, by order in writing, specify, shall be entitled to exercise 
the powers of general superintendence, direction, control and manage-
ment of the affairs and bUsiness of a textile undertaking, the right, title 
and i'llterest of the Company in' relation to which have vested in that 
Corporation under sub-section (2) of section 3, and do all such things !l5 
as the Company is authorised to exercise and do. 
11. On the vesting of a textile undertaking in the National Textile 
Corporation, all persons in charge of the management of a textile under-
taking immediately before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to the 
National Textile Corporation, all assets, books of account, registers or 30 
other documents in their custody relati'llg to the textile undertaking 
CHAPT~ V 
PROVISIONS UUTING '1'0 DIPLOYUS or THE HXTlL'II: Ul'fHIlTAKINGS 
12. (1) Every person who has been, immediate~y before the appoint-
ed day, employed by the Company in relation to a textile undertakinl,35 
shall become, on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Na-
tional Textile Cor~o~ation and. shall. hold oftl.ce o.r service in that Cor-
poration with the same rights and privileges as to pension.. gratuity and 
other like matters as would have been admissible to him if the rights 
in,Mlation to such textile .undertaking had I10t been transferred to, and 40 
vested: in, the National Texttle Corporation, and shall continue to do 
80 unJeu and untU ma' employment in, that Corporation i. duly tennl-

14 of 1947. 
, 
nated or· until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment 
are duly altered by that Corporation. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 194'7, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer 
5 of the services of any officer or other person employed in a textile un-
dertaking to the National Textile Corporation shall not entitle· such 
officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
10 13. (1) Where the Company has established a provident fUnd, super-
annuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed 
in a textile undertaking, the moneys relatable to the officers and other 
employees whose services have been transferred hy or under this Act 
to the National Textile Corporation shall. out of the moneys standing, 
15 on the appointed day.. to the credit of such provident fund, superannua-
tion, welfare or other fund. stand transferred to, and vest in, the Na-
tio'nal Textile Corporation. 
(2) The moneys which stand transferred under sub-sect1on (1) to 
the National Textile Corporation, shall be dealt with by ·that Corpora-
20 tion in such manner as may be prescribed. 
14. Where any textile undertaking Or any part thereof Is transferred 
under this Act to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation, every person 
referred to in section 12 shall. on and from the date of· mtch transfer, 
become an employee nf the Subsidiary Textile Corporation. and the 
:.15 provisions of !'lections 12 and 13 shall apply to such employee of the 
National Textile Corporation as if references in the said sections to the 
National Textile Corporation were referenre!'l to the Subsidiary Textile 
Corporation, 
CHAPTER VI 
30 COMMlSSTONEJI OF PAYMENTs 
Provident 
and oth&lr 
funds. 
Transfer 
of em-
ployees to 
a Subsi. 
diary 
Textile 
Corpora. 
tion. 
15. (1) The Central Government shall, for the pul'POSf'. of clisburi'i'mr Appoint-
the Qmounts payable und .. r ~e('tions Rand 9 to the Company. by noM- ment Of 
cation, appoint a COlDmi8~inner of Payments. Commls-Iioner of 
(2) The Central Govern1nent may appoint such other pel'5Ons asit 
35 may think flt to ass!!-1t the Commissioner and thereupon the Commis-
sioner may authorise' one 01' more of such persons also to exercl~ all 
or any of the powers cxprdsable by him under this Act and ditferent 
person!!! may be lmthm.·jsp~ to exerd!lP different powen, 
(3) Any person Ruthorised by the Commissioner to· exercise aDY' of 
40· the pow~ exerc1sabJe by the Commissioner may exereiw those! pmvers 
bl the same manner and with the sam .. elect as if tlley have been ,eon-
ferred on that person directly by this Ad and not by way Gf authorisation. 
(4) The 5Rlar;es and allowances of the Commissioner Del otller 
persODS appobated under tl1i!'l section shal1 be defrayed out of the Con-
45 solidated Fund of Jndia. 
Payments. 

Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govern· 
ment to 
the Com. 
milaiooer. 
Ce'I'taiD 
power. 
Of the 
National 
Textile 
Corpora. 
tion. 
. 'PriOr1tIII 
oIc1a1m1. 
8 
16. (1) The Central Govcmmea.t shall, within thirty dq. from tJae 
specified date, pay in cash to the CoIDJIIissiODer, for paymeat to the 
Company, an amount equal to the amount specified in section 8 IIDd. the 
....... ts payaWe to • Company under seetion 9. 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Cental Government 5 
in favour of the Commissioner in t'he Public Account of India, . and 
every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be dePosited 
by him to the credit of the said deposit account, and the said deposit 
account Jlhall be operated by the Commissioner. 
(3) The interests accruing O'll the amount standing to the credit of 10 
the deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall enure to the 
benefit of the Company. 
17 •. (1) The National Textile Corporation shall be entitled to receive, 
up to the specified date. to the exclusion of all other persons, any money 
due to a textile undertaking, realised after the appointed day, notwitb- 15 
standing that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed 
day. 
(2) The National Textile Corporation may make a claim to the Com-
missioner with regard to every payment made by it as the authorised 
person in relatiOn to a textile undertaking after the appointed day but 20 
before the date I)n which the Ordinance was promulgated for discharging 
any liability of the Company in relation to any period prior to the 
appointed day, and· every such claim shan have priority, in aceordance 
.with the priorities -attaehingj . under this Act. to the matter in 
relation to which such liability has been . discharged by the authorised 25 
person. 
(3) Save as C'therwise provided in this Art, the liabilities in 
relatlolJ to a textile underteking in respect of any period prior to the 
appointed day which have not been discharged by the authorised person 
shan be the liabilitieR of the Comp8'l1Y. 30 
Erplanation..-For the purposes of this section. "authorised person" 
means the person authorised· to take over the management of 
any textile undertaking in pursuance of. the ardB of the Govern-
ment of India in the late Ministry of Industrial Develol)ment No. 9.0. 
265 (E), 4ated the 13th l\pril. 1978, .issued under clause (.vI) of sub-section 35 
(1) of secliO'll 18AA of .the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
lel. .. 
. 18. Every persc;>n h.aving a claim agaizu;t the Company in relation to 
'the textile undertakings with regard to any of the matters specified in the 
~hedule shall prefer such c1~im before the Commissioner within thirty 40 
days fr!»U the ~ifjed d,te: . 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant wu 
prevented b~· sufticierit caUle from preferring the claim within the said 
~rioc:l~of thiny d&ys;· he fDa., entertain the claim within a further period 
of. timty dRYS, but not thereafter.' . 45 
" ~JI.~"'. claims, arising qat .of -matters specified in the Schedule shaU 
have priorities in accordance with the following principles, namely:-
. .(ti) e~te~~y I $haIl h-ave precedence· oye~ all other categories and 
category n shall have precedence over Category m and so on; 
• 
85 of 18151. 

Sot 1908. 
5 
'(b) the claims specified in each of the categories, shall rank equally 
and 'be paid in full, but, if the amount is insufficient· to meet such 
claims in. full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid ac-
cordingly; and 
(c) the question of discharging allY liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplus.is l~ft 
after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category. 
20. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commis-
10 lioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in . the 
Schedule .and examine the same in accordance with such order. 
(2) If on examination of the claims against the Company, the Com-
missioner is of the opinion that the amounts paid to him under this 
Act for payment to such Company are not sufficient to meet the liabilities 
15 specifiea in any lower category, he shall not be required to examine any 
claim in respect of such lower category. 
21. (1) After examining the ~laims agamst the Company with refer-
ence to the priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commislioner shall fix 
a date on or before which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim. 
20 (2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
given by advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper in the English 
language having cireulation in the major part of the country and in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in such reglonal language as the Commis-
sioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the 
25 claimant to file the proof of his clainl with the Commissioner within th.e 
period specified in the advertisement. 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
period speclfied by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the dis-
bursements made by the . Commissioner. 
30 (4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
'opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of 
refuting the claim and after giving the claimant' a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard, by order, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole 
or in part. .. . __ .• , -- ~ -*- • 
35 (5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions, 
includ.i.ng the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and 
shall, for the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have 
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
40 Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following mattea, 
namely:.- j 
(a) the summoning and entorcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; . 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other ma-
t~ object producible as evidence; . 
(c) tbereception of evidence on affidavit; 
, (d) the issuing of a~ COmmission for ·theaxamination. 'of' wit-
neue&. 
Examina-
tion of 
claima. 
Admis-
sion or 
rejec-
tion ot 
claims. 

Disburse· 
ment of 
money 
by the 
Commis-
sioner to 
claimant.. 
Undia-
buned 
or un. 
claimed 
amount 
to be 
deposit-
edwl;h 
the 
pneral 
revenue 
account. 
Act to 
have 
over-
ridin, 
d'ect. 
ABBumP. 
tion of 
liability. 
10 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 
the Iridian Penal Code, and the Commissioner shail be deemed to be a civil 45 of 1860. 
court for the purposes of section 195 anQ, Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973. • • 5 2 of 1874. 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Com-
missioner, may preier an appeal against the decision to the principal civil 
court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose juris-
diction the registered office of the Company is situated: 
.f>rovided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is 10 
appointed to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall lie to the High 
Court of Allahabad pnd such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by 
not less than two judges of that High Court. 
22. (1) After admitting a claim against the Company under this 
Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by thEt Com- J 5 
missioner to the person or persons to whom such amount is due and on 
such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of such claim shall 
stand discharged. 
(2) If, out of the moneys paid to him in relation to the textile un-
dertakings, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as speci- go 
tied in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to 
the Company. 
23. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisburs-
ed or unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on .which 
the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred !25 
by the Commissioner before his office is finally wound up, to the general 
revenue account of the Central Government, but a claim to any money 
SO transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the per-
son entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer 
had not been made, and the order, if any, for payment of the claim 30 
being treated as an order ·ror the refund of revenue. 
CHAPTER VII 
MIscELLANEoUS 
K The provisions of tliis Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 35. 
in force Or in any instrum~nt having effect by virtue of any law, other 
than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority. 
25. (1) Where ally liability of the Comp ... y in relation to any tex-
tile undertaking alisin, out of any item &peeifted in IPart I of· the Sche- 40 
dale is DOt discharged fu1ly by the CoaanU,sio .. er out of the aJDounil 
,.w to him UDder this Ad, the Commi88ioner shan intimate In writin, 
to the Central Government the exteDt of the liabWty 'Which remains 
mullleharged .... that liahility shall be auumed by the Central Govern-...c. . . 
,~ • •. ~ 45 

II 
(.2) The Central Govenament lIUly, by. order, dlr.eet the National 
Tatile Corporation to take over the liability a_ed by the Central 
GovenuneDt uader aub-seetion (J), and on receipt of aueh direction, it 
.... 11 be the. duty of that Corporation to .u.eha r •• sueh IiabiUty. 
5 •. Every contract, entered into by the Company in relation . to . any 
textile undertaking which has vested in the National Textile Corpora-
tion under sub-section (2) of section 3, for any service, sale or supply 
and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from 
the expiry of a period of one hundred and eighty aays from the date on 
J 0 which the Ordinance was promulgated, cease to have effect ur11ess 
such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified. in writing 
by the National Tetxilc Corporation, and in ratifying such contract, the 
National Textile Corporation may make such alterations or modifications 
therein as it may think fit: 
15 Provided that the National Textile Corporation shall not omit to ra-
20 
tify a contract and shall not make any alteration or modification in a 
contract-
(a) unless it is liatisfied that such contract is unduly onerous 
or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the inte-
rests of the textile undertaking concerned, and 
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and except after recording in writing its 
reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any alteration 
or modification therein. . 
27. Any person who,-
<a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of any of the textile lmdertakings, wrongfully with-
holds such property from the National Textile Corporation; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains any property 
30 forming part of any of the textile undertakings; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the National Tex-
tile Corporation or any person or .body of persons specified by that 
Corporation, any document or inventory relating to any of the tex-
tile undertakings which may be in his possession, custody or control; 
35 or 
(d) wilfully fails to deliver to the National Textile Corporation 
any inventory or property and assets forming part of any of the 
textile undertakings; or 
(e) fails to deliver to the National Textile Corporation or any 
person or body of persons specified by that Corporation, any 
assets, books of account, registers or other documents in his p0sses-
sion, custody or coutrol relating to any of the textile undertakings; or 
(f) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of any of the textile undertakings or prefers any claim under this 
45 Act which he knows or has reason to believe to be false or grossly 
inaccurate, . . 
sIIall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees •. 
Contracta 
to cease 
to have 
effect 
unless 
ratified 
by 
National 
Textile 
Corpo-
ration. 
Penalties. 
'. 

Offences 
by com_ 
panies. 
Protec-
tion Of 
action 
taken in 
~ 
Dele,.-
tiOQ Of 
poweIW. 
ii 
18. .(1) Wbere an oJIwae u.nder thi~ Act hal beeD. commit*! b; a 
compuy, every pe1'IIGIl wbo, at the· time t8e otl'ence was OOll'lllllUeG, 
was in .charge of, and was responsible to, the company for ihe -coaduct 
of the busmeN·of the company, .as well as the compaay, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the oUence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accoldingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall re.nder any 
such person liabJe to "any punishment, if' he proves that the otfelu:e was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due . dill:-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
5 
(Z) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), where 
any offence under this Act.. has been' committed by a c~mpany and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the comp~y, such director, 15 
manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accord-
ingly. 
E~lanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 20 
other association of .individuals; and. 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
•• (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government or any officer of, or other person authorised by, 
that Government or the National Textile Corporation or any Subsidiary 25 
Textile Corporation or any officer of, or other person authorised by, such 
COrporatiOll for anything which is in good faith daDe or intended to be 
done undel' this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any ofticer of, or other person authorised by, that 30 
Government, ()l! the National Textile Corporation or any Subsidiary Tex-
tile Corporation· or any officer of, or other person authorised by, such Cor-
poration for apy damage caUled or likely to be caused by anything whk:h 
is in good faith done or "intended to be done under this Act. 
30. (1) The Central Government may, by hotification, direct that all 35 
or .any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
powers conferred by this section and sections 31 and 32, may also be 
exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any' .delegation of power is made under Bub-section 
(1), the person to whom'such power has been del.gated shall act under 40 
the direction, control anc;l supervision of the Ce~~al GoverDDleDt. 
31. H) The Central Government may, by notifica.tio~, make' rules fOr 
carryiaa out the proVisions . of this Act. 

II 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the !0N-
going powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the time within- which, and the manner in which, an intima-
S tion referred to in sub-section (4) of section 4 shall be given; 
(b) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or 
other fund, referred to in sub-section (2) of section 13 shall be dealt 
with; 
• 
(c) any other matter which is req:uired to be, or may be. pres-
10 cribed. . . 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act sl1all 
be laid. as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
1 S before the· expiry of the session immediately. following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both HouSt"~ agree in making any modiflca-
tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made. 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
20 annulment shall be wftnout prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule. 
32. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act. the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
2S Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the date on which the Ordinance was promulgated. 
Power 
to remove 
di1Uculties. 
:13. (1) The Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Umited (Acquisition and Repeal 
5 of 1986. Transfer of Undertakin~~) Ordinance. ]986, is hereby repealed. and 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anythin·g done or any action taken 
30 under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 
taken undet: the corresponding provision~ of this Act. 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See sections 18, 19, 20 (1), 21 (1), 22 (2) and 25 (1) J 
ORDER 0 .. PRJOJt1TIBS "OR THE DISCHARCE OF LIABILlTIES OF 'mE COMPANY 
35 PARTY 
CD.tegory 1 
Employees' dues on account of unpaid salaries. wages, provident fund, 
Employees' State Insurance contribution or premiums relating to the W. 
Insurance Corporation of Tndia and any other aJDounts1iue to employe •• 
40 In respect of anY' period whether before ot' after the date of takiftg over 
of the textile undertakings. . 
Ca.tegof'y 11 
Secured loans obtaiDed. from natlanalfsed banks and public financial 
tllfltftutfnns other than the Natfonal Text~le Corporation. tn respect of any 
saving. 

J", 
period wh.ether before or after the date of taking over of the textile 
undertakinp. 
Categcwy III 
Any credit availed of for trade or manufacturing purposes during the 
post-take over management period. S 
patego"1l IV 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rate or other ~ues to the Central Government, 
State Government and local ,"uthorities for the period after the date of 
taking over of the texttle underakings. 
PART II 
.Category V 
. Revenue, taxes, cesses .. rate or other dues to the Central Government. 
State Government and local au.toorittes or State Electricity Boards for 
the pre-take aver management period. 
Category VI 
Any credit availed of for trade or manufacturing purposes during the 
pre-take over mlll1agement period. 
10 
IS 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The management of six textile undertakin~ of the Swadeshi Cottall 
Mills Company Limited, Kanpur was taken over by the Central Gov-
ernment under section 18AA of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 on the 13th day of April, 1978. After such take 
over, large sums of money had been invested with a view to making 
the said undertakings viable and the liabilities of the undertakings were 
also frozen under an order issued under the Industries (Developme'l1.t 
and Regulation) Act. Further investment of money is also necessary 
for Jhe purpose of securing the optimum utilisation of the available 
facilities by the said undertakings and for th~ continued employment 
of the workmen employed therein. In addition, the order freezing the 
liabilities of the und.ertakings was expiring on the 19th of April. 1986 
and it could not be further extended beyond that date as the maximum 
period specified under the Industries (Development and Regulations) Act 
was expiring on that date. The S~adeshi Cotton Mills Company Limited 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1986 was, 
therefore, promulgated by the President on the 19th April, 1986 to 
provide for the acquisition of all the six undertakings of the Company. 
2. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DB:LHI; 
The 28th April, 1986. KHURSHED ALAM KHAN. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITU'l'ION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1011186-CSM, dated the 30th April. 1986 from 
Shri Khurshid Alam Khan, Minister of State of the Minist,·y of TextiLs 
to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President. having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Limited (Acquisition· and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Bill. 1986. recommenCis under clause (1) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, the introduction of the said Bill in Lok ,Sabha 
and also recommends under clause ('3) of the same article 117; the coa .. 
tideration of the Bill by Lok Sabba. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the payment in cash and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI of the Bill, by the Central Gov-
ernment to the Company, an amount equal to Rs. 24.32 crores for 
v~ting in the Central Government the right, title and interest of the 
Company in relation to t~ textile undertakings of the Swadeshi Cotton 
MUls Company Limited. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 9 provides for the payment in cash of 
an amount calculated at the rate of Rs. 10,000 per annum to the 
Company for the deprivation of the Company of tQe management of its 
undertakings, for the pe.riod commencing on the date on which the 
management of the textile undertakings of the Company was taken 
over in pursuance of the order made by the Central Government under 
the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 and e'11ding on 
the appointed day. It is estimated that the' amount payable under the 
said sub-clause (1) of clause 9 is likely to be of the order of Rs. 70,000, 
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 provides for the payment. in cash of an 
amount calculated at the rate of Rs. 10,000 per annum to the Company 
in consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions of 
clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill for the period commencig,g on the appointed 
fJay and ending on the date on which the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Com-
pany Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 
1~ was promulgated. It is estimated that the amount payable under 
sul:M:lause (2) of clause 9 is likely to be of the or.der of Rs. 10,000. 
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 9 provides for payment of simple interest 
on the amounts referred to in clause 8 and the amounts determined in 
accordance with the proviSions of sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause 9, 
at the rate of 4 per cent. per annwn, for the period commencing on the 
appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of such 
amounts is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner. It 
is estimated that the interest payment in terms of the provisions of 
the said sub-clause is likely to be of the order of Rs. 8.11 lakhs per 
month. 
5. Under clause 15 of the Bill, a Commissioner of Payments shall be 
appointed by the Central Government with adequate staff to assist him 
for the purpose of discharging the functions indicated in Chapter VI of 
the Bill. The sa!aries and allowances of the Commissioner of Payments 
and his staff ana expenditure on oftlceand establishment will be defrayed 
out of the Consolidated Fund of In~~. The estimated expenditure on 
this account is likely to be of the order of Rs. 45,000 per month. 
6. Under clause 25 of the Bill, the Central G~vernment shall assume 
liabilities in relatian to any textile undertaking arising out of any item 
specified, in Part I of the Schedule to the Bill, which is not discharged 
fully' by the Commissioner out of the amounts paid to him under the 
aforesaid provisions. The Commissioner of Payments is· required to 
16 

intimate in writing to the Central Government the exte'l1t of the liability 
which remains undischarged and that ~iability shall be assumed by the 
Central Government. The exact quantum of the liability will be worked 
out by the Commissioner of Payments. It is, however, estimated that the 
total liability arising out of this clause is likely to be of the order of 
Rs. 15 crore'S. 
7. Funds will also have to be provided to these undertakings for 
furthe.r investment necessary for the purpose of securing the optimum 
utilisation of the available' facilities for the manufacture, produeUon aDd 
distribution of cloth and yarn. It is estimated that the requirement of 
.funds for this purpose is likely to be of the order of Rs. 37 crores. 
8. During the initial pe.riod till these investments are completed, the 
undertakings are liable to incur losses which may have to be recouped 
by the Central Government. The exact quantum of losses cannot be 
estimated at present. 
9. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for 
matters. such as-:-
(a) the time within which and the manner in which an inti-
mation referred to in sub-claU'se (4) of clause 4 of the Bill shall be 
given; 
(b) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund o.r 
other fund referred to in sub-clause (2) of clause 13 shan be dealt 
with. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made, are matters 
of procedure and administrative detail and it is 'Dot practicable to provide 
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of the legislative power is. 
therefore, of a norma' character. 

LOK SABRA 
to provide for the acquisition' and transfer of certain textile undertakings 
of the Swadeshi Cot:on Mills Company Limited. with a view to 
securing the proper management of such undertakings so as to sub-
serve the interests of the general public by ensuring the continued 
manufacture, production and distribution of different varieties of 
cloth and yam and thereby to give effect to the policy of the State 
towards securing the principles specified in clauses (b) and (c) of 
article 39 of the Constitution and for matters connected therewith or 
t.cidental thereto. 
'-- ..... .,~ 
(Shri ICJaw.hid A14m lC1wm.,. 
.. • Mimster of State of the 
Ministry tif Textile •. ) 