THE DELIMITATION COMMISSION BILL, 1952 
t~\s I.!iT.ROl)UCED IN THE HOUSE OF TIlE J'11()PI.l~) 
II. 
BILL 
~o pr'Jnid /J fOT Ow readjustment of the repr6BMtatiotl of territorial 
(Jonlltduol/.niOH in the House of the People and in the State Degislati1'" 
AHIlI?f"I.lJiiell and fliT matteTS connected therewIth. 
BE it enBCted by Parliament fiS foll!lws:-
1. Short title.-This .\ct may be e(tlled the Delimitation Commission 
A0t, 19!i2. 
2. Deflnition&>. -111 thif; Ad, unless the (~ontext ~therwise requirf'S,-
(a) "nrti(')/''' IIWllfl8 an article ctf the COl1stitution; 
(II) "Commission" memH~ the Delimitation Comluission consti· 
tuted 1IIlrll"~' 8w:tiou B; 
«~) "ITll'mber" rnf'nnR II member of the Commission Ilnd includes 
the Chairman. 
5 
3. Oonstitution of Delimitation Oommilslon.-(l) As soon as may be 10 
after tho eornnwneemcnt of this Act, the Central Government shull conRti· 
tutl' ~ Co)'!Jl'JissiOll to be cnllpci thE' DeJimitation Commission which sbBU 
IlODsist of three nll:'mbers as follows:-
(a) two members, each of whom shall be a person _0 is or haa 
b·~en IJ Jlld~e of the SlIprPIIl<' Court or of It High Court, to be appoint- 15 
od b~' t.he ('Pllt,l'a.l Government, nnd 
(b) the Chief Election Commissioner, ex-officio. 
(e) The. Centrn] (iovernnwnt shall nominato one of the mombers ap-
pointed under eJUlISP (II) of sub-section (1) to he the Cbairman of the Com-
m~oo. ro 
4. Duties of the Oommission.-It.shall be the duty of the Commission 
to TPIl(ljw;t. the r(lpr(I!o\cnt,ntioTl of the sever",l territorial constituencieR in the 
Rouse of thn 11('.opk and of t,IIC Reveral territorial constituencies in the 
LegiRlative Assembly of each State other than Jammu and Kashmir, 011 
the basis of the population as ascertained at the census held in 1951. 25 
6. Associate membe1'8.-(l) Tlw Commission Rhflll flsRocinte with itself 
Buch number of persons 110t bP.ing less than two or more thnn four from eaoh 
State other than .Tammu and J\:a.shmir o.s may be determiqed by it, for the 
purpose of I\s!'iRting the Commission when it considers £he readjustment 
of the rl'prestmtntion of the territorial constituencies, both for the House 3D 
of the People and tho Legislative A!!'!!embly, in that State, .. 

2 
(2) The p(:rsOIlS tc.. be so ass~iated from each State shall be nominated 
by the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the Stuttl from among th" 
membe"£> of that Assembly and the members of the House of the People 
repl'esenting thut State: . 
1 Pl'ovided that in the case of u. Part C State having no ~gislative Assombly 
the mt,mbers to be 80 associated shall be the members of the House of the 
People representing that State. 
(:1) NON) of thfl pHsons so lIt;sociated with the Cornmissioo shall have .. 
right to vote or to sign any finlll decisioD of the Commission. 
10 G. Procedure and powerl of the OommllllOl1.-(l) The Commission shall 
8tltf:'l'mine its }Jl'ocedure and shall in the' performSDC(! of its functions haVE! 
all the POWf1I'S of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1008 (Act 
V of l00H). while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, 
llBmely:-. 
11 (II) summoning and enforcing the a.ttendance of witnesses; 
(b) req\.."iring the production of any document; aud 
(~) rnquisit.ioning any publia record from any court or office. 
(9) Th,~ ComrnissiOl! shall have power to require any person to furnish 
any infOl'mntioll em su<'h point~ or matters !IS in the opinion of the Com-
20 m:8sion ml\y be IIli1eful for, 01' relevant to, any matter under the considera· 
tion of the Commission, 
(.'1) The Commission may authorise any of its members to exercise nny 
of the powers mnlfpl'rf'n on it by clauseR (n) to (0) of sub-section (1) and 
suu·sectkn (g). alld 11Il)' order made or act done in exercise of any d 
26 thelle POWl'I'S b'y the member ·a.uthoriled by the Commission in that behalf 
shall be de(.med t.o be the order or act, 1\8 the CBse UlHy be, of the COlrl-
mi~sion. 
(4) 'l'he Commission shnll he deemed to be R dvil court for the pUrpOBf'1! 
of sections 400 I\nd 482 of the Code of Criminal PrO!~ed\lre, lA9H (A'}t. V 
30 of 1898). 
Ezplanation,-For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnes!':efl 
• t.hl~ ht:al limits of the jurisaiction of the Commission shall be the limit~ of 
tho territory of India. 
7. Kanner of ma.k1Dg readJUltIIlIDt.-In .mnking readjustment of thtl 
81 reprostmiation of the several territorial t'onRtitncn('ifls in the House of thl\ 
People and in the Legislative Assembly of ARCh State other than Jammu 
and Kashmir thc Commission shllll have regard to the following provision;;, 
namely:-
(11) The Commission shall firRt de.terminc the totul number of S(ln.tR 
toh,3 IIllot.t(·d to the various StRtes in the Honse of the People, on the 
ballis of the population 88 ascertained at the census hold in 
1951 by makinJ; Bueh ndditions to, or reductions in, the number of 
seMs [\Hotted to thoRe States under the UepresentRtian of the People 
Act, 1950 (XLUI of 1950), I'S it may conRider necessary, Rnd in doing 
110 shRll hll\'(' "ega~d to the provisions of 1'\1ause (1) of article 81. 
(b) The CommiRsion shall then determine the total number of SCRt.! 
to be Rssitmrd to the Legislative Assemblies of Part A and Part B 
Stateg on the. basis of the population as RBcertained at the cenSUR held 
in 1951 and in doing so shall have regard to the provisions of clause 
(e) of nrticle 170 llnd shall II,lso .,nllur~ thnt *~ t~~Rl numbr-r of seRtoS 

assigned to the Legislative AssempJy of a State forms all integral 
multiple ot tile total number of seuts allotted to that State in tho 
HOll~e of tht: People. . 
(,;) After having detm'lnilwd the lIumber of sooLIt under clause (u) 
ond clause (b), bhe Commission shall distribute those seats and the 
seats allotted to each of the Legislative Assembliefl of Part eStates 
under se(~tion 8 of the Govel'Dment of Part C States Act, 1951 
(XLIX (If 1051) t·o till! vnriotls tf"1'iiol'iul eOlll'lj.itIlBllci,·s thn hOllnd,U'ie~ 
of whioh shall be redrawn by the Commission in accordance with the 
provisions of the Constitution on the basis of the population as 
asoeli;nined at the census held in 1951. 
(d) In ddimiting the said eOJlstituen('ies j,he Commission shlll1 
ensme that geographically contiguous aress are, as far 8S pOl!Isible, 
grouped together to form one eonstituency and shall wso talce iuto 
Ii 
10 
C'oIJRidf'fllti(.n the physical features of the constituency. 15 
8. Readjustment of representation and the date of operatJoD of such 
rOadjustment. -I II On the eomplption of its work the Commission shall 
embody its eOIl':lu8:0l;S ill one or more fOI'mell order or orders, draw up a 
report t.'xplllining the rl1n~onR for the eonclusions AO embodied, and CBur;e 
the rer-ort and order or Ol'derR to be published in the Ga.zette of India; and 20 
upon suc1l! }>llbliClLtion, the order or orcierH 8hal1 have the full Coree of 11l'l1'. 
(B) Subjeet to the provisions of sub-seetioll (3), the readjustment of 
the reprt'!:Icntation of the severn) t(~rritorilll eOJlstituenci<-'s in the House of 
the People or in the Legislative Assembly of 110 State provided for in !lolly 
OJ'der made by the Commission under sub-section (1) shall apply in relation 25 
to every election to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly 
I)f !:IlIeh Rtntf', ItS tlw Clll'il' limy he, hl.-'lrl lifter the publiclttion in the Ga.zette 
of India of that order,_ and shall so apply in supersession of the provisioJls 
relating to suah representation contained in the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 (XLIII of 1950), the Government of Part C States Act, 80 
1951 (XLIX of 1951) and the orders made under either of the sa.id Aots. 
(m Nothing in this section shall affect the representlltion in the Houfle 
of the People or in the Legislative Assembl;V of a State until the dissolution 
of the House or the Assembly, as the Case may be, existing on thc date of 
pUblication in the Gazette of India of the order mndA by the Commission 30 
under sub-section (1) relating to the rea.djustment of such representa.tion. 
9. Power to amend the order after the Oommllllon has ceased to tunc-
tiOD.-After th,~ Commission hilS ct'ftsed to fun('.tion, I\ny mistake in the 
m'dl'r ma.d(~ hy the Commission under slIh-section (1) of section 8 or any' 
errol' ~ri8inLt therein from nny slip or omi~'~ion mlly be corrected, a.nd 'my ~ 
other chnng,~ which is not m a sl1h~trlJ\til\1 ch:mll't-er mlly be also made . 
therein by the Chief Election Commissiouer by order published in t.he 
fiR7.ette of India. 

, 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS. - \ 
Artillies Hl(3) and 170(4) of th(- Constitution pru\'ide that upon tho 
cOJnpletkn of tmcla census t.he representation of the s6vera.l territorio,l 
cOllstituencies in the House of the PIlople Ilnd in tho LHgislative Assembly 
of ellc:h Stllte shull btl reltdjustC'd by such authority, in su'!h manner and 
witr effc(·t from sueh date. as PUl'lill·mbllt mlly by law determine. Th:~ 
pr(~~Pllt dtllimitatioil of l)al'lilluwlltlll',Y 1l1J(1 AHst'U1bly ('o(Jstituellcies is based 
011 the el!t;Dlut.l'S uf populatiull whieh hnve Lt't'll givell legal authority hy lin 
ordor of the Prosident under article 387 snd are uccordingly restricted to 
elections hold rluriug the first three years lifter the eOmmelll'.ement of thf: 
C.onstitutiOl'. If lln~- gent-rill election has to be held after the 26th Jalluary, 
1953, it will not be 'lonstitutionally correct to do so on the basis of the 
existing delimitation of (~OIl1,tituencies. A "readjustment of representa-
tion" under articles 81 (3) and 170(4) is therefore necessary. 
Th~ object of the Bill is to set up a Delimitntilm Commission for the 
l)U/'P()S~ of effecting reudjustment of the representlltion in the House of the 
People and in the State Legislative Assemblies (including those of Part C 
States) on the basis of the population us ascertained at. the census of 19~1. 
'fhe Bill also seeks to lay down certaiu instructiou!:! as to the manner in 
which such readjustment will be made for the guidance of the Delimitution 
Commission. These instructions are generally based 011 the provisions of 
articles 81(1) and 170(2) of the Constitution and the procedure followed in 
assigning seats to the State Legislative Assemblies nnd in delimiting 
Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies uIHler the Representation of 
the People Act, 1950. It has been also provided in the Bill that the 
readjllstment. will apply to every general election to t.he HOllse of the 
People or to a State Legislative Assembly held after the fiual orders of the 
Commission have been published, and to every bye-election arising from 
such general election. 
NBW DELHI; 
7'he 19th May, 1952. 
O. C. BISWAS. 

5 
FinsMisZ M,morsnOum 
The Delimitation Commission Bill contemplates the setting up of a 
Delimitation Commission for the purpose of effecting readjustment of the 
representation in the Hous!'! of the lleople and in the State Legislative 
Assemblies on the basis of the population as ascertained at the census held 
in 1951, as required under clause (3) of article 81 and clause (4) of article 
170 of the Constitution. .. 
The Commission is to consist of three members of whom two shall l:e 
appointed from among persons who are or have been judges of the Supreme 
Court or of a High Court and the Chief Election CommiBBioner shall be 
an 6z-o-fficio member of the Commission. The Commission shall also 
associate with itself persons nominated by the Speakers of the several 
Legislative Assemblies for assisting the Commission. The Commission will 
also have a small office staff. It is difficult to anticipate how Ion" the 
Commission will take to complete its work or to make an . estimate of its 
expenditure. As far as can be antioipated,the cost Involved will be about 
Rs. 2,00,000 (non-recurring) for a period of about six months. The estimRte 
is neoeuarily a rough one. 
• 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the readjustment of the representation CJl 
territorial constituenoies in the House of the People and in 
the State Legislative Assemblies and for matters connected 
therewith. 
= 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of artiole 
117 of the Constitution of India, reoommended to the House 
of the People the consideration of the Bill. 
(SAri O. O. Bwas, 
M. N.XAE, 
Becretary. 
Minister for Law., 
GIPD-NS-375 P. S.-16.6.~~1.400. 