As intropucen in THE Lox SABHA

a

ae

|

Bill No. 53 of 1998

THE LAND ACQUISITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
Suri BHAGWAN SHANKAR Rawar, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894

itenacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (J) This act may be called the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1998.

(2) Sections 2 to 4 and 6 shall be deemed to have always been in force and section
shall be deemed to have been in force with effect from 24th day of September, 1984.

_ 2. Inthe Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for
ion 16, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—

‘Short title and
‘commencement.

‘Substitution of
‘new section for
section 16.


Power to take
possession.

Amendment
of section 17.

Amendmentof
section 18,

‘Amendinent of
section 28

"16. (7) When the Collector has made an award under section 11, he may take
possession of the land, which shall thereupon vest absolutely in the ;
free from all encumbrances:

Provided that any person, from whom any land is so acquired, may, after the expiration
of a period of ten years from the date of such acquisition, apply to the State Government
for restoration 6f that land to him on the ground that the land has not been utilised for the
public purpose for which it was acquired within the said period, and, if the State Government
is satisfied to that effect, it shall order restoration of land to him on payment of charges
which were incurred in connection with acquisition together with interest at the rate of
fifteen per centum per annum and such developmental charges, if any, as may have been
incurred afier acquisition.

Explanation— In computing the period of ten years, the period during which
she acquired land could not be utilised on account of injunctions or stay order of the
Court shall be excluded.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Registration Act, 1908, the order of
restoration of land passed by State Government under sub-section (1) shall not be liable to
registration under that Act. and shall also be not liable to be charged with any stamp duty
under the Stamp Act, 1899",

3. In section 17 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section
shall be added, namely:—

“(5) The provision relating to restoration of land referred to in sub-section (1)
of section 16 shall also apply in relation to acquisition of land made under the sub-
sections (1) and (2).

4. In section 18 of the principal Act,

(i) in sub-section (2), after the existing proviso. the following provisos shall be
added, namel

“Provided further that the Collector may entertain the application after the expiry of
any period referred 10 in clauses (a) and (b) of the first proviso if he is satisfied that the
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application in time:

Provided also that if a reference has been made to the Court which thereupon finds
that the application was not made in time, the Court may, if satisfied that the applicant was
prevented by sufficient cause from making application in time, condone the delay.".

(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be added, namely:—

“(3) The Collector shall, within ninety days from the date of receipt of an application
under sub-section (1), make a reference to the Court

Provided that if the Collector does not make a reference to the Court within a period
of ninety days from the date of receipt of the application, on an application by the applicant
the Court may direct the Collector to make a reference within such time as the court may
fix

(4) Any order made by the Collector on an application ander this section shall be
subject to revision by the Court, as if the Collector were a court subordinate to the High
Court within the meaning of section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.".

5. In section 28 of the Principal Act, the following explanation shall be added at the
end, namely:—
“ Explanation— The expression ‘compensation’ as appearing in this section
and also in section 34 shall include all the amounts payable under sub-sections
(1A) and (2) of section 23.".


6. In section 28A of the principal Act—

(i) in sub-section (1), after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—

"Provided also that the Collector may entertain the application after the expiration
said period, if he is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause,
from making an application in time."; and

(ii) after sub-section (3), the following explanation shall be added, namely:—

"Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, an award of the Court under
this part means and includes the judgement of the High Court and of the Supreme
Court and if the award of the reference Court, made under section 26, is disputed by
an aggrieved person, and the limitation as prescribed in sub-section (1) shall be
computed, accordingly, from the date of the judgement of the High Court or the
Supreme Court, as the case may be.

7. In section 50 of the principal Act,—

(i) in sub-section (2), after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be added,
ly: —

“Provided also that the knowledge of the Jocal authority or company regarding the
ndency of reference proceedings would be sufficient notice to such local authority or

(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-secticn shall be added, namely:—

“(3) Where the amount is payable by the Collector consequent to, the making of the
ard by the Court under part III or, the decree of the High Court or the Supreme Court on
an appeal therefrom under section 54, the person interested may, at his option, recover the
same from the local authority or the Company as if it were liable to pay such an amount.”

Amendment of
section 28A

Amendment
of Section 50,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The power of Sovereign to take private properties for public use is based upon the
Uoctrine of eminent domain, Consequently, the right of the owner to compeasation for the
deprivation of such as property is also well recognised. A justification of this exercise of
the power is based on two Latin maxims: (i) alus populo suprema est ie. regard for the
public welfare is the highest law and (ji) necessity publica major est quam private i.e.
public necessity is greater than private necessity.

One of the most important enactments for exercise of the right of eminent domain is
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, which was enacted more than a century back. However,
with the passage of time and evolution of law, scores of deficiencies in the Act have surfaced.

‘he Parliament and also the State Legislatures tried 10 remove them from time to time.
most appreciable endeavour in that regard is the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act,
1984 (Act No. 68 of 1984), whereby several new provisions were inserted and certain
existing provisions were modified.

‘The judicial pronouncements that have been recently given, while construing the
provisions of the said Act and also the provisions enacted by the Act No. 68 of 1984, have
highlighted several facets, which ordain amendments of the Act.

Ithas been often experienced that large scale acquisitions are being resorted to without
there being immediate need of such lands and, therefore, the provision relating to the
restoration of the acquired land to its ex-land owner would provide an effective check on
such unhealthy tendency.

Burther, there can_ hardly be any rational for not restoring it back to its ex-owner on
payment of acquisition cost alongwith interest and development charges if the State fails
19 utilize the acquired land even after the expiry of ten years from the date of acquisition
of such tand.

Also, lack of an in-built provision in section 18 of the Act for condonation of delay is
apparently harsh. Bona fide and inadvertent delays merit to be excused. Since there are
inordinate delays on the part of the Collector in making references to the Court, the Bill
Proposes to lay down time limut of 90 days for the Collector to make reference on receipt of
an application from the interested person and, if the time period of 90 days elapses, an
applicant may apply to the Court for seeking directions against the Collector, commanding
him 10 make a reference.

‘Tili recently, there has been consistent judicial opinion that the amount of solatium,
payable under section 23 of the Act, in consideration of compulsory acquisition is an
integral part of compensation and is to fetch statutory interest under sections 28 and 34 of
the Act However, of late, the Court has taken a contrary view, according to which the
amount of compensation means only the market value of the land. The proposed
amendinent to seciion 28 seeks to define the expression ‘compensation’ to include the
10015 le under various sub-sections of section 23 of the Act.

‘The proposed amendment to section 28A of the At 1s to achieve the laudable purpose
‘empowering the Collector to entertain such fications which are not filed in time on
count of bona fide reasons constituting sufficient cause, The proposed explanation to
ion 28A is intended to enlarge the connotation of the expression ‘award of the Court’
under Part UL

The Apex Court in ifs recent judgement has, inter-alia opined, that the right of a
jocal authority or a company for whom land 1s being acquired has a right to be given
‘equate notice under section 50(2) 91 the Act. Since the Act does not postulate any particular
fuem Of notice and, most often, it has been experienced that the loc: wuthority/company
Pussesies complete knowledve and information about reference proceedings, it has been
proposed that the kaowdege of pendency of the reference proceedings would be construed
sufficient notice to such local authority/eompany. Purther, under the law, as it stands
aGw, an ex-land owner cannot recover the amount awarded by the reference Court/High



3

| from the local authority/company in the execution proceedings. At the same
the Collector also does not satisfy the decree of the Court for want of funds from the
d local authority/company. It has also been experienced that the amounts are
‘ed by attachment of properties belonging to the Collector. The Bill, therefore, seeks
wer the decree-holder to realise the awarded sum directly from the concerned focal
ity/company.

It cannot be gainsaid that review of any law in the light of judicial scrutiny is crucial
ure de facto achievement of the legislative intent and purport. The various
ents proposed in the Bill are, therefore, urgently required and intended to give a
॥ to the farmers and others by removal of several anomalies and deficiencies of the

Hence this Bili.

Deut: BHAGWAN SHANKAR RAWAT

y 8, 1998.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to define the expression ‘compensation’ in order to include
the amounts payable under sub-sections (1A) and (2) of section 23 of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894,

As regards the payment of compensation in connection with the lands acquired by
the State Governments, the expenditure will be met out of the Consolidated Funds of
fespective State Governments. However, in case of Payment of compensation for lands
acquired by the Central Government, the expenditure will be met out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure out of the
Consolidated Fund of India. At present, it is not possible to give the exact amount which
will be incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of India to carry out the Provisions of the
Bill. However, a recurring expenditure of the amount of rupees 100 crore per annum is.
likely to be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees 100 erore is also likely to be involved,


ANNEXURE
Extracts oF THE Lanp Acquisrrion Act, 1894
(1 of 1894)

* * *

16. When the Collector has made an award under section 11, he may take possession
the land, which shall thereupon vest absolutely in the Government, free from all
ibrances.

17. (7) In cases of urgency, whenever the appropriate Government so directs, the

ion
‘any land needed for a public purpose. Such land shall thereupon vest absolutely in the
ment, free from all encumbrances,

(2) Whenever, owing to any sudden change in the channel of any navigable river ar
unforeseen emergency, it becomes necessary for any Railway Administration to
quire the immediate possession of any land for the maintenance of their traffic or for
purpose of making thereon a river-side or ghat station, or of providing convenient

ection with or access to any such station, or the appropriate Government considers it
¢ possession of any land for the purpose of maintaining
structure of system pertaining to irrigation, water supply, drainage, road communication
lectricity, the Collector may, immediately after the publication of the notice mentioned
ib-section (1) and with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government, enter
and take possession of such land, which shall thereupon vest’ absolutely in the
ment free from all encumbrances:

Provided that the Collector shall not take possession of any building or part of a
lilding under this sub-section without giving to the occupier thereof at least forty-eight

notice of his intention so to do, or such longer notice as may be reasonably sufficient
able such occupier to remove his movable property from such building without
ecessary inconvenience.

(4) In the case of any land 10 which, in the opinion of the appropriate Government
he provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) ae applicable, the appropriate
ernment may direct that the provisions of section SA shall not apply. and, if it does so.
a declaration may be made under section 6 in respect of the land at any time after
date of the publication of the notification under section 4, sub-section (1).

18. (J) Any person interested who has not accepted the award may, by written
ation to the Collector, require that the matter be referred by the Collector for the
etermination of the Court, whether his objection be to the measurement of the land, the
int of the compensation, the persons to whom it is payable, or the apportionment of
pensation among the persons interested,

(2) The application shall state the grounds on which objection to the award in taken:
Provided that every such application shall be made,

(a) if the person making it was present or represented before the Collector at the
when he made his award, within six weeks from the date of the Collector's award;
(0) in other cases, within six weeks of the receipt of the notice from the Collector

Section 12, sub-section (2), or within six months from the date of the Collector's
whichever period shall first expire.

* * *

28. If the sum which, in the opinion of the Court, the Collector ought to have awarded
pensation is in excess of the sum which the Collector did award as compensation,
ard of the Court may direct that the Collector shall pay interest on such excess at

7

Power to take
possession.

Special powers
in cases of

urgency

Reference to
Count

Collector maybe
directed to pay
interest onexacss
‘compensation


Re deternn
tion of the
amount of
Compensation
on the basis of
the award of the
Court

Payment of in-
terest.

Acquisition of
land at cost of a
ocal authority
or Company.

the rate of nine per centum per annum from the date on which he took possession 0
land to the date of payment of such excess into Court.

Provided that the award of the Court may also direct that where such excess of
part thereof is paid into Court after the date of expiry of a period of one year trom

on which possession is taken, interest at the rate of fifteen per centumn per annum ४
payable from the date of expiry of the said period of one year on the amount of such
or part thereof which has not been paid into Court before the date of such expiry,

28A. (1) Where in an award under this Part, Court allows to the applicant
amount of compensation in excess of the amount awarded by the Collector under Se
11, the persons interested in all the other land covered by the same notification uf
Section 4, sub-section (1) and who are also aggrieved by the award of the Collector:
notwithstanding that they had not made an application to the Collector under Section
by written application to the Collector within three months from the date of the awan
the Court require that the amount of compensation payable to them may be re-determ
on the basis of the amount of compensation awarded by the Court

Provided that in computing the period of three months within which an appli
to the Collector shall be made under this sub-section, the day on which the aw:
Pronounced and the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the award shall be excluded

(2) The Collector shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), co
an inquiry after giving notice (० all the persons interested and giving them a reason
opportunity of being heard and make an award determining the amount of compen:
payable to the applicants

(3) Any person who has not accepted the award under sub-section (2) वा;
written application to the Collector, require that the matter be referred by the Collecto
the determination of the Court and the provisions of Sections 18 to 28 shall so far ast
be, apply to such reference as they apply to a reference under Section 18.

* * *

34. When the amount of such compensation is not paid or deposited on or
taking possesion of the land, the Collector shall pay the amount awarded with inte
thereon at the rate of nine per centum per annum from the time of so taking pos
until it shall have been so paid or deposited:

Provided that if such compensation or any part thereof is not paid or deposited ए
a period of one year from the date on which possession is taken, interest at the
fifteen per centum per annum shall be payable from the date of expiry of the said peri
one year on the amount of compensation or part thereof which has not been paid or depo
before the date of such expiry.

50. (1) Where the provisions of this Act are put in force for the purpose of acquit
land at the cost of any fund controlled or managed by a local authority or of any Cor
the charges of land incidental to such acquisition shall be defrayed from or by such fun
Company.

(2) In any proceeding held before a Collector or Court in such cases the local auth
or Company concerned may appear and adduce evidence for the purpose of de
the amount of compensation:

Provided that no such local authority or Company shall be entitled to der
reference under Section 18.

* * *


G/WINUSER V/GAZZETTE492LS

LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

(Shri Bhagwan Shankar Rawat, M.P)