Bm No. 53 of 1855. 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES 
(BANKINO COMPANIES) DECISION 
BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

10 
IS 
20 
am No. 53 of 1855. 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (BANKING COMPANIES) 
DECISION BILL, 1955 
... [As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA] 
4 
BILL 
to provide for the modification of the decision of the Labou.r Appet-
late Tribunal, dated the 28th day of April, 1954, in accordance 
with the recommendations of the Bank Award Commission and 
for giving effect to the award accordingly. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes (Banking Short dUO. 
Companies) Decision Act, 1955. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) "appellate decision" means the decision of the Labour 
Appellate Tribunal, dated the 28th day of April, 1954, in 
the matter of the appeals filed before it against the award 
of the IJI-India Industrial Tribunal (Bank Disputes), 
Bombay; 
(b) "award" means the award of tge All-India Industrial 
Tribunal (Bank Disputes), Bombay, constituted by the 
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry 
of Labour No. S.R.O. 35, dated the 5th day of January, 
1952; 
(c) "Bank Award Commission" means the person appointed 
by the Resolution of the Government of India in the· 
Ministry of Labour No. LR. 100(9)/55, dated the 25th day 
of February, 1955, to enquire into and report upon the 
terms of reference specified in the Resolution of the Gov-
ernment of India in the Ministry of Labour No. LR. 100(5p)/ 
54, dated the 17th day of September, 1954; 

2 
(d) "modification order". means the order of the Government 
of India in th-e Ministry of Labour No. S.R.D. 2732, dated 
the 24th day ·of August, 1954, modifying the appellate 
decision under section 15 of the Industrial Disputes 
(Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950. 
Appellate 3. The appellate decision shall have effect as if the modifications decision to . have effect recommended m Chapter XI of the Report of the Bank Award Com-
" XLVIII of 
5 1950 . 
::iect ~ifi- mission, dated the 25th' day of July, 1955, had actually been made 
catio: therein, and the appellate decision as so modified shall be the 
:co,::meng~ de'eision of the Appellate Tribunal within the meaning of the Ie 
BaDk ~w!rd Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, and the award XLVIII of 
Commission. shall have effect accordingly. 1950 
• 
Duration of 
the award. 4. Notwithstanding anything co?tained in the Industrial Di;putes XIV of 1947. 
Act, 1947, or the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, XLVIII of 
the award as now modified by the decision of the Appellate Tribunal IS 1950, 
in the manner referred to in section 3 shall remain in force until the 
31st day of March, 1959. 
~~~::e 5. The provisions of the modification order shall not have, and 
no e1l'ec:t shall be deemed never to have had, any force or effect except, in so 
:= ~ .. far as any of such provisions has become incorporated in the award 20 
Power to 
remove 
difficulticl. 
by reason' of the provisions contained in section 3. 
6. (1) If any difficulty or doubt ,arises as to the interpretation of 
any provision of the award as now modified by the decision of the 
Appellate Tribunal in the manner referred to in section 3, the 
Central Government shall refer for decisionth e matter in respect 25 
of which such difficulty or doubt has arisen to the Labour Appellate 
Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes (Appellate 
Tribunal) Act. 1950, or to such Industrial Tribunal constituted under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as it may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
XLVIII of 
1 92<?' 30 XIV of 1947-
(2) The tribunal to which such matter is referred shall. after 
giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, decide 
such matter and its decision shall be final and binding on all such 
parties. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJE~TS AND REASONS 
In June, 1949, the Central Government referred for adjudication 
a number of disputes between the banking companies in the country 
and their employees to an All-India Industrial Tribunal known as 
the Sen Tribunal. The Tribunal gave its award in July, 1950, but 
it was set aside by the Supreme Court in April, 1951. The matter 
was subsequently referred to another All-India Industrial Tribunal 
known as Sastry Tribunal in January, 1952. That Tribunal gave Its 
award in April, 1953. On appeal, the Labour Appellate Tribunal 
made certain alterations in the award. The decision of the Labour 
Appellilte Tribunal was modified by Government in certain respects 
in August, 1954. In making the modifications, Government was 
necessarily guided by the material available at the time. It was 
• considered desirable to collect more complete data and to have the 
matter investigated further in the light of· those data. Govern-
merft, therefote, appointed a single-member Commission of Inquiry 
known as the Bank Award Commission, consisting of a Judge of 
the Bombay High Court. The Commission was requested to conduct 
a fact-finding enquiry and make recommendations as regards the 
further _modifications, if any, necessary in the decision of the 
Labour Appellate Tribunal as adapted by the Government's Modifi-
cation Order. The Commission submitted its recommendations 
towards the end of July, 1955. Government have accepted in full 
the recommendations of the Commission on the substantive terms 
of the award. This Bill is designed to give, effect to the recom-
mendations of the Commission. Considering that the dispute has 
been pending since 1949 and that it has taken so long to finalise the 
terms and conditions of service of the employees in question, it is 
considered desirable that those terms and conditions should remain 
in operation for at least five years instead of the normal period of 
one year provided for in the Industrial. Disputes Act, 1947. The 
Bill accordingly makes the necessary provision in this regard. 
2. It has also been considered advisable to provide for a suitable 
machinery to resolve points of difference or doubt between the 
parties- as regards the interpretation or application of the terms of 
the award. Provision in this regard has been made in the Bill. 
KHANDHUBHAI K. DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
-The 15th September, 1955. 

• 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
" , 
to provide for tI-.e modification of the decision of the Labour" 
Appellate Tribunal, dated the 28th day of April, 1954, in 
accordance with the recommendations of the Bank Award 
Commission and fer giving effect to the award accordingly~" 
(Shri Khandhubhai K. Desai". 
Mim'ster oj Labour. ) 