‘As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

na nov 200!

Bill No. 53 of 2001

THE GIRLS (FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION) BILL, 2001
By
‘Suni 0.5. Basavaral, M.P.
A
BILL
10 provide for free and compulsory education to every girl child whose Parenis ove
living below poverty line.

rhe it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of ladia as

follows:—

1. 0) This Act maybe called the Girls Free and Compulsory Education) Act, 2001+ Short title,
(2) It extends to the whole of India. Seana
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by

notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires. — Definitions.

("appropriate Government” meansin the case ofa State the State Government
and in all other cases the Central Government,

(0) “education” means education up to higher secondary level;

(©) gil” means a female who has not attsined the age of eighteen years of
age;

(@ «person living below poverty Tine” means a person whose income from all
sources is less than rupees three thousand per month


2
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “school” means an educational institution imparting education.

‘Free and 3. (1) The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory |
esicosed to every girl child whose parents are living below poverty line and are ordinarily
residing in its territorial jurisdiction. |

(2) The appropriate Government shall provide to every girl child born of parents:
living below poverty line, the following facilities: —

(@ free education up to higher secondary level;

(ii) free stationery items like books, note-books, writing materials;
(iii) free school uniform;

(iv) free hostel facility and meal during school time; and

(») stipend at the rate of one hundred rupees up to primary level,
hundred rupees upto middle level and five hundred rupees per month up to higher
secondary level.

4. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain or cause to be:
lished or maintained such primary, middle or higher secondary schools within its
torial jurisdiction as the appropriate Government may deem necessary for the
of carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Establishment
of schools by
the appropriate
Government.

Responsibility 5. It shall be responsibility of every parent to get his girl child admitted to a school
ते receiving education and the parent shall not in any manner restrain the girl child from
every gitl attending the school till she completes her education.

child to school.

Restriction on 6. No person shall employ a girl child in such a. job which prevents her from
employment of school for receiving education.

a girl child.

Punishment for 7. Any person including a parent, who for any reason prevents, restrains or

violation of obstructs a girl child from receiving education in a school, shall be liable to si
provisions of imprisonment which may extend to one year.

Power to make 8. The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the provisions of
rules. Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The ability to read and write is an essential element of human capability. Literacy is
the first step towards acquiring tools of learning and opening the doors for knowledge and
information. Education expands opportunity for girls, empowers them to resist oppression
and to claim their right.

In our country, girls belong to weaker and vulnerable section of the society. Although
many steps have been taken to improve their conditions, yet nothing concrete has been
done. Even today, girls are not treated equally and are subject to discrimination by their
parents. They are kept away from schools and are forced to assist their mothers in household
affairs and are deprived of childhood joys.

It is the appropriate time to take stock of the situation and to ensure that girls belong
to poor families are given free and compulsory education. They should also be provided
with facilities like free stationery items, free uniform, writing materials, hostel facilities
etc. to encourage them to get education. This will not only help in eradication of illiteracy
from the country but will also help the girls to grow and compete with their male
counterparts.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut, G.S. BASAVARAJ
June 21, 2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free and compulsory education and other facilities to
every girl child whose parents are living below poverty line by the appropriate govern-
ment. Clause 4 provides for establishment of schools by the appropriate government. The
Central Government will bear the expenditure incurred in respect of Union territories and
the State Governments will bear the expenditure incurred in respect of their States out of
their respective consolidated funds.

‘The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore per
annum is likely to be involved.

‘A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eight hundred crore is likely to be
involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA |

A
BILL

न
living below poverty line.

(Shri 6. 5. Basavaraj, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—944LS—13-07-2001.