Short title, and
extent.
THE  AGRICULTURAL  LAND  ACQUISITION  REGULATORY
AUTHORITY  BILL,  2009
BY
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide  for  the  constitution of an Agricultural Land Acquisition Regulatory Authority
for the purpose of regulation of land acquisition in the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Land Acquisition Regulatory Authority
Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural land" means such land where any crop has been grown through
cultivation at any time during the preceding ten years or any land having any forest
cover;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "Authority" means the Agricultural Land Acquisition Regulatory Authority
constituted under section 3 of this Act; and
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bill No. 53 of 2009
Definitions.5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Agricultural
Land
Acquisition
Regulatory
Authority.
Composition
of the
Authority. 5
10
20
15
25
30
35
40
3.  The Central Government shall constitute a regulatory authority for regulation of
acquisition of agricultural land to be known as the Agricultural Land Acquisition Regulatory
Authority.
4. (1) The Authority shall consist of:—
(i) a retired judge of Supreme Court who shall be the Chairperson;
(ii) five members having atleast ten years experience of teaching in agriculture
universities and who shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed; and
(iii) five other members having special knowledge in the field of agriculture to
be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairperson and other members of the Authority shall hold office for a period
of five years.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Nagpur in the State of Maharashtra.
(4) The Authority shall have its office in every State/Union Territory.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Authority as are required for its efficient functioning.
5.  The Authority shall perform the following functions:—
(a) collection of data pertaining to agricultural land in all the States;
(b) monitoring all agricultural land acquisition in the country;
(c) issuing prohibition order on acquisition of agricultural land wherever
necessary;
(d) issuing no-objection certificate for agricultural land acquisition; and
(e) conducting suo motu inquiry into any specific acquisition of agricultural
land in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) after the commencement of this Act, it shall be mandatory for every authority or
agency under the Central Government or the State Government or the Union territory
administration, as the case may be, to obtain a no-objection certificate from the Authority for
acquisition of land in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Before issuing any no-objection certificate under sub-section (1), the Authority
shall satisfy itself by verifying relevant documents or visiting the site that the land being
acquired by the appropriate Government is not an agricultural land or, if it is an agricultural
land, circumstances exist warranting the acquisition of such land.
(3) The Authority shall give its decision regarding issue of no-objection certificate not
later than three months from the date of receipt of application for no-objection certificate.
7. Any person violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished with an
imprisonment which may extend to three years and a fine which shall not be less than ten per
cent. of the market value of the land acquired.
8. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority for meeting
the expenditure relating to its offices, infrastructure and for implementing the provisions
of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in implementing the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government shall have power to issue such orders not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act by notification in the Official Gazette as are required to remove such difficulty.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Functions of
the
Authority.
Land not to
be acquired
without no-
objection
certificate
from the
Authority.
Punishment.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.

3
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As a result of population explosion, the pressure on resources of earth is on a constant
increase year after year. At present the size of rural population is more than 70 crore. About
two decades ago 18.5 crore hectare of land catered to the requirements of almost 80 crore
people. But the present scenario is that 18 crore 29 lakh hectares of land is catering to the
needs of nearly 120 crore people. With increase in population and stagnant land availability,
the food security may no longer be there. Surveys conducted by the Planning Commission,
the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) and other agencies have all confirmed that
the size of arable land in the country is shrinking because fertile land is being sacrificed in the
name of urbanization and industrialisation. We are already witnessing that more and more
farmers are turning landless.
There is no sensitization on the part of either planners or the Government towards the
fact that fertile land is a finite resource and needs to be conserved. That is why, the per capita
land availability which was 0.27 hectare in 1980 has come down to less than 0.20 hectare now.
What is truly surprising is the fact that most of the new urbanization or industrialisation is
happening on land that is cultivable whereas the barren land which is about 7.7 crore hectare
remains untouched. It would have been more practical and less damaging if this land was
used for urbanization and industrialisation. But the Governments keep on acquiring cultivable
land for non-agricultural purposes. The problem is compounded when it is realized that
about 19 lakh acres of land is under litigation and 20 lakh of and land is to be distributed
under the Land Reforms Acts.
On the one hand per capita land availability is declining, on the other hand almost
32 per cent population of the country is landless. The concept of Special Economic Zones
(SEZ) is likely to make lakhs of farmers landless. As per an estimate, 3 lakh hectares of land is
to be acquired for SEZs. Most of this land is likely to be acquired from the farmers. The
acquisition of agricultural land is already causing dissatisfaction amongst farmers and at
many places the protests have turned violent. The decline in agricultural land may give rise
to a number of problems such as the question of food security, increase in import of foodgrains
and resultant dependence on other countries for our foodgrain requirements. Therefore, it is
wrong to acquire agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes.
It is felt that legislation is needed to monitor and regulate the process of land acquisition
in the country. Therefore, a Bill is proposed to set up an Agricultural land Acquisition
Regulatory Authority with a view to put a stop to acquisition of agricultural land for other
purposes unless it is absolutely essential.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR
June 29, 2009
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Land Acquisition Regulatory
Authority. Clause 4 provides for composition of the Authority. Clause 5 provides that the
Authority shall perform a number of functions including collection of data on agricultural
land. Clause 6 provides that the Authority shall issue no-objection certificate before any
acquisition of land is made. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall provide
adequate funds to the Authority for implementing the provisions of this Act.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore would be
involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. Therefore, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide  for  the  constitution of an Agricultural Land Acquisition Regulatory Authority
for the purpose of regulation of land acquisition in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2681LS(S5)—10-07-2009.