AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 53 of 2023
THE  SALT WORKERS WELFARE BILL, 2023
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection from exploitation and welfare measures for
the salt workers in the country by setting up a welfare fund, for
payment of old age pension, healthcare, educational
facilities for their children and for payment of
minimum wages and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Salt Workers Welfare Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. (a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases the Central Government;
Short title and
commencement.
5
Definitions.

(b) “employer” means any person who employs, whether directly or through any
other person, or contractor, whether on behalf of himself or on behalf of any other
person, one or more labourer or workers for work connected with salt making from sea
or salt lake, as the case may be, including handling of salt;
(c) “welfare fund” means the Salt Workers Welfare Fund constituted under
section 4;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) “salt worker” means any person engaged in making salt from sea or lake water
on land by digging shallow wells and pumping out brine or in a chemical factory or
any related occupation as a wage earner, whether in cash or kind, for his livelihood
and includes a person engaged through a contractor or engaged as a self employed
person.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
formulate a National Policy of Salt and Salt Workers.
(2) The National Policy formulated under sub-section  (1) shall include,—
(a) a common salt policy for the entire country;
(b) declaration of salt as an agricultural product; and
(c) welfare measures and social security for the salt workers.
4. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Salt Workers Welfare Fund for carrying out
the purposes of this Act.
5. The Fund shall be utilised for,—
(a) providing healthcare facilities for the salt workers;
(b)  conducting of medical check-up camps at least once in a year for the
salt workers;
(c) payment of compensation to the next kin in case of death of salt workers;
(d) housing facility at subsidised rate;
(e) payment of old age pension;
(f) providing water supply for drinking and other purposes;
(g) providing educational facility to the children of salt workers; and
(h) undertaking such other welfare measures which the appropriate
Government deems fit.
6. It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to,—
(a) undertake welfare measures for the salt workers;
(b) ensure payment of minimum wages to the salt workers; and
(c) ensure job security to the salt workers.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation by Parliament,
provide funds to Governments of concerned States for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this
Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government, may make such order to give such direction, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of
the difficulty and any such order shall be final.
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
10
2
Formulation of
National Policy
for Salt and Salt
Workers.
Utilisation of
Fund.
45
Constitution of
Salt Workers
Welfare Fund.
Responsibility
of the
appropriate
Government.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
3
5
10
Power to make
rules.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Salt is a Central subject and land is a State subject. A body need to be constituted
to set up common rules and regulations for the salt farmers. Salt workers are seasonal
workers with marginal source of income. There is lack of social and health securities
for salt workers. They are exposed to hazardous work-environmental factors and
work in extreme climatic conditions. Workers also suffer from different occupational
health condition as well as due to lack of education and awareness they pay no
attention to the occupational health hazardous conditions. There is lack of motivation
towards use of personal protective equipment. All the workers have oral abusive
habits and poor personal hygiene. The salt workers settlements lack basic amenities
like potable drinking water, toilets and waste management systems. Government should
pay attention towards the salt workers health and socio-economic status.
 Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;  RAHUL SHEWALE
16 January, 2023.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of Salt Workers Welfare Fund.
Clause 7 provides for funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one crore will be involved per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection from exploitation and welfare measures for
the salt workers in the country by setting up a welfare fund, for
payment of old age pension, healthcare, educational
facilities for their children and for payment of
minimum wages and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Rahul Shewale, M.P.)