1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
DR. DHARAM VIRA GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
(a) after clause (bb), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(bc) "constituency" means the Parliamentary constituency;';
(b) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 53 of  2017
Amendment
of section 2.
5
10
43 of 1951.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
'(ca) "designated place" means any public place designated by the Election
Commission where the election petition is available for the electors to sign;';
(c) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted namely:—
'(ha) "Recall Petition" means a petition calling for a member of Parliament
to vacate his seat in the House of People;'; and
(d) after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted namely:—
'(ia) "signing period" means a period of sixty days from the date of
submission of petition to the Election Commission;';
'(ib) "Speaker" means the Speaker of the House of People;'.
3. After Part V A  of the principal Act, the following PART and sections thereunder
shall be inserted namely:—
"PART  VB
RECALL OF MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
78C. (1) A member of Parliament shall be deemed to have vacated his office if he is
recalled through a recall petition filed with Election Commission signed by not less than ten
per cent. of the total number of electors of that constituency in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) Subject to the provision of sub-section (1), no process of recall of a member of
Parliament shall be initiated—
(i) within a period of two years from the date on which such member of Parliament
is elected and enters upon his office; or
(ii) if that member of Parliament was elected in a bye-election and one-half of
the period of tenure of such member of Parliament has not expired; or
(iii) if  a notification for general election is issued by the Election Commission
within sixty days following the date of petition submitted to the Election Commission; or
(iv) if that member of Parliament is already subject to a recall petition process.
78D. The Election Commission shall ensure that the recall petition is available for
the public for signing at the designated places during the signing period.
78E. Every elector of the constituency, in respect of whose member of parliament the
recall petition has been filed, shall be eligible to sign the recall petition.
78F. Every recall petition shall be signed in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Election Commission.
78G. (1) The Election Commission shall forward the result of the recall petition to the Speaker.
(2) A recall petition of a member of Parliament shall be deemed to be successful recall
petition for the purposes of this Act, if it is signed under section 78F by electors whose
number is not less than thirty-five per cent. of the number of valid votes which that member
was polled in his election.
78H. The member of Parliament in respect of whom the recall petition was filed, upon
successful recall petition under sub-section (2) of the section 78G, shall be deemed to have
vacated his seat in the House of the People.
78I. When as a result of a successful recall petition, a seat in the House of the people
is duly vacated under section 78H, the Election Commission shall cause a bye-election to be
held to fill the vacant seat in such manner as may be prescribed.".
Conditions to
hold a recall
election
petition.
Recall petition
to be make
available for
signing.
Persons
eligible to sign
a recall
petition.
Manner of
signing the
recall petition.
Result of
recall petition.
V acation of
seat upon
recall.
Conduct of a
bye-election.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Insertion of
new Part VB.

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Recall of Parliamentarians is said to be a democratic method, by which citizens have
the power to remove or in effect de-elect a Member of Parliament before the end of his term
of office. This power to removal of a Member of Parliament is an instrument for the constituents
to scrutinise their performance and conduct and ensure good practices and delivery of
services that an elected representative is expected to follow. This right flows from the
fundamental principle of representative democracy which is enshrined in the Indian
Constitution as a part of its basic structure. It is a prerogative of the electors to decide
whether a non-performing representative be allowed to represent them in the Parliament.
This puts a check on the representatives and makes them accountable to the public.
In some States like Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, the right to recall
has been incorporated in their respective Nagar Palika Acts. Thus, it is required to introduce
a similar legislation at the national level as well.
Countries like USA, Switzerland, Canada, Taiwan, Venezuela and Ukraine have adopted
specialised legislations on the people's right to recall elected representatives. Although the
modes of recall may vary but the essence of law is same in all these countries.
It is, therefore desirable to enact a law to de-elect a Member of Parliament who has
lost public confidence, regulate the procedure with regard to the recall of the elected members
of Parliament and improve parliament's transparency and accountability to the general
public.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DHARAM  VIRA  GANDHI
February 14, 2017.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 78D provides that the Election Commission
shall ensure that the recall petition is available for the public for signing at the designated
places during the signing period. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. As the expenditure to be incurred would depend upon
the number of recall petitions filed, it is not possible at this stage to give the exact amount of
recurring expenditure which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is also likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill vide proposed section 78C provides that any elector may file a recall
petition with the Election Commission in such manner as may be prescribed. The proposed
section 78I empowers the Election Commission to hold a bye-election to fill the vacant seat
on a successful recall petition in such manner as may be prescribed. As the rules will relate to
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE ACT, 1951
(43 OF 1951)
* * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * *
(bb) "chief electoral officer" means the officer appointed under section 13A of the
Representation of People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);
* * *
(e) "elector" in relation to a constituency means a person whose name is entered in the
electoral roll of that constituency for the time being in force and who is not subject to any of
the disqualifications mentioned in section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950
(43 of 1950);
* * *
(h) "public holiday" means any day which is a public holiday for the purposes of
section 25 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881);
* * *
Interpretation.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4882LS(S3)—17-03-2017.