1
THE TELEVISION PROGRAMMES (REGULATION) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI A. T. NANA PA TIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the programmes telecast on television channels and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the  Television Programmes (Regulation ) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “Authority” means the Television Programmes Regulation Authority set up
under section 3 of this Act;
(ii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 53  of   2011
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(iii) “programme” means and includes any serial, documentary, opinion poll,
short film, commercial advertisement, musical programme including songs and dance
sequences, fashion show, talk show or any other programme telecast for public viewing;
and
(iv) “television network” means a television channel, whether privately owned
or otherwise, including a foreign television channel, whether in partnership with an
Indian Television Channel or otherwise, or owned by a non-resident Indian.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up an Authority to be known as the Television
Programmes Regulation Authority.
(2) The Authority shall consist of :—
(a) A Chairman who shall be an eminent personality in the field of entertainment/
media to be appointed by the Central Government; and
(b) two other members to be nominated by the Central Government.
(3) The terms and conditions of service and salary and allowances of the Chairman
and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Authority shall perform such functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff as may be
required for the efficient functioning of the Authority.
4.  (1) The Authority shall have its offices in the capital of every State of the country.
(2) Every office of the Authority set up under sub-section (1) shall consist of—
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government; and
(b) four other members to be appointed by the Central Government, in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The terms and conditions of service and salary and allowances of the Chairman
and members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) Every  television network before telecasting any programme on its network shall
forward the contents of the programme to the office of the Authority nearest to the
headquarters of the television network for the purpose of obtaining certificate for public
exhibition of the programme.
(2) The television network shall not be required to obtain prior permission from the
Authority for telecasting news or any other programme, which has already been allowed for
public exhibition under the Cinematograph Act, 1952 or any other law for the time being in
force or under the provisions of this Act.
(3) The Authority, while certifying every programme, shall ensure that:—
(i) it does not violate any existing law of the country;
(ii) it does not exhibit violent, vulgar or sexually explicit scenes or any scene degrading
our culture or posing threat to unity and integrity of the country;
(iii) it does not exhibit nude or semi-nude scenes in the name of fashion show or song
dance sequences;
(iv) it does not show programmes creating hatred between different sections of the
society on the ground of religion, caste, creed or language;
(v) it does not promote drinking, smoking or use of any other narcotic drug;
Television
Programme
Regulation
Authority.
Authority to
set up its
offices in
every State.
Functions of
Authority.
37 of 1952.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(vi) it does not defame any person, organization including a business organization,
Government or a political party;
(vii) it does not telecast mischievous news-item or give false or inaccurate information
which could create confusion among the viewing public;
(viii) it does not offer any unwarranted comment on any matter pending in a Court of
Law; and
(ix) it does not offer any comment on the functioning of Parliament or State Legislature
or Members  thereof or Judiciary.
6. The office of the authority where programmes have been submitted for certification,
shall scrutinize the programmes and give a certificate for allowing public exhibition of such
programmes on the television channel.
Explanation.— Certificate from any office of the Authority shall mean permission to
telecast the programme throughout the country.
7. The Authority may, on its own or on receipt of a complaint, cause an inquiry into the
functioning of a television channel.
8. (1) If, after an inquiry, it is found that the television channel has violated the
provisions of any guideline issued by the Authority, the licence of the television channel
shall be suspended for a period of one year:
Provided that if any television channel violates the provisions of this Act for the
second time, the Authority shall cancel the licence of that channel.
(2) The owner and the in-charge of the programme of the television network shall be
punished for violating the provisions of this Act with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh or
with both.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act  shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Certificate
for public
exhibitions.
Power of the
Authority to
inquire.
Penalty for
violation.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The number of television channels in the country is increasing rapidly and programmes
telecast on these channels run into thousands. Some of the programmes telecast on these
channels are such that they cannot be watched alongwith children. These channels expose
the youngsters to violence and vulgarity which can corrupt their minds. Even some commercial
advertisements are not in good taste.
Our culture is being tarnished by these channels. In our country there is a separate
regulatory mechanism for films. Television channels air thousands of serials and other
programmes every month but there is no regulatory mechanism for them. Television has
become part and parcel of the lives of vast number of families all over the country.
It is accordingly proposed to set up a regulatory mechanism to regulate the programmes
being telecast on television channels.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
July 19, 2011.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish an Authority to regulate programmes  telecast by
television channels with its headquarters at New Delhi. Clause 4 provides that an office of
the Authority shall be set up in every State capital. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees two hundred crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the programmes telecast on television channels and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—896LS(S3)—10-08-2011.