1
THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI FEROZE VARUN GANDHI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2014.
2. In the Electricity Act, 2003, in section 135,—
(a) in the sub-section ( 1), for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Provided that in a case where the load abstracted, consumed, or used or
attempted abstraction or attempted consumption or attempted use—
Bill No. 53 of 2015
Short title.
Amendment of
section 135.
36 of 2003.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(i) does not exceed 5 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall
not be less than three times the financial gain on account of such theft of
electricity or rupees fifty thousand, whichever is higher, and in the event of
second or subsequent conviction the fine imposed shall not be less than six
times the financial gain on account of such theft of electricity or rupees one lakh,
whichever is higher;
(ii) exceeds 5 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall not be
less than three times the financial gain on account of such theft of electricity or
rupees seventy five thousand, whichever is higher, and in the event of second
or subsequent conviction, the sentence shall be imprisonment for a term not less
than six months, but which may extend to five years and with fine not less than
six times the financial gain on account of such theft of electricity or rupees one
lakh and fifty thousand, whichever is higher:"; and
(b) in sub-section (1A), the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—
"Provided also that five per cent. of the deposit or payment shall be equally given as
additional benefit to the officers of the licensee of supplier, as the case may be, who were part
of the inspection team."
5
10
15

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The electricity sector in India has an installed capacity of about 250 GW and accounts
for 5% of global electricity production, being surpassed only by 7 China and the United
States of America. However, our impressive electricity generation record is tarnished by the
lossess suffered while transmitting power to the end consumer incurred in the form of
Aggregate Technical & Commercial Loses (AT&C losses) which range from 30-50% depending
upon the geographical region and the surveying agency concerned. Reputed independent
agencies like The Energy Research Institute (TERI) have pegged the AT&C loss in some
areas to as high as 60%, which are among the highest in the world. Comparable figures in
other major countries range from 4% in Japan and Germany to 6%-8% (China, Europe and
USA).
At a PLF of 60% and AT&C loss of 30%, India loses 45 GW of electricity. If the AT&C
losses are restricted to 15% approximately, 23 GW of electricity shall be available to other
sectors, bringing in immense benefits in the Indian economy.
The high fraction of AT&C losses, coupled with insufficient or no tariff revision, have
plunged the financial health of the State Electricity Boards (SEB's). Consequently, it has
become increasingly difficult for SEB's to service their debt and lenders have become wary in
terms of lost revenue. Thus, plugging of these thefts shall reduce lost revenue, lessen
blackouts and stabilize the financial health of the SEB's.
Meanwhile, the Officers of the Licensee or Supplier (as applicable) are also encouraged
and incentivized to conduct frequent raids and curtail electricity theft.
The case of Gujarat Electricity Board (GEB), which made and annual profit of rupees
550 crore in Financial Year 2000-01 is a glaring example of the beneficial effects of curtailing
electricity thefts.
The present Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Electricity Act, 2003 with a view to
impose penalty on the consumer practicing theft of electricity and causing loss of revenue
and posing energy crisis in the country.
The Bill also proposes to give five per cent. of the fine deposited for theft of electricity
as additional benefit to the officers of the licensee or supplier so as to incentivize efficient
crackdown of theft of electricity.
N
EW DELHI; FEROZE V ARUN GANDHI
February 13, 2015
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
(36 OF 2003)
* * * * * *
PART XIV
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
* * * * * *
135. (1) Whoever, dishonestly,—
(a) taps, makes or causes to be made any connection with overhead, underground or
under water lines or cables, or service wires, or service facilities of a licensee or supplier as
the case may be; or
(b) * * * * * *
(c) * * * * * *
(d) * * * * * *
(e) * * * * * *
Provided that in a case where the load abstracted, consumed, or used or attempted
abstraction or attempted consumption or attempted use—
(i) does not exceed 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall not be
less than three times the financial gain on account of such theft of electricity and in the
event of second or subsequent conviction the fine imposed shall not be less than six
times the financial gain on account of such theft of electricity;
(ii) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall not be less
than three times the financial gain on account of such theft of electricity and in the
event of second or subsequent conviction, the sentence shall be imprisonment for a
term not less than six months, but which may extend to five years and with fine not less
than six times the financial gain on account of such theft of electricity:
* * * * * *
(1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the licensee or supplier, as the
case may be, may, upon detection of such theft of electricity, immediately disconnect the
supply of electricity:
Provided that only such officer of the licensee or supplier, as authorised for the purpose
by the Appropriate Commission or any other officer of the licensee or supplier, as the case
may be, of the rank higher than the rank so authorised shall disconnect the supply line of
electricity:
Provided further that such officer of the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, shall
lodge a complaint in writing relating to the commission of such offence in police station
having jurisdiction within twenty four hours from the time of such disconnection:
Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, on deposit or payment
of the assessed amount or electricity charges in accordance with the provisions of this Act,
shall, without prejudice to the obligation to lodge the complaint as referred to in the second
proviso to this clause, restore the supply line of electricity within forty-eight hours of such
deposit or payment.
* * * * * *
Theft of
electricity.
4

GMGIPMRND—4745LS(S3)—03-03-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003.
————
(Shri Feroze Varun Gandhi,  M.P.)