As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

' | My 208

TERRDIg “si

मा . i
a

Bill No. 53 of 2000
OE 2000

THE ALTERNATE FUEL RESOURCES BOARD BILL, 2000
By
SHRI ANNASAHEB MLK. Pam, MP.
A
‘BILL

40 provide for research and use of alcohol as alternate fuel in the country and for matters
connected therewith,

BE it. enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Alternate Fuel Resources Board Bill, 2000, Short tite and
(2) It shall come into force at once, suede:
2. In this Act, unless the Context otherwise requires, — Definitions.

(@) "appropriate Government" means a State Government, in rélation to a State
and the Central Government in other cases;

(2) "Board" means the Alternate Fuel Resources Board established under
Section 3;

(० “alternate fuel" means alternate sources of fuel apart from petrol and
diesel;

(४) “fund” means the Alternate Fuel Research Fund established under section 9;

(०) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.


2

Establishroent 3. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official |
ey oma Sstablish an Alternate Fuel Resources Board (hereinafter tobe referred to as the Board)

@ a Chairman, having requisite qualification in Chemical Engineering
especially in the field of non-conventional energy sources, to be appointed by the
Central Government.

(éi) members who shall represent,—

(@) the automobile industry;

(6) the sugar-cane industry;

(०) the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas;

@ the Ministry of Environment and Forests;

(०) Government concerned; and

(0 the field of non-conventional energy sources.

(2) The terms and conditions of: ‘appointment, service, salary, allowances and other
benefits of the Chairman shall be such as. may be prescribed.

(3) The members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances for attending
the sittings of the Board, as may be prescribed.

Officers and 4. The Central Government shall make available necessary officers and other
boa staff to the Board,

Appropriate 5. Every appropriate Government shall inform the Board about the quantity of alcohol
Government to

rae produced in that State every year and also other ‘alternate sources of fuel developed in that State,
inform

Board about
the quantity of
alcohol. :

Sitting of the 6, (1) The Board shall meet as often as possible but a sitting of the Board shall not be
Board. held later-thansthree-months from the date of its Previous sitting.

(2) The sittings of the Board shall be presided over by the Chairman and in his absence.
by a member to be elected from amongst the members themselves.

Pe ote 7. (1) It shall be the duty of Board to —
oa i
* @ promote the tse of methanol and ethanol blended with petroV/diesel as an alternate.
fuel;
(@) explore the possibility of using methanol as an alternate fuel and ‘conduct research
work; and
(di) explore the possibilities of other alternate sources of fuel.
(2) The Board may use the services of. ‘experts in the relevant fields for conducting _
research work.
Board to 8. The Board shall submit an annual report with suitable steps necessary for imple-
ey का menting the recommendations contained therein, to the Central Government,
repor
Report to be 9. The

Central Government shail cause the Teport to be laid on the table of both the
ae onthetable Houses of Parliament alongwith a statement of action taken thereon and the reasons for
rea implementing any recunitiendation contained in the report.

Establishment 10. The Central Government shall establish a fund to be known ss the Al
rue Fuel Resources Fund to meet expenditure on salary, allowances, research and for.

other work for developing and promoting the use of methanol or ethanol as an al
fuel or exploring other sources of fuel.


3

11. The Board may enter into agreement or contract with any foreign company for Agreement
tesearch/sale of alternate fuel in the country, with forcign
of el in the es intry.
12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules Powertomake
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. rales.

|



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India has vast natural Tesources. Some of the resources have not been fully explored
and put to use for benefit of common man,

Etropean countries are the front runners in this field.

India is one of the largest sugar producers in the world. Mollases is obtained from
Sugar-cane. If methanol and ethanol which are obtained from extracts of sugar-cane, are
blended with petrol in @ppropriate proportion, automobiles can be run without making
any modification in the engine system. To that extent, consumption of petrol will be
reduced. Moreover, methanol can be used as fuel even without blending with petrol,

Another major advantage of using methanoi/ethanol as alternate tuel is that it is

environment friendly and helps in reducing environmental Pollution to a considerable
extent, 5

In our country also, use of methanol/ethanol was tried successfully in western region
for some time.

Itis really surprising that with all the advantages, why our country is not willing to
come forward to accept this as an alternate fuel.

The Bill seeks to Promoie the use bf methanol/ethanol as an alternate fuel and to
explore other sources‘of fuel.

New Dewar; ANNASAHEB M.K. PATIL
February 9, 2000,



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of an Alternate Fuel Resources Board. It
"further provides for salaries and allowances to Chairman and allowances to the members
for attending the sittings of the-Board. Clause 4 provides for appointment of necessary
| officers and staff for the Board. Clause 7 provides for conducting extensive research to
_ explore possibilities of other sources of alternate fuel and for engaging the services of
; in relevant fields by the Board. Clause 10 provides for the setting up of an Alternate
Fuel Resources Board Fund. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the

Consolidated Fund of India.
Itis likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore.
A non-recurring expenditure of abovt rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
ut the purposes of this Bill.”As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal cl



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for research and use of alcohol as alternate fuel in the country and for matters
connected therewith,

(Shri Annasaheb M.K. Patil, M.P.)

IGIP(PLU)MAND—43991 S—21-03-2000.