THE ECONOMICALLY WEAKER CLASS CORPORATION BILL, 2012
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Corporation for the welfare and advancement of
persons belonging to economically weaker class and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Economically Weaker Class Corporation Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It  shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  53 of  2012
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) “Corporation” means the Economically Weaker Class Corporation established
under section 3;
(iii) “economically weaker class” means any household except those belonging
to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes whose annual income from all sources
does not exceed rupees two lakh or such amount, not less than rupees two lakh, as the
Central Government may, from time to time, notify; and
(iv) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette appoint, there shall be established a Corporation to be known as the
Economically Weaker Class Corporation.
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of  property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business
of the Corporation shall vest in a Board of directors which may exercise all  such powers
and do all such acts as may be exercised or done by the Corporation under this Act.
(4)  The Board of directors shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson; and
(b) six other directors,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and other directors of the Corporation shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Corporation shall have its office at such place as may be prescribed.
(7) The Corporation shall, in consultation with the Central Government, appoint a
Managing Director and such number of officers and staff, as it may deem necessary for its
efficient functioning.
(8) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Managing Director and other officers and staff of the Corporation shall be such as
may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Corporation shall have a Fund with an initial corpus of rupees five thousand
crore.
(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, credit such sums to the Fund as may be necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Chairperson of the Corporation or by any
director of the Corporation authorized by him in this behalf.
5. The Corporation shall,—
(i) in consultation with the State Governments, identify the families belonging
to economically weaker class by evolving such methods, as it may deem fit;
(ii) maintain a register of families belonging to economically weaker class;
(iii) provide the following facilities to the families belonging to economically
weaker class,—
(a) free educational facilities to the children;
(b) educational loan for higher education at concessional rate of interest;
Definitions.
Establishment
of
Economically
Weaker Class
Corporation.
Functions
of the
Corporation.
Fund of the
Corporation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(c) opportunities for employment and self employment;
(d) free healthcare facilities;
(e) financial assistance for setting up of self-employment units;
(f) housing facilities at subsidised rates; and
(g) provision of supply of essential commodities of daily use at subsidised
rates.
(v) recommend to the Central Government the welfare measures for overall
development of the families belonging to the economically weaker class;
(vi) recommend to the Central Government the quantum of reservation of seats
in higher educational institutions including technical and professional institutions in
favour of persons belonging to the economically weaker class:
Provided that while recommending the quantum of reservation, the Corporation
shall ensure that it bears at least the same ratio as the population of economically
weaker class bears to the total population of the country;
(vii) recommend to the Central Government the quantum of reservation of posts
and services under the Central Government in favour of persons belonging to the
economically weaker class:
Provided that the quantum of reservation recommended by the Corporation
shall not be less than ten per cent. of the total number of the posts and services under
the Central Government.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to implement the recommendations
of the Corporation.
(2) The implementation of the recommendations of the Corporation shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in any judgement, decree or order of
any Court or in any other law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Corporation shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
submit it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of  Parliament the
report submitted to it under sub-section (1).
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
9. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Recommenda-
tions of the
Corporation
to be
implemented
by the Central
Government.
Annual report.
Act to be in
addition to
any other law
for the time
being in force.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
A considerable chunk of our society is living below poverty line. They are deprived of
adequate access to the basic needs of life such as health, education, housing, food, security,
employment, etc. These persons belong to vulnerable, disadvantaged and marginalised
section of the society and are deprived of enjoying their basic rights. Ours is a welfare State.
It is the duty of the welfare State to ensure overall development of all sections of society.
Successive Governments have taken steps to address the grievances of persons living
below poverty line from time to time. However, till date there has been no consensus on
defining and measuring the poverty. Therefore, welfare measures to provide easy access to
education, food, housing, security and employment to the persons belonging to economically
weaker class of the society in a targeted manner are not being implemented effectively.
The Bill proposes to establish a Corporation to:—
(i) identify the persons belonging to economically weaker class;
(ii) maintain a register of persons belonging to economically weaker class;
(iii) provide certain facilities like financial assistance, housing, educational loan, health-
care facilities to the persons belonging to the economically weaker class; and
(iv) suggest measures to the Central Government for overall development of persons
belonging to the economically weaker class.
The Bill also provides for reservation in posts and services under the State and in
admission to educational institutions in favour of persons belonging to economically weaker
class on the recommendations of the Corporation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL  SURESH
March  26, 2012.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the Economically Weaker Class
Corporation. Clause 4 provides for constitution of Fund with an initial corpus of rupees five
thousand crore and it also provides for supply of adequate funds by the Central Government
from time to time for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Clause 5 provides for identification
and maintaining of a register of families belonging to economically weaker class. It also
provides for certain facilities like free education to the children, opportunities for employment
and self-employment, financial assistance, educational loans at subsidised rates of interest,
housing, etc. to the persons belonging to the economically weaker sections. Clause 6 provides
for implementation of the recommendations of Corporation by the Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore will be
involved per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees six thousand crore is also likey to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—81LS(S3)—24.04.2012.
LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a Corporation for the Welfare and advancement of persons
belonging to economically weaker class and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.)