THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI K ASHIRAM R ANA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the  Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2008.
2. After article 279 of the Constitution, the following new article shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘279A. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, for all schemes
announced by the Union Government for delivery of public services to the
poor and for improvement in infrastructure, the State Governments shall
formulate provisions for meeting the specified objectives of such schemes
and the Union Government shall guarantee to the States access to adequate
funds required for the implementation of the schemes.’’.
Short title.
Adequate
funds to
States for
carrying out
Central
schemes.
Bill No.  53 of 2008
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10
Insertion of
new article
279A.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present most financial powers and planning responsibility covering all States
of the country is that of the Central Government. The Planning Commission is responsible
for approving State plans and deciding on actual flow of central plan assistance to
different States from year to year. The present system, with multiple party coalitions in
power in different States, has become totally outdated. There is urgent need to transfer
more financial powers and higher responsibility to State in the conception as well as
implementation of developmental programmes. At present, all schemes for delivery of
public services and for improvement in infrastructure are announced by the Centre, but
implementation is the responsibility of States. The Centre decides who will get what,
and when, and under what conditions, but implementation is the responsibility of the
States. For example, the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Rajiv Gandhi Drinking Water Mission,
National Rural Health Mission, National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, etc. are
all central schemes, but the implementation is with the State Governments. The Central
Government blames the States for all failure and takes credit for all successes. On
the other hand, the States blame the Centre for impractical rules and inadequate
allocation of funds.
Therefore, it is essential to devolve powers on the States, to formulate provisions
of the scheme to meet the specified objectives with guaranteed access to adequate
funds.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KASHIRAM RANA
July 14, 2008.
2

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provide for provision of  adequate funds to State Governments
for implementation of schemes announced by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India for ongoing
schemes of the Central Government. The expenditure involved in the future schemes
will be determined as per the parameters set for those schemes and the plans made by
the respective State Governments for meeting the objectives of the particular schemes.
It is estimated that at present a recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore per
annum will be involved.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kashiram Rana, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3186LS(S5)—03.10.2008.