Bill No. 53 of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
ADV. DEAN KURIAKOSE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5

2. In section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act):—
(a) in clause (s), the words "mental, intellectual or sensory" shall be omitted; and
(b) after clause (t), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
 (ta) 'person with mental disability' means a person with long term mental, intel-
lectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with barriers, hinders
his full and effective participation in society equally with
others.
3. In section 32 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:–
"(1) All Government institutions of higher education and other higher education
institutions receiving aid from the Government shall reserve not less than,–
(a) five per cent. seats for persons with benchmark disabilities; and
(b) one per cent. seats for persons with mental disability.".
4. In section 33 of the principal Act, in clauses (i) and (ii), for the words "persons with
benchmark disabilities", at both the places,  the words "persons with benchmark disabilities
and persons with mental disabilities" shall be substituted.
5. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)—
(a) for the words "not less than four per cent." the words "not less than five per
cent." shall be substituted;
(b) after the words "one per cent. for persons with benchmark disabilities under
clauses (d) and (e)", the words "and one per cent. for persons with mental disabilities under
clause (f)" shall be inserted;
(c) in clause (d), the words "and mental illness" shall be omitted;
(d) after clause (e), and before the proviso, the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:–
"(f) mental disability:"; and
(e) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be added, namely:–
"Provided also that one per cent. of seats reserved for persons with mental
disabilities shall be compulsorily filled.".
6.  In the Schedule to the principal Act, in paragraph 3, for the words "Mental
Behaviour", the words "Mental Disability" shall be substituted.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment
of section 34.
Amendment
of the
Schedule.
2
Amendment
of section 2. 49 of 2016.

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 was a landmark legislation in the
history for protecting the rights of differently able people of India. According to 2011
census, 2.68 crore or 2.2 per cent. of Indian population lives with certain mental or
physical disability. However, this number is based on a very narrow definition of benchmark
disability. If we broaden the definition, the number will increase. According to Human
Rights Watch, there are more than 70 million people suffering from psycho-social disabili-
ties in the country.
The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 provides reservation as a means to
ensure representation in the Government. However, the number of mentally disabled people
who avail these benefits are very less, compared to the physically disabled people. Hence,
these categories should be clearly defined and steps taken to ensure the representation of
mentally challenged people in higher education institutions and government positions.
There should be effort to identify the posts and earmark them to be filled by the people with
mental disabilities.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
with a view to specify the term "persons with mental disabilities" and provide them
reservation in higher educational institutions and in posts in the establishments of the
appropriate Government.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; DEAN  KURIAKOSE
4 February , 2022
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RIGHT OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT , 2016
(NO. 49 OF 2016)
* * * * *
      2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)   * * * * *
(s) "person with disability" means a person with long term physical, mental,
intellectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with barriers, hinders his full and
effective participation in society equally with others;
(t) "person with disability having high support needs" means a person with
benchmark disability certified under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 58 who needs
high support;
* * * * *
32. (1) All Government institutions of higher education and other higher education
institutions receiving aid from the Government shall reserve not less than five per cent.
seats for persons with benchmark disabilities.
* * * * *
33. The appropriate Government shall—
(i) identify posts in the establishments which can be held by respective category
of persons with benchmark disabilities in respect of the vacancies reserved in accordance
with the provisions of section 34;
(ii) constitute an expert committee with representation of persons with benchmark
disabilities for identification of such posts; and
(iii) undertake periodic review of the identified posts at an interval not exceeding
three years.
* * * * *
34. (1) Every appropriate Government shall appoint in every Government establish-
ment, not less than four per cent. of the total number of vacancies in the cadre strength in
each group of posts meant to be filled with persons with benchmark disabilities of
which, one per cent. each shall be reserved for persons with benchmark disabilities under
clauses (a), (b) and (c) and one per cent. for persons with benchmark disabilities under
clauses (d) and (e), namely:—
(a) blindness and low vision;
(b) deaf and hard of hearing;
(c) locomotor disability including cerebral palsy, leprosy cured, dwarfism, acid
attack victims and muscular dystrophy;
(d) autism, intellectual disability, specific learning disability and mental illness;
(e) multiple disabilities from amongst persons under clauses (a) to (d)
including deaf-blindness in the posts identified for each disability:
Provided that the reservation in promotion shall be in accordance with such
instructions as are issued by the appropriate Government from time to time:
Provided further that the appropriate Government, in consultation with the Chief
Commissioner or the State Commissioner, as the case may be, may, having regard to the
type of work carried out in any Government establishment, by notification and subject to
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in such notifications exempt any Government
establishment from the provisions of this section.
* * * * *
4
Reservation
in higher
educational
institutions.
Identification
of posts for
reservation.
Reservation.
Definitions.

THE  SCHEDULE
[See clause (zc) of section 2]
SPECIFIED  DISABILITY
1. * * * * *
3. Mental behaviour,—
“mental illness” means a substantial disorder of thinking, mood, perception,
orientation or memory that grossly impairs judgment, behaviour, capacity to recognise
reality or ability to meet the ordinary demands of life, but does not include retardation which
is a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind of a person, specially
characterised by subnormality of intelligence.
* * * * *
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
————
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P.)