Bill No. 54 of 1'51 
THE ESSENTIAL SERVICES MAIN-
TENANCE BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No. 51 of 12S1 
THE ESSENTIAL SERVICES MAINTENANCE BILL, 
1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to proviie tor the maintenance of certain essentiaJ services 
and the normal lite 0/ the community. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic QI 
India as follows: -
1. (1) This Act may be called the Essential Services Maintenance Short d~~ ... cent _ 
Act, 1957. d.,.doll. 
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of J antl'ftu 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall cease to have effect on the 31st day of December, 
1958, save as respects things done or omitted to be done before that 
date. 
10 2. (1) In this Act,-
(a) "essential service" mean&-
(i) any postal, telegraph or telephone service; 
(ii) any railway service or any other transport service 
~or the carriage of passengers or goods by land, water or 
IS air; 
(iii) any service connected with the operation or main-
tenance of aerodromes, or with the operation, repair or 
maintenance ot aircratt; 
(iv) any service connected with the loading, unloading, 
20 movement or storage of goods in any port; 
(v) any service in any mint or security press; 
(vi) any service in any defence establishment of the 
Government of India connected with the manufacture, 
storage or distribution of arms, ammunition or other military 
2S stores or equipment; 
(vii) any service which the Central Government, bein, 
of opinion that strikes therein would prejudicially a1fect 
the maintenance of any public utility service or would 
• result in the infliction ot grave hardship on the community 
ao may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be 
an essential service tor the purposes of ihis Act;,; 

Power to 
prohibit 
Itrikes in 
c:crtain em-
plO)'JDCDtI. 
a 
(b) "strike" means the cessation ot work by a body of 
persons employed in any essential service acting in combination 
or a concerted refusal or a refusal under a common understand-
ing of any number of persons who are or have been so employed 
to continue to work or to accept employment. S 
(2) Every notification issued under sub-clause (vii) of clause ,(0) 
of sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament as 
soon ~s may be after it is made, and shall cease to oper,te at the 
expiration of forty days from the re-assembly of Parliament unless 
before the expiration of that period a resolution approving the issue 10 
of the nQtUlcation is passed by both Houses of Parliament. 
E.rplanation.-Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned 
to re-assemble on difteNnt dates, the period of forty days shall bt 
reckoned from the later of those dates. 
S. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that in the public IS 
interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by general Qr 
special order, prohibit strikes in any essential service specified in 
the Order. 
(2) An Order made under sub-section (1) shall be published in 
such manner as the Central Government considers best calculated 20 
to bring it to the notice of the pel"SOD8 affected by the Order. 
(3) An OMer made under sub-section (1) shall be iB torce for 
~ mOflths only, but tIDe Central Government rna" by a like Order, 
eJttend. . it for any period. not exceeding six mon1lba it it is satisfied 
that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do. 25 
(4) Upon the issue of an Order under sub-seetton (1),-
,(0) no person employed in any essential service to which 
the Order relates shall go or remain on strike; 
(b) any strike declared or commenced, whetb.er before or 
after the issue of the Order, by Persons employed in any such 30 
service shall be illegal. 
PaWly for " Any person who COIIl11).ences a strike or remains or Qtherwise 
iUoplltrikCl. takes part in a strike which is illegal under this Act ahal.i be punish-
aete with imprisonrnent for a term which may exten.d to six months, 
PCDIlly for 
inltiption. 
etc. 
or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 35 
5. Any person who instigates,' or incites other penollS to take 
part in, or otherwise acts in furtherance of, a strike which is illegal 
under' this Act shall be punishable wUh iJ:aprisonment for a term 
. which may extend ,to . one year, or with tine wJUch Ulay e.tend to 
one thousand rup~, Qr with botb. 40 

I 
•. Any person who knowingly expends or supplies any money in p.~t>;"'for 
furtherance or support ot a strike which is illegal under this Act ~~ aid 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend !~~~ 
to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, 
$ or with both. 
,. Notwithstanding any1hing contained in the Code of Criminal Power tc? 
, of I8~8. Procedure, 1898, any police officer may arrest without warrant any ::'!.:!;. 
person who is reasonably suspected of having committed any oftence 
under this Act. 
10 8. The provisions ot this Act and of any Order issued thereunder Act to oY.r-
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsisten~ therewith ~:. other 
14 of I~7. contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any· other law 
for the time beina in force. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The 'Federation of posts and telegraphs employees and certain 
other organisations of Central. Government servants have given 
notice that they will go on strike from the midnight of 8th of 
August, 1957. Government have accepted their main demand for 
an enquiry into the structure and conditions of service of Central 
Government employees. In spite of this, however, these employees 
have persisted in and reiterated their intention to go on strike. It 
is necessary in this situation that Government should have power to 
meet the emergency created by such attempts and ensure the main-
tenance of essential services and the normal life of the community. 
The Bill is an enabling measure. It deftnies "essential services" and 
authorises the Central Government to prohibit strikes in such 
services. It declares prohibited strikes to be illegal and provides 
for penalties for persons participating in such strikes as well as for 
persons instigating or financing such strikes. The Bill is an emer-
gency measure and it has been provided that it will remain in force 
for a limited period. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 1st August, 1957. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BIll. 
to provide for the maintenance of certain essential Services and 
the normal life of the community 
.. . 
(Shrl GIIfJind Ballabh Pant, 
MinUter of Home AJlairl.) 