fO 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
-1 SEP "'-
8m No. s. of I". 
THE REPR'HSENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, I9St 
A 
BILL 
furthe-r to amend the Representatton of the People Act} 1950, and the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
BE it enac,ted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India 8S follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People Short 
(Amendment) Act, 1964. title. 
2. In section 20 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950-
(a.) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) after the words "A member of 1he armed forees of 
the Union", the words "or, a member of an armed police 
force of a State who is serving outside that State," shall be 
inserted; 
(ii) after the words "in the armed forces", the words 
"or, as the case may be, in that armed police force" shall be 
inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (5), after the words "anned forces", the 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 20 
of Act 41 
ot 1950. 
IS words "or, as the case may be, the armed police force" shall be 
inserted. 
3. In section 60 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in Amend-
b . h mentol su -clause (\) of clause (a.), after the words "armed forces of t e section 60 
Union", the words "or, as the case may be, of an armed police force of Ac\ 43 
i'0 of a State," shall be inserted. of 195 . 

STAHMENT OF OBJEcTS ANb REAsoNS 
A member of the Armed Forces of the Union is, by virtue of SeQ.I 
tion 20 (3) of the Representation· of the People Act, 1950, deemed to 
be ordinarily resident in his home constituency and, therefore, is 
eligible for registration as a voter in the electoral roll for such cons-
tLtuency, although on account of exigencies of service he may be 
away from, and not ordinarily resident in, the home constituency at 
the time of the preparation or revision of the electoral roll. As a 
corollary to this, a member of the Armed Forces of the Union is, by 
virtue of section 60 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, 
entitled to give his vote by postal ballot. 
2. Such facilities are not, however, available to the members of 
the Armed Police Forces of a State, when they are employed on 
duty outside the State. This is anomalous. It is proposed to remove 
this anomaly by bringing such members of the· Armed Police Forces· 
of a State on a par with the members of the Armed Forces of the 
Union. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve this object by amending section 20 of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and section 60 of the 
Representation of the People Act. 1951. 
NEW DBLHI; A. K. SEN. 
The 27th August, 1964. 

ANNEXtiR.! 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950 
(43 or 1850) 
• • • * • • 
20. • * * • • • Meaning 
of "ordf-
. narily resi-(3) A member of the armed forces of the Uruon shall be deemed dent". 
to be ordinarily resident on any date in. the constituency in which, 
but for his service in the armed .fo~.ces, 4e would have been ordinarily 
resident on that date. 
• * • • • • 
(5) The statement of any such person as is referred to in sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4) made in the prescribed form and 
verified in the prescribed manner, that but for his service in the 
armed forces or but for his holdine any such office or being employ-
. ed in any such post as is referred to in sub-section (4) he would 
have been ordinarily resident in a specified place on any date, shall, 
in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be conclusive evidence 
of that fact. .' . . 
48 of 1~1IO. 
• • • • • • 
ExTRACT FROM THE R.ilPRESENTATION OF THE PEoPLE ACT, 1951 
(43 OF 1951) 
* * • • • • 
60. Without prejudice to the ~efteraHty of the provisions contain- Speeial 
ed in section 59, provision may be made by rules made under this f~~edure 
Act for enabling- votln" by , certaIn 
(a) any of the following persons to give his vote by postal classes of 
ballot, and not in any other manner, at an election in a consti- persons. 
tuency where a poll is taken, namely;-
(i) a member of the Armed Forces of the Union to 
whom the provisions of sub..section (3) of section 20 of the 
Representa·tion of the People Act, 1950 apply. 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABt-tA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950, 
and the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, Minister of LtlfJ)) 