Bill No. H of 1M' 
THE INDIAN POST OFFICE (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoE SABRA) 

6 of 18\,10. 
Bill No. 54 of 1956 
THE INDIAN POST OFFICE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL .J/ii< Pf.lfu't:d 'bu tk","b:,J'()w,' fl:e:'~Ji:~ 
lUTther to amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1898. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows :-
I. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Post Office (Amendment) Short title 
Act, 1956, and com-mencement, 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govemmen t 
10 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. For the First Schedule to the Indian Post Office Act, 1898, the fo1- S b' , u stltut1l1n 
lowing Schedule shall be substituted, namely :- of a new 
Schedule for 
"THE FIRST SCHEDULE ~~hedu~ir:~ 
Act 6 of 
INLAND POSTAGE RATES J898. 
(See section 7) 
Letters 
For a weight not exceeding one tola 13 naye paise. 
For every tola, or fraction thereof, exceeding one 
15 tola 6 naye paise. 
Single, 
Reply. 
Postcards 
5 naye paise. 
10 naye paise. 

i 
Book, PalteTn and Sample Packets 
For the first five tolas or fraction thereof • 6 nay!! paise. 
For every additional two and a half tolas, or 
fraction thereof, in excess of five tolas 3 naye paise. 
Registered Newspapers S 
For a weight not exceeding ten tolas 2 naye paise. 
For a weight exceeding ten tolas and not exceed-
ing twenty tolas 3 naye paise. 
For every twenty tolas, or fraction thereof, ex-
ceeding twenty tolas . 3 naye paise. [0 
In the case of more than one copy of the same 
issue of a registered newspaper being carried 
in the same packet-
For a weight not exceeding ten tolas 3 nqye paise. 
For every additional five tolas, or fraction 15 
thereof, in excess of ten tolas 2 naj'e paise. 
Provided that such packel shall not be delivered 
at any addressee's residence but shall be given 
to a recognised agent at the Post Office. 
Parcels 
For a weight not exceeding forty tolas 50 1wye paise. 
For every forty tolas, or fraction thereof, ex-
ceeding forty tolas 50 naye paise .... 
2.0 

STATEMENT OF OBjEctS AND REASON~ 
With the amendment of the Indian Coinage Act, 1906 C3 of 1906) by 
Act 31 of 1955, it has become necessary to refix the postage rates in terms 
of decimal system of coinage. The Bill accordingly amends the First Sche· 
dule to the Indian Post Offic! Act, 1898, so as to fix the postage rates in terms 
of the naye paise for the different categories of postal articles specified in 
that Schedule. In so fixing the rates the principle has been kept in view 
that there should be an approximate equivalence between the new rates 
and the existing ratcs. 
NEW DELHI; JAGJIVAN RAM.. 
The 13th August, 1956. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN POST OFFICE Aer, 1898 . 
... ... ... ... ... ... • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
INLAND POSTAGE RATES 
(S,e section 7) 
Letters 
For a weight not exceeding one tola Two annas. 
For every tola, or fraction thereof, exceeding 
oa.c tola . One anna. 
Postcards 
. Nine pies. 
One and a half annas. 
Boole, Pattern and Sample Paclcels 
For the first five tolas or fraction thereof One anna. 
For every additional two and a half tolas, or 
fraction thereof, in excess of five tolas Six pies. 
Registered NeflJspapers 
For a weight 110t exceeding ten tolas .' Three pies. 
For a weight exceeding ten tolas and not ex-
ceeding twenty tolas . Six pies. 
For every twenty tolas, or fraction thereof, 
exceeding twenty tolas Six: pies, 
In the case of more than one copy of the same 
issue of a registered newspaper being carried 
in the same packet-
For a weight not exceeding ten. tolas Six pies. 
For every additional five tolas, or fraction 
thereof, in excess of ten tolas . . Three pies: 
Provided that such packet shall not be delivered 
at any addressee's residence but shall be given 
to a recognised agent at the post office. 
Parcels 
For a weight not exceeding forty tolas . Eight annas. 
For every fortY tolas, or fraction thereof, exceed-
ing forty tolas Eight annas. 
4 
GIPD-SS-JooS M of Law-z4-8-S6-J8,50 

tOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabba 
the inttoduction of the Bill, 
.... Pa88" by the Lute Nab,.. M. N. KAUL. 
Secretarjl 
(ShriJagji'Datt Ram, Minister of Communicatiom). 