• ,. • t., ... ',' r.'~' 
. , 
'~L,\ I . .t ~.' \, . 
C 
'j 
) 
~ 
\.' 
.. " , 
As INTRODUCIJ) IN Lox SAmU. Oif' 
.... ; 
", , ~. I 
'. BIllHO. If" ;e. TIm CllNTRAL SALES TAX (AMENDMENT) BIlL, ICJ70 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Centlral Scifa 'I'~ Act, 1_ 
B~ it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year ot the Republic 
ofr.f:DIIIi,..j~: __ 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Short, 
Act, 1970. Utle and 
C!ODl~ 
5(2,· It 'shall come into force on such date as the Central 'Government ~ 
DUly,' bY'nOttft~at1on in the Oftlcial Gazette, appoJnl meat: 
,I. Us' seetian'6 ,of the Central Sales TaxAet, 19&8 (heretuftler re-
feNett .... "the p1'iDcipal Act), fer' lUb-eectton (2), the fon~, 1Ub-
aeettIMi aIaU I.·substituted, namely:-
8(Z) NOtwftlWtanarq aIlythiDc CODtaJaed ha IUb-MtflOa (1) or 
I.~ 
.~..u01l (IA), where ... of aD7 ,... in the CDUI'Ie of' ••• 
.. u trade or commercehu either occaaioned the moveaaent ., '.ada 
pQdIi . from ODe state to another or hal been eftected b, • tnaIfer 
of dOcn'DeDtt of tUI. to lucb podl cl~ their movement hoIa ODe 
Sfate to aDother, aDy subsequent .. Ie durin, .nch mov .... t • .,... 
IJ' by • traDder of doc:umub of title to .ucb poD,-
30 
(a) to the Govemment, or 
(b)'" .. ~ dealer other diu tit. Gevena .. t, Jathe 
...... ..... el the delcriptioA refenoodto .. ~ (3) of 
.sac-I, 
IIbaII be aempt from tu UJUIer thb··Aet: 
AmeM-. 
men • .., 
~., 

Inaertien 
of new 
section 
GA. . 
Burden 
of proof, 
etc., in 
cue of 
tranafer 
of ,ooc.i8 
claimed 
otherwiae 
than by 
wayot 
sale. 
1 
Provided that no such subsequent sale shall be exempt from td 
uncler this sub-seetion unless the dealer electing the sale furnisheS 
. to the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner and within the 
preterlbed time,-
(a.) a certificate duly filled and signed by the reeistered s 
dealer from whom the goods were purehased containing the 
prescribed particulars in a preseribed fOnD obtained from the 
preScribed authority; and 
(b) if the subsequent sale is made,-
(i) to a registered dealer, a declaration referred to in 10 
clause (a.) of sub-section (4) of section 8, or 
(fl>' to the Government, not being a registered dealer, a 
certificate referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (4) of 
leC'tloD 8:.1 
Provided further that it shall not be neceaaary to turmah the de- 15 
claratlon or the c:ertificate referred to In claUie (b) of the precedtn. 
proviso in respect of a subsequent sale of goods if,-
(a) the sale or purchase of such goods is, under the sales 
tax law of the appropriate stare, exempt from tax generally or 18 
subject to tax generally at a rate which is lower than three per 20 
cent. (whether called a tax or fee or by any other name); and 
(b) the dealer effecting such subsequent sale proves to the 
satisfaction of the authority referred to in the preceding proviso 
that such sale is of the nature referred to in clause (a) or clause 
(b) of this sub-section.". a5 
3. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"6A. (1) Where any d-.ler claims that be is not liable to pay ~ 
under this Act, in r~peet of any goods, on the pvund that the move-
ment of such good. from one State to another was occasioned b7 30 
realOll of transfer of such goods by him to any other place of his 
bUlla .. or to his qent or principal, as the cue may be, aDd DOt 1t~ 
I'e8IOD of sale, the burden of proviDl( that the mOVemeDt of tb8te 
goods wa. so oecaaioned shall be on that dealer and for this purpoae 
. he may produce before the prescribed authority, within the preacrib- 35 
eel. time, a declantion, duly 61led pd siped by the principal olker 
of the other place of businesS, or hi. ageot Or principal, al the case 
may be, contalniq the prescribed parti~lars in the prescribed fOnD 
obtained from the preseribecl authority. elong with the evidence of 
despatch of such aoocIs. 4Q ' 
(2) If the p~escribed authority is satisfied after such enquiry as 
he ,may deem necessary that the particulars contairied In the de-
-claration are true, he shall make an order to that effect and there-
upon the movement of goods to which the declaration relates shall 
be deemed for .the purposes of this Act to have been occasioned other- 45 
wise than as a result of sale.". 

10 
IS 
3 
4. In section 7 of the principal Act,-
Amend. 
(0) after sub-section (2), the following sub-seetion .• 1.._1t be in ment of 
serted, name]y:_ -- - section 7 
II (2~) Wh~re it appears necessary to the authority to whom 
an applIcation IS made under sub-section (1) or sub-aectfon (2) 
~ to do for the proper realisation of the tax payable under this 
. ct 0'1' for the proper custody and use of the forms referred to 
In clause (.a) of the first proviso to sub-section. (2) of section 6 
or sub-secbon (1) of section 6A or clause (a) of sub-section (4) 
of section 8, he may, by an order in writing and for reasons to 
be recorded therein, impose as a condition for the issue of· a certf.. 
flcate of registration a requirement that the dealer shan furnish 
in the prescribed manner and within such time as may be 
specifted in. the order such security as may be so specifted for 
all or any of the aforesaid purposes."; , 
, (b) in sub-section (3), after the words "rules made' thereunder", 
the . worda, brackets, figure and letter --and the conditf01'1, If any im-
posed. under sub-section (2A), has been complied with" .haD be In-
serted; 
20 (c) after sub·section (3), the following sub.sections shall be in-
serted, namely:-
, "(3A) Where it appears necessary to the authority granting 
a certfflcate of registration under this section 90 to do for the 
proper realisation of tax payable under this Act or for the pro-
3$ per custody and use of the forms ref~d to In sub-section 
(2A), he may, at any time while such certificate Is In force, by 
an order in writing and for reasons to be recorded tberefn, re-
quire the dealer, to whom the certificate has been 'fi'anted; to 
furnish within such time as' may be specified in the order and 
30 in the prescribed manner such security and, if the dealer has 
already furnished any security in pU1'suance of an order under 
this sub-section or sub-section (2A) , such additional security all 
may be specified in the order, for all or any of the aforesaid 
purposes. 
35 " . (3B) No dealer shall be required to furnish my . ~urity 
undf'r sub-section (2A) or sub-section· (3A)" unless he has been 
given an opportunity of being heard and the amount of securfty 
that may be demanded from any dealer under either or both of 
the aforesaid sub-8ectfons shall be reasonable having regard tn 
40 all the circumstances of the case and shall not In the aggregate 
exceed fifty thousand rupeel. 
(3C) Where the security furnJshed by a dealer UDder sub-
section (2A) or sub-section (3A) is in the form of a surety bond 
and the surety becomes insolvent or dies the dealer .halJ, "'ithin 
Jifteen days of the occurrence of anv of the aforesaid events, m-
form the authority wanting the certificate of r.egistratlon and shall 
within thirty days of such occurrence furnish a fresh surety bond 
or furnish in the prescrf~ Tnan~~ ft'_ lW'f''''tv for the 
amount of the bond. 

Amend-
mento! 
section 8. 
4 
(3D) The authority gran~g the. certjAcate of registration 
may by order and for good and sufficient cause forfeit the whole 
Dr any part of the eecurity ·furnished··by a dealer,-
(a) for realising any amount of tax or penalty payable 
by. the dealer; 5 
. (~) if f the dealer is ·found to have miluaed.aJ;lY of the 
f.onns refelTed to in sub-section (2A) or to have.iIliled to 
keep them in. proper custody: 
PJ::ovid~ that no order shaD be passed under this sub-
section witbout giving the dealer on opportunity of being heard. 10 
(3E) Where by reason of an <1rder under sub-SeetiOn (3D), 
the security furnished by any dealer is renderedtnsufBeient, he 
shall make up the deficiency in suell manner' ed wttJiin such 
time as may be preserlbed. 
(3F) The authority issuing, the .-forms . refetred tf) .in sub- 15 
seetiGll '(Z.A)may refuse· to isSlle .auch.fQl'ID8,to.&,dealer . .w~.has 
taU.d '~·comply with an order ,umier that ERlb-S4U:tioD gr. ,.ub-
section (SA), or with the provisions of sub-section (3C) .~Gl'.,,ub­
section (3E), until the dealer has complied with such order or 
sueh proviSions, as the case may be. .. 
(3G) The authority, granting a certificate of registration 
may,·on.applteatlon·bythe dealer to whom it has'been granted, 
.,on1er the-reftmd· of any amount or parlthereof. deposited by the 
iJeaIer'by weydf seeurity under this sectisn, ifitis.JIOt,required 
for the ptU'pcIRI of this Act."; ¥ 
(el) in rsub~ion ' (4), in clallse (b), for the words "or has 
ceued,to exilt",tbe.words, brackets, figures andJetters "or has ceas-
·ed .to..existf or' baa-filled without sufficient:cause, to COMPlY with an 
'Or4er . under wb.section (3A) or with the provisions of, sub-section 
(JC) .. or.,su~seetion -(3E) or has failed. to. pay any tax· Of, penalty pay- 30 
6le ,uMerWa ,Act" ·shall be substituted. 
S. In section 8 of the principal Act,- -. 
(a) far sub-section (2A), the fol1owin~ sub-section shall be and 
Ihil! bfllIeemeC1' to havP been :sublt!tuted with .~/from· the 1st day 
of Oetober. t_. namelr.- . . , Ir'~'" .~ ..... ,.- ... -..--, 3$ 
"(~A)Notwithstanding anything eontaine8in ~section 
(-lA, (Jf secl.ion 6 or sub-section (1) CIl"8Ub-9er:tion(~) 'of this 
seetion, the tax payable under this Act· by a 'dealer an: bis turn-
over In 80 far as the tumoveror any' part' thereOf relates to the 
ale of.any goods, the sale or. as the case may be, the purchase 40 
of which Is, under the sales tax law of the 8pp1 oprlate State, 
exempt from tax generaDy or subject to tax generany at a rate 
which Is lower than three ope!' eent. (wliether caned a tax or fee 
or by any other name), shall be nn or as the case maybe, shall 
be calculated .at the lower rate. 4' 
E:mlmurtion.-'For the l'>urposes of· this sub-sec&n a :late or 
purchase of any goods $Q.all I10t be d~'to,be __ ~pt from tax 

r' 
". I 
J 
10 
IS 
5 
:8eD8raijy under the sales. tax 1a of ~der thatlathe w theQPJ'apiate State it . . :w sale or ·purchase of.lUCh ~Ja QeIn t only 
. m."pecifted. Cll'cumstanc:.es:or· under specified conditi Ph 
is levied on the sale or purchase of such goods at s=i~t ~a::: 
or otherwise than with reference to the turnover of the fOQda._: 
'(fI)hlsub-aeetion (4), after· the words' CfQ),thIt'PNlGriIJed.tbo-
rfty in !he prescribed manner", the words "anel wtebia',tJae,,...mb-
-ed~Ume abaIl be fnseried· , 
(c) for sub-section (5), the follawing .sub-sectio~ ~ll be 8ubl. 
tiNted, ~amely,-
H($) NotWithstanding anything 'cODtailllcHa rthiat III!IItftll; the 
.state Govermn~t may, if it is satisfiedthat~it isrn4lCell8lT'IfO to 
do in th~ publIc interest, by notification in.the.Omdal,a...~~, 
-:'!ct7~ect to such .conditions . as may be spee~. therein. 
(G) that no tax under this Aet shan be'JNl,...'.lUty 
dealer havillg,hiB pJace of busiae5s in the.State in respect of 
tJ.e.:8I1es by him, in the course of inter:-Sta~ tracfe or com-
merce, from any such place of business of any IUeb goods 
or classes of goods as may be·...specfW in t.1ae.~QqI2c~ or 
that. the tax on such sales shall be calculated at such lower 
rates than those specifted In sub-sectfon (I) or IUb4ectIon <J) 
as may be mentioned in the notification; 
(b) that in respect Qf all. sales Qf go~s or saI~ of such 
alasses o1.goods as may be specified in the notfftcatlon, which 
are made, in the course of inter-State trade or corprnerce, by 
a~y dealer having his place of business in the State or by any 
.class of such d~alers as may be speclfted· in the notfftcatlon 
.to any.person or to s:uch class of persons U'maybe .ospeclfted 
in the notification. n<1 tax under this Act ahaD be plyahle or 
the tax on such sales shall be calculated at such· lower 1"Ite. 
than 1bOIe specified in· sub<tsection· (1) or .aub-.aedion ell ." 
may be mentioned in the notiftcation.". 
,I..:Jp,aectiOCl.9 of ... the ;principal Act, fn sub-~on (2), for the words Amend. 
35 4'ze"'ds,.pen.alties,", the words "refunds, rebates, pena1ttes," ·.ban be ment Of 
substituted. 8ICtion .. 
40 
'I . . Sec,tion.~A.of tlle principal Act shall be re-numbered .. sub-leetlon 
.el) .tb~f and af4!r sub-sectfon (1) 88 110 reonumber8d; 1be,foltnl(ng 
"ectf~s shan be in.aerted, namely:-
'-(1) /my amount coUeeted or . purporting . to have been con~ 
"",. ftgiMered' dealer or -any other .person by way .of ~ under thil 
Aet 'In any State or part. thereof in contraventiQn of the provflfOTll 
of this Act shall not be retained by such dealer or other person b~1 
shall be deposited by bim,-
(4) in such manner and within sueh period u,m.yrbc JII'eS-
cribed by the State Government. 1'IJth the· authority .. powered 
to'8SIIeSS, or as·the case may be, re-auess,.coU'!Ctand. enforce pay-
!IRIQt 'Of any tax tinder t hp. SleDeral ealts < Wt Ii/waf tM aPf'"t'r 
priate State or part. U1ereofj and 

Amend-
mentof 
section 
10. 
Amell"" mentor 
aecUon 
lOA. 
Amend-
mentof 
aeet10n 
11. 
6 
fb) where then:! is no general sales tax law in sueh State or 
part thereof, in such manner, within such period and with such 
authority as may be prescribed by the Central Government, 
and notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any law 
for the time being in force, the refund of the amount so deposited 5 
. 'may be claimed only by the person from whom such dealer or other 
pel"BOn collected ft. 
(3) If any question arises as to whether any registerpd dealer or 
other person has collected any alll{)Unt by way of tax un rIer this Act 
in any State or part thereof in contravention of the provisions of sub- I~ 
section (1), it shall be decided by the authority referred to in elause 
(4) or, as the case may be, in clause (b) of sub-section (2), after 
giving an opportunity to the dealer or other person concerned to be 
beard and making such inquiry as that authority may deem fit. 
(4) The prescribed authority shall, in the prescribed manner, re- IS 
fund to a person making an at>plication in this behalf arty amount 
collected from such person and deposited under S\lb-section (2): 
Provided that no such application shall be entertained unless it 
Is made within three years of the date of such deposit .... 
I. In aeetion 10 of tbeprinclpal Act,- 20 
(a) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:-
II (a) furnishes a certificate or declaration, under sub-section 
(2) of section 8 or sub-section (1) of section 6A or sub-sectIon 
.. (4) of section 8, which he knows, or has reason to believe, to be a, 
false; or :; 
(aa) fails to get himself registered as required by section 7, 
or fails to comply with an order under sub-section (3A) or with 
requirements of sub-section (3C) or sub-section (3E), of that ... 
section;"; 30 
(b) kIr clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(f) collects any amount by way of tax in contravention of 
tbe provisions of sub-section (1) of section 9A or fails to depOsit 
the amount required to be deposited under sub-section (2) of 35 
that section:". 
t. In section lOA of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the worc;ts 
'"the tax which would have been levied under this Act in respect of the 
sale to blm of the goods if the oftence had not been committed", the 
\Yards, brackets and figures "the tax which would have been levied under 40 
sub-section (2) of section 8 in respect of tbe sale to him of the goods, If 
the sale had been a sale falling within that sub-section" shall be substi-
tuted. 
Ie. In section 13 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-sectton (1) ,-
(i) in clause (b), after the words "the deductions which 45 
may be made", the words, brackets, letters and figures "under 
cleQse (c) Qf sub-section (1) of section SA" shall be insertec;\ 

5 
to 
.. ,f 
., 
(ii) in clause (d), the words "and the State of ori' f b 
form or certificate" shall be inserted at the end; gm 0 sue 
(iii) after clause (f), the following claU8l!ll aball be Jnaerted, 
namely:-
(ff) t~e ma.nner in which, the period wit}pn which and 
the authonty With whom deposits may be made under claUle 
(b) of sub-section (2) of section 9A" , 
(fff) the authority by whom and the manner In whlch 
amounts deposited. under clause (b) of IJUb.eectton (a) Of 
sect~on 9A may be refunded under sub-section (4) of· that 
section;"; 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-tection aball be mbl-
tituted, namely:-
"(2) Every rule made by the Central Goftl'Mlent UDd .. 
15 sub-section (1) shall be laid as soon 88 may be after it 11 made, 
before each House of Parliament while it 11 in luon for a total 
period of thirty days which may be compriJed in oDe IeIIIdon or 
in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the Hllfon 
in which it is so laid or the session immediately fol1owing, both 
~ 0 Houses agree in making any modification in the rule· or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be· made, • the rule Ihall 
thereafter have effect only in such modi1led form or be of no 
e1!ect, ~sthe case may be; so, however, that any such modUlcatloD 
or annulment shan be without prejudice 110 the vaUdlty of any-
25 thing previously done under that rule."; 
30 
35 
4S 
(c) in sub-section (4) ,-
(i) after clause (CI),the following c1aUJe·.bU be 1naerted, 
n~,ely:-
"(00) the manner in whfch aeearJty may be furnllhed 
under sUlb-section (2A) or sub-aectlon (SA) or ItJb.eedIon 
. (3C), of section 7 and the manner in ',!bid1 and the time 
within which any deficiency may be made up under IUHec-
tion (3E) of that section;"; 
(ii) far clause (e), the following clauIe IhaJl be IUbatituted, 
lnamely:- . 
Ie (e) the authority from whom, the condJUona subjeet 
to which and the fees subject to paymeDt of which any form 
of certi1icate prescdbed under clause (CI) of the ftrBt pro-
viso to sub-section (2) of section 8 or of declaratioll preIo-
eribed under sub-section (1) of sectton 6A or ~on (4) 
of section 8 may be obtained, the milmer In wb1ch IUCh 
forms shall be kept In CNBtody and reconII relating thereto 
maintained, the manner in which any IUCh form may be UJed 
and any such certI1lcate or declaration may be fum1ahed and 
the time within which any IIlICh certiftcate or declaration 
shalL beproduoed or turnfsba!l;"; :.. 

Amend· 
mentot 
aect10D 
1~ 
~ 
(iiij after -clause (g) t the following clause· shall be inserted, 
namelYi-
" (II.) . themaDDerm which, the period. within which and 
ihe authority with whom deposits may be made UDder clause 
(4) of sub-section (2) of section 9A and the authority by 5 
whom and the manner in which amounts deposited under 
diat clause may be refunded under sUlb-sectlon (4) of that 
section."; 
(d) -in sub"section (5), for the words "the State Government", 
the words -"the Central Government or as the case may be, the Ie 
State' Government" shall be substituted. 
U.ln netioa 14d the principal Aet,-
(4) for clause (i), the following clause aballbe and be deemed 
alw."tlt,baveo been- substituted,namely:-
"(0 coal, including coke iD. aU Us forms. but,.excluding char- IS 
coal;'!; 
(b) for- etanse (iv) ,the following ctause shatt· be substituted, 
n.n~ 
U(lv) I traD adateel; tllatiato.,.-
CO pia tr.on and cast iron fDcluding fniotmoulU, bottom ~ 
Plata,. runner .:rap. ana iron skull acaapa 
(ii) steel semis (b'lgots; slabs, blooms and 'bill'ets of all 
qualities, shapes and s1zes)'a 
(iii) akelp bart, tin baril, sheet barB, Jia.ban and I1eep-
.,lIImIi ·s, 
<Iv) steel bart (rounds, rods, aquares, 88_ 0ICtag0Da and 
heu.eoas,~ plainraH. ribbec1rOl',.twistedj ,iD eoil form as well 
as. straight .leagtba) i 
(t) 'Itet!1 Ib!actmlls (anJles,' ,oJdI, cJwme1a, teeB, sheet 
plling -seet!ons, Z sections -or' ~ other TOlled 'eections) ; 
(vi) sheets, hoons, strips and skelp, both black and gel-
wrj\IItWJ,-:hot aDliuc0J4:mUecI, piaift'amb::mrup1e<i, in all qua· 
Utl., in atratght lengths and in con form, .. i ftIIId and m 
rivetted condition; 
:(vII): lDtea both plain and chequered in aU quaUtles; 
(viii) discs, riDgs, forgings and steel' eatings; 
(U=) . tool, alloy and special steels of any of the above 
cate&ol1-J ! I I 
(i:) .' deelmeltlftl--ap ~ 611 termJ'!DetidMg ateel Ikull, 
tuft\tft~ "1Dld :borlftgll; 
-(zij' Bteeltubes, both welded and _mlen, of all dia-
l' .... and lenJb, iuludiDg -tube &UDII:' 
30 

5 
10 
9 
(xii) tin-plates, both hot dipped tnd electrolytic and tiD· 
free Pbltes; J ~ 
(xiii) fish plate bars, bearing plate bars, croaing sleep-
er bars, fish plates, bearing plates, c:rcab:II.a1 ..... ad .... 
sed steel sleepers, rails-heavy and light crane rails: 
(xiv) wheels, tyres, axles and wheel sets; 
. (xv) wire rods and wires-rolled, drawn, galvanised. alu-
mmised, tinned or c1l1ted sl'ch as by copper; 1·1 
(m) defectives, r. jects. cuttings or end ,... ........ 
the above categories;"; 
(c) for clause (v), the following clause shall be subltttuted, 
namely:-
"(v) jute that is to say, the fibre extracted from plants be-
longing to the species COTchoT1LS capsularis andCorchorus oliCp-
15 nus and the fibre known as mesta or bimli extracted from plants 
of the species Hibiscus cannabinus and Hibiscua 84'bdclri6cz-Var 
altissima and the fibre known as Sunn or Sunnhemp extracted 
from plants of the species Crotalaria ;uncea whether baled or 
otherwise;" ; 
ao (d) for clause (vi), the following clause shall be substituted, 
25 
35 
40 
namely:-
.. (vi) Oilseeds that, is to say-
(i) Groundnut or Peanut (ATflChis hypogutl): 
(ii) Sesamum or Til (Sesamum orientcde); 
(iii) Cotton seed (G08.aypium Spp.); 
(iv) Soyabean (Glycine se;4); 
(v) RapeBeed and Muat4rd-
(1) Toria (Bras.ica campestris V4T toria); 
(2) Rai (Brassica ;uncea); 
(3) Jamba-Taramira (Eruca Satit/4); 
(4) Sarson, yellow and brown (Branca C4mpet&N 
var sarson); 
(5) Banarasi Rai or True Mustard (Brasdca fttgra); 
(vi) Linseed (Linum usiutilftmum) i 
(vii) Castor (Ricinus communtB); 
(viii) Coconut (i.e. Copra excluding tender coconuts) 
(COCOS nucif era); 
(i%) Sunflower (Helianthua 4nfl,'lU); 
(x) Niger seed (Guizotia 4by,smicC); 
(%i) Neem, vepa (Az4di rachta i1UUca); 
(%ii) Mahua Ulupai, Ippe (M4Clhuca fndic4 If. Ladfoli4, 
BUM, Latifolia 'and ModhuCG longifolia I}'ll. If. Longifoli4); 
(zUi) Karanja, Pongam, Honp (Pcmgczmfa plntt4i4 IYJl. 
P. GlobT4) j 
1028 (B) L.S.-2 

Amend-
mentol 
aectlon 
15. 
Inaertion 
of new 
Chapter 
V. 
Deftnl-
tionl. 
Company 
in liqui-
dation. 
10 
(:riv) Kusum (Schleichera oleosa, syn. S. Trijuga); 
(':tv) Punna, Undi (Calophyllum. inophyllum); 
(zvi) Kokum (Carcinia indica) j 
-(:rUtt) Sal (Shorea robusta); 
(mii) Tung (Aleu.rites jordii and A. montana); 
(=) Red palm (Elaeis guinensis) j 
(:1:%) Safflower (Carthanus tinctoriu.s) ;". 
s 
t'J '.'11D aectiAm 15 of the principal Act, in clause (b). for the words .~. 
tax 80 levied", the words "and tax has been paid under this Act in res-
pect of the sale of such goods in the course of inter-State trade or com- 10 
meree, the tax levied under such law" shall be and shall be deemed to 
have been, substituted, with effect from the 1st day of October, 1958. 
13. In the principal Act, after Chapter IV, the following Chapter 
shall be inserted, namely:-
'CHAPTER V IS 
LIABILITY IN SPECIAL CASES 
16. In this Chapter,-
(a) "appropriate authority", in relation to a company, means 
the authority competent to assess tax on the companyj 
(b) cccompany" and ccprivate company" have the meanings 20 
respectively assigned .to them by clauses (i) and (iii) of sub-
section (1) of section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956. 1 of 1958. 
17. (1) Every person-
(a) who is the liquidator of any company which is being 
wound up, whether under the orders of a court or otherwisej or 2S 
~b) who has Deen appointed the receiver of any assets of a 
company, 
(hereinafter referred to as the liquidator) shall, within thirty days 
after he has become such liqUidator, give notice of his appointment 
as such to the appropriate authority. 30 
(2) The appropriate authority shall, after making such inquiry 
or calling for such information as it may deem fit, notify to the li-
quidator within three months from the date on which he receives 
notice of the appointment of the liquidator the amount which, in 
the opinion of the appr<?priate authority would be suftlcient to pro- 3S 
vide for any tax which is then, or is likely thereafter to become, 
payable by the company. 
(3) The liqUidator shall not part with any of the assets of the 
company or the properties in his hands until he has been notified 
by the appropriate authority under sub-section (2) and on being 80 40 
notified, shall set aside an amount equal to the amount notified and, 
until he so sets aside such amount, shall not part with any of the 
Jlsset$ c:>f the company or the properties in his hands; 

5 
15 
20 
1 of 1958. 2S 
30 
II 
. ~~ded that notbi~g contained in this sub.sectiOD shall debu 
the liqwdator from partmg with such assets or properties for the 
p~se of the pay.ment of the tax payable by the company under 
thIS Act or for makmg any payment to secured creditors whose d bts 
are entitled under law to priority of payment over debts due e to 
Government on the date of liquidation or for meeting such coats 
and expenses of the winding up of the company as are in the opiui 
of the appropriate authority reasonable. on 
(4) It the liquidator fails to give the notice in accordance with 
sub-section (1) or faiia to set aside the amount as required by or 
parts "?th any of ~e assets of the company or the propertiu ~ his 
hands m contraventlOn of the provisions of sub-section (3), he shall 
be peraonally liable for the payment of the tax which the company 
would be liable to pay: 
. P~ovided that if the ~mount of any tax payable by the company 
18 notified under sub-sectlon (2), the personal liability of the liqui~ 
dator under this sub-section shall be to the extent of such amount. 
(5) Where there are more liquidators than one, the obUpUoDl 
and liabilities attached to the liquidator under this section shall 
attach to all the liqUidators jointly and severally. 
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstand-
ing anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time 
being In force. 
18. Notwithstanding anything contained In the Companies Act, 
1956, when any private company is wound up after the commence-
ment of this Act, and any tax assessed on the company under thlI Act 
for any period, whether before or in the course of or after its liqui-
dation, in respect of any previous year cannot be recoventd, then, 
every person who was a director of the private company at any time 
during the relevant previous year shall be jointly and sevcraDy liable 
for the payment of such tax unless he proves that the nt>n-recovery 
cannot be attributed to any gross neglect, misfeasance or breach of 
duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the company.'. 
1'. The principal Act, as amended by this Act, is hereby extendfld to, 
3S and shall be in force in, the Kohima and Mokokchung districts in the 
State of Nagaland. 
15. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree 
or order of any court or other authority to the contrary, any aueIIlDmt, 
reassessment, levy or collection of any tax made or purporting to have 
40 been made, any action or thing taken or done in rela~on to IUCh ....... 
mant, reassessment, levy or collection under the prOVIsions of the prtn-
c1pal Act before the commencement of thi&' Act shall be deemed to be u 
valid and effective as if such assessment, reassessment, levy or colleetton 
Liability 
of d1rec:-
tor. of 
private 
company 
lnllqw-
dation. 
ExteD-
lion oftbe 
priDcipaJ 
Act to 
KobJma 
aDd 
Mokok-
chuDI 
dJatricta 
iDtbe 
8tateof 
Napland. 
VaUcla· 
tionof 
...... 
mentl etc. 

t2 
at.etlon or thing had been made, taken or done under the principal Act 
as Qmemted by clause (a) of section 5, clause (a) of section 11 and settion 
12 of this Act, and accordingly-
(a) all acts, proceedings or things done or action taken by the 
State Government or by any other officer of the State Government 5 
or by any other authority in connection with the assessment, reassess-
ment, levy or collection of such tax shall, for all purposes, be deemed 
to be and to have always been done or taken in accordance with law; 
(b) no £tuit or other proceedings shall be maintained or conti-
nued in any court or before any authority for the refund of any such 10 
tax; and 
(c) mo court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refllnd 
of any such tax. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing 
In sub-section(l) shan be construed as preventing any person- IS 
(a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the 
principal Act, as amended by this Act, the assessment, reassessment, 
levy or collection of such tax for any period, or 
(b) from claiming refund of any tax paid by him in excess of the 
amount due from him under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 20 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
lB5ihe levy of tax on inter-State sales under the Central Sales Tax Act, 
. I commenced from the 1st July, 1957. Experience of the workin of 
the Act has shown that it requires to be amended in certain respectsi for 
dealing with ~he problems of evasion of tax, illegal collection of taxreaU. 
HUon of ~x In the e~ent of liqUidation of a company and for spe1li~g out 
the intentlOn underlymg certain prOvisions more clearly so 88 to overcome 
or, avoid interpretations to the contrary. 
2. The Bill seeks to make the following important amendments in the 
Act:-
(i~ Central sales tax is not leviable in respect oC tranuetions of 
transfer of goods from a bead office or a principal to a branch or an 
agent or vice versa as these do not amount to sales. Thls aids eva. 
_sian in that dealers try to show even genuine sales to third parties a8 
trmasaetions of this type. Accordingly, it is proposed to provide that 
the burden of proving that the transfer of goods in such cases iI 
otherwise than by way of sale shall lie on the dealer who claims ex-
emption from tax on the ground that there was in fact no sale. 
(ii) In order to deal effectively with tax evaders, provision is 
sought to be made for demand, in appropriate cases, of security or 
additional security not exceeding RI. ~,OOO for initial registration or 
for· continuance of registration. It is also proposed to makfl the 
penalty provisions more stringent. 
(iii) To deal with illegal collection of tax, section 9A of the prin-
cipal Act is sought to be amended to make it obligatory for a dealer 
who collects by way of tax any amount in contravention of the pro-
viSions of law to deposit the same with Government. Provisions are 
,also being made for refund of amounts so deposited to the Persons 
from whom they were collected by the dealer. 
(iv) Section 14 of the Act which declares eertain goods as ot 
special importance in inter-State trade or commerce is sought to be 
amended as under:-
(a) The Supreme Court has ruled that the existing deftnltton 
of "coal" includes "chareoal". Coal was included as one of the 
goods of special importance with a view. to covering onl~ that 
"coal" whieh is used mostly as an industnal fuel and not char-
coal". The definition is, therefore, sought to be amended retros-
pectively to exclude "charcoal". 
(b) The definitions of "iron and steel" and "otlseedJ", given 
in the section, have led to varying in:erpretations by aueutng 
authorities and the courts. The existing definitions are, there-
fore, sought to be replaced by specific lists of iron and steel items 
and oilseeds in order to avoid any ambiguity in thl_ respect. The 
13 

14 
definition of "jute" is also being substituted by a more preclse 
definition. 
(v) Clause (b) of section 15 which provides for refund of local 
sales tax on goods declared to be of special importance in inter-State 
trade or commerce in cases where such goods are sold in inter-8tate 
trade or commerce, is being amended retrospectively to make it clear 
that the refund of local sales tax can be claimed only when tax on 
the inter-State sale has beel1 paid and not otherwise. 
(vi) A new Chapter is sought to be added to provide for collec-
tion of tax in the event of liquidation of a company. 
(vii) The Bill also makes necessary provision for validation of 
past levies. 
8. Opportunity is being taken to extend the principal Act to Kohima 
and Mokokchung Districts of Nagaland. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
P. C. SBTBL 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th Ma.y, 1970. 
President's Recommenda'cion under ArticLes· 117 a.nd· 274 of the Constitu-
tion of India. 
[Copy of letter No. F. 8/22/60-ST (III), dated the 11th May, 1970 from 
Shri Prakashchand B. Sethi, Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance 
to the Secretary. Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Bill, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 read with 
clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, the introduction of 
the Central .Sales Tax (Amendment) Bill, 1970 in the Lok Sabha and also 
recommends to the Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill. . 

N oteB on ClaUBj!S 
. Cleme 2.-This clause seeks to substitute a new sub-section tor ezftt. 
mg sub-section (2) of section 6. Under the existing sub-section all inter-
State sales of the same goods subsequent to the first of such sal~s dectecl 
during the same movement of goods are exempt from tax if such IUbae-
quent sales are ~a?e to registered dealers. The new suh-lection seeb 
to provide for ~ sInular exemption from tax in respect of such subsequent 
sales to Government also. 
Cld.uae 3.-This clause seeks to insert a new section SA in the principal 
Act for the purpose of providing that the burden of proving that any 
movement of goods from one State to another was occasioned otherwise 
than by way of sale shall be on the dealer making such claim. 1'or tnl; 
purpose of discharging this burden, the dealer may produce a declaration 
in the prescribed form from the person in the other State to whom the 
goods have been sent along with evidence of such despatch of goods. 
Cleme 4.-This clause seeks to amend section 7 of the principal Act to 
empower the registering authority to demand, in appropriate cues, secu-
rity or additional security up to an amount or amounts not exceedlng In 
the aggregate fifty thousand rupees, for initial registration or for continu-
ance of registration. The clause also makes the necessary ancillary and 
consequential provisions in regard to the torm in which tae security may 
be furnished or replenished, the forfeiture of security, etc. 
Clewe 5.-
Sub-cleuse (a) of this clause seeks to substitute with retroapec-
tive e1!ect from the 1st October, 1958, a new sub-section for emUna 
sub-section (2A) of section 8 of the principal Act. '1"he new sub-
aectiOD seeks to bring out more clearly that an exemption or lower 
rate of levy under the local sales tax law of the appropriate State 
would be available in respect of an inter-State ale of goodI only If 
such exemption or lower levy is available generally with reference 
to such goods or such class of goods under the local sales tax law. 
Sub~lause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 801 the 
principal Act for the purpose of empowering the State Government 
to prescribe the time within which the declarations or certiAcatei 
prescribed under the sub-section have to be fumbhed. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to substitute a new sub-section for emttng 
sub-section (5) <1f section 8 of the principal Act. Under the existing 
sub-section, State Governments may grant exemption from tax or 
reduction in rate of tax with reference to any goods or cla.aes of 
goods only. The new sub·section seeks to provide for such exemp-
tiODS or reductions being granted with reference to pet'IOOi a1Io. 
CZau.e S.-This clause seeks to amend sub-tection (2) of MCtion 9 of 
the principal Act for providing that the provisiODS relating to rebat. 1D 
I, 

16 
the general sales tax law of the appropriate State WQuld also apply for 
the grant of rebates under the principal Act. 
Clause 7.-This clause seeks to insert three new sUb-sections in !'Iection 
9A of. the principal Act. The first of these sub-sections provides that 
amounts collected or purporting to have been collected by way of tax in 
contravention of the provisions of the principal Act should be depOIi-ted 
with Government. The second sub-section provides for settlement of 
diS'Putes, as to whether any such amount has been colJ.ected. The ~ird 
sub-section provides for the refund of amounts deposited with Govern-
ment to the persons from whom those amounts were originally collected. 
Clause B.-This clause seeks to amend section 10 of the principal Act 
to provide for penalties in respect of the various matters specified there-
in. 
Clause 9.-This clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section lOA 
of the principal Act which provides for imposition of penalty in Ueu of 
prosecution for certain offences. At present the maximum penalty which 
may be levied in respect of any offence is an amount equivalent toone 
and a half times the tax which would have been levied in respect of the 
sale of goods to which the offence relates. The amendment seeks to provide 
that the maximum penalty shall be computed in the case of every 
offence with reference to the higher rates of tax applicable 11Dder S1,1b.. 
section (2) of section 8 as if the sale to which the oftence relates were 
a sale under that sub-section . 
... CLause 10.-This clause seeks to amend section 13 of the principal Act 
which deals with the rule-making powers of the Central and State Gov-
ernments. The amendments proposed by this clause are mainly of a 
consequential f1r formal nature. 
Clause 11.-
Su.O-clause (a) seeks to exclude, with retrospective eftect,cha-
coal from the definiCon of "coal" contained in clause (i) of aeetion 
14 of. the principal Act. 
Su.b-clause (b) seeks substitute clause (iv) of section 14 of the 
principal Act for the purpose of enumerating expressly· the various 
Bub-items falling under the item "Iron and Steel". 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to substitute the definition of the term 
"jute" by a more precise definition. 
Sub-c!.ause (d) seeks to substitute clause (vi) of secti<m 14 of 
the principal· Act for enumerating expressly the various types of on· 
seeds. 
Clause 12.-This clause seeks to amend with retrospective eff~t from 
the 1st October, 1958, clause (b) of section 15 of the prin9pal Act so as 
to make it clear that refund of local sales tax on goods declared to be 
of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce would be admissl-
ole only when the tax on the inter·State sale of such goods has been pa14. 

*, 
ClaUle l3.-This clause seeks to insert a new Chapter V in the princi-
pal Act to provide for collection of tax in the event of liquidation of a 
campany. 
Clause l4.-This clause seeks to extend the principal Ad to Kohima 
and Mokokchung Districts in the State of Nagaland. 
ClauBe 15.-This clause seeks to make the necessary validatini provi-
sion. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
'l'he Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, utilises the machinery in existence 
in States and Union territories for collection of tax. Thus no expen-
diture out of the Consolidated Fund of India is involved in the collec-
tion of Central sales tax in States. 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new sub-section for sub-
section ~) of section 6 of the principal Act. The first proviso to the 
new sub-section provides that for the purposes of claiming exemption 
from tax on subsequent sales dealers have to furnish certificates in the 
prescribed form. 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 6A in the principal 
Act. Sub-section (1) af the new section provides inter alia that for the 
purpose of proving that the movement of goods from one State to 
another effected by a dealer was occasioned otherwise than by way of 
sale, the dealer may furnish a declaration in the prescribd form. 
The aforesaid forms will have to be printed by the Central Govern-
ment for meeting the requirements in Union territories. The printing 
of the same will involve an expenditure of a recurring nature which 
is not likely to exceed Rs. 10,000 per annum. 
The Blll does not involve any non-recurring expenditure. 
f 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Certain provisions of the Bill confer rule-making powers on Central 
and State Governments. . 
The first proviso to new sub-tlection (2) of section 6 (vide claUle 
2 of the BilJ.) provides for furnishing of certain forms m claim In, 
exemption from tax on subsequent inter-State sales referred to In 
that proviso. New section 6A (vide clause 3 of the BW) provides 
for the filing of a declaration by a dealer cla1m.1ng that the movement 
of any goods has been occasioned otherwise than by way of sale. The 
aforesaid new sub-section (2) of section 6 and new section SA r'Jad 
with new clause (e) of sub-section (4) of section 13 [vide claule 
10 (c) (if) of the BUll empower the State Government to preacribe 
by rules the form of, and the particulars which should. be contained 
. in, the said certificates and declarations; the authority from whom, 
the conditions subject to which and the fees subject to the payment 
of whlch the said fonns may be obtained; the manner in which! the 
said forms shall be kept in custody and records relating thereto 
maintained and the manner in which such forms may be used and 
the certificates and declarations in such forms may be furnished 
and the time within which such certificates and declarations shall 
be furnished. etc. 
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 7 of the principal 
Act for authorising the registering authority to demand security or 
addi.tional security for Initial registration or tor continuance of 
registration. This clause read with clause 10 (e) (i) of the Bfll autho-
rises the State Government to prescribe by rules the manner in 
which the security or the additional security shall be turniJhed and 
the manner in which and the time within which any security which 
has become insuftldent shall be replenished. 
Clause S (b) of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 
8 of the prindpal Act to enable rules being made for .preacribfng also 
the time within which the certiflcates and declarations referred to in 
that sub-section should be furnished by dealers. The power to make 
such rules is exercisable by the State Government [ufde clause 
10 (e) (ii)]. 
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert three new sub-sections (2), 
(3) and (4) in section 9A of the principal Act. New sub-leetton (2) 
authorises the mkaing ot rules inter alia for prescribing the manner 
in which and the period within which amounts collected by dealers 
by way of tax in contravention of the provisions of the Act should 
be deposited with the appropriate authority. New sub-sectfon (4) 
19 

authorises the making of rules for prescribing the authority beforl! 
whom and the manner in which applications for refund of the 
amounts deposited under new sub-sectm (2) should be made. The 
power to make such rules is exercisable by the appropriate State 
~veroll~t in t~e ~se of apy$tQte JU' Mrt ~~reo1 J1l whicb there 
is in force a general sales tax law and in other cases by the Central 
Government (vide clause 10, sub-clause (a) (iii) and sub~lause 
(c) (iii). 
Clause 10 of t.he Bill spells out the Government (Central or 
State) by which l'Ulea in respect of the matters menUuied above may 
be made. The clause also provides for rules being made by the Cen. 
tral Govemment for prescribing the appropriate State of origin of the 
fQl'lU to be used for the various dealuattens or certtAca~ UDder the 
Aot [~ elauae 10 (a) (ii)], and also for pNSCribing the penalties 
:lor. oentl'aventioa of rules made by that Ocwernment [vi~ clause 10 
td)]. 
All the afomsald pl'9visions un4ler Which rules ll\ay be made by 
the CentAl Government. or, as tlae case may be, State Go.v~ment, 
eaoept Ule prorilion empowering the Centl'al ao"ermnent to pro-
~de far. penalties for contrav8IltloD at ~ made by it, pertain 
essentially to matteR of admilliatrative _tail and preceduN and, 
theIJefwe, Uaedelegation of legialatNe POWflI' fa of a normal 
ebar.acter._ 'l'h. provision [clause 16 (') of tbe lUll] empGwering the 
€lents/al GOfIel'lllDent to prelcrihe penalties for contravention of 
rule. made by it is allO of a nGl'lll81 oharae.ter beeaule the maximum 
limits of any such penalty (fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees and in the case of a continued oftence, a daily fine 
Whioh m4lY ~dt~ fiJty ~~ ~r ~v~ cMY dijfl9g which the 
othnqe 4'GaUnu.es) have \leu. 1IPd' ,~t. i'\\,~.~. ~\l.-section 
fi) <t.f uctiGn 1a of Ule pr~Jlipi\l .t\qt, a stR\iIAI' po.W~F' hf"J already 
been M~iGrred Qn StatP. Go,ve1'11lments. 
I. Suh-alaUIJe (c) of dallSe ~ Qf ijle~Ul1 s~ \~ ~JolP~'f.~t. a new 
Iub-S~ f~r existing ~.c~ ~~) ~ 4~~ 8. ~f the ~~~al Act 
for the purpose of eQabliD.g ~te Q.p~~MW ~ mnt~ptpls from 
tax or reductions in rate of tax not only with reference to any goods or 
~l~ssps qf ~oo4s as at present but, alSC! ~lth r~fer~nce to persons. The 
~'f~~.p.Wm {r<>.1l\ te.x Qr redqction in ~ate of ta~ may be granted only if 
tpe $..~t~ Government is satisft~d that it is, neces,sary s,o to do in the public 
~~~(~. ~, ~t, is :not PQssible to visu{lUsE} ro a~ance the cases in which 
~~h ~~lljlptip.:n!1 ~ re~ctiQlVi may, be, n~c.es~ary and as the exemptions 
or reductions can be granted only in public interest, the delegation of 
power to grant exemptions or reductions is of a norma} character. 

e. (1) 
.. ~ 
~E 
:EwmAMS I'BOM TIlE CBN'l'UL SAUlS TAX A~, 19M 
(74 OF 1956) 
• • 
• 
• 
CHAPI'ER III 
INTER-STATE SALES TAX 
• • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub'section (1) or sub-
section (1A), where a sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce 
of goods of the description referred to in sub-section (3) of section 8-
(4) luis occasilmed the movement of ~uch pds from one State to 
Q9tJt.l'; or 
. (b) has been effected by a uusfel of dOeUflMQts of ,title to such 
IOGds during their movement from one s\tlte to aROther; 
any subsequent sale to a registered dealer during such movement effected 
~ a transfer ()f docmnente of title to such ,oad. _II nQt be subject 
to tax under this Act: 
Provided that no such subsequent sale shall be exempt from tax under 
~. S\1b-secUon 1,ll11ess ate dealer effecting the sale fumisQeI to the 
pr~ribed ~qthoIity in thepresC1,'ibed Jl1ann~r. a certiftcate duly filled 
,nd sigtwd by *he registered dealer from whom the goods were purchased, 
CQnt"n~ the prescrib.ed particulars. 
1. (n • • • • • 
(9) Jf the authority to whom an application under SUb-sectfon (1) or 
sub.s~ction (1) i~ made is satisfied that the application it! in conformJty 
with the provisioll$ of this Act and the rules made theJeunder, he 1ha11 
regIster the applicant and grant to him a certihate ot~tratioJl· tn the 
prescribed form which shall specify the class or classes of good. tor the 
purposes of sUb-section (1) of section 8. 
,·(4) A certifi;ate of registcation granteq under this lection may~ 
• • • • • 
(b) be cancelled by the authority grantil'lg It where be is .. tided, 
after due notice to the dealer to whom it hu been gt'aJl'ted, that he 
llas ceased to earry on business or has eaued to eDt, er in the ease 
C!f a dealer registered under sub-section (2) has eeaeed to be liable 
t9 pay tax under the sales tax law of the appropriate Staw or for 
8!ly other suffteient reason. 
• • • • • 
Liabilit7 
to taxon 
inter. 
State 
aIel. 
lte.dtra. 
tlon of 
dealers. 

Rateaof 
taxon 
aaleain 
the course 
ot inter-
State 
trade or 
commerce. 
Levy and 
collection 
ottax and 
penaltiel. 
II! 
'" • ... • 
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (lA) of 
Beetlon 8 or in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of this section, if under 
the sales ta~ law of the appropriate State the sale fJr purchase, as the 
ease may be, of any goods by ,a dealer is exempt from tax generally 
or is subject to tax generally at a rate which is lower than three 
per cent (whether called a tax or fee or by any other name), the 
tax payable under this Act on his turnover in so far as the turnover or 
any part thereof relates to the sale m such goods shall be nil or, as the 
case may he, shall be calculated at the lower rate. . 
Explanlltion.-For the purposes of this sub-section a sale or purchase 
of goods shall not be deemed to be exempt from tax generally under 
tJie sales tax law of the appropriate State if under that law it is exempt 
only in specified circumstances or under specified conditions or in rela-
tion to which the tax is levied at specified stages or otherwise than with 
reference to the turnover of the goods . 
• • • • • 
(4) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to any sale in 
the course of inter-State trade or commerce unless the dealer sellin~ the 
goods furnishes to the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner-
(a) a declaration duly filled and signed by the registered dealer 
to whom the goods are sold containing the prescribed particulars in 
8 prescribed form obtained ftom the prescribed authorityj or 
(b) if the goods are sold to the Government, not being a regis-
tered dealer, a certificate in the prescribed form duly filled and signed 
by a duly authorised officer of the Government. 
(5) NotWithstanding anything contained in this section. the State 
Government may, if it is satisfied that it is' necessary' so to do in the 
public interest. bv notification in the Official Gazette, direct that in res-
pect of IlUch goods OT' classes of goods as may be mentioned in the noti-
fication and subjrct to such conditions as it may think fit to impose, no 
tax under this Act shall be payable by any dealer havin~ his place of 
business in the State in respect of the sale by him from any such place 
of business of any such goods in the course of inter-State trade 01' com-
merce or that the tax on such sales shall be calculated at such lower 
rates than those specified in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) as may 
be mentioned in the notification. 
• • • • • 
t. '(1) • • • • • 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder. the authorities for the time being empowered to 9!!SeSS, re-
assess, collect and enforce payment of any tax under the gen,eral sales 
tax law of the appropriate State shal] , on behalf of the Government of 
India, assess, re-assess, collect and enforce payment of t.ax, includJn, my 
penalty, payable by a dealer under this Act as if the tax 01' penalty pay-
able by such a dealer under this Act is a tax 01' penalty payable undel 
the general sales tax law of the State; and for this purpose they may 
exercise all or any of the powers they have under the general sales tax 
law of the State: and t.he provisions of such law, includin~ provisions 
relating to returns, provisional assessment, advance payment of tax! :r~ 

~3 
glstration of the transferee of any bu " . . " smess, lltlposltlon of the tax liabilit . 
of a person carrying on b~i~ss' on the transferee of, or successor ~ 
such busine~, transfer of hablllty of any firm or Hindu undivided family 
to pay t~ In the event of the dissolution of such firm or partition of 
such family, recovery of tax from third parties, appeals, reviews, revi-
mOIlS, references, refunds, penalties, compounding of offences and treat-
ment of documents furnished by a dealer as confidential, shall 1 
accordingly: app y 
Provided that if in any State or part thereof there is no general 
~es tax law in force, the Central Government may, by rules made In 
this behalf make necessary provision for all or any of the matters speci-
fied in this sub-section. 
• • • • • 
10. If any person-
(a) fails to get himself registered as required by section 7; or 
• • • • • 
(f) collects any amount by way of tax in contravention of the 
provisions contained in section 9A; 
he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to 
six months, or with fine, or with both; and when the offence is a continu-
ing oftence, with a daily fine which m,ay extend to fttty rupees for every 
day during which the offence continues. 
lOA. (I) If any person purchasing goods is guilty of an offence under 
clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) of section 10, the authority who 
granted to him or, as the case may be, is competent to grant to him a 
certificate of registration under this Act may, after giving him a reasona-
ble opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, impose upon him 
by way of penalty a sum not exceeding one-and-a-half times the tax 
which would have been levied under this Act in respect of the ssle to 
him of the goods if the offence had not been committed: 
Provided that no prosecution· for an offence under section 10 shall be 
instituted in respect of the same facts on which a penalty hal been fm· 
posed under this section. 
• • • • • 
PenllUu. 
Impoal-
Uonot 
penalty 
fnlleuot 
proleCflo. 
Uon. 
13. (1) The Central Government may, by noWicatioD in the 08ldal Power 
Gazette, make rules providing for- ~ 
• • • • • 
(b) the period of turnover, the manner in which the turnover 
in relation to the sale of any goods under this Act shall be determin-
ed and the deductions which may be made in the procell of such , 
determination; 
• • • • • 
(d) the form in which and the particulars to be contained in any 
declaration or certificate to be given under this Act; 
• • • • 
' . 
"(2) All rulea made by the Central Govermnent under sub-eectlon (1): 
shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as I0OI1 as may be after 

Certain 
gooda 
to be of 
special 
import-
aneem 
inter-
State 
trade or 
commerce. 
"14 
they are made and shall be subject to such modifications as Parliament 
may make during the session in which they are so 'laid or the session 
iml'l\ediatefy foUowmg. 
• • • • • 
(4l In partieular and without prejudice tcf the' pOwes co~ by' 
su'b-nctiOh (3), the State Govet'1i1'nent may mtke mte!l tot all or ~ 
of ,the follOWing parposes, namely:-
• • • • • 
(e) the authority 1rom. whom, the conditions subject to which 
and the tees subjeot to payment of which any form of declaration. 
prescribed under sub-section (4) of section S may be obtained, the 
manner in which the form shall be kept in custody and records :re-
lating thereto maintamed, the manner in ,which any such form may 
be used and any such declaration may be furnished; 
• • • • • 
(6) In makilli any fule I1Ilcier this section the State GQvernment may 
, I 
direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees and when the offence is a continulng 
offe~e, with a daily fine which may extend to fifty rUpees tor evert daY' 
durlna.wblCh the o1!cmce continues. 
CHAPTER IV 
H; U is- hereby declU8(l that the fol1owing goods are of special im-
pwtanoe ill intel'-State tr.ade or oommerce:-
(0 coal, including coke in all its forms; 
• • • , . 
(iv) ilOA and steel, that is to say,-
(4), pis Stoll aDd !rODi scrap; 
(b) iron plates sold in the same form in which thief atfj' 
directly produced by the rol11ng milli 
(ct}Ls_ltIOlaP, .. 1 iI1~,steel· bWeUjstt*""'"' aH ~;" 
(d) (i) steel plates, 1 ld' th f 
(ii) steel sheets l80 m e same orm 
(iii ) sheet bars ~,tin bars, tin which they a,re dir~tly 
(iv) rolled steel sectiODli, J pro~ed by tbe rollin, 
(v) tool alloy steel; DUD. .. , 
(~) jute, that is to say, the fibre extracted from plants be.long~ 
ing to the species corchoTUS capsularis and corchorus olitorioUB and 
the fibre known as mee14ut birnli: extractedfrOln'pltdlts of t1le species 
hibiscus CClnMpinus and' ,"'iSt"U6 ",bdariffaoofol&aima., whether baled 
or otherwisej 
(di) oil-aeed&', that is- to say, seed& yieldiBI,non-volaW.. oils used 
fOC' btuDaD, colllUlDptiGrt, or in industry, 01' in the manufaeture of 
. ' I 

2S 
varnishes, soaps and the like, or in lubrication, and volatile oUa 
used chiefly in medicines, perfumes, cosmetics and the like; 
• • • • • 
15. Every sales tax law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes or 
authorises the impos1tJ.on of a tax on the sale or purchaae of declared 
goods, be subject to the following restrictions and conditions, namely:-
• • • • • 
(b) where a tax has been levied under that law in respect of the 
sale or purchue inside the State of any declared ioods and. such 
loads are sold in the course of Inter-State trade or commerce, the 
tax 80 levied shall be refunded to such penon in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be provided in any law in force 
in that State. 
• • • • • 
Beatrle-
tieM 
and C'QIl-
diUonaln 
regard to 
tax OD 
,ale or 
purch ... 
ofdec1ar· 
ed.ooda 
wltb1aa 
State, 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Centtal Sales Tax Act, 19S6. 
(Shri PraluJshehtllld B. Sethi, 
Minister of Stllte in 1M 
Ministry oj Ftnant:..) 