s 
To BE IN'l'RODUCBD IN Lolt SABRA 
/,ft 
IIW No. H " 1"5. 
THE GOVERNMENT (LIABILITY IN TORT) 
BILL, 1~5 
A 
BILL 
to define and amend the law with respect to the liability of the 
Gooermn.ent in tort and to provide for certaItn ma.tters cOftnect~ 
therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-" 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government (Liability in Tort) Short 
Act, 1965~ title, 
extent 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jmnmu and com-. ~e-
and Kashmir. ment. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Oftlc1al Gazette, appoint. 

VI 
Deflni .. 
tiona. 
Liability 
of Gov-
ernment 
in lort. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a)-.-!!agenf!rin-relation. to the . Goverrunent,-_means a person 
(other than an employee of the Government) who being em-
ployed to do any act for the Government is, in doing the ect, 
under the order or control of the Government; S 
(1) "emplo:yee of the Government" means any person who-
(i) is a member of a defence service or of a civil ser-
vice of the Union or of an all-India service or holds any post 
conneded with defence or any civil post under the Union; or 
(ii) is a member of a civil service of a State or holds 10 
any civil post under a St:lte; 
(c) "Government", in relation to any liability imposed 
under this Act, means-
(i) where a tort is committed by an employee of the 
Government while acting in connection with the aftairs of IS 
the Union, or by an agent or independent contractor em-
ployed by the Central Government, the Central Government; 
(ii) where a tort is committed by an employee of the 
Government while acting in connection with the affairs of 
a State, or by an agent or independent contractor employed 20 
by a State Government, the State Government; 
(d) "independent contractor", in relation to the Government, 
means a person who contracts to do an act· for the Government, 
but who in doing the act is not under the order or control of 
the Government. 
3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Government shall be 
liable in respect of any tort-
(a) committed by an employee of the Government or an 
agent employed by the Government,-
(i) while acting in the course of his employment; or 
(ii) while acting beyond the course of his employment 
if the act constituting the tort was done by the employee 
Or agent on behalf of the Government and is ratified by the 
Government; I 
2S 
30 
(b) committed by an independent contractor employed by 
the Government or any of his servants or workmen in doin, the 35 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
act contracted to be done for the Government in any of the 
folloW'iDc cases (and in no others), namely:-
(i) where the Government assumes control of the ad 
£ontraded to be doneby-tbe indepeudentcoDtrador; 
(ij) where the Government has authorised or ratified 
the act of the IndepeDdeDt contractor alleged to constitute 
the tort; 
(iii) where the act contracwd to be done although law-
ful'is of such a nature that unless reasonable care is taken, 
it is likely in the ordinary course of events to ca~ per-
SODal injury or damage to property in the doing thereof and 
such care has not beeD taken: 
Provided that the Government shall not be' liable UDder 
this sub-clause if there is an express stipulatioD in the con-
tract between the Government and the indepeDdeDt cODtraC-
tor that-
(a) reasoDable care in the doing of the ad shall 
be takeD by the indepeDdeDt contractor aDd Dot by the 
GovernmeDt, and 
(b) the indepeDdent contractor shall, and the Gov-
ernment shall not, be liable for any persoDal injury or 
any damage to property caused in the doing of the act 
by the failure OD the part of the indepl!DdeDt cODtrador' 
to take IUeb care; 
(iv) where the GovernmeDt is under a lepl obliption 
to . do the act itle~; 
(v) where any law for the time beinc in force impoaea 
upon the Government an absolute duty to ensure the safety 
of persons or property in the doine- of the' act contracted to 
be done and there has been a failure to comply with tbat 
duty. 
4. Where the Government is the OWDer of any immovable pro- Liability 
perty, or is in possession or occupation of, or exercises cODtrol over, of Gov- ill 
any immovable property, .e Government shall b1c "liable in respect ernment 
35 of any breach of duty attaching by law to the ownersbip, possession, ~!e:S or 
occupation. or control of such property in the same manDer and to oCcupier 
the same exteDt as a private person of full age and capacity: of inUIl0v" 
able pro-
P1'!Ovided that where any such property vests in the Government perty. 
by virtue of any rule of law which operates independently of the 
40 acts or intentions of the Government, the GovernmeDt shall not, 
by virtue 9' this s.eCtiOD~ be sub1cct to any liability in tort by reason 

Liability 
of Gov-
ernment 
in tort in 
respect of 
escape of 
dangerous 
things. 
Liability 
of Gov-
ernment 
in respect 
of breach 
df duties 
tIOits 
emplo-
,.... 
aatu-
tory 
limits 
• to the 
amount, 
of llabb-
lity to 
apply to 
claims 
apinst 
OoVt!m-
D1ent 
':8110. 
Deferiees 
'&pen'to 
Govem-
'ment. 
4 
'oal)' of the ,preperty bebac 10 wsted, bat the provisions of this sec-
tion .hall be without prejudice' to the liabilltt- of the Govetnment 
thereunder in respect of any period after the Government or aD)' 
penon aetinc for the Government hu, in fact, taken possession or 
control Of -Biiy-Siich-property -;or' entered into occupation thereof. , 
5. The Gevemment shall be liable in respect of any· personal in-
jury or aDy damage to property caused by any dangerous thing in 
the possesSion of the Government or over which the Government 
es:ereises eontrol in the same manner ami to the same extent as a 
private penon ,Of full age and eapaelty would be liable in similar 10 
eireumataDees . U he -were in possession of, or exerdsed control over, 
mmth~. I 
8. The Government shall be subject to all those liabilities in tort 
to which, If it were a private penon of full age and capacity, it 
would be subject in respect of any breach of those duties which a IS 
person 'owes to his servants or agents under any law for the tline 
being in foree by reason of being their employer: 
Provided that in' awarding c~nsation to any employee of the 
Government or any agent employed. by the Government in respect 
of any personal injury or any damage to property caued by the ao 
tiream 'of 'any suehduties, tile eoGri iihall· take into account the 
, 1IIIlOioit, 'If any, paid or reqUired to 1te paid by' the GOftI'IIIIlent, 
-wbe~ by way of"disablemmd'beDefit, compemation or otherwise, 
to Reb employee'orllleDt wider an)" other· law for the time being 
in force. ~S 
7. Any enactment which negatives'or limits 1Ihe 'amount of lia-
bility of an employee of the Gove~llt- -6re ·aren.t~ employed by 
the Government ,in r~pect of any tort committed' by such em-
pl~Yt!e' ,or agent -~, in the case of any pr08eedin~ against the 
. ~d\r~ent under' thi~. ~t in i1!spect of such tort, apply in relation 30 
~o the' Government as it woUld -have applied to such employee or 
. agent if the proceedings against the Government had been procee~. 
ings against that employee or agent. ' 
. 
8. In' any proceedings against the Goverriment under this Act, the 
, Government slurll' be entitled to raise by way of defence the same ~S 
pleas which· a' private person would be entitled under law to rais~ 
if a similar suit had been instituted against such person. 
Indemnity 9. Where the Government is subject to any liability tn tort by 
and contri- virtue of this Act, any law relating to indemnity and contribution 
bution. shall be enforceable by or against the G-ov~ent"in respect of the 40 

5 
'mlbtlity : to which' it Is So subject as if the Government.. were a pri-
va~ 'person' of full age and ~pacity. 
10. (1) AD.y--act--doneby a member-of the armed forces of the Special 
Union while on duty as such or by a member' of a police force while P,l'o~ 
"d~'1itity as sueh shall not subject either him or the Government to ::Stma 
liability ih tort for causing the dEeth of another person or for to armed 
causing personal injury to another person, in so far as the death or forces of 
personal injury is due to anything suffered by that other person while.the Union 
he is a member of the armed forces of the Union or, as the case may and pollce 
to be, a member of the police force if- forces. 
IS 
('4) at'the time the thing is suffered by that other person he 
eithc!T'is on duty as- a member of the anned foreesof the Union 
or as a m~mber of the police force or, though not on duty, is 
on any land~ 'premises, ship, aircraft or vehicle for the time being 
used for the purposes of the anned forces of the Union or, as 
the ease may be, for the purposes of the police force; and 
(b) the Government certifies that his suffering that thing 
has been or will be treated as attributable to service for the pur-
poses of entitlement to any award under any. law or scheme re-
lating to the death or disablement of members of the force of 
''ft!ch he is' 'a m~mber: 
Provided that this sub-section shall not exer-~ a member 
of the armed forces of the Union or a memb~r of a police 
fofce from' liability in tort in any Ct3Se in which the court is 
satisfied that the act was not 'conriected With the ~eCtition of 
ius :"dtities' as a 'mem tier" of' tnbse forces' or that force. 
'(a)No:pr~ bf tort 'shall Ue 'apfnat tbe'Go\remment fOr 
.. _ath "oi"-periOrial inj1.u'y -due to. any:thingsWfered bY .. member of 
the'amieci f6rc~ of the Union 'or a member of a police force if-
30 (a) that thing is suffered by him in consequence' of the 
nafure Or c'ondition of any such land, premises, ship, aircraft 
or vehicle as aforesaid or in consequence of the nature or 
cOndition of any eqUipment.or supplies used for -the purposes 
of those forces or that force; and 
3-5 (b) the Government certifies as mentioned in the pr~-
dttlg stlb~·section; 
nor shall any act of an employee of the Government subject him to 
liability in tort for death or pers~nal injury in so far as the 
·g~at4'or personal injury is ,due to anything suffered: ,by a member 

Savin,.. 
6 
of the armed forces of the Union or by a member of a police force, 
being a thing as to which the conditions aforesaid are satisfied. . 
(3) The Government or an officer authorised by the Govern-
ment inthisbehalf;-if-satisfied-that it is the fact-
(a) that a person was or was not on any particular 5 
occasion on duty as a member of the armed forces of the Union 
or as a member of .a police force; or 
(b) that at any particular time any land, premises, ship, 
aircraft, vehicle, equipment or supplies was or was not or were 
or were not used for the purposes of those forces or that force, 10 
may issue a certificate certifying that to be the fact; and any such 
certificate shall, for the purposes of this section, be conclusive as' to''"' --
the fact which is certified 
(4) In this section, the werd "Government" means,-
(a) in relation to a member of the armed forces of the IS 
Union or of a police force maintained by the Central Govern-
ment, the Central Government; 
(b) in relation to a police force maintained by a State 
Government, the State Government. 
U. Nothing contained in this Act shall render the Government 20 
liable in respect of-
(a) any act of State; 
(b) any act done by the Government in the discharge of 
its functions in relation. to any of the matters enumerated in 
entries 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 of List I in the Seventh 25 
Schedule to the Constitution; 
(c) any act done by the President of India in the exercise 
and performance of the powers and duties of his offtce in rela-
tion to the summoning and prorogation of the HQlUes of 
Pvliament, the dissolution of the House of . the People, the 30 
assent to, or the withholding of assent from, any BUl, the retum 
of any Bill to the Houses for reconsideration of the Bill or any 
specified provisions thereof or the issue -of any Proclamation ..... 
under the Constitution; 
(d) any act done by the Governor of a State in the exer- 3S 
cise and perfarmance of the powers and duties of his office in 
relation to the summoning and prorogation of the House or 
Houses of the Legislature of the State, the dissolution of the 
Legislative Assembly, the assent to, or the withholding of 
assent from, any Bill, the reservation of a~y Bill for the con- 40 
sideNtiQQ of the President or the return of any Bill to the 

'I 
" 
18 of. 1947. 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
13 of 1885., 30 
6 of 1898. 
I Dol 1890. 
, 
House or Houses for reconsideration of the Bill or any speci1led 
provisions thereof; 
(e) any act done under -a --Proclamatioli' lsstieci Wider -'the 
Constitution; 
(f) any act authorised by or under the Trading with the 
Enemy (Continuance of Emergency Provisions) Act, 1M7; 
(g) any act done in the exercise of the powers vested in 
the Union for the purpose of training, or maintaining the eftl-
ciency of, the anned forces; 
(h) any act done by a ~ of the armed forces of the 
Union while on active service; 
(i) any act done by-
(i) a member of a police force, or 
(ii) a public servant whose duty it is to preserve peace 
and order in any area or place or who is engaged on guard, 
sentry, patrol, watch and ward, or other similar duty in 
relation to any area or place, 
for the prevention or suppression of a breach of the peace, or a 
disturbance of the public tranquility, Or a riot, or an aftray, or 
for the prevention of any offences~gainst public property; 
(j) any act done or ordered to, be done by a judge, 
magistrate, or any other person while discharging or purporting 
to discharge any responsibilities of a judicial nature vested in 
him; 
(k) any act in connection with the execution of lawful 
warrants or orders of a judge, magistrate, or any other person 
discharging' or purporting to discharge any responsibilities of 
a judicial nature vested in him, done by any person bound to 
execute the warrants or. orders; 
(Z) any act for which immunity is granted under th:e 
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the 4indian Post Office Act,' 1898, 
or under any other enactment for the time ~eing in force; 
(m) any act in respect of which a remedy is provided 
under the Indian Railways Act, 1890, or under any other enact· 
ment for the time being in force; 
(n) any personal injury or any damage to property caused 
by an act which by its nature is likely in the ordinary course 
of events to cause such injury or damage, if the doing of the 
act is authorised by any enactment for the time being in force; 

Pendina 
proceed-
inp. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 13 at 
1866. 
-- I 
(G) any claim arising out of defama1doa, malicious p308e 
cution or malicious arrest; 
- (PO) any c1aim--~out of the operation -otany qua-
rantine law; 
(q) any claim arising in a foreign country. 
12 .. The provisions of this Act shall not affect any proceeding! by 
or against the Government which have been instituted before the 
commencement of' this Act, and such proceedings shall be dispoaed 
of as if this Act had not been passed. . 
13. In the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, in section 4, for the words 10 
'the word "person" shall apply to ·bodieS politic and corporate', the . 
. following shall be substituted, namely.:-
'the word "person" shall apply to bodies politic and corporate 
and the Government·. 

-STATEMENTOFOBJECTS-AND REASONS 
The law relating to the liabit=ty of the Government for torts or 
civil wr.ongs is in a state of uncertainty. This uncertainty ,has been 
occasioned by conflicting judicial decisions. In view of' this un-
certainty, the matter was referred, on the initiative of the late 
President of India, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, to the Law Commission 
for consideration and report. The Law Commission examined the 
matter in detail and after having made a general survey of the law 
with respect to liability of the ~t in tort in various coun-
tries such as the United Kingdom, United States of America, 
Canada, Australia, France, etc., recommended that legislation should 
betindertaken in India for defining the liability of the Government 
in tort and formulated for this purpose certain specific proposals 
based mainly on the U.K. Crown Proceedings Act, 1947. While 
these proposals were under the active consideration of the Govern-
ment, the question of the extent of liability of the Government in 
tort came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in State 
of Rajasthan v. Mat. Vidyawathi-I962, Supp. 2 S.C.R. 987. In that 
case it was held by the Supreme Court that in India, ever since the 
time of the Eest India Company, the sovereign has been held liable 
to be sued in tort ()r in contrac~, and that'the Common~ Law immunity , 
never operated in India. But, in a more recent case-Ralia Ram t1. 
the State of Uttar Pradesh, 1965, 1 S.c.A. 809, the Supreme Court 
has held that the distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign 
functions of the Government even now obtains in India and that, 
therefore, the State is liable for tortious acts committed by its 
employees only if such acts are committed in the discharge of 
functions which are not sovereign. The Court, however, was not 
satisfied with this state of law and urged that the matter should be 
set right without delay by legislation, as has been done in the United 
Kingdom by the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947. The proposed legis-
lation which seeks to implement, subject to some modifications, the 
recommendations of the Law Commission in its Report on the liability 
of the State in tort, is intended to give effect to the suggestion of the 
Supreme Court. I'·' '!" 
2. The recommendations of the Law Commission, as given effect 
to in the Bill, may be categorised as follows:-
(i) In the first place, there 1s the liability of the Govern-
ment to third parties for torts committed by its employees and 
9 

".'... . 10 
agents. Here, the Government, like any private individual, 
should be vicariously liable to third parties for torts committed 
by its employees- and-agents in the course- of their- employment 
or for torts committed by its employees and agents on behalf of 
the Government and subsequently ratified 'by the Government. 
This recommendation has been embodied in clause 3 (a) of the 
Bill. 
(it) In the second place, there is the liability of the Gov-
ernment to third parties for torts committed by an independent 
contractor employed by the Government and his servants and 
workers. Here, the Government, like any private individuaJ, 
should be liable to third parties only "ill cases specified in 
clause 3'(b) of the Bill. 
CUi) In the third place, there are Common Law duties 
attaching to ownership, occupation, possession or control of 
property. Here also, the Government, like any private indivi-
dual, should have certain duties when it is the owner of any 
immovable property 01' in possession or occupation of, or 
exercises control over, any immovable property. Clause 4 of 
the Bill gives e1fect to this recommendation. 
(iu) In the fourth place, there is the liability of the Govern-
ment in tort in reaped of escape of dangerous things. Here 
also., the Government, like any private individual, should be 
liable in respect of any personal injury or any damage to pro-
perty caused by ey dangerous thing in the possession of the 
Government or over which the Government exercises control. 
Clause 5 of the Bill gives effect to this recommendation. 
(v) In the fifth place, there is the liability of the Govern-
ment towards its own employees and agents. Here also, the 
Government, like any private individual, should be liable to its 
own employees and agents for any injury caused by the failure of 
the Government to take the requisite care. Clause 6 of the Bill 
gives effect to this reconunendation. 
(ui) In the sixth place, the other recommendations of the 
Law Commission which are of an incidental, ancillary or minor 
nature have been incorporated in clauses 7, 8 and 9 of the Bill. 
(vii) Clause 10 of the Bill makes certain special provisions 
as to armed forces of the Union and police forces and clause 11 
provides for a number of savings and exceptions. 
3. 'f.he Notes on clauses explain in greater detail the various 
prOvisions of the Bill and also indi( ate the deviations made from 

II 
the recommendations of the Law. Commission and the reasons for 
the deviations. The Notes also make feference to relevant provi-
lions of the U.K. Crown Proceedings Act and important oases OD 
the subject. 
NEW DELHI; A. K. SEN. 
The 12th August, 1965. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 11'1 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 11 (2) 59--Leg. n, dated the 24th August, 1965 
from Shri Jaganatha Rao, Deputy Minister of Law to the Secre-
tary, Lok Sabha, New Delhi.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Government (Liability In Tort) Bill, 19~ recommends to the ~k 
Sabha, under clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution, the COD-
sideration of the Bill. 

N CItes on clauses 
--------------------
Clause 2.-This clause contains the definitions of imp'U1ant 
words and expressions used in the Bill some of which are based on 
the definitions suggested in paragraph 66.VI of the Report of the 
Law Commission on Liaobility of the State in Tort (hereinafter refer-
red to as the "Report"). 
The Law Commission has suggested that "agent" shall have the 
same meaning as in the Indian Contract Act, 1872. But this sugges-
tion has not been accepted as "agent" as defined in the Indian Con-
tract Act is wide e~ough to include an "iSle pendent contractar" 
also. In the law of contract an "independent contractor" may be 
regarded as an "agent" but in the law of tort there is an assential 
difference between an "agent" and- Ian "independent contractor", but 
there is no such di1ference between an "agent" and a "servant". It 
is thus stated in Clerk and Lindsell on Tarts (11th Ed. at page 116) 
while drawing a distinction between a "servant" and "contractor"-
"Of the former class (servants) those whose employment is 
more or less continuous are usually styled servants while those 
whose employment is intermittent or confined to a particular 
occasion are usually calIed by the generic name of agents. Bet-
ween servants, however, and other agents over whom the em-
ployer reserves control, there is no distincti6n in point of law; 
the employer is liable for the torts of the one to the same extent 
and subject to the same conditions as he is liable for the torts 
of the other. For the sake of brevity, therefore, it may be 
convenient to speak of all those classes of agents over whom the 
employer reserves control as servants in contra~tinction to 
contractors over whom such control is not reserVed." 
[See also ibid. p. 135, Salmond on the Law of Torts (12th Ed. 
pp. 104 e.t seq.); Pollock's Law of Torts (15th Ed., pp. 62 and 63); 
Fleming, the Law of Torts, p. 357; Street, Law of Torts (1963), Chap. 
XXVII; Performing Right SoCiety, Ltd. 11. Mitchell (1924), 1 K.B. 
762.· In this case the distinction between a searant and an indepen-
dent contractor has been clearly brought out with reference to 
general principles laid down by well-mown authorities; see also the 
case of Honeywilland Stein, Ltd. v. Larkin Brothers, Ltd. (1934) 
1 K..B. 191 (C.A.~· \a~ 196, 197]. 
The definition of "employee of the Government" is based on 
article 310 of the Constitution. 
12 

13 
The deftnitton of "independent contractor" hu bee!l explained 
above. 
The exact definition of "tort" is well nigh impossible as pointed 
out by tbe Law CommissipD, 8I!<Lt!!.~ref9~~ has n()tbeen attempted. 
Clo.use 3.-Sub-clause (a.) gives effect to the recommendation in 
paragraph as. I (i) of the Report and is modelled on section 2 (1) (a) 
of the U.K. Crown Proceedings Act, 1947 (hereinafter r-eferred to as 
"the UK. Act") • 
. This provision seeks to implement in relation to the Government 
the common law provision that a master is vicariously liable to 
third parties for torts committed by his servants and agents in the 
course of· theill' employment or for torts cODll!L!itt.ed by his servant:l 
and agents for the master's benefit and subsequently ratified by the 
master. 
Both in relation to an employee of the Government and an agent 
of the Governmen~, the expression "in the course of his employ-
ment" has been used. There is no differellce between "course of 
his employment" ~d "scope of his authority". uScope of employ-
ment", "course of employment", "scope of authority" and "scope of 
service" mean practically the same thing. Ai?, stated in Winfield on 
Tort (Seventh Edition), p. 741, "course of employment seems to 
have supplanted scope of authority". These expressions are the 
formulae which are employed to indicate the outward limits of res-
ponsibility of the employer for the torts of his ~rvants or agents. 
Ai?, Fleming states in his "Law of Torts" at p. 365,-
"That phrase (course of employment) like its variants 
"scope" or "sphere of employment" is the formula which is 
employed to indicate the outward limits of responsibility for the 
unauthorised w~ongdoing of a servant and represents the judi-
cial compromise between the "social necessity" of making a. 
master answerable for the injury occasioned by servants en-
trusted with the power of acting in his business and the feeling 
that it would be unjust, and indeed undesirable, to make him 
responsible for every act which the servant chooses to do." 
The proviSO to section~ (1) (a) of the U.K. ·~t has been omitted 
for the reasons given in paragraph 19 of the Report. 
Sub-clause (b) implements paragraph 66. I (iii) of the Report 
read with Appendix VI.B thereto. Compare in this connection 
section 40(2) (d) of the U.K. Act. See in this connection Clerk 
and Lindsell on Torts (Eleventh Edition), p. 137. The proviso to 
item (iii) of sub-clause (b) is, however, new becauSe it is felt that it 

~, 14 
will noi be fair and proper to make the Government liable under 
this item if there is an express stipulation in the contract between 
the Govamment and the independent contractor that reasonable 
care in the .doing of the __ acLshall_be_talten by_the.contractor and not 
by the Government and the independent contractor shall, and the 
Government shall Bot, be liable for any personal injury or any 
damage to property caused in the doing of the act by the failure 
on the part of the independent contractor to take such care. 
The recommendation of the Law CommiSSion (vide paragraph 
66: 1 (i) of the Report that the Government shall be liable for torts 
committed Iby employees or agents of public corporations or Govern-
ment companies, has not been accepted because Government corpo-
rations or com~es are separate juridical persons an<t1:hete is no 
reason why the Government should be liable for the torts com-
mitted by the employees and agents of such corporations or com-
panies. 
Clause 4.-This clause implements paragraph 66.1 (v) of the 
Report read with Appendix VI.E thereto. See also paragraph 24 
of the Report. This clause corresponds to section 2 (1) (c) and 
section 40 (4) of the U.K. Act. See in this connection Clerk and 
Lindsell on Torts (Eleventh Edition), Chapter 18, and Winfield on 
Torts (Seventh Edition), Chapter 12. 
Clause 5.-This clause implements par&graph 66.1 (vi) of the 
Report -read with Appendix VI.E (4) ·,thereto.! 
The -recommendations of the Law Commission in paragraph 
66.II (ii) to (v) have been criticised as being rather too wide. It 
would appear that the position would be the same even if these re-
commendations were not implemented. Accordingly, these recom-
mendations have not been included in any clause of the Bill. It 
has, however, been provided by sub-clause (n) of clause 11 that 
the Government shall not be Uable in respect of any personal.injury 
or any damage to property caused by an act which, by its nature. is 
likely in the ordinary cours of events to cause such injury or 
damage, if the doing of the act is authorised by any enactment for 
the time ·being in force. This implements paragraph 66. Ilii} of the 
Report. 
Clause 6.-This clause implements paragraph 66.1 (ii) of the Re-
port read with Appendix VI.D thereto and follows section 2 (1) (b) of 
the U.K. Act and is based on Clerk and Lindsell on Torts (Eleventh 
Edition), pp. 390--395. A proviso, has, however, been added that in 
awarding compensation to an employee of the Government the court 
shall take into account any amount payable under any other law 

1$ 
[such as the Extraordinary Pension Rules, the Personal Injuries 
(Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962, the Personal Injuries (Compen-
sation Insurance) Act, 1963, etc.l to -such-employee- byway of com- --
pensation, disablement benefit, etc. 
Recommendation of the Law Commission in paragraph 66.111 
of the Report has not been included in the Bill. The Law Com-
mission without assigning any reason has simply recommended that 
a provision may be made on the lines of section 3 of the U.K. Act. 
In view of the special powers conferred on the Government by 
section 21 of the Patents and Designs Act, 1911 and section 20 of 
the Atomic Energy Act, 1962,' in relation to patents, designs, etc., 
there is hardly any practical.....aity for such a provi:sion. Even in 
regard to section 3 of the U.K. Act, Prof. Glanville L. Williams in 
his booklet on Crown Proceedings, p. 59, observes that there is little 
scope in the case of patents and deSigns, etc., for infringement actions 
notionally given by this clause, to operate. Implementation of this 
recommendation may introduce avoidable uncertainty and compli-
cations in the matter. 
Clause 7.-This clause implements paragraph 66.11 (vi) of the 
Report and is modelled on section 2 (4) of the U.K. Act. 
Clause 8.-This clause implements the observations at the end 
of paragraph 66.1 of the Report. 
Clause 9.-This clause impleII1tnts paragraph 66. IV (i) of the 
Report and is modelled on section 4 of the U.K. Act. 
Clause 10.-This clause implements paragraph as.V (iv) (c) and 
is modelled on section 10 of the U.K. Aet, but there is a di1ference. 
The members of the police forces also have been brought within the 
purview of this clause, the reason being that in principle, the case 
of a police constable is not distinguishable :flrom that of a soldier, 
especially when the police force to which he belongs is maintained 
by the State. Vide Attorney General for New South Wales VB. P~r­
petual Trustee & Co. (1955), 1 All E.R. 846 (P.C.) at pp. 857-58. In 
:h~ U.K. Act, the members of the police force have not been brought 
within the purview of section 10 of that Act mainly because the police 
forces: theI~ are maintained by tille-local authorities, the onJy excep-
tion being the Metropolitan police which is under the Secretary of 
State for Home Affairs. 
Clause H.-This clause implements paragraph 66.V of the Report 
and saves the Government from liability in respect of a large number 
of acts detailed therein. 
Clause 12.-This clause saves pending proceedings. 
Clause 13.-~ clause makes a consequential and necessary am-
endment in the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to define the liability of Government in tort. It 
is not possible to assess the financial liability which Government 
will incur on the bringing into operation of this Bill when enacted, 
as a result of the torts committed by the Government or its em-
ployees, agents and contractors. That will depend on various 
factors, such as the number of torts committed, the number of suits 
instituted against the Government ancktll&'number of'decrees for 
compensation pAssed in those suits against the Government. As it 
is not possible to foresee and visualise any of these matters, no esti-
mate of the expenditure involved out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India (in case of the liability of the Central Government) is possible. 
' .. , 
16 

Er.raACT nOM THE FATAL AcClDJ:N'1'S Act, 1855 -------
(13 OJ' 1855) 
• • • • • 
4. The followin, words and expressions are intended to have the l'nterpN-
meanings hereby assigned to them respectively, so far as- such mean- =. 
ings are not excluded by the context or by the nature of the subjeet-
matter; that is to say the word "person" shall apply to bodies politic 
and corporate; and the word "parent" shall include father and 
mother and grand-father and grand-mother; and the word "child" 
shall include son and daughter and grand-soD and grand-daughter 
and step-soD and step-daughter. 
17 
I • ~ 

LOK SABRA ---
.. 
BILL 
to define and amend the law with respect to the liability of 
the Government in tort and to provide for certain 
matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister of Lil'ID and 
Social Security.) 