BW No. 51 of 1"1 
THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE 
CORPORATION BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION BILL, 1961 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PREI.n\mrAllY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPl'ER II 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF THE DEPOSIT 
INSURANCE CORPORATION 
3. Establishment and incorporation of Deposit Insurance Corpo-
ration. 
4. Capital of Corporation. 
5. Management of Corporation. 
6. Board of directors. 
7. Meetings of Board. 
8. Committees of Corporation. 
9. Fees and allowances of directors. 
CHAPTER III 
RIIGIlftATION OF BANKING COMPANIES AS INSURED BANks 
AND LIABn.ITY OF CORPORATION TO DEPOSl'l'ORS 
10. Registration of existing banking companies. 
11. Registration of new banking companies. 
12. Registration of defunct banking companies. 
13. Cancellation of registration. 
14. Intimation of registration. 
15. Premium. 
16. Liability of Corporation in respect of insured deposits. 
17. Manner of payment by Corporation in case of winding up of 
insured banks. 
i 

ii 
CLAUSES 
18. Manner of payment by Corporation.in case of scheme of com-
promise or arrangt!ment or of reconstruction or amalgamation 
in respect of an insured bank. 
19. Discharge of the liability of CorporatIon. 
20. Provision for unpaid amounts. 
21. Repayment of the amount to Corporation. 
CHAPTER IV 
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
22. Funds of Corporation. 
23. Deposit Insurance Fund. 
24. General Fund. 
25. Investment. 
26. Advances by Reserve Bank. 
27. Advance from General Fund to Deposit Insurance Fund. 
28. Preparation of balance-sheet. etc., by Corporation. 
29. Audit. 
30. Income-tax and super-tax. 
31. Reserve fund. 
32. Annual accounts and reports. 
33. Staff of Corporation. 
CHAPTER V 
MUCBLLAHBOUS 
34. Returns from insured banks. 
35. Corporation to have access to records. 
36. Inspection of insured banks by Reserve Bank. 
37. Corporation to furnish infonnation to Reserve Bank. 
38. Reserve Bank to furnish information to Corporation. 
39. Declaration of fidelit.y and secrecy. 
40. Indemnity of directors. 
41. Defects in appointments not to invalidate aets, etc. 
42. Protection of action taken under this Act. 
43. Companies Act, 1956 and Insurance Act, 1938 not to apply. 
44. Liquidation of Corporation. 

iii 
CLAUSBS 
45. Power of Central Government to give directions. 
46. Dispute as to amount of premium. 
47. Penalties. 
48. Offences by companies. 
49. Cognizance of offences. 
50. Regulations. 
51. Amendment of certain enactments. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.-DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.-AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN ENACTMElftII. 

Bill No. 51 of 1"1 
'J'HE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION BILL, 1961 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
\ A 
BILL 
to p1'ovide for the establishment of a corporation for the purpose of 
insurance of deposits and for other matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Deposit Insurance Corpora- Short title. 
tion Act, 1961. . ~ 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come Into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint. 
mcot. 
10 Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- DdtDiUODI. 
(a) "banking" means the accepting, for the purpose of 
lending or investment, of deposits of money from the public, 
repayable on demand or otherwise, and withdrawable by cheque, 
draft, order or otherwise; 
IS (b) "baaking company" means any company which tran-
sacts the business of banking in India and includes the State 
Bank, a subsidiary bank and any other banking institution 
10 of 1949. notified under section 51 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, 
but does not include the Madras Industrial Investment Corpora-
:w tion Limited. 

E.%planation..-Any company which is engaged in the manu-
facture of goods or carries on any trade and which accepts 
deposits of money from the public merely for the purpose of 
financing its business as such manufacturer or trader shall not 
be deemed to transact the business of banking . within the S 
meaning of this clause; 
-(c) "Board" means the Board of directors constituted under 
section 6; 
(d) "company" means any company as defined in section 
3 of the Companies Act, 1956, and includes a foreign company 10 I of 19S6. 
within the meaning of section 591 of that Act; 
(e) "Corporation" means the Deposit Insurance Corpora-
tion established under section 3; 
(1) "defunct banking company" means a :~anking IS 
company-
(i) which has been prohibited from receiving fresh 
deposits; or 
(ii) which has been ordered to be wound up; or 
(iii) which has transferred all its deposit liabilities in 
India to any other institution; or 20 
(tv) which has ceased to be a banking company within 
the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 36A of the 
Banking Companies Act, 1949, or has converted itself into 10 of 1949. 
a non-banking company; or 
(v) in respect of which a Uquidator has been appointed 25 
in pursuance of a resolution for the voluntary winding up 
of its affairs; or 
(vi) in respect of which any scheme of compromise or 
arrangement or of reconstruction has been sanctioned by 
any competent authority and the said scheme does not 30 
permit the acceptance of fresh deposits; or 
(vii) which has been granted a moratorium which is in 
operation; or 
(vHO in respect of which an application for the winding 
up of its affairs is pending in a competent court. 3S 

5 
JO 
IS 
10 of 1949. 20 
30 
3S 
10 of 1949. 
3 
(9) "deposit" means the aggregate of the unpaid balances 
due to a depositor (other than a foreign Government, the 
Central Government. a State Government or a banking com .. 
pany) in respect of all his accounts, by whatever name called, 
with a banking company and includes credit balances in any 
cash credit account but does not include,-
(i) where a banking company at the commencement 
of this Act is working under a scheme of compromise or 
arrangement or of reconstruction sanctioned by any compe-
tent authority providing for the acceptance of fresh 
deposits, any amount due to the depositor in respect of 
his deposit before the date of the coming into force of the 
scheme to the extent it is not credited after ~ he said date 
under the provisions of that scheme; or 
(ii) any amount due on account of any deposit received 
outside India; 
(h) "existing banking company" means a banking com· 
pany carrying on the business of banking at the commencement 
of this Act which either holds a licence at such" commencement 
under section 22 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949 or 
having applied for such licence has not been informed by notice 
in writing by the Reserve Bank that a licence cannot be granted 
to it and includes the State Bank and a subsidiary bank, but 
does not include a defunct banking company; 
(i) "insured bank" means a banking company for the time 
being registered under the provisions of this Act and includes 
for the purposes of sections 16, 17, 18 and 21 a banking company 
referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 13 the registration whereof has been cancelled under 
that sub-section; 
U> "insured deposit" means the deposit or any portion 
thereof the repayment whereof is insured by the Corporation 
under the provisions of this Act: 
(k) "new banking company" means a banking company 
which begins to transact the business of banking after the com· 
mencement of this Act under a lk:ence granted to it under section 
22 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949. and includes any banking 
institution notified under section 51 of the said Act after such 
commencement. 
(1) "premium" means the sum payable by an insured bank 
under section 15 of this Act; 

4 
(m) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made 
under this Act; 
(n) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India 
constituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; z of 1934· 
(0) "State Bank" means the State Bank of India constituted S 
under the State Bank of India Act, 1955; ~3 of 19S5· 
(q) "subsidiary bank" shall have the meaning assigned to 
it in section 2 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) 
Act, 1959. 38 of 19S9· 
CHAPTER II 
EsTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE 
CORPORATION 
10 
BltabUsh- 3. (l) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Ofti-
ment and cial Gazette, establish a Corporation by the name of the Deposit 
=~ra- Insurance Corporation which shall be a body corporate having per- IS 
Deposit petual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the 
=~~on. provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold or dispose of property and to 
contract, and may, by the said name, sue or be sued. 
(2) The head office of the Corporation shall be at Bombay, but 
it may, with the previous sanction of the Reserve Bank, establish:ao 
bl"anches or agencies in any other place in India. 
Capital of 4. The authorised capital of the Corporation shall be one ClOre 
Corporation. of rupees, which shall be fully paid-up and shall stand allotted to 
the Reserve Bank. 
MaDqe- 5. The general superintendence, direction and the management 2S 
~C:tion. of the affairs and business of the Corporation shall vest in a Board 
of directors which may exercise all powers and do all acts and 
things which may be exercised or done by the Corporation. 
Baud of 6. (1) The Board of directors of the Corporation shall consist 
directors. of the following, namely: - 30 
(a) the Governor for the time being of the Reserve Bank, 
who shall be the Chainnan of the Board; 
(b) a Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank nominated 
by that bank; 
(c) an officer of the Central Government nominated by 3S 
that Government; 

s 
(d) two directors nominated by the Central Government 
in consultation with the Reserve Bank having special know-
ledge of commercial banking or of commerce, industry or 
finance, neither of whom shall be an officer of Government or 
S of the Reserve Bank or an officer or other employee of the Cor-
poration or a director, an officer or other employee of a banking 
company or otherwise actively connected with a banking com-
pany. 
(2) A director nominated under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-
10 section (1) shall hold office during the pleasure of the authority 
nominating him and a director nominated under clause (d) of sub-
section (1) shall hold office for such period not exceeding four 
years as may be specified by the Central Government. 
(3) A person shall not be capable of being nominated as a 
IS director under clause (d) of sub-section (1) if-
(a) he has been removed or dismissed from the service of 
Government or of a local authority or of a corporation or com-
pany in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up 
share capital is held by Government; or 
20 (b) he is or at any time has been adjudicated as insolvent 
2S 
3S 
or has suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with 
his creditors; or 
(c) he is of unso:.md mind and stands so declared by a 
competent court; or 
(d) he has been convicted of any offence which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude. 
(4) If a director nominated under clause (d) of sub-section 
(1)-
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications men-
tioned in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-section (3); 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board for more than 
three consecutive meetings thereof; or 
(c) becomes a director or an officer or an employee of an 
insured bank; or 
(d) becomes an officer or other employee of Government or 
of the Reserve Bank or of the Corporation; 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. .J 

Meetings of 
Board. 
6 
7. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Chairman or, if for any reason he is unable .to attend, 
the director nomiJlated under clause (b) of sub-sec~ion (1) of 5 
.ection 6 shall preside at meetings of the Board and, in the event 
of equality of votes, shall have a second or casting vote. 
Committees 8. (1) The Board may constitute an Executive Committee con-
of Corpora- sisting of such number of directors as may be prescribed. lion. 
Fees and 
allowances 
of directon. 
Rqiltration 
of existing 
bankil1l 
companies. 
(2) The Executive Committee shall discharge such functions as 10 
may be prescribed or may be delegated to it by the Board. 
(3) The Board may constitute such other committees, whether 
consistinl wholly of directors or wholly of other persons or partly 
of directors and partly of other persons as it thinks fit for the pur-
pose of discharging such of its functions as may be prescribed or 15 
may be delegated to them by the Board. 
(4) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at 
such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be 
prescribed. 20 
(5) The members of a committee (other than directors of the 
Board) shall be paid by the Corporation such fees and allowances 
for attending its meetings and for attending to any other work of the 
Corporation as may be prescribed. 
9. The directors of the Board shall be paid by the Corporation 25 
such fees anCi allowances for attending the meetings of the Board or 
of any of its committees and for attending to any other work of the 
Corporation as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no fees shall be payable to the Chairman or to tli.) 
director nominated under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) 30 
of section 6. 
CHAPTER III 
REGIS1'RATION OF BANKING COMPANIES AS INSURED BANKS AND 
LIABILITY OF CORPORATION TO DEPOSITORS 
10. The Corporation shall register every existing banking com- 35 
pany as an insured bank before the expiry of thirty days from the 
date of commencement of thil Act. 

10 of 1949' 
7 
11. The Corporation shall register every new banking company Re,iltratiOJl 
as an insured bank as soon as may be after it is granted a licence g~:i~' 
under section 22 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, or, as the case companies. 
may be, after it is notified under section 51 of the said Act; 
S 12. Every bankir.g company, being a defunct banking company :re~~~:~~oll 
at the commencement of this Act, by reason of sub-clause (vii) or bankin, 
sub-clause (viii) of clause (f) of section 2 shall, unless it becomes companies. 
a defunct banking company under any other sub-elause of that 
clause, be regisered by the Corporation as an insured bank as soon 
10 as may be after the termination of the order of 
moratorium or, as the case may be, the rejection of the application 
for its winding up. 
13. The registration of a banking company as an insured bank ~r:t=:!~1l 
shall stand cancelled on the occurrence of any of the ~ollowing events, tion. 
15 namely:-
(a) if it has been prohibited from receiving fresh deposits; 
or 
10 of 1949· 20 
(b) if it has been informed by notice in writing by the 
Reserve Bank that its licence has been cancelled under secti!ln 
22 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, or that a licence under 
that section cannot be. granted to it; or 
10 of 1949. 
(c) if it has been ordered to be wound up; or 
(d) if it has transferred all its deposit liabilities in India 
to any other institution; or 
(e) if it has ceased to be a banking company within the 
meaning of sub-section (2) of section 36A of the Banking Com-
panies Act, 1949, or has converted itself into a non-banking 
company; or 
(f) if a liqUidator has been appointed in pursuance of a re-
30 solution for the voluntary winding up of itsaifairs; or 
(g) if in respect of it any scheme of compromise or arrange-
ment or of reconstruction has been sanctioned by any competent 
authority and the said scheme does not permit the acceptance 
of fresh deposits; or 
3S (h) if it has been amalgamated with any other banking 
institution. 

latim.tion 
of reciltn-
tiOll. 
8 
14. (1) Where the Corporation has registered any banking com-
pany as an insured bank, it shaU, within thirty days of its registra-
tion, send an intimation in writing to the banking company that it 
has been registered as an insured bank. 
(2) Every such intimation shall indicate the manner in which 5 
t~e premium payable by the bank under section 15 may be calcu-
lated. 
Premium. 15. (1) Every insured bank shall, so long as it continues to be 
registered, be liable to pay a premium to the Corporation on its 
deposits at such rate or rates as may, with the previous approval of 10 
the Central Government, be notified by the Corporation in the 
Oftlcial Gazette from time to time: 
Provided that the premium payable by any insured bank for any 
period shall not exceed fifteen naye paise per annum for every 
hundred rupeeS of the total amount of the deposits in that bank at IS 
the end of that period or, where its registration has been cancelled 
during that period, on the date of its cancellation: 
Provided further that where the registration of any insured bank 
is cancelled under section 13, such cancellation shall not affect the 
liability of that bank for payment of premium for the period 20 
before such cancellation and of any interest due under the provi-
sion of this section. 
(2) The premium shall be payable for such periods, at such 
times and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) If an insured bank makes any default in payment of any 2S 
amount of premium, it shall, for the period of such default, be 
liable to pay to the Corporation interest on such amount at such 
rate not exceeding eight per cent. per annum as may be prescribed. 
Liabi1i~f 16. (1) Where an order for the winding up or liquidation of an 
~::o~ 0'} insured bank is made, the Corporation shall, subject to the other pro- 30 
in1ure:cs visions of this Act. be liable to pay to every depositor of that bank 
depollta.. rd . h h . . f t' 17 tIt In acco ance WIt t e prOVISIons a sec Ion an amoun equa a 
the amount due to him in respect of his deposit in that bank at the 
time when such order is made: 
Provided that the liability of the Corporation in respect of an 3S 
insured bank referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of section 13 
shall be limited to the deposits as on the date of the cancellation of 
the registration: 

9 
Provided further that the total amount payable by the Corporation 
to anyone depositor in respect of his deposit in that bank in the same 
capacity and in the same right shall not exceed one thousand and five 
hundred rupees: 
5 Provided further that the Corporation may, from time to time, 
having regard to its financial position and to the interests of the 
banking system of the country as a whole, raise, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, the aforesaid limit of one 
thousand and five hundred rupees. 
10 (2) Where in respect of an insured bank a scheme of compromise 
or arrangement or of reconstruction or amalgamation has been sanc-
tioned by any competent authority and the said scheme provides for 
each depositor being paid or credited with, on the date on which the 
scheme comes into force, an amount which is less than the original 
15 amount and also the specified amount, the Corporation shall be liable 
to pay to every such depositor in accordance with the provisions of 
section 18 an amount equivalent to the difference between the amount 
so paid or credited and the original amount, or the difference between 
the amount so paid or credited and the specified amount, whichever is 
20 less: 
Provided that where any such scheme also provides that any pay-
ment made to a depositor before the coming into fo~ce of the scheme 
shall be reckoned towards the payment due to him under that scneme, 
then the scheme shall be deemed to have provided for that payment 
25 being made on the date of its coming into force. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, the amount of a deposit shall 
be determined after deducting therefrom any ascertained sum of 
money which the insured bank may be legally entitled to. claim by 
way of set off against the depositor in the same capacity and in the 
30 same right. I 
3S 
(4) In this section,---" 
(a) "original amount" in relation to a depositor means the 
total amount due by the insured bank immediately before the dete 
of coming into force of the 'scheme of compromise or arrangement 
or, as the case may be, of reconstruction or amalgamation to the 
depositor in respect of his deposit in the bank in the same capacity 
and in the same right: ' ! 
Provided that where under the proviso to sub-section (2), 
the scheme is deemed to have provided for any payment being 
made on the date of its coming into force, the amount of such 
payment shall be included in calculating the original amount; 

Manner of 
payment by 
Corporation 
in case of 
winding up 
of insured 
banks. 
10 -. 
(b) "specified amount" means one thousand and five hundred 
rupees, or, as the case may be, the amount fixed by the Board 
under the third proviso to sub-section (1). 
17. (1) Where an insured bank has been ordered to be wound up 
or to be taken into liquidation and a liquidator, by whatever name S 
called, has been appointed in respect thereof, the liquidator shell, 
with the least possible delay and in any case not later than three 
months from the date of his assuming charge of office, furnish to the 
Corporation a list in such form and manner as may be specified by 
the Corporation showing separately the deposits in respect of each 10 
depositor and the amounts of set off referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section 16. 
(2) Before the expiry of two months from the receipt of such 
list from the liqUidator, the Corporation shall pay to each depositor 
of the insured bank in respect of his deposit the amount payable IS 
under section 16 either directly or through the liqUidator or through 
any other agency as the Corporation may determine. 
Manner of 18. (l) Where a scheme of amalgamation of any insured bank 
~;:~~~i~ with any other banking institution (hereinafter referred to as the 
in case of transferee bank) or a scheme of compromise or arrangement or of :w 
::;:~~~se reconstruction in respect of such bank has been sanctioned and the 
or arrange- Corporation has become liable to pay to depositors of the insured 
~~~~t~- bank under sub-section (2) of section 16, the transferee bank where 
tion Or amal- the scheme is of amalgamation and the insured bank in any other 
::~o~/:n case shall, with the least possible delay and in any case not later than 2S 
insured three months from the date on which such scheme takes effect, 
b'lnk. furnish to the Corporation a list in such form and manner as may be 
specified by the Corporation and certified to be correct by the chief 
executive officer of the transferee bank or, as the case may be, of 
the insured bank showing separately deposits in respect of each 30 
depositor and the amounts of set off referred to in sub-'Section (3) 
of section 16 and also the amounts paid or credited or deemed to have 
been paid under the scheme. 
(2) Before the expiry of two months from the receipt of such list, 
the Corpol"3tion shall pay the amount payable under section 16 either 3S 
directly to the depositor or to the transferee bank or the insured bank 
for being credited in his account. 
Discharge of 19. Any amount paid by the Corporation under section 17 or . 
the liability section 18 in respect of a deposit shall, to the extent of the amount of Corpora-tion. paid, discharge the Corporation from its liability in respect of that 40 
deposit. 

ti 
ZOo Where any depositor to whom any payment is to be made in Pl'OVi&ion 
accordance with the provisions of section 17 or section 18 cannot be for unpaid amounts. 
fOWld or is not readily traceable, adequate provision shall be made 
by the Corporation for such payment and the amount of such provi-
5 sion shall be eccounted for separately in its books. 
21.. (1) Where any amount has been paid under section 17 or R~paym~nt 
section 18 or any provision therefor has been made under section 20, ~~~nt to 
the Corporation shall furnish to the liquidator or to the insured bank Corporation. 
or to the transferee bank, as the case may be, information as regards 
10 the amount so paid or provided for. 
20 
35 
(2) On receipt of the information under sub-section (1), notwith-
standing anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the 
time being in force,- . 
(a) the liqUidator shall, within such time and in such manner 
as may be prescribed, repay to the Corporation out of the amount, 
i~ any, payable by him in respect of any deposit such sum or sums 
as make up the amount paid or provided for by the Corporation 
in respect of that deposit; 
(b) the insured bank or, as the case may be, the transferee 
bank shall, within such time and in such manner as may be 
prescribed, repay to the Corporation Qut of the amount, if any, 
to be paid or credited in respect of any deposit after the date of 
the coming into force of the scheme referred to in section 18, 
such sum or sums as make up the amount paid or provided for 
by the Corporation in respect of that deposit. 
CHAPTER IV 
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
22. The Corporation shall maintain two funds to be called res· Funds of 
pectively the Deposit Insurance Fund and the General Fund. Corporation. 
23. (1) To the Deposit Insurance Fund shall be credited,- D~posit 
(a) all amounts received by the Corporation as premium; ~~d~nce 
(b) all amounts received by the Corporation under section 21; 
(c) the amount advanced by the Reserve Bank under 
section 26; 
(d) all amounts transferred to that Fund from the General 
Fund under section 27; and 
(e) all income arising from the investments made out of that 
Fund,: I 

General 
Fund. 
Investment. 
(2) The said Fund shall be applied-
v 
.~.; . 
(a) to make JlGyments in resp::!ct of insured deposits; 
(b) to meet liability in respect of an advance taken under 
section 26; and 
(c) to meet liability in respect of the amounts referred to S 
in clause (d) of sub-section (1). 
24. All receipts of the Corporation other than those referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 23 shall be credited to the General Fund 
and ell payments by the Corporation other than those referred to 
in sub-section (2) of that section shall be made out of that Fund. ]0 
25. All moneys belonging to the Deposit Insurance Fund or the 
General Fund which may not for the time being be required by the 
Corporation shall be invested in promissory notes, stock or securities 
of the Central Government and all other moneys shall be deposited 
with the Reserve Bank. . IS 
Advances by 26. (1) The Reserve Bank shall, from time to time, advance to 
Reserve the Corporation on a request by it such sum or sums as may be Bank. 
required by the Corporation for the purposes of the Deposit Insurance 
Advan('e 
from Gene-
ral Fund 
to deposit 
Insurance 
Fund. 
Preparation 
of balance 
sheet, etc.,· 
by Corpora-
tion. 
Fund: 
Provided that the total amount outstanding at anyone time on 20 
account of such advances shall not exceed five crores of rupees. 
(2) The terms and conditions of any advance under this section 
shall be such as may be determined by the Reserve Bank with the 
approval of the Central Government. 
27. If ·at any time the amount awilable in the Deposit Insurance 2S 
Fund in insufficient to meet the requirements of that Fund, the Cor-
poration may transfer from the General Fund such amount as may be 
necessary to meet the requirements of the Deposit Insurance Fund 
on such terms and for such period as may be determined by the 
Board with the approval of the Reserve Bank. 30 
28. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Corporation shall 
be prepared and maintained in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. I 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Corpora-
tion to be balanced and closed as on the 31st day of December, each 35 
year. I 

101195 6. 
13 
ZI. (1) The affairs of the Corporation shall be audited by an Audit. 
auditor duly qualified to act as an auditor under sub-section (1) of 
section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956, who shall be appointed by 
the Board with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank and shall 
S receive such remuneration from the Corporation as the Reserve 
Bank may fix. 
(2) The auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the· annual 
balance sheet of the Corporation and it shall be his duty to 
examine it together with the accounts and vouchers relating 
10 thereto and he shall have a list delivered to him of all books kept 
by the Corporation and shall at all reasonable times have access to 
the books, accounts and other documents of the Corporation and 
may, in relation to such accounts, examine any director of the Board 
or any officer or employee of the Corporation. 
IS (3) The auditor shall make a report to the Corporation upon 
the annual balance sheet and accounts and in every s'uch report he 
shall state whether in his opinion the balance-sheet is a full and 
fair balance-sheet containing all necessary particulars and properly 
drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the state of 
zo affairs of the Corporation and in case he had called for any explana-
tion or information from the Board, whether it has been given and 
whether it is satisfactory. 
(4) Without prejudice to anything contained in the preceding 
sub-sections, the Central Government may at any time appoint the 
zS Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to examine and report 
upon the accounts of the Corporation, and any expenditure incurred 
by him in connection with such examination and report shall be 
payable by the Corporation to the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India. 
30 30. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Income- Income-tax 
tax Act, 1922 or any other enactment for the time being in force aDd 11qJCr-
relating to income-tax or super-tax, the Corporation shall not be ta:. jjJ 
liable to pay income-tax or super-tax on any of its income, profits 
or gains for the accountlnB year during which the' Corporation IS 
3S established and for four accounting years following that year. 
31. After making provision for all its liabilities and for all other Reacrve 
matters for which proviSion is necessary or expedient, including fuDd. 
any contribution to the stat! and superannuation funds, the Corpo-
ration shall transfer the balance, if any, of its income in its General 
40 Fund to one or more reserve funds to be utilised in such manner 
Bnd for such purposes as the Corporation may deem fit. 

I4 
Annual 32. (1) The Corporation shall furnish to the Reserve Bank with-
;:=~~~!~ and in three months from the date on which its accounts are balanced 
and closed the balance-sheet and accounts together with the audi-
tor's report and a report of the working of the Corporatlon during 
the year and copies of the said balance-sheet and accounts 5 
and reports shall be fu·rnished by the Corporation to the Central 
Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall cause every auditor's re-
port and report of the working of the Corporation to be laid for 
not less than thirty days before each house cf Parliament as soon 10 
as may be after each such report is received by the Central Govern-
m~. I , 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Stafl'of . 33. (1) The Corporation may appoint such number of officers and 15 
CorporatIOn. employees as it considers necessary or desirable for the efficient 
performance of its functions and determine the terms and condi-
tions of their appointm~nt and service. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), 
it shall be lawful for the Corporation to utilise, and for the Reserve 20 
Bank to make available, the services of such staff of the Reserve 
Bank on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between 
the Corporation and the Reserve Bank. 
~ from 34. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Banking 
banks. Companies Act, 1949, or any other law for the time being in force 2S 10 of 1949· 
the Corporation may at any time direct an insured bank to furnish 
Corporation 
to have 
acc:ns to 
records. 
to it, within such time as may be specified ·by the Corporation, 
such statements and information relating to the deposits in that 
bank as the Corporation may consider necessary or expedient to 
obtain for the purposes of this Act. 30 
(2) The Corporation may, if it considers it expedient and after 
consulting the Reserve Bank, publish any information obtained by 
it under this section in such consolidated form as it may think ftt. 
35. (1) The Corporation shall have free access to all such records 
of an insured bank perusal whereof may appear to the Corporation 35 
to be necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The Corporation may require any insured bank to furnish 
to it copies of any of the records referred to in sub-section (1) and 
the bank shall be bound to comply with the requiSition. 

15 
36. (1) The Corporation may for any of the purposes of this Act tn~pection 
t t l-.. R B k . ~ of lflsured reques lilt: eserve an to cause an InSpectIOn of the books and banks by 
accoWlts or an investigation of the affairs of an insured bank to Reserve 
b d d h Bank. e rna e an on suc request the Reserve Bank shall cause such 
5 inspection or investigation to be made by one or more of its officers. 
(2) The provision of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of sec-
10 or 1949· tion 35 of the Banking Companies Aet, 1949 shall apply to an inspec-
tion or investigation under sub-section (1) as they apply to &n 
inspection under that section. 
z of 1934. 
: 0 of 1949. 
10 (3) When an inspection or investigation has been made under 
this section, the Reserve Bank shall furnish a eopy of its report to 
the Corporation and neither the bank inspected or investigated nor 
any other bank shall be entitled to be furnished with a copy of such 
report. 
IS (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force, no court, tribunal or other authority shall com-
pel the production or disclosure of a report under this section or of 
information or material gathered during the course cf an inspection 
or investigation under this section. 
20 37. The Corporation shall, on a request in writing from the Corpor!1tion 
R Bank, f . h t' 'thi h t' b 'fied to furnIsh eserve umlS 0 It WI n suc lme as may e Specl information 
by the Reserve Bank, such statements and information relating to to Reserve 
the business or affairs of the Corporation or of an insured bank as Bank. 
the Reserve Bank may consider necessary or expedient. 
2<; 38. The Reserve Bank shall, on a request in writing from the Reserve 
- Corporation furnish to it any report or information relating to an ~~~~s~ in-
insured hank made or obtained by it under or in pursuance of the fonnatio~ to 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 or the Banking Companies Act, CorporatIon. 
1949. 
30 39. Every director, auditor, officer or other employee of the Cor- Decffid'aral,tion • 0 e Ity 
poration or an employee of the Reserve Bank whose servIces are and secrecy. 
utilised by the Corporation under sub-section (2) of section 33 shall, 
bebore entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and ' 
secrecy in the form set out in the First Schedule to this Act. 
35 ·40. (1) Every director of the Board shall be indemnified by the I'.ldemnityof 
. . t 11 I d . d b him' dIrectors. CorporatIon agams a osses an expenses Incurre y In, or 
in relation to, the discharge of his duties except such as are caused 
by his own wilful act or default. 
(2) A director of the Board shall not be responsible for any other 
40 director or for any other officer or other employee of the Corpora-
tion, or for any loss or expenses resulting to the Corporaticn from 

16 
the insuftlciency or deficiency of value of or title to any property 
or security acquired or taken on behalf of the Corporation or the 
insolvency or wrongful act· of any debtor or any person under 
obligation to the Corporation or anything done in good faith in the 
execution of the duties of his office or in relation thereto. 5 
~s in 41. (1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of any committee 
~on:~ of the Corporation shall be questioned on the ground merely of the 
date acta, existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Board 
etc. or committee. 
(2) No act done by any person aciing in good faith as a director 10 
of the Board shall be· deemed to be invalid merely on the ground 
that he was disqualified to be a director or that there was any other 
defect in his appointment. 
Plt!teCtioD of 42. N 6 suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Cor-
::de: :~ poration or the Reserve Bank or any director of the Board or llny IS 
Act. officer of the 'Corporation or the Reserve Bank or any other person 
authorised by the Corporation to discharge any functions under this 
Act for any damage caused or likely to be caused . by anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of 
Companies 
Act 19S6 
and Insur-
aneeAct, 
19:18 not to 
apply. 
Liquidation 
or ColJlOra-
doD. 
Power of 
Central Go-
gernmeDt to 
live direc-
tions. 
this Act. 20 
43. Nothing in the Companies Act, 1956 or the Insurance Act, 1 of J9S6. 
1938, shall apply to the Corporation. 4 of 1938. 
44. (1) The Corporation shall not be placed in liquidation save 
by order of the Central Government and in such manner as that 
Government may direct. 2S 
(2) On the liquidation of the Corporation-
(a) the outstanding assets of the Corporation in so far as 
they relate to the Deposit Insurance Fund shall be distributed 
among the insured banks in such manner and in such propor-
tion as may be determined by the Central Government having 30 
regard to the amounts of premium paid by them during any 
prescribed period or the deposits of the said banks as on the 
date of liquidation of the Corporation or other relevant circum-
stances; 
(b) the remaining outstanding assets of the Corporation J' 
shall be transferred to the Reserve Bank. 
45. In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Corpora-
tion shall be guided by such directions in matters of policy involv-
ing public interest as the Central Government may after consulting 
the Reserve Bank give to it in writing, and if any question arises 40 

• ... " _, ,:' 17 
whether the direction relates to a matter of policy involving public 
interest, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be 
final. 
46. Any dispute as to the amount of premium due from any in- = ~; to 
5 sured bank shall be decided by the Central Government and the premium. 
decision of that Government shall be final. 
47. (1) Whoever in any return, balance-sheet, or other document PcnaItiC8. 
or in any information required or furnished by or under or for the 
purposes of any provision of this Act, wilfully makes a statement 
10 which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, or 
wilfully omits to make a material statement, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) If any person fails to produce any book, account or other 
15 document, or to furnish any statement or information which, under 
the provisions of this Act, it is his duty to produce or furnish, he 
shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to two thousand 
rupees in respect of each offence and in the case of a continuing 
failure, with an additional fine which may extend to one hundred 
20 rupees for every day during which the failure continues after con-
viction for the first such failure. 
48. (1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, Oft'cnc:c! by 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in compaDieB. 
charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of 
2S the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-secti"n shall ren-
der any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, 
30 if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
such oftence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where an oftence under this Act has been committed by a company 
35 and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any gross .negligence 
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other omcer of 
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other oftlcer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
40 proceeded against and punished accordingly. 

CoFizance 
of offences. 
Regulations. 
18 
Expla:n.ation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and ipcludes, 
a firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 5 
49. No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by an offi-
cer of the Corporation generally or specially authorised in writing 
in this behalf by the Board and no court inferior to that of a Pre-
sidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First Class shall try any 10 
such offence. 
SO. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Re-
serve Bank, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to pro-
vide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient 
for the purpose of giving effect to the pro~sions of this Act. IS 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality· of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the Board or 
of any committee constituted under this Act and the procedure 
to be followed at such meetings including the quonlm necessary 20 
for the transaction of business; 
(b) the number of directors constituting an Executive 
Committee, and the functions that such committee shall dis-
charge; 
(c) the functions which any other committee may discharge 2S 
under this Act; 
(d) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the mem-
bers of a committee other than directors of the Board; 
(e) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the direc-
tors of the Board; 30 
(f) the periods for which, the times at which and the man· 
ner in which premium may be paid by an insured. bank; 
(g) the interest Which may be charged from an insured. 
bank where it makes default in payment of premium; 
(h) the manner in which and the time within which the 3S 
amounts referred to in section 21 may be paid; 

19 
(i) the form and the manner in which the balance-sheet 
and the accounts of the Corporation shall be prepared or main-
tained; and 
(;) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
5 (3) Any regulation which may be made by the Board under this 
Act may be made by the Reserve Bank within three months of the 
establishment of the Corporation; and any regulation so made may 
be altered or rescinded by the Board in the exercise of its powers 
under this Act. 
10 51. The enactments specified in the Second Schedule to this Act Amendment of CC1'tIIin shall be amended in the manner provided therein. enactments. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 39) 
Declaration of fidelity and secrecy 
15 I do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of 
my skill and ability execute and perfonn the duties requin!d of me as 
director, auditor, officer or other employee (as the case may be) of 
the Deposit Insurance Corporation and which properly relate :to the 
office or position held by me in the said Corporation. 
20 I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be 
communicated. to any person not legally entiiled thereto any infor-
mation relating to the affairs of the Deposit Insurance Corporation 
or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said 
Corporation; nor will I allow any such person to inspect or have 
ZS access to any books or documents belonging to or in the possession 
of the Deposit Insurance Corporation and relating to the business 
of the said Corporation or the business of any person having any 
dealing with the said Corporation. 
(Signature.) 
30 Signed before me. 

20 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 51) 
Amendment of certain enactmenu 
PART I 
AMENDMENTS TO THE REsERVE BANK OF INDIA AI:.T, 1934 5 
(2 OF 1934) 
Amendments 
1. In section 2, after clause· (bb), insert the following clause, 
namely:-
'(bbb) "Deposit Insurance Corporation" means the Deposit 01 
Insurance Corporation established under section 3 of the. Deposit 
Insurance Corporation Act, 1961;'. 
2. In section 17,-
(a) after clause (4C), insert the following clause, namelY:-
" (4D) the making to the Deposit Insurance Corpora- IS 
tion of loans and advances; and generally assisting the 
Corporation in such manner and on such terms as may be 
determined by the Central Board."; 
(b) in clause (SA), after "the capital of", insert "the Depo-
sit Insurance Corporation". 20 

:zi 
PART II 
AMfo:NDMFNTS TO THE BAKING COMPANIES AcT, 1949 
(10 OF 1949) 
Amendments 
1. In section 5, after clause (f), insert the following clause, S 
namely:-
'(ff) "Deposit Insurance Corporation" means the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation established under section 3 of the Depo-
sit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961;'. 
2. In secUon 43~-
(i) in sub-section (6), for "the foregoing provisions", subs-
titute "the provisions of this section"; 
(ii) after sub-section (8), insert the following sub-sections, 
namely.:-
10 
"(9) Nothing contained in sub-sections (2), (3), (4), IS 
(7) and (8) shall apply to a banking company in respect of 
the depositors of which the Deposit Insurance Corporation is 
liable under section 16 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation 
Act, 1961. 
(10) After preferential payments referred to in sub- 20 
section (1) have been made or adequate proVision 
has been made in respect thereof, the remaining assets 
of the banking company referred to in SUb-section 
(9) available for payment to general creditors shall be 
utilised for payment on pro rata basis of the debts of the 2S 
general creditors and of the sums due to the depositors: 
Provided that where any amount in respect of any 
deposit is to be paid by the liquidator to the Deposit Insur-
ance Corporation under section 21 of the Deposit Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1961, only the balance, if any, left after 30 
making the said payment shall be payable to the depositor.". 

• 
2~ 
PART III 
AliuNDMKNTS TO THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
In section 2, in sub-clause (i) of clause (a), after "to an industrial 
dispute concerning" insert "the Deposit Insurance Corporation estab-
lished under section 3 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961, S 
~' . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The question of establishing a statutory Corporation for insuring 
deposits in commercial banks has been under consideration for some 
time. Various suggestions or proposals in this connection, inelu-
ding the recommendations made by the Shroff Committee on 
finance for the private sector which reported in 1954, have been 
examined in consultation with the Reserve Bank and the represen-
tatives of the commercial 'banks, and it is now considered desirable 
that the scheme should be implemented at a very early date. 
2. The Deposit Insurance Corporation will be established as a 
wholly-owned subsidiary of the Reserve Bank with a paid-up eapital 
of a crore of rupees. It will insure all deposits in commercial banks 
including the State Bank and its subsidiaries, other than the de-
posits belonging to the Central Government or to a State or foreign 
Government or to the insured banks. The limit of the insurance 
cover will be Rs. 1,500 but this limit may be raised by the Corpora-
tion with the previous approval of the Central Government. The 
premium rate will l:-e determine by the Corporation from time to 
time with the previous approval of the Central Government. The 
maximum rate for which provision is being made in the Bill is 15 
naye paise per hundred rupees per annum. 
3. The Corporation's liability will arise and be discharged in the 
event of the liquidation of a bank or the enforcement in relation to 
it of a scheme of compromise or arrangement or reconstruction or 
amalgamation. The payments due to the depositors up to the limit 
of the insurance cover offered by the Corporation will be made 
in the most convenient and expeditious manner which may be 
possible. 
4. The Bill is intended to give effect to these proposals. The 
notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained 
in the Bill. 
Nzw DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 21st August, 1961. 
23 

Notes on clauser 
CZause 2.-This clause defines the various expressions used In 
the Bill. A banking company for the purposes of this Bill will 
include the State Bank of India and its statutory subsidiaries, but 
will exclude the Madras Industrial Investment Corporation Ltd., 
which although it is technically a banking company as defined in 
the Banking Companies Act performs .actually the functions of a 
State Financial Corporation. 
A deposit for the purposes of the insurance scheme has -been de-
fined as the aggregate amount of all the unpaid balances due to a 
depositor, but excludes deposits received outside India and amounts 
due to the Central Governr.lent or to a State or foreign Govern-
ment or to an insured bank. 
A definition cA. a defunct banking company has been inserted in 
sub-clause <f) of this clause in order to exclude from the scheme of 
insurance banking companies which do not function normally. 
"Existing banking companies" as defined in clause 2 (h) will in-
clude all banking companies which may be functioning normally 
on the date on which the Act comes into force and new banking 
companies will be any new banking companies .which may be estab-
lished thereafter. Attention is invited in this connection to the 
provisions of clauses 10 and 11, in accordance with which all exist-
ing banking companies and a1,0 all new banking companies will 
have to be registered by the C Jrporation. 
Clause 3.-This clause provides for the establishment of the Cor-
poration. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides for the authorised and paid-up 
capital of the Corporation. The authorised capital will be Rs. 1 
crore, the whole of which will be paid-up and will be fully allotted 
to the Reserve Bank. 
Clauses 5 and 6.-These clauses provide for the constitu.tion of a 
Board of directors to direct and manage the affairs of the Corpora-
tion. The Governor of the Reserve Bank will be the Chairman of 
the Board and the four other members will be a Deputy Governor 

2S 
nominated by the Reserve Bank, an oftlcer of the Central Govern-
ment nominated by that Government, and two non-officials with 
suitable qualifications and experience, who will also be nominated by 
the Central Government. 
Clause 6 also provides that the non-official directors nominated 
by the Central Government should not be actively connected with 
any insured bank. 
Clauses 7 to 9.-These clauses provide for the manner in which 
meetings of the Board may be held, the constitutions of an Execu-
tive Committee and of such other committees as may be necessary, 
and the payment of fees and allowances to the members of the 
Board and the committees. 
Clauses 10 and H.-These clauses provide that every banking 
company which may be functioning normally on the commence-
ment of the Act shall be registered as an insured bank within 
thirty days of such commencement and that every new banking 
company formed after such commencement shall be registered like-
wise within thirty days of the grant of a licence to it or its notifi-
cation for the purposes of the Banking Companies Act, as the case 
may be. 
Clause 12.-This clause provides that any banking company 
which may not be functioning normally at the time of the commen-
cement of the Act shall be registered as an insured institution if it 
begins to function normally at any subsequent stage. 
Cl.a.use 13.-This clause provides for the cancellation of the re-
gistration, if a bank ceases to function normally or independently 
at any time in future. 
Clause 14.-This clause provides that intimation of the registra-
tion shall be sent to every insured bank. 
Clause 15.-This clause provides for the payment of a premium 
by the insured banks. The actual amount of the premium will be 
determined by the Corporation with the previous approval of the 
Central Government from time to time, but the maximum rate is not 
to exceed 15 naye paise per hundred rupees per annum. 
Clause 16.-This clause deals with the liability of the Corpora-
tion in respect of the imured deposits. The deposits will be insu-
rable up to a sum of Rs. 1,500 in the case of each individual deposi-
tor, but this limit may, if necessary, be raised by the Corporation 

26 
at any later stage, after obtaining the previous approval of the 
Central Government. The Corporation's liability up to the limit of 
the insurance cover offered by it will arise and be discharged in 
the event of the liquidation of a bank or the enforcement in relation 
to it of a scheme of compromise or arrangement or reconstruction 
or amalgamation. The liability in the event of the liquidation of an 
insured bank will be for the payment of the sums due to a d.epositor 
up to the limit of th.e insurance cover offered by the Corporation, 
but in the event of the enforcement of a scheme in relation to any 
insured bank,' the liability will be limited to the difference bet-
ween the amounts payable under the scheme and the amount up to 
which insurance cover is for the time being offered. 
Clauses 17 to 21.-These clauses deal with the manner in which 
the Corporation's liability is to be discharged and for the subse-
quent reimbursement to the Corporation of any amounts paid by 
it. Provision has been made for payments directly to the deposi-
tors, in case this proves to be either necessary or desirable. 
The liquidator in the event of a winding up or the reconstructed 
or transferee bank in case any scheme has been sanctioned and 
brought into force will be required to pay to the Corporation, instead 
of to the depositors concerned, any sums which may become due for 
disbursement to such depositors individually after the Corporation 
has discharged its liability to them. These repayments to the 
Corporation will be authorised, notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary in any other law, and will be made until the amounts dis-
bursed by the Corporation to, or on account of, the depositors have 
been repaid in full. 
Clauses 22 to 27.-Tbese clauses provide for the constitution and 
maintenance of a Deposit Insurance Fund for meeting the liabilities 
of the Corporation on account of insured deposits and of a General 
Fund to account for the receipts and disbursements other than those 
attributable to the Deposit Insurance Fund. 
The Deposit Insurance Fund will be built up from the premium 
payments made by the insured banks under clause 15, but in the 
event of a deficiency in that fund for meeting the liabilities which 
may have to be met from it, a temporary transfer to the fund may 
be made from the General Fund, or a sum not exceeding Rs. 5 
~rores may be obtained by the Corporation for the purposes of the 
Deposit Insurance Flmd from the Reserve Bank on such terms as 
.may be approved by the Central Government· 

27 
Clauses 2B to 32.-These clauses provide for the maintenance and 
audit of the accounts of the Corporation and ,the preparation of a 
balance sheet and annual report. In view of the exemption from 
taxation which is available to the Deposit Insurance Corporation 
in the United States and on the analogy of the exemption of new 
industrial undertakings from income-tax under the provisions of 
section 15C of the Income-tax Act, the Corporation has been 
exempted from income and super ta'Xes in respect of its income. 
profits or gains in the first five accounting years, but its entire dis-
posable income in its General Fund will during this period be cre-
dited to one or more reserve funds. 
Clause 33.-This clause provides for the appointment of the Cor-
poration's staff and also for the services of the officers or other em-
ployees of the Reserve Bank to be made available to the Corpora-
tion to the extent to which this may be necessary. 
Clauses 34 to 3B.-These clauses provide for returns and. informa-
tion from the insured banks and for the exchange of information 
as between the Corporation and the Reserve Bank. Provision has 
been made in clause 36 for a special inspection of any insured bank 
by the Reserve Bank at the instance of the Corporation. 
Clauses 39 to 42.-These clauses contain the usual provisions as 
regards the fidelity of the directors, indemnity and protection in 
respect of action taken under the Act, the validation of such action 
and secrecy in respect of the information obtained by the Corpora-
tion. ' 
Clause 44.-This clause provides that the Corporation shall not 
be taken in liquidation except under the orders of the Central Gov-
ernment. The balance in the Deposit Insurance Fund, in the event 
of the liqUidation, is intended to be distributed among the insured 
banks. 
Clause 45.-This clause provides for directions being issued to 
the Corporation in case this becomes necessary or desirable. 
Clauses 46 to 49.-These clauses contain provisions for the deter-
mination of any dispute as regards the payment of premium, penal-
ties for the infringement of the provisions of the Act and cogni-
zance of offences. 
Clause SO.-This clause provides for regulations to be framed by 
the Corporation with the approval of the Reserve Bank for carry-
tna out the provillonl of the Act. 

28 
'the First Schedule.-This Schedule contains the form of the 
declaration as to fidelity and secrecy which is to be made by the 
directors and auditors and· employees of the Corporation and is 
based on the corresponding provision in the State Bank of India 
Act, 1955 and the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
1959. 
The Seccmd Schedule.-This Schedule contains the consequential 
amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking 
Companies Act, 1949 and the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The 
amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Act are for the purpose 
of enabling the Reserve Bank to invest in the share capital of the 
Corporation and to grant loans to it. The amendments to the Bank-
ing Companies Act are for the purpose of modifying the procedure 
in liquidation so as to conform to the provisions of the present Bill 
The amendments to the Industrial Disputes Act are intended to 
clarify t~e position that the Central Government will be the appro-
priate Governmr:!nt in relation to the Deposit Insurance Corporation 
for the purposes of that Act. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 50 empowers the Board of directors to make regulations to 
carry out the purposes of the Act. That clause also empowers the 
Reserve Bank to make the first regulations. The matters in respect of 
which regulations may be made have been specified in that clause. 
They relate, inteT aZia, to the times and places of the meetings of the 
Board or of any committee constituted under the Act, the procedure 
to be followed at such meetings, the number of directors constituting 
an Executive Committee and the functions that Committee or any 
other committee may discharge, the fees and allowances payable to 
directors and members of a committee, the periods for which, the 
times at which and the manner in which premium may be paid, and 
the form and the manner in which the balance-sheet and the 
accounts of the Corporation may be prepared or maintained. Thua 
the matters in respect of which regulations may be made are 
matters of procedure or detail and the delegation is of a nonnal 
character. 
2. Under clause 15 (1) power is conferred on the Board to fix rate 
of premium payable by an insured bank, subject to a ceiling of 
fifteen naye paise per annum per hundred rupees. It is not possible 
to specify the rate in the Act, as the rate may vary from time to 
time depending upon certain factors such as the amount of premium 
collected and remaining unutilised. 
3. Under clause 16(1) power is conferred on the Corporation to 
raise the limit of insurance cover. Certain criteria for raising such 
limit are laid down in that section. It is not possible to visualise at 
this stage to what extent this limit will be raised. 
4. Having regard to the circumstances under which powers under 
clauses 15 (1) and 16 (1) will be exercisable by the Board, the 
powers delegated to it are of a normal character. 

Business 
which the 
Bank may 
transact. 
Preferential 
paymentl to 
depoeiton. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT nOM THE REsERVE BANK 0 .. INDIA ACT, 1934 
(No.2 OF 1934) 
• • * • • 
17. The Bank shall be authorised to carry on and transact the 
several kinds of business hereinafter specified, namely:-
• • • • • 
(8A) the purchase and sale of shares in, or the capital of, 
the State Bank or any other bank or financial institution noti-
fied by the Central Government in this behalf; 
GA. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE BANKING COMPANIES ACT, 1949 
(No. 10 OF 1949) 
• • • • • 
• • •• • • 
(6) When any claimant, creditor or depositor to whom any 
payment ,is to be made in accordance with the foregoing provi-
sions, cannot be found or is not readily traceable, adequate pro-
vision shall be made by the official liquidator for such payment. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT meM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTI'B AcT, 1947 
(No. 14 OF 1947) 
• • • • • 
l)eftnitioDl. 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
30 

31 
(a) "appropriate Government" means-
(i) in relation to any industrial dispute coneeming any 
industry carried on by or under the authority of the Cen-
tral Government or by a railway company or concerning 
any such controlled industry as may be specified in this· 
behalf by the Central Government or in relation to an in-
dustrial dispute concerning a banking or an insurance com-
pany, a mine, an oil-field. or a major port, the Central 
Government, and 
* * * • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a corporation for the pur-
pose of insurance of deposits and for pther matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 and 
clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, recom-
mended to Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
M.N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 