InK s.A.BHA 
CDRRI GmDA 
• to 
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECIrON) AMlI-ID '-1ENT BILL, 1986 
(To be/As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. Page 3, line 10,-
w "suh- section" l:~ '!sub- sections" 
" r· 
2. In the docket page,-
;}fter "Shri Z.R. Ansari," 
NEW DELHI; 
t 
MB.~ , nP86 __ - .. J« _Ie ~ .. ~::.. __ . __ ._ ... _ ... :.-_______ . 

As INTRODVcm IN Lox SABHA ON 
~ 
1 " . 
.•... :,..; if 0.1 
Bill No. 54 of 1986 
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 1988 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wild I,.ife (Protection) Amendment Short 
5 Act, 1986. title 
10 
15 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
'and com-
mf'nce-
mf'nt. 
2. In the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as Amt.'tld-
the principal Act), in sub-section (1) of section 44,- ment of 
(a) in the opening paragraph,--
(i) for the words, brackets and figure "Except under, and in 
accordance with, a licence granted under sub-section (4), no 
person shall", the words, figures. letter and brackets "Subject to 
the provisions of Chapter VA, no _person shall, except under, and 
in accorda'nce with, a licence granted under sub-section (4)" shall 
be substituted; 
(ii) after sub-clause (i), the following sub-clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
II (ia) a manufacturer of, Of !it;aler in, any article made of 
ivory importE.!d. ~~tt? Jndia;"; 
sectioll 44. 

Insertion 
of new 
Chapter 
VA. 
Deftni-
tlons. 
Prohibi-
tionof 
deau.. 
In troph-
ies. 
animal 
articles, 
etc., de-
rived from 
schedul-
ed ani-
mala. 
2 
(b) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be sub-
stituted, namely: ~ 
"Provided fJ~ther that nothing in thi~ sub-section shall apply 
to manufacturers of, and dealers in, articles 'made of feathers of 
peacock.". 5 
3. After Chapter V of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be 
inserted, namely:-
'CHAPTER VA 
.PaOHIBlTION OF TRADE OR COMMERCE IN TRopmES, ANtMAL ARTlCLB8, 
ETC., DERIVED FROM CERTAIN ANIMALS 10 
49A. In this Chapter,-
(a) "scheduled animal" mea'llS an arumal speclfted for the 
time being in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II; 
(b) "scheduled animal article" means an article made from 
any 'Scheduled animal and includes an article or object in which 15 
the whole or any part of such animal has been used; 
(c) "specified date" means-
(i) in relation to a scheduled animal on the commence-
ment of the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 1986, the 
date of expiry of two months from such commencement; and 20 
(ii) in relation to any anima! added or transferred to 
Schedule I or Part IT of Schedule II at any time after such 
commencement, the date of expiry of two months from such 
addition or transfer. . 
49B. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this section, on and 25 
after the specified date, no p~san shall,-
(a) commence or carryon the business as-
(i) a m~nufacturer of, or dealer in, scheduled animal 
art~c1es; or 
(ti) a taxidermist with respect to any scheduled animals 30 
or any par~s of such animals; or 
(iii) a dealer in trophy or uncured trophy derived from 
any scheduled animal; or 
(iv) a dealer in any captive animals being scheduled 
animals; or 35 
(v) a dealer in meat derived from any scheduled animal; 
or 
(b) cook or serve meat derived from any scheduled animal in 
any eating-house. 
Erplanation.-For the purposes of this 'Sub-section, "eating-
hoWle" has the same meaning a8 in the Explanation below 40 
8ub-l,Iection (1) of section 44. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this s~ction, no licence 
granted or renewed under section 44 before the specified date shall 
entitle the holder thereof or any other person to commence o.r carry 
on the business referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of this 45 
section or the occupation referred to in clause (b) of that sub-section 
after such date. . . 

1 of 1956. 
21 of 1860. 
5 
10 
(8) Notwithstanding anything cOnta1i1ed in sub-section (i) or sub. 
section (2), where the Central Government is satisft.ed that it is 
necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, by 
general or special order published in the Official Gazette, exempt, for 
purposes of export, any corporation owned or controlled by the Central 
Govemment (including a Government company within the meaning 
of section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956), or any society registered 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or any other la:w for the 
time being in force, wholly Or substantially financed by the Central 
Government, from the provisions of sub-section (.1) and (2). 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or 
'Bub-section (2), bu.t subject to any rules which may be made in this 
behalf, a person holding a licence under section 44 to carry on the 
business as a taxidermist may put under a process of taxidermy any 
15 scheduled animal or any part thereof,-
(a) for or on behalf of the Government 0,1' any corporation or 
society exempted under sub-section (3), or 
(b) with the previous authorisation in writing of the Chief 
Wild Life Warden, for and on beha1f of any pet1;on for educational 
~o or 'Scientific purposes. 
35 
45 
49C. (1) Every person carrying on the business or occupation 
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 49B shall, within thirty days 
from the specified date, declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the 
authorised officer,- ' 
(a) his stocks, if any. as at the end of the specified date of-
(i) 'Scheduled animal articles; 
(ti) scheduled animals and parts thereof; 
(ii~) trophies and uncured trophies derived from scheduled 
animals; 
(iv) captive animals, being scheduled animals; 
(b) the place or places at which the stocks mentioned in the 
declaration are kept; and . 
(c) the'description of such items, if any, of the stocks men-
tioned in the declaration which he desires to retain with himself 
for his bona fide personal use. 
(2) On receipt of a oeclaration under sub-scction (1), the Chief 
Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may take all or any of 
the measures specified in section 41 and for this purpose, the provi-
sions of section 41 shall, so far a'S may be, apply. 
(3) Where, in a declaration made under sub-section (1), the 
person making the declaration expresses his desire to .retain with him-
self any of the items of the stocks specified in the declaration for his 
bona fide personal use, the Chief Wild Life Warden, with the prior 
approval of the Director, may, if he is satisfied that the person is in 
lawful possession of such items, issue certificates of ownership in 
favou.r of such person with respect to all, or as 'the case may be, such 
of the items as in the opinion of'the Chief Wild' Life Warden, are 
Decjlara-
tion by 
dealers. 

A.end-
RlWl'el 
aeetien 51. 
required for the bona fide personal use of such person and aftix upon 
such items identification marks in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no such item shall be kept fOr display in any 
commercial premises. 
(4) No persall shan oblite.rate or counterfeit any identification 5 
mark referred· to in 'Sub-section (3) . 
(5) An appeal shall lie against any refusal to grant certificate of 
. ownership under sub-section (3). and the provisions of sub-sectiom 
(2), (3) and (4) of section 46 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation 
to appeals under this sub-section. 10 
(6) Where a person who has been issued a certiftcate' of owner-
ship under sub-section (3) in respect of any item,-
(0) tran'Sfers such item to any person, whether by way of 
gift, sale or otherWise, or ' 
(b) transfers o.r transports from the State in which he 15 
resides to another State any such item, 
he shall, within thirty days of such transfer or transpart, report the 
transfer or transport to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised 
officer within whose jurisdiction the transfer or transport is effected. 
(7) No person, other than a person who has been issued a certift- 20 
cate of ownership under sub-section (3) shall, on and after the speci-
fied date, keep under his control, sell or offer for sale or transfer to 
any person any scheduled animal or a scheduled animal article.'. 
4. In section 51 ,of the principal Act,-
(0) in sub-section (1), for the words "contravenes any provision 25 
of this Act", the words, brackets, figure and letter "contravenes any 
provision of this Act (except Chapter VA)" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: - . 
II (1A) Any person who contraven.es any provisions of Chapter 30 
V A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years 
and also with ftne which shall not be less than ftve thousand 
rupees.". 
5. In 'Sub-section (1) of section 63 of the principal Act, aftel' claua_ 95 
(c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
I' (d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 provides for the protection of 
wild animals and birds and for matters connected therewith or ancillary 
thereto. 
~ . 
2. Under the scheme of the Act, trade or commerce in wild animals, 
animal articles and trophies within the country is permissible 
and is regulated under Chapter V. Since there is hardly any 
market within the country for wild animals or articles and derivatives 
thereat, the stocks acquired for trade within the country are smuggled 
out to meet the demand in foreign markets. This clandestine trade 
is abetted by illegal practices of poaching which have· taken a heavy 
toll of Our wild an~mals and birds. The stocks declared by the traders 
at the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 are still 
used as a cover for such illicit trade. Attempts to acquire the declared 
stocks of skins of some wild species have also not met with the desired 
success,. mainly because most traders are not inclined to part with their 
stocks and thereby lose the ploy for illegal activities. It is, therefore, 
necessary to suitably amend the Act to prohibit trade in certain specified 
wild animals Or their derivatives. It is, therefore, proposed to provide 
that no one will be permitted to trade in wild animals specified in Sche-
dule I or Part II of Schedule II of the Act or in any derivatives therefrom 
after a period of two months from the commencement of. the amending 
Act or two months from the date on which a wild animal is included in 
Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II by notification issued under the pro-
vision! of the Act. All existing licences for mternal trade would be in-
valid thereafter. Further, no fresh licences would be granted for inter-
nal trade on such wild animals or their derivatives in future. An exemp-
tion is being given to notified Government of India undertakings who can 
purchase stocks from licensees during the specified period of two months 
for manufacturing articles from them exclusively for export. The exemp-
tion at present available to dealers in ivory under the second proviso to 
Section 44(1) is also being removed so as to enforce a total ban in deal-
ing in Indian ivory and simultaneously to provide for some regulation 
over the manufacture and trade of articJes made out of imported ivory. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 30th April, 1986. Z. R. ANSAR1. 
e 

MEMORANDUM· REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 63 of 
the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 19'72 80 as to make a residuary provision 
in that sub-section enabling the Central Govern·ment to make rules in 
respect of such other matters which are required to be or may be pres· 
cribed under the Act. 
The delegation of legislative ·power is thus normal in character. 
• 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS I'IlOM '1B WILD Lm: . (Paonx:ttON) ACT, 1972 
(53 OF 1972) 
• • • • • 
44. (1) Except under, and in accordance with a licence granted under 
lub-section (4), no person shall-
(a) commence or carryon the business as-
(i) a manufacturer of or dealer in, any animal article; or 
(ii) a taxidermist; or 
(iii) a dealer in trophy or uncured trophy; or 
(iv) a dealer in captive animals; or 
(v) a dealer in meat; or 
(b) cook or serve meat in any eating-house: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent a person, who, 
immediately before the commencement of this Act was carrying on the 
business or occupation specifted in this sub-section, from carrying on 
such business or occupation for a period of thirty days from such com-
mencement, or where he has made an application within· that period for 
the grant of a licence to him, until the licence is granted to him or he is 
informed in writing that a licence cannot be granted to him. 
Provided further that nothin~ in this sub-section shall apply to manu-
facturers of. and dealers in, articles made of ivory and feathers of pea-
cocks. 
Explaf/.ation.-For the purposp.c; of this section, "eatin~-house" includes 
a hotel, restaurant or any other place where any eatable is served on 
payment, whether or not such payment is separately made for such 
eatable or is included in the amount charged for board and lodging . 
• • • • • 
DealiDp 
iD trophy 
and 
animal 
articles 
without 
Iic:oDCO 
probibiled. 
St. (1) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or any Penalties. 
rule or order mnde thereunder or who commits a breach of any of the 
conditions 'of any licence or permit granted under thi!! Act, shall be 
ltUilty of an offence allainst this Act, and shall, on' conviction, be punish-
abJe with imDrisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with flne which may extend to two thousand rupees, or' with both: 
Provided that where the nffencp. committed Is in relation to any animal 
I'Inecifled in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule J1 or meat of any such 
an~mal or animal article, troDhy or uncured trophy' derived from such 
animal or where the offence relates to hunting in a sanctuary or a National 
., 

8 
Park, such offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than six months but may extend to six years and 
also with fme which shall not be less than' five hundred rupees: 
Provided further that in the case of a second or subsequent offence 
of the nature mentioned in the foregoing proviso. the term of imprison-
ment shall not be "less than one year and the amount of the fine shall 
not be les8 than one thousand rupees. 
• • .- • • 

LOI{ ~ABHA 
we. 
A 
BILL 
. , 
further to amend the Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972, 
... 
(Shri Z. R. Amari. 
Ministry of State in the Ifinilt", 
Of Environment and 1'000at.). 