a

2 #०० dus.

Bill No. 54 of 2002
——_

THE CROP INSURANCE BILL, 2002
By
‘Sun 1084, AHMED SaRapal, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for insurance of crops and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as

follows: —
1. (1) This Act may be called the Crop Insurance Act, 2002, Short title, ex-
_ 2) Itextends to the whole of India. btn

5 (3) Itshall come into force at once,

2. In this act unless the context otherwise requires, —

(q “crop” means and includes all agricultural crops such as paddy, wheat, gram, Definitions.
pulses, all types of fruits, coconut, all types of cotton and cotton seeds, etc. and such
other agricultural commodities which may be notified, from time to time, by the Central

10 Government, in the Official Gazette; :

(b) "excess crop” means crop which is produced in excess of demand and where
the retum is very less compared to cost of production;

(©) “natural calamity" means drought, floods, cyclone, storm and heavy rains;
and

15 (@) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.


Insurance
Scheme.

Insurance
Scheme to be
applicable 10
all farmers.
Premium.

Payment of
Insurance
amount.

Insurance
amount to be
paid within

two months.

Supply of
essential
commodities
to farmers.

Procurement
of excess
crop.
Application of
other laws to
crop insur-
ance.

Power to make
rules.

2

3, The Central Government shall formulate a scheme providing for insurance |
crops and excess of crops through the country. 7

4. The insurance scheme shall be applicable to all kinds of crops and in all seasons and
to all farmers irrespective of the size of their land holding.

5. (1) The premium in respect of insurance shalll be borne by the Central Government
and the State Governments in such proportion as may be prescribed.

(2) Each farmer shall contribute towards the premium according to the size of the land
owned by him and the rate shall be such as may be prescribed.

6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to pay insurance amount to the
farmers for the loss of crops suffered by them due to any natural calamity or excess of U
crops where the returns is less,

7. (1) The insurance amount shall be paid within two months after the full assessment of
the loss suffered by the farmer is made by a Committee of Experts to be constituted by the
Central Government.

(2) The farmers shall be fully compensated for the loss suffered by them.

8. It shall be the duty of both Central and State Governments to provide all essential
commodities tothe farmers who have submitted their claims for insurance for their daily
needs free of cost till they recover from the loss.

9, It shall be the duty of the Central and the State Governments to procure excess crops
from the farmers so as to compensate them for the decrease in return for their produce.

10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to crop insurance.

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The farmers always greatly suffer due to floods, cyclone, drought and heavy rains. It
has been a common phenomenon that the'standing crops are destroyed by the natural
calamities every year. In most parts of the country, drought has also affected the crops. The
frequent loss of crops suffered by the farmers has rendered them helpless and has even
forced them to commit suicide, Due to the loss of crops, farmers are not in 8 position to
repay their loans to money lenders. 7

In the last few years, heavy rains have damaged the crops in several parts of the
country. Drought was also experienced in several other States which resulted in heavy loss
to farmers. Farmers have not only been victimised by natural forces but also by Government
by way of not procuring surplus production from them. It is, therefore, necessary to enact a
legislation so that farmers can be compensated for loss of their crops. due to natural calamities.

NewDeut, || IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
June 28, 2002.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM-

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of a Crop Insurance Scheme. Clause 5
provides that the premium in respect of crop insurance shall be borne by the Central
Government and the State Governments. Clause 6 provides that it shall be duty of the
Central Government to pay the farmers the insurance amount due to loss of crops. Clause 8
provides for supply of all essential commodities to farmers for their daily needs free of cost
till they recover from loss. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. The State Governments will incur expenditure from their
respective Consolidated Funds in respect of payment of premium of crop insurance and
procurement of excess crop production. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees five hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupee fifty crore is also likely to be involved.


ISLATION

rules for carrying
the delegation of

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEG!

॥ the Bill empowers the Central Government to make

Clause 11 of
atters will relate to detail only,

out the purposes of the Bill. As the m

legislative power 1s of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A

BILL,
to provide for insurance of crops and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P.)s

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1944LS—1 1-07-2002.