AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

4 १ १ JUL m5

Bill No. 54 of 2005
a ERA SEAS ADAIR HF 9H

THE VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS (REGULATION) BILL, 2005

By
‘SHRI KasuiraM RANA M.P.
| A

10 provide for recognition and regulation of voluntary. organisations and jor matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Voluntary Organisations (Regulation) Act, 2005 Short title,
a xtent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India extent an |

___ (3).1t shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
the official Gazette, appoint



ee ime etic aa %- पा >> >>

Definitions.

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

- (a) "appropriate Government" means the State Government in relation to a State
and the Central Government in other cases;

(5) "fund" means Voluntary Organisations Assistance Fund established under
section 10;

(c) "National Board" means the National Board of Voluntary Organisations
established under section 3;

(d) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(e) "Voluntary Organisation" means any organisation or institution or society
whether incorporated or registered or not, which is engaged in any of the following
activities, namely:—

(i) promoting literacy and adult education;

(ii) involved in relief operations during natural calamities like floods,
earthquakes, storms, squalls and likewise; |

(iii) involved in relief operations and providing assistance to victims in
cases of accidents;

(iv) involved in relief operations and providing assistance to victims during
strikes and other forms of disturbances;

(v) organizing free medical camps, distributing free medicines, promoting
in any way health awareness among general public or running free and charitable
dispensaries;

(vi) providing assistance to orphaned children and running orphan children
homes; |

(vii) running schools for orphaned and destitute children and providing
them with all necessary facilities; |

(viii) running homes for destitute women and providing all facilities and
training in self-employment;

(i) running homes for aged and old persons, wherein all necessary facilities
and support are provided;

(x) creating awareness among general public regarding pollution hazards
and teaching methods of pollution control;

(xi) creating awareness among general public regarding dangerous diseases
like AIDS and other contagious diseases;

(xii) creating awareness among general public about family planning;

(xiii) creating awareness among general public about ill effects of social
evils like dowry, domestic discords and negligence of dependant persons;

(xiv) creating awareness among general public about the need for religious,
caste and linguistic harmony and educating public about measures to be adopted
to achieve harmony;

(xv) spreading and taking all necessary steps to enable people to lead a
peaceful and healthy life and for improving general standard of life;

without any profit or commercial intention or motive.



3

3. (1) The Central Government shall establish a National Board of Voluntary
Organisations at New Delhi.

(2) The Board shall consist of—

(i) aChairman who shall have experience in social services for a period of not less
5 than ten years, to be appointed by the Central Government;

(ii) four other members who shall have experience in social services for a period
of not less than five years, to be nominated by Central Government on rotation basis;

(3) The Chairman and other members shall be appointed for a term of five years.

4. (1) The Central Government shall establish a Regional Board of Voluntary
10 Organisations in capital of every State/Union territory.

(2) The Regional Board shall consist of—

(i) a Chairman who shall have experience in social services for a period not
less than ten years, to be appointed by the Central Government;

(ii) two other members who shall have experience in social services for a
15 period of not less than five years, to be nominated by the Central Government on
the basis of recommendation of the State Government concerned;

(3) The Chairman and other members shall be appointed for a term of five years.

5. The National Board and every Regional Board shall consist of such number of
employees as the Central Government may prescribe.

6. Every voluntary organisation shall within a period three months from the date of
commencement of this Act, apply to the Regional Board for registration with such particulars
as may be prescribed.

7. Every Regional Board shall within one month from the date of receipt of an
application from a voluntary organisation, declare whether the application for registration
has been accepted or rejected and in case the application has been rejected, the reasons
therefor.

8. Any voluntary organisation, whose application for registration has been rejected
may appeal to the Nationa! Board.

9, The National Board may hear the views of the Regional Board and that of voluntary
organisation concerned and take a decision which shall be binding on both the parties:

Provided that the National Board may before taking a decision, consult experts in the
relevant fields.

10. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Voluntary organisations Welfare
Fund.

(2) The Central Government and all State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in
such ratio as may be prescribed.

11. (1) The Central Government shall administer the fund in such manner as may be
prescribed.

(2) The Central Government shall make a grant to each voluntary organisation every
_ year or at such intervals as it may determine.

(3) While making a grant under sub-section (2), the Central Government shall consult
the National Board and the member of Parliament representing the constituency in which
_ the organisation is situated:

Establishment
of a National
Board of
Voluntary
Organisations.

Regional
Board of
Voluntary
Organisations.

Employees of

. National

Board and
Regional
Board.

Application
for
registration.

Registration.

Appeal.

Decision of
National
Board.

Constitution
of a
Voluntary
Organisations
Welfare Fund.

Administration
of Fund.


Annual
Report of
voluntary
Organisation.

Regional
Boards to
send annual
reports to
National
Board.
Witholding
of grants to
voluntary
Organisation.

Regional
Board to
recommend

action against

voluntary
Organisation.

National
Board to take
action.

Power to
make rules.

4
Provided that the Nationa! Board may consult the Regional Board concerned in whose

jurisdiction the office of the voluntary organisation is situated before recommending to th
Central Government for release of grant.

12. Every voluntary organisation which is in receipt of grant from the Centr
Government, shall send an annua! report to the Regional Board about its activities during the
year and a statement of receipts and expenditure of the Organisation.

13. Every Regional Board shal] send the annual reports received from various volunte
Organisations under its jurisdiction to the National Board alongwith its comments on the
performance of the voluntary organisations.

14. The Central Government may, after due consultation with National Board, reduce
the amount of grant or withhold the total amount of grant payable to a voluntary organisation
for such period as it may determine. |

such action against the voluntary organisation as it may deem fit.

16. The National Board on receipt of a report from a Regional Board, shall take such
action aginst the voluntary organisation, as it may deem fit.

17. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official] Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. ;


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Voluntary organisations play a significant role in the development of the nation. They
supplement the activities of the Government in times of crisis. In times of natural calamities,
voluntary organisations come to rescue of the affected persons even before the Government.
They are doing a yeomen service to the society. These voluntary organisations are engaging
themselves in wide range of activities i.e. in providing education, health care, running homes
for orphaned children, old age homes, providing free food and medicines to the needy
people. However, many of the voluntary organisations are lacking adequate funds to
undertake their activities. They mainly depend upon funds received through contributions
and donations which is not enough to meet its expenditure. Moreover, there is no mechanism
at present, for registration and regulation of the affairs of voluntary organisations. They do
not have a legal status.

At present, Government provides grants to many voluntary organisations. But there
is no check on utilisation of money granted to them and their activities. As such, these
organisations utilise the money for the purposes other than for which it was granted. On the
other hand genuine voluntary organisations are deprived of any assistance from the
Government

There is an urgent need to provide for registration and regulation of voluntary
_ organisations for their better involvement in welfare activities ४

॥

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DELHI; KASHIRAM RANA
March 3, 2005



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM -

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Board of Voluntary
Organisations. Clause 4 provides for the setting up of Regional Board in every State. Clause 5
makes provision for appointment of officers and staff for the Boards. Clause 10 provides for
the constitution of a Voluntary Organisations Welfare Fund to which both Central and State
Governments will contribute. Clause 1 1 provides for making grants to voluntary organisations —
every year. The Bill, therefore, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore
from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore
is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the matters will relate to detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for recognition and regulation of voluntary organisations and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto

(Shri Kashiram Rana, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—5245LS (S-4)—06-04-2005.