Bill No.  54  of  2017
THE NATIONAL TRIBAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
UNIVERSITY BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NINONG ERING, M.P.
——————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE UNIVERSITY
3. Establishment and incorporation of the University.
4. Territorial jurisdiction and constituent bodies.
5. Objectives of the University.
6. Admission to the University.
7. Powers and functions of the University.
8. Visitation and inspection.
CHAPTER III
A
UTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITY
9. Authorities of University.
10. Constitution of Board of Management.
11. Powers and functions of the Board.
12. Academic Council.
13. Powers and functions of the Academic Council.
14. Research Council.
15. Functions of Research Council.
16. Extension Council or Extension Education Council.
17. Functions of the Extension Council or Extension Education Council.
18. Faculties and Board of Studies.
19. Constitution of committees.
20. Provisions in relation to membership of Authorities.
21. V alidity and protection of Acts.
22. The Visitor.
(i)
AS INTRODUCED  IN  LOK SABHA

CHAPTER IV
OFFICIERS OF THE UNIVERSITY
23. Officers.
24. The Chancellor.
25. The Vice-Chancellor.
26. Powers and duties of the Vice-Chancellor.
27. General terms and conditions of other officers of the University.
28. Functions of Directors, Deans, Registrar, Comptrollers, etc.
CHAPTER V
E
DUCATION, RESEARCH AND EXTENSION
29. Education.
30. Research.
31. Extension.
32. Integration of teaching, research and extension.
CHAPTER VI
F
UNDS AND ACCOUNTS
33. The University Funds.
34. Management of Funds.
35. Accounts and Audit.
36. Provident Funds, pension and insurance.
37. Government Grants.
38. Finance Committee.
39. Statutes subject to the provisions of this Act.
40. Statutes how made.
41. Regulations.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
42. Residence of students.
43. Annual Report.
44. Delegation of powers.
45. Constitution of adhoc committees.
46. Disputes as to constitution of Authorities or Bodies.
47. Legal proceeding.
48. Appointment to posts in connection with the affairs of University.
49. Power to remove difficulties.
50. Statues and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before
Parliament.
(ii)
C
LAUSES

1
THE NATIONAL TRIBAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
UNIVERSITY BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NINONG ERING, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a research and teaching university at East Siang in the
State of Arunachal Pradesh to facilitate and promote research in the domain of tribal
studies and to provide for matters therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Tribal Research and Development University
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  54 of  2017
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
AS INTRODUCED  IN  LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act and all Statutes and Regulations made thereunder, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
(1) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University.
(2) "Tribal studies" includes the disciplines of:
(a) tribal livelihoods;
(b) production and protection of tribals;
(c) tribal education;
(d) tribal culture and lifestyle;
(e) development of tribal societies;
(f) tribal health;
(g) forest and land rights of tribals;
(h) North-East Tribes study; and
(i) any other subject related to tribals.
(3) "authority" means any authority of the University as specified in this Act;
(4) "Board" means the Board of Management of the University;
(5) "Board of Studies" means the Board of studies of the University at faculty
level;
(6) "college" means a constituent college of the University under its direct
administrative and financial control and management;
(7) "Chancellor" means the Chancellor of the University;
(8) "Comptroller" means the Comptroller of the University;
(9) "Dean" means the Head of the constituent College;
(10) "Dean of Faculty" means the Head of the subject matter faculty.
(11) "Dean Student Welfare" means the Dean of Student Welfare, Counseling
and Student Placement;
(12) "Director" means the Director of Education or the Director of Research, or
the Director of Extension or the Director of Extension Education;
(13) "Extension Council" means the Extension Education Council of the
University;
(14) "Faculty" means Faculty of the University as Pecified in the Act and the
Statutes;
(15) "Government" means the Central Government;
(16) "Head" means the Head of the Department of the University;
(17) "hostel" means a place of residence for students of the University maintained
or recognized by the University;
(18) "centre" means the Tribal Research and Development Centre established
under the jurisdiction of the University;
(19) "officer" means an officer of the University as specified in the Act or Statutes;
(20) "prescribed" means provision as set forth in the Statutes of the University;
(21) "Registrar" means the Registrar of the University;
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(22) "Research Council" means the Research Council of the University;
(23) "Statutes" means the Statutes of the University;
(24) "student" means a person admitted and enrolled in a constituent college of
the University for taking a course of  study  for  a degree, or other academic programme
duly instituted;
(25) "teacher" means a person not below the rank of Assistant Professor appointed
or recognized by the University for the purpose of imparting instruction and/or
conducting and guiding research and/or extension education programmes and includes
any other a person who may be declared by the Statutes to be a teacher;
(26) "University" means the National Tribal Research and Development
University established under this Act; and
(27) "Vice-Chancellor" means the Vice-Chancellor of the University.
CHAPTER II
T
HE UNIVERSITY
3. (1) There shall be established in the State of Arunachal Pradesh a University by
the name of the "National Tribal Research and Development University".
(2) The University shall consist of a Chancellor, a Vice-Chancellor, Board of
Management, Academic Council, Research Council, Extension Council and other
authorities and officers and constituent bodies as set forth in this Act or provided in the
Statutes.
(3) The University shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and common
seal and shall sue and be sued by the said name.
(4) In all suits and other legal proceedings by or against the University, the pleading
shall be signed and verified by the appropriate officer and all processes in such suits and
proceedings shall be issued to and served on the appropriate.
(5) The headquarters of the University shall be at East Siang in the  State of Arunachal
Pradesh.
4. (1) With respect to teaching at the University or college level, research, and extension
education programmes in the field of Tribal studies broadly defined in this Act.
(2) All colleges, research stations, centres and other institutions coming under the
jurisdiction and authority of this University shall be constituent unit of the University under
the full management and control of the university officers and authorities and no other unit
shall be recognized as an affiliated unit.
(3) The University  may assume responsibility for the establishment, development and
operations of its constituent bodies in the territorial jurisdiction and abroad as may be
required.
5. The objects of the University shall be—
(1) to impart education towards development of quality human resource, in different
branches of study and allied matters as it may deem fit;
(2) to further the advancement of learning and conducting of research;
(3) to undertake programme of extension education;
(4) to promote partnership and linkages with national and international educational
institutions; and
(5) to undertake such other activities as the University may, from time to time,
determine.
Establishment
and
incorporation
of the
University.
Territorial
jurisdiction
and
constituent
bodies.
Objects of the
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
6. (1) The University shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the statutes, be
open to all persons:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section, shall require the University to admit to any
course of study any person who does not meet the prescribed academic standards for
admission or to retain on the rolls of the University, persons whose academic records are
below the minimum standards required for the award of a degree or whose personal conduct
is such as to be inimical to the objectives of the University or to the appropriate rights and
privileges of other students and staff.
(2) Subject to the provisions under sub section (1), the university shall reserve seats
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and categories specified by the Government
or candidates from other States in India:
Provided that no such person shall be entitled to be admitted to the university unless
he meets the standards prescribed in respect of such candidates.
7. The University shall,—
(1) provide for undergraduate and postgraduate instructions in tribal studies as stated
in sub-section (3) of section 2 and other areas as the University may deem fit;
(2) provide for conduct of research in tribal studies;
(3) facilitate dissemination of the findings of research and technical information through
an extension education programme;
(4) institute courses of study and hold examinations for and confer degrees, and other
academic distinctions on persons who have pursued and qualified for a prescribed course of
study or research or both in the University or including part courses and/or research carried
out in any other university or recognized institutions for the purpose;
(5) confer honorary degrees and other distinctions as prescribed;
(6) provide training for tribals, field workers, tribal youth and women and other persons
not enrolled as regular students of the University;
(7) have collaboration in academic, research and extension education programmes
with other universities, and Public and Private Research and Development organizations or
institutions;
(8) acquire, hold and retain property, both movable and immovable, to lease, sell or
otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property which may have become vested or
have been acquired by it for the purpose of the University, and to receive and borrow money
from the Central Government, State Government or any other approved sources and do all
other things necessary for the purpose of this Act;
(9) establish and maintain colleges, Research Stations, centres and units thereof relating
to tribal studies and allied sciences as stated in sub-section (3) of section 2;
(10) create teaching, research and extension education posts with the approval of the
Government and to appoint persons to such posts;
(11) create administrative and other posts with the approval  of  the Government and to
appoint persons to such posts;
(12) institute and award fellowship, scholarships, stipends, prizes in accordance with
the Statutes;
(13) fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed;
(14) institute and maintain residential accommodations for students and staff of the
University as appropriate;
Admission to
the
University.
Powers and
functions of
the
University.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Visitation and
inspection.
Authorities of
the
University.
(15) supervise and control the residence, conduct and discipline of the students of the
University, and to make arrangement for promoting their health and welfare; and
(16) do all such acts and things whether incidental to the powers aforesaid or not as
may be required in order to further the objects of the University.
8. (1) The Chancellor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such
person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, loaboratories and
equipments and of any constituent units of the University and may cause an inquiry to be
made in the like manner of any matter connected with the University.
(2) The Chancellor, shall, in every case, give due notice to the University of his intention
to cause an inspection or enquiry.
(3) The Chancellor shall communicate to the University with reference to the result of
such inspection or inquiry, and may after ascertaining the opinion thereon of the University,
advise the University upon the action to be taken and fix a time limit for taking action.
(4) The University shall, within the time limit so fixed, report to Chancellor the action
which has been taken or is proposed to be taken on the advice tendered by the Chancellor.
(5) The Chancellor may, where action has not been taken by University to the
satisfaction of the Chancellor within the time limit fixed and after considering any explanation
furnished or representation made by the University, issue such directions as the Chancellor
may think fit and the University shall comply with such directions.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sub-sections of this section,
if at any time the Chancellor is of the opinion that in any manner the affairs of the University
are not managed in furtherance of the objects of the University, or in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, and the statutory regulations or the special measures desirable to
maintain the standards of University teaching, examination, research or extension, he may
indicate to the University any matter in regard to which it desires an explanation, and call
upon the University to offer such explanations, within such time as may be specified by the
Chancellor:
Provided that if the University fails to offer any explanation within the time specified or
offer an explanation which, in the opinion of the Chancellor is unsatisfactory, the Chancellor
may issue such instructions as appeared necessary and desirable to him in the circumstances
of the case and may exercise such powers as necessary for giving effect to the instructions.
(7) The University shall furnish such information relating to the administration of the
University as the Chancellor may require.
CHAPTER III
A
UTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITY
9. The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely:—
(1) the Board of Management;
(2) the Academic Council;
(3) the Research Council;
(4) the Extension Council or Extension Education Council;
(5) the Faculties and their Board of Studies; and
(6) such other bodies of University as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities
of University.
10. (1) The Chancellor shall, soon after the first Vice-Chancellor is appointed, constitute
the Board of Management.
Constitution
of Board of
Management.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(2) The Board of Management shall constitute of the following:
(i) the Vice-Chancellor—Chairperson;
(ii) the Principal Secretary or Secretary, Department of Tribal Affairs, State
Government or his nominee not below the rank of Joint Secretary, as member;
(iii) the Principal Secretary or Secretary, Finance Department of the State
Government or his nominee not below the rank of Joint Secretary, as member;
(iv) one eminent educationist (not below the rank of Professor) from the field of
tribal research to be nominated by the Chancellor, as member;
(v) one Member of Parliament to be nominated by the visitor, as member;
(vi) one member of autonomous/Zila Parishad body, with substantial contribution
towards rural and tribal upliftment and empowerment, to be nominated by the Chancellor,
as member;
(vii) one outstanding woman social worker having background of rural and
tribal advancement to be nominated by the Chancellor, as member;
(viii) one progressive tribal from the jurisdiction of the University to be nominated
by the Government, as member;
(ix) one distinguished tribal to be nominated by the Government, as member;
(x) one eminent educationist from outside University from the field of tribal
studies to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, as member;
(xi) one Director to be nominated by the vice-Chancellor, as member;
(xii) one Dean to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, as member; and
(xiii) Registrar—Secretary, as member.
(3) The term of the office of the Members of the Board other than the ex-offcio members
shall be two years.
(4) When a vacancy occurs in the office of any member by the reason of death,
resignation or any cause other than the expiry of term, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance
with the provisions of this section and the person who fills such vacancy shall hold office for
the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.
(5) No action or proceedings of the Board shall be invalid merely on the ground of the
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Board.
(6) One-third of the members of the Board shall form quorum at a meeting of the Board:
Provided that if a meeting of the Board is adjourned for want of quorum, no quorum
shall be necessary at the next meeting called for transacting the same business.
(7) No other officer or employee of the University shall be eligible to be a member of the
Board under clause (vi) to (xi) of sub-section (2) of this section.
(8) The Board  for  the  purpose of consultation may invite any person having experience
or special knowledge on any subject under consideration to attend its meeting:
Provided that the person so invited may speak or otherwise take part in the proceedings
of such meeting but shall not be entitled to vote and shall be entitled to such allowances for
attending the meeting as may be prescribed.
(9) The Board shall on dates to be fixed by the Vice-Chancellor meet at least twice a
year:
Provided that the Vice-Chancellor may whenever, he thinks fit and shall, upon the
requisition in writing signed by not less than five members of the Board, convene a special
meeting of the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
Powers and
functions of
the Board.
11. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Board shall be the
Chief Executive Body of the University and shall manage and supervise the properties and
activities of the University and shall be responsible for the conduct of all administrative
affairs of the University not otherwise provided for in this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, the Board shall exercise
and perform the following powers and functions, namely:—
(i) consider and approve the financial requirements, estimates and the budget of
the University;
(ii) hold and control the property and the funds of the University and issue any
general directive on behalf of the University;
(iii) accept or transfer any property on behalf of the University;
(iv) administer funds placed at the disposal of the University for the purpose
intended;
(v) arrange for the investment and withdrawal of the funds of the University;
(vi) borrow money for capital investments with prior approval of the State
Government and make suitable arrangements for its repayment;
(vii) accept on behalf of the University trusts, bequests and  donations;
(viii) consider and approve the recommendations of the Academic, Research
and Extension Councils where required;
(ix) direct the form and use of the common seal of the University;
(x) appoint such committees and bodies as it may deem necessary and set down
the terms of reference thereof an accordance with the provisions of this Act and the
Statutes;
(xi) consider and approve establishment, amalgamation and abolition of college,
department, centre or Research Station/Sub-Station on the recommendation of Academic
Council, Research Council or  Extension Council.
(xii) create teaching, research and extension education posts with the approval
of the State Government; and
(xiii) approve the recommendations of Selection Committee in the prescribed
manner for appointment of officers, teachers and employees of the rank of Assistant
Professor and above.
12. (1) The Academic Council shall consist—
(i) the Vice-Chancellor—Chairperson, ex-officio;
(ii) the Directors of Research and Extension, as members;
(iii) all Deans, as members;
(iv) two Heads of the Department from each faculty nominated by the
Vice-Chancellor on rotational basis, as members;
(v) one teacher of the Professor rank from each faculty to be nominated by the
Vice Chancellor on rotational basis, as member;
(vi) one eminent tribal studies educationist from outside the University to be
nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, as  member;
(vii) the Registrar, as member; and
(viii) the Director of Education—Member Secretary.
Academic
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
Powers and
Functions of
the Academic
Council.
(2) The Comptroller and University—Librarian shall be the non-member invitees of the
Academic Council.
(3) The Academic Council may co-opt as members not more than two persons for  such
period and in such manner as may be prescribed so as to secure adequate representation of
different sectors of tribal and allied fields.
(4) All members of the Academic Council other than the ex-officio members and members
referred in sub-section (3) shall hold office for a term of two years.
(5) One third of the members of the Academic Council shall form quorum at a meeting
of the Council:
Provided that if a meeting of the Council is adjourned for want of quorum, no quorum
shall be necessary at the next meeting for the transaction of the same business.
(6) The Academic Council shall meet one in each semester on such dates as may be
fixed by the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor thinks fit, he may convene special meetings of the
Academic Council.
13. (1) The Academic Council shall, subject to provisions of this Act and the Statutes,
have the power by regulations of prescribing all courses of study and determining curricula,
and shall have control on teaching and other educational programmes within University,
and shall be responsible for the maintenance of standards thereof.
(2) The Academic Council shall have power to make regulations consistent with this
Act and the Statutes relating to all academic matters subject to its control and to amend or
repeal such regulations.
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the
Academic Council shall,—
(i) advise the Board and Vice-Chancellor or an academic matters;
(ii) make recommendations for the institution of Professorships, Associate
Professorships, Assistant Professorships and other teaching posts including posts in
research and extension education and in regard to the duties thereof;
(iii) make recommendations for adjunct professorship;
(iv) make recommendations for the establishment or amalgamation or abolition
of Faculty, College, Department of teaching, research and extension education;
(v) make regulations regarding the admission of students to the University, and
determine the number of students to be admitted;
(vi) make regulations relating to the courses of study leading to degrees, diplomas
and certificates;
(vii) make regulations relating to the conduct of examinations and to maintain
and improve standards of education;
(viii) make recommendations to the Board regarding conferment of honorary
degree;
(ix) make recommendations regarding the qualifications to be prescribed for
teachers in the University; and
(x) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be
conferred or imposed on it under the provisions of this Act, by the Board or
Vice-Chancellor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
Extension
Council.
14. (1) There shall be a Research Council consisting of the following members:
(i) the Vice-Chancellor—Chairperson;
(ii) the Directors of tribal affairs (depending upon research mandate and
programmes of the University) of the Government, as member;
(iii) the Directors of  Education and Extension, as member;
(iv) all Deans, as member;
(v) all Heads of Departments/Associate Directors, as member;
(vi) not more than four persons including one progressive tribal for such period
and in such manner as may be prescribed so as to secure adequate representation of
tribes, as members; and
(vii) the Director of Research — Member-Secretary.
(2) the Registrar and Comptroller shall be the non-member invitees of the Research
Council.
15.  The Research Council shall consider and make recommendations in respect of:—
(i) research programmes and projects undertaken or to be undertaken by the
various University scientists in the field of Tribal and allied sciences and their
prioritization, monitoring and evaluation;
(ii) physical, fiscal and administrative facilities required for implementing  research
projects;
(iii) orienting research to meet tribals and other stakeholder's needs;
(iv) public-private partnership in research; and
(v) any other matter pertaining to research programmes which may be referred to
by the Vice-Chancellor or the Board or any other authority of the University, as the
case may be.
16. (1) There shall be an Extention Council consisting of,—
(i) the Vice-Chancellor — Chairperson;
(ii) the Directors of  Tribal   Affairs (depending upon mandate and programmes
of the University) of the Government, as members;
(iii) the Director of Education, Research and all Associate Directors and Joint
Directors, as members;
(iv) all Deans, as members;
(v) all Heads of the Departments or Regional Research Station or Centres, as
members;
(vi) two eminent persons in the field of Extention Education from outside nominated
by the Vice-Chancellor, as members;
(vii) two progressive tribal to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, as members;
(viii) the Vice-Chancellor may co-opt up to two members from related
organizations; and
(ix) the Directors of Extention — Member-Secretary.
(2) the Registrar and Comptroller shall be the non-member invites of the Extension
Council.
Research
Council.
Functions of
Research
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

10
Functions of
the Extension
Council.
Faculties and
Board of
Studies.
17.  The Extention Council shall consider and make recommendations in respect of:
(i) the Extention Education Programmes and Projects of the University;
(ii) co-ordination of Extension Education activities;
(iii) development of farmers' Education, Training and Advisory Services;
(iv) monitoring and evaluation of the Extension Education Programmes and
Projects of the University; and
(v) any other matter referred to it by the Vice-Chancellor, Board or any other
authority of the University, as the case may be.
18. (1) The University shall have the faculties.
(2) Each faculty shall have Board of Studies consisting of the following members:
(i) the Dean of Faculty — Chairperson;
(ii) the Deans of the constituent colleges of the faculty, as members;
(iii) all Heads of the Departments of the concerned faculty, as members;
(iv) one elder faculty member from each Department nominated by the Dean of
Faculty, as members; and
(v) a senior Head of the Department— Member-Secretary.
(3) The faculty shall—
(i) review teaching programme and suggest improvement thereof;
(ii) consider the recommendations of the Committee of Courses and Curricula or
similar body of department or faculty and submit to the Academic Council for approval;
and
(iii) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Academic
Council or Vice-Chancellor.
19. Every authority shall have the power to appoint committees which may unless
otherwise provided in this Act or Statutes consist of the members of the authority and such
other persons as it may deem fit.
20. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, if any member other than ex-officio
member of any authority or body of the University, is unable by reason of his death, resignation,
removal or otherwise to complete his full term of office, the vacancy so caused shall as soon
as convenient, be filled by appointment, nomination or co-option, as the case may be and the
person so appointed, nominated or co-opted shall fill such vacancy for the un-expired portion
of the term for which the member in whose place such person is appointed, nominated or co-
opted would otherwise have continued in office.
(2) The Board may remove any person from membership of any authority or body of
the University on the ground that such person has been convicted of any offence involving
moral turpitude or conduct not befitting the office held by the concerned member with the
approval of the Chancellor, except that prior approval of the Chancellor shall not be necessary
where such a person has been convicted by a competent Court of law:
Provided that no such order shall be made against any person without giving reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
(3) A person who is a member of any authority or body of the University as a
representative of another body whether of the University or not, shall cease to be a member
of such authority or body if before the expiry of the term of his membership he ceases to be
a member of that other body by which he was appointed or nominated.
Functions of
Faculty.
Constitution
of
committees.
Provisions in
relation to
membership
of authorities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
(4) Whenever any person becomes a member of any authority or body of the University
by virtue of the office held by him, he shall forthwith cease to be a member of such authority
or body if he/she ceases to hold such office before the expiry of the term of his membership:
Provided that he shall not be deemed to have ceased to hold his office merely by
reason of his proceeding on leave for a period not exceeding four months.
(5) Any member, other than an ex-officio member of any authority or body of the
University may resign his office by letter addressed to the Vice-Chancellor and such
resignation, upon acceptance, shall take effect from the date on which the same is submitted.
21. (1) The University shall adhere to the Acts and Laws of the Union and the State.
(2) No act or proceeding of any authority or body of the University shall be invalid by
reason of the existence of any vacancy among its members or by reason of some person
having taken part in the proceedings who is subsequently found to have been not entitled to
do so.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all the acts done or orders made in good
faith by the University or any of its authorities shall be final and no suit shall be instituted
against or damages claimed from the University or its authority for anything done or purported
to have been done in pursuance of this Act or the Statutes or the Regulations.
(4) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer or other employee of
the University in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of this Act or any Statutes made thereunder.
22. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work
and progress of the University, including colleges and institutions managed by it, and to
submit a report thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the
views of the Board thereon through theVice-Chancellor, take such action and issue such
directions, as he considers necessary, in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report
and the University shall be bound to comply with such directions.
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person
or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and
equipment, and of any college, institution or campus maintained by the University and also
of the examinations, instruction and other work conducted or done by the University and to
cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the
administration or finances of the University, colleges or institutions.
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub-section (3) give notice to the
University of his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made—
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the
University or any college or college or institution maintained by it, or
(b) to the management of the college or institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be
made in respect of the college or institution admitted to the privileges of the University, and
the University or the management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make such
representations to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary.
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the
management, as the case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry
as is referred to in sub-section (3).
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the
University shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be
present in person and be heard at such inspection or inquiry.
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University,
college or institution maintained by it, address the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the
V alidity and
protection of
Acts.
The Visitor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
result of such inspection or inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the
action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address
made by the Visitor, the Vice-Chancellor shall communicate forthwith to the Board the results
of the inspection or inquiry, and the views of the Visitor and the advice tendered by him upon
the action to be taken thereon.
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any college or
institution admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management concerned
through the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his
views thereon and such advice as he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken
thereon.
(9) The Board shall communicate, through the Vice-Chancellor to the Visitor such
action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or
inquiry.
(10) Where, the Board does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction
of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation
made by the Executive Council or the management, issue such directions as he may think fit
and the Executive Council shall comply with such directions.
(11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Visitor may, by
order in writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the
Act, the Statutes or the Ordinance:
Provided that before making any such order, the Visitor shall call upon the Registrar to
show cause why such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a
reasonable time, he shall consider the same.
(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
CHAPTER IV
O
FFICERS OF THE UNIVERSITY
23. The following shall be the officers of the University, namely:—
(i) the Chancellor;
(ii) the Vice-Chancellor;
(iii) the Director;
(iv) the Deans;
(v) the Registrar;
(vi) the Comptroller;
(vii) the University Librarian; and
(viii) such other persons in the service of the University  as may be declared by
the Statutes to be the Officers of the University.
24. (1) The Governor of the State of Arunachal Pradesh shall by virtue of his office be
the Chancellor of the University.
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University and shall,
if present, preside at the Convocation of the University.
(3) Every proposal to confer an honorary degree shall be subject to the confirmation of
the Chancellor.
(4) The Chancellor may by an order in writing annul any order or proceeding of the
officer or authority of the University which is not in conformity with this Act and Statutes:
Officers.
The
Chancellor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

13
Provided that before making any such order he shall call upon the officer or authority
concerned to show cause why such an order should not be made and if any cause is shown
within the time specified in this behalf, he shall consider the same.
(5) The Chancellor shall exercise such powers and perform such other duties as are
conferred on him by this Act or the Statutes.
25. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole time officer of the University and he shall
be appointed by the Chancellor from the panel of eminent educationists in Tribal studies
drawn by the Search Committee.
(2) The Search  Committee shall consist of the following members:
(i) an eminent personality in Tribal Studies;
(ii) one nominee of the Government;
(iii) one nominee of the Chancellor:
Provided that one of the members shall be nominated by the Chancellor to act as
Convener:
Provided further that nominee of the Government and the Chancellor shall be in the
rank of Vice-Chancellor or equivalent.
(3) A person who has attained academic excellence and demonstrated leadership
qualities in research, education and extension shall be eligible for candidature to the post of
Vice-Chancellor.
(4) The Notice of filling of vacancies in Search Committe shall be widely publicized and
communicated to every Tribal Universities and institutes.
(5) The Search Committee shall select and suggest a panel of the three names.
(6) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years or until he attains the
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
(7) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the service
of the Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be prescribed.
(8) The Vice-Chancellor may relinquish his office by resignation in writing under his
hand addressed to the Chancellor which shall be delivered to the Chancellor normally sixty
days prior to the date on which the Vice-Chancellor intend to be relieved from his office:
Provided that the Chancellor may, if he deems fit, may relieve the Vice-Chancellor prior
to the date on which the Vice-Chancellor intends to be relieved from his officer.
(9) In the event of a temporary vacancy of the post of Vice-Chancellor or his absence
on leave or for any other reason, senior most Director or Dean of Faculty or Registrar of the
University, with the approval of the Chancellor, may perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor
but his period shall not exceed six months.
(10) The Vice-Chancellor shall not be removed from his office except by order of the
Chancellor passed on the ground of misbehaviour or incapacity or if it appears to the Chancellor
that the continuance of the Vice-Chancellor in office is detrimental to the interests of the
University, after due inquiry by such person  who is or has been a Judge of High Court to be
nominated by the Chancellor in which the Vice-Chancellor, shall have an opportunity of
making his representation.
26. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Principal Executive Officer of the University
and ex-officio Chairperson of the Board, Academic Council and other authorities and shall in
the absence of the Chancellor, preside at the Convocation of the University and confer
degrees on person entitled to receive them.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise overall control over the affairs of the University
and shall be responsible for due maintenance of discipline in the University.
The Vice-
Chancellor.
Powers and
duties of the
Vice-
Chancellor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall convene meetings of the Board of Management, Academic
Council, Research Council and Extension Council.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall ensure faithful observance of the provisions of this Act
and Statutes and Regulations.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for the presentation of the annual financial
estimates and the annual accounts to the Board of Management.
(6) The Vice-Chancellor may take any action in any emergency which in his opinion
calls for immediate action and as soon as may be thereafter report his action to the authorities
who would ordinarily have dealt with the matter:
Provided that if the authority disagrees with the action of the Vice-Chancellor, the
matter shall be referred to the Chancellor whose decision shall be final.
(7) Where any action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under sub-section (6) affects any
person in the service of the University to his disadvantage, such person may prefer an
appeal to the Board within thirty days from the date on which such person has been served
a notice of the action taken.
(8) If the Vice-Chancellor is satisfied that a decision of the Board is not in the best
interest of the Univerisity, he shall refer it to the Chancellor whose decision thereon shall be
final.
(9) Subject to the provisions of the preceding sub-sections, the Vice Chancellor shall
give effect to the decisions of the Board regarding the appointments, promotions and dismissal
of officers, teachers and other employees of the University.
(10) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for the proper administration of the
affairs of the University and for a close coordination and integration of teaching, research
and extension.
(11) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as are conferred or imposed upon him under the provisions of this Act and the
Statutes.
27. The Officers of the University referred to in clause (iii) to (viii) of section 23 shall
be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the concerned authority of the
University on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Vice-Chancellor may make appointments of such officers as a
temporary measure for a period of six months under intimation to the concerned authority of
the University.
28. (1) The Director of Education shall,—
(a) be responsible for planning and academic coordination for teaching, quality
of education, policy matters and system regarding resident instruction, overseeing the
examination and evaluation, development and enforcement of curricula, development
of educational technology and teachers' training programme(s), and Human Resource
Development of faculty; and
(b) function as Member-Secretary of the Academic Council.
(2) the Director of Research shall be responsible for the direction and coordination of
research programmes in the University as laid down in section 30.
(3) the Director of Extension or Extension Education shall be responsible for the Tribal
Extension Education programmes as laid down in section 31.
(4) the Dean shall be Head of the College and be responsible for teaching, research and
extension activities in the College.
General terms
and
conditions of
other Officers
of the
University.
Functions of
Directors,
Deans,
Registrar,
Comptroller,
etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(5) the Dean of Faculty shall be the Chairman of Board of Studies of the concerned
faculty and shall be responsible to the Vice-Chancellor for the organization and
implementation of the teaching programme of the faculty.
(6) the Dean of Students Welfare shall,—
(a) plan and direct the programme of students' advisement and counselling
and to enlist the co-operation of prospective employers and employment agencies
to assist in the placement of graduates of the University and to promote discipline
amongst the students of the University;
(b) plan and organize students' extra-curricular activities such as sports,
cultural and other recreational activities, National Cadet Corps (NCC), National
Social Service (NSS) and communication skill improvement and other allied
activities;
(c) make arrangements and supervise management of students' hostel,
cafeteria and mess; and
(d) supervise and control medical and health services and other welfare
measures in the University.
(7) The Registrar shall be,—
(a) ex-officio Secretary of the Board of Management and permanent invitee
of all councils;
(b) responsible for the due custody of records and common seal of the
University;
(c) responsible for establishment matters and general administration in the
University as prescribed; and
(d) responsible for admissions of Under Graduate and Post Graduate and
conduct and management of examinations at Under Graduate and Post Graduate,
maintenance of permanent records of the students, at the University including
the courses taken, credits obtained, degrees, prizes or other distinctions and
other items pertaining to academic performance and discipline of the students.
(8) The Comptroller shall,—
(a) prepare the budget, the statement of accounts, management of the funds
and investments of the University;
(b) be responsible for ensuring that expenditure is made as authorized;
(c) arrange periodical internal inspection of the accounts maintained in
various units of University;
(d) maintain the accounts of the University in the form and manner as
approved by the Board and keep constant watch on the state of cash and bank
balance and on the state of investment; and
(e) see that the asset registers are maintained up-to date and that the regular
stock checking is conducted.
(9) The University Librarian shall be responsible for the maintenance and
management of the University Library Information System and to guide and co-ordinate
library activities of all the constituent units of the University.
(10) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Officers of the University referred
to in clauses ( iii) to ( viii) of section 23 shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed or as may be assigned to them from time to time, by the Vice-Chancellor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
CHAPTER V
EDUCATION, RESEARCH AND EXTENSION
29. (1) Subject to provisions of this Act, education in the University shall include
research particularly Doctoral or PhD degree in Tribal Research, Bachelor's, Master's and
degree programmes and short-term diploma/certificate courses in the disciplines of tribal
studies and research as may be prescribed.
(2) The educational programmes shall maintain congruence with the State and National
policies.
(3) The University shall put in place initiatives for e-learning, distributed or distance
education, and Information and Communication Technology enabled knowledge sharing.
(4) The programmes of tribal education should aim at producing competent and skilled
graduates and post-graduates.
30. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the University shall carry
on strategic, basic and applied research in tribal studies.
(2) The University through its research organization shall be the principal agency of
control over research activities in tribal affairs and other allied branches in its jurisdiction.
(3) The University with the concurrence of Government may establish Regional or
Zonal Research Stations and Sub-Stations in different tribal zones in its territorial jurisdiction
for the conduct of research including operational research.
31. (1) The Extension Education programmes shall be established in the University
and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, ensure technology assessment
and refinement and facilitate adoption of technology based on research findings.
(2) The Extension Education programme shall include demonstrations and training
programmes for the benefit of various stakeholders.
(3) The Extension Education programmes shall be coordinated with various units of
the University and other appropriate agencies of the Centre Government and the State
Governments.
(4) The University shall be responsible for developing models of tribal Extension in the
State.
32. (1) In consultation with the appropriate officers of the University, the Vice-Chancellor
shall be responsible for taking such steps as may be necessary for the full integration of
teaching, research and extension activities of the University.
(2) Every faculty member borne on teaching cadre shall devote some time not (exceeding
thirty per cent and as decided by the Vice-Chancellor in consultation with the appropriate
officers of the University) in an academic year for undertaking research and/or extension
besides teaching.
(3) All teaching, research and extension staff located in the college shall be under the
administrative control of Dean of the College and overall technical control of Director Research
and Director Extension as the case may be.
(4) The University shall develop its programme of research and extension keeping in
view the regional needs of the State and provide the appropriate technological backstopping,
to the Government and other stakeholders.
CHAPTER VI
F
UNDS AND ACCOUNTS
33. (1) The University shall have a General Fund to which shall be credited:—
Education.
Research.
Extension.
Integration of
teaching,
research and
extension.
The
University
Funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(i) income from fees, endowments and grants and income from properties of the
University including hostel, experimental stations;
(ii) contribution and grants made by the Government on such conditions as are
consistent with the provision of this Act; and
(iii) other contributions, grants, donations, beneficiations and loans and other
receipts.
(2) The University shall constitute a fund to be known as the Foundation Fund from
contributions and grants made by the Central Government or the State Government or
approved agency for being credited to that fund and such other sums as may be specified by
the Board, shall be credited to this fund.
(3) The Board may as and when necessary re-transfer such amount as may be specified,
from the Foundation Fund to the General Fund, in manner prescribed.
(4) The University shall furnish statements of accounts, reports and other particulars
to the Government relating to any grant made by the Government and shall take such action
and furnish such statements, accounts, reports and other particulars relating to the utilization
of any grant within such time and manner as the Government may direct.
(5) It shall be competent for the University in furtherance of  its objectives to accept
the grants from the Government or any other State Government or the Central Government or
Statutory Bodies or endowments or donations under such conditions as may be agreed
upon between the University and the granter or donor.
34. The General Fund, Foundation Fund and other funds of the University shall be
managed according to the provisions laid down by the Statutes.
35. ( 1) The Annual Statement of accounts (based on the double entry system of
accounting) of the University shall be prepared by the Comptroller and certified by an
authority to be nominated or authorized by the Board.
(2) The Statement prepared under sub-section (1), shall include all the money accruing
to or received by the University from whatever source and all amount disbursed and paid by
the University.
(3) The statement prepared under sub-section (1), shall be submitted to the Government
by the Board normally within six months after close of the financial year to which these
pertain, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament.
36. (1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, teachers, ministerial
staff and other employees, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed, such pension, gratuity, insurance, provident fund, contributory pension fund as
it may deem fit.
(2) For such pension, gratuity, insurance and provident fund so constituted by the
University, the Government should declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act
shall apply to such funds as it were Government provident Fund:
 Provided that the University shall have power in consultation with the Finance
Committee and the Board to invest Provident Fund amount in such manner as it may determine.
37. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide every year the following lumpsum grants to the University,
namely:
(i) a grant not less than the estimated expenditure of pay and allowances of the
staff contingencies, supplies and services of the University for proper functioning of
University; and
Management
of Funds.
Accounts and
Audit.
Provident
Fund, pension
and
insurance.
Government
grants.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(ii) a grant to meet the actual pensionary and all other retirement liabilities of
the pensioners of the University.
(2) The State Government shall also make non-lapsable lumpsum grant to the
University in respect to schemes included in the Five Year Plans and transferred to it for
implementation by the University of an amount equal to the net outlay in the annual plan.
38. (1) The Board shall constitute a Finance Committee consisting of:
(i) the Vice-Chancellor—Chairperson;
(ii) the Principal Secretary or the Secretary (Finance) to the State Government or
his nominee not below the rank of Joint Secretary, as member;
(iii) the Principal Secretary/the Secretary (Tribal) to the Government, as member;
(iv) one Director/Dean from amongst the Board Members to be nominated by
the Vice-Chancellor, as member;
(v) one nominee of the Board, as member;
(vii) the Comptroller—Member-Secretary;
(viii) the Registrar shall be the non-member invitee.
(2) The Finance Committee shall—
(i) examine the annual accounts and budget estimates of the University and to
advise the Board thereon;
(ii) review the financial position of the University from to time; and
(iii) make recommendations to the Board on all matters relating to the finances of
the University.
CHAPTER VII
S
TATUTES AND REGULATIONS
39. The Statutes of the University may provide for any matter connected with the
affairs of the University and shall, in particular, provide for the following, namely:
(1) constitution, powers and duties of the Authorities;
(2) creation, composition and functions of the other Bodies or Committees necessary
or desirable for improving the academic life of the University;
(3) designations, powers, functions, duties, manner of appointment and selections,
and terms and conditions of service of the officers other than Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor;
(4) classification, qualification and manner of appointment, terms and conditions of
services and duties of teachers and non-teaching staff of the University;
(5) terms and conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor;
(6) establishment, amalgamation, sub-division or abolition of  faculties, Departments/
Research Stations/Centres or other units of the University;
(7) establishment of pension and insurance schemes for the benefit of officers, teachers
and other employees of the University and rules, terms and conditions of such schemes;
(8) holding of Convocation to confer degrees and diplomas;
(9) conferment and withdrawal of honorary degrees and academic distinctions;
(10) conditions of service, remunerations and allowances including traveling and
daily allowances to be paid to officers, teachers and other persons employed under the
University;
Finance
Committee.
Statutes
subject to the
provisions of
this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

19
(11) conditions and mode of appointment and the duties of examining bodies and
examiners;
(12) management of Colleges/Centres/Divisions/Departments/Regional Stations/other
centres/institutions founded or maintained by the University;
(13) constitution of Selection Committee for appointment of teachers and other staff;
and
(14) all other matters which by this Act are to be provided by the Statutes.
40. (1) The Statutes made under this Act shall be proposed by the Board and submitted
to the Chancellor for his assent and shall be valid only after assented to and notified by the
Vice-Chancellor.
(2) Any Statute may be amended or repealed by the Board with the assent of the
Chancellor.
(3) All Statutes made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette.
41. (1) The authorities of the University may make regulations consistent with this Act
and the Statutes for:
(i) laying down the procedure for their meetings and number of members required to
form the quorum;
(ii) providing for matters which by this Act and the Statutes are to be regulated by
Regulations; and
(iii) providing for any other matter solely concerning the authority and not provided
for by this Act and the Statutes.
(2) The Academic Council may subject to the provisions of Act and the Statutes, make
regulations providing for courses of studies, system of examination, academic calendar,
award of degrees and diplomas of the University and other matters related to resident
instruction.
(3) The regulations made by any authority of the University shall be subject to such
directions as the Board may, from time to time, give in this behalf.
(4) Academic Council of the University may make regulations for:
(i) holding of Convocations to confer degrees and diplomas;
(ii) conferment of honorary degrees, academic distinctions and withdrawal of
degrees;
(iii) establishment and abolition of hostels maintained by the University;
(iv) institution of fellowships, scholarships, stipends, bursaries, medals and
prizes and the conditions of award thereof;
(v) entrance or admission of the students to the University and their enrolment
and continuance as such and the conditions and procedures for dropping students
from enrolment;
(vi) fees which may be charged by the University;
(vii) course of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of
the University;
(viii) conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degrees, diplomas,
or other courses and examinations of the University and their eligibility for the award
of degrees and diplomas;
(ix) conditions for conferment of degrees and other academic distinctions;
Statutes how
made.
Regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

20
(x) maintenance of discipline among the students of the University;
(xi) special arrangements, if any, which may be made for residence, discipline
and teaching of women students and the provision of special courses of study for
women; and
(xii) conditions of residence of students of the University and the levy of fees
for residence in hostels.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
42. The students shall reside in the accommodation maintained by the university or
approved by the Vice-Chancellor subject to the conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Vice-Chancellor or an authorized officer of the University may permit
the student(s) to reside with their parents or in private accommodations when no such
accommodation is available with the University.
43. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared by the Registrar or any
other officer, assigned under the direction of the Vice-Chancellor normally within six months
from the close of the Financial Year and circulated to the Members of the Board before the
meeting at which it is to be considered.
(2) The Board shall after consideration of the annual report forward a copy thereof to
the Government which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
44. The Vice-Chancellor may, by Statutes, delegate the powers exercisable under this
Act or the Statutes made thereunder, to any authority, officer, heads of colleges or divisions
or departments or institutions or units/office subject to such conditions and restrictions as
the Vice-Chancellor may deem proper.
45. Notwithstanding anything in this Act and until such time as the authorities are
duly constituted, the Vice-Chancellor may subject to the approval of the Board, after it has
been constituted appoint committees temporarily to exercise, perform and discharge any of
the powers, functions and duties of such authority under this Act.
46. If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly appointed or is
entitled to be a member of any authority or other body of University, the matter shall be
referred to the Chancellor whose decision thereon shall be final: Provided that before taking
any such decision, the Chancellor shall give the person affected thereby reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
47. All suits and other legal proceedings by or against the University shall be instituted,
prosecuted or defended on behalf of the University by the Registrar or any other officer
specifically nominated in this behalf by the Vice-Chancellor.
48. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes made thereunder,
appointment to posts and services in connection with the affairs of the University may be
made by the Vice Chancellor with the approval of the concerned authority as prescribed.
Provided that such approval of Board shall not be necessary in respect of appointment of
posts carrying scales of pay lower than the pay scale of an Assistant Professor.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and until such time as the Statutes
are made or the authorities of the University are constituted, appointments to posts and
services in connection with the affairs of the University may be made by the Vice-Chancellor
on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Chancellor.
49. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Residence of
students.
Annual
Report.
Delegation of
powers.
Constitution
of ad-hoc
committees.
Disputes as to
constitution
of Authorities
or Bodies.
Legal
proceeding.
Appointment
to posts in
connection
with the
affairs of
University.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree
that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
order.
50. (1) Every Statute or Regulation made under this Act shall be published in the
Official Gazette.
(2) Every  Statute or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute or Regulation
or both Houses agree that the Statute or Regulation should not be made, the Statute or
Regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute or Regulation.
(3) The power to make Statutes or Regulations shall include the power to give
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the
Statutes or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any
Statute or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such
Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.
Statutes and
Regulations
to be
published in
the Official
Gazette and
to be laid
before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, vide its article 14 states that
"Indigenous peoples have the right to establish and control their educational systems and
institutions providing education in their own languages, in a manner appropriate to their
cultural methods of teaching and learning". The access to educational facilities, especially
for the tribal population in our country is still very limited. Lack of tribal research and
inadequate opportunities for higher studies lead to disadvantageous educational and socio-
economic status of the tribal population.
There is an information asymmetry while dealing with issues of tribals especially in
North-East India. Thus, there is information gap while forming policies for tribal population
which further impacts effective implementation. Therefore, the university aims to fill the
information gap while forming the policies for tribals especially in the North-Eastern States.
The need is to provide excellent quality research to foster policies for the tribal by the tribal.
It is, therefore, proposed to establish and incorporate a teaching university at East
Siang in the State of Arunachal Pradesh to facilitate and promote research in the domain of
tribal research and development.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NINONG  ERING
February 15, 2017.
22

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a University in the State of Arunachal
Pradesh by the name of the National Tribal Research and Development University. Clause 37
provides for lump sum grants to the University every year. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees  five hundred crore per annum would involve from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
23

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 40 of the Bill provides that the Statutes of the University shall be proposed by
the Board. It also empowers the Board of the University to make new or additional Statutes
or to amend or repeal the Statues of the University subject to the assent of the chancellor.
Clause 41 of the Bill enables the authorities of the University to make Regulations,
consistent with the Act and the Statutes for the conduct of their own business and that of
the Committees appointed by them and also for such matters as may be prescribed by the
Statutes or Ordinances.
Clause 49 empowers the Central Government, by order, to make provisions to remove
certain difficulties, which may appear to be necessary or expedient and such an order is not
to be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the commencement of the Act and
that such order shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 50 provides that every Statutes or Regulation made under the Act shall be
published in the Official Gazette and laid before each House of Parliament.
As matters for which the Statutes or Regulations may be made pertain to matters of
procedure or detail and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill, the delegation of
legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.
24

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a research and teaching university at East Siang in the
State of Arunachal Pradesh to facilitate and promote research in the domain of
tribal studies and to provide for matters therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ninong Ering, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5062LS(S3)—17.03.2017.