As IntRobucED IN Lox SABHA

Sed

98 An AMR ।

Bill No. 54 of 2006

THE PREVENTION OF FEMALE INFANTICIDE BILL, 2006
By

Suri Monan Sincu, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent female infanticide.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention of Female Infanticide Act, 2006.

(2) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(0) “girl child” means a girl upto the age of ten years; and
(ii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

3. Whoever causes, or does any act with the intention of causing death of a girl child
or allows a sick girl child to die by deliberately not giving timely and proper medical assistance
or does any act or neglects the care of the girl child which may result in her death, commits
the offence of female infanticide.

Short title and
commencement.

Definitions.

Female
infanticide.


Information
about birth or
death of a girl
child to be
given to
authorities.

Arrest of
person
committing
female
infanticide.

Punishment.

Investigation
and filing of
report.

Offence to be
non-bailable.

Act to have
over-riding
effect.

Power to make
101९5.

2

4. (1) Whenever a girl child is born or a girl child below ten years of age dies, it shall
be the duty of the parents or the guardian of the child to inform the nearest health centre, run
by the Government or such authority as may be prescribed for this purpose, about the birth
Gfdeath of the girl child.

3330 cad Offdeath of a girl child, the child shall not be cremated or buried unless the
health centre or such other authority as may be prescribed for this purpose, has caused an
investigation into the cause of the death of the child.

(3) The investigation under sub-section (2) shall be completed within twenty-four
hours from the time information about death is received.

5. If, after a preliminary investigation into the cause of the death of a girl child, any
person is found to have committed the offence of infanticide, he shall be taken into custody
at once.

6. Any person who commits or abets the commission of the offence of female infanticide
or withholds information about the death of the girl child, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a period of ten years and also with fine of rupees one lakh:

Provided that any person who withholds information about the birth of a girl child
shall be punished with imprisonment for a period of six months.

7. Any inquiry or investigation into female infanticide and filing of reports or a suit in
a court of law shall be completed within a period of three months from the date of the death
of the girl child.

8. An offence under this Act shall be non-bailable.

9. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860
or any other law for the time being in force.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10

45 of

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

With the menace of dowry system continuing in the country, birth of a girl child in
an ordinary family is considered to be very inauspicious and a curse. Birth ofa girl child is
considered as a burden by poor families, As a result, female infanticide is widely prevalent in
the country. Thousands of innocent girls are dying prematurely as a result of inadequate
care and indifference on the part of their families. It is high time that this dastardly act is
brought to an end. However, in the absence of a stringent legislation it is quite difficult to
put an end to this evil practice.

Itis, therefore, proposed to bring forward legislation providing for severe punishment
to those who commit female infanticide in order to eradicate this malady from the country.

Hence this Bill.

New Detut; MOHAN SINGH
January 31,2006.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to prevent female infanticide.

(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1069LS(S3)—30-6-2006.