Bill No. 54 of 2025
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY 
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
By
Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti, M.P.
a
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and  
Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-Sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education (Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education  
Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ia) “National Right to Education Fund” means the National Right to 
Education Fund established under section 34A.”. 
To be introduced in Lok SabhaAs introduced in Lok Sabha
5
35 of 2009.
Short title and 
commencement.
10
Amendment 
of section 2.

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
(b) after clause (q), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(qa) “ State Right to Education Fund” means the State Right to 
Education Fund established under section 34B.”.
(c) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(na) “non-compliant school” means school who fails to abide by the 
provisions of clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12.” 
3. In section 12 of the principal Act—
(a) in sub section (1), in clause (c), for the words, “at least twenty-five per 
cent.”, the words “minimum twenty-five per cent.”, shall be substituted. 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:
“(2A) Every school shall prepare and submit an annual compliance 
report,—
(a) in case of each school under State Government with the 
District Collector within whose territorial jurisdiction it fall before the 
completion of an Academic Year, after which the said District Collector 
shall forward the said report to the respective Ministry of the State 
Government concerned who shall compile an annual report and then 
forward the same to the Union Ministry of Education on an annual 
basis; and 
(b) in case of each school under the Central Government to the 
Union Ministry of Education before the completion of an Academic 
year who shall then submit a compilation of the same to the Union 
Ministry of Education which shall be laid along with a compilation 
of the reports as submitted by respective State Governments under  
clause (a) of sub-section (2A).
(2B) If any school fails to abide by provisions of clause ( c) of  
sub-section (1) of section 12, the name of the school shall be mentioned to 
a public list of ‘non-compliant schools’ and then: 
(a) in the first instance, the said school shall pay a penalty of ten 
times the admission fees for an academic year of the total number of 
prospective students who would have been given admission in order to 
fulfil the directives under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12 and 
deposited as under: 
(i) in case of the school being recognised by the State 
Education department to the respective State Right to Education 
Fund established under section 34B; and 
(ii) in case of the school being under Central or any other 
authority, to the National Right to Education Fund established 
under section 34A; 
(b) at the second instance, the said school shall pay a penalty of 
twenty times the admission fees for an academic year of the total 
number of prospective students who would have been given admission 
in order to fulfil the directives and deposited in a manner mentioned 
under sub-clauses (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of section 12B. 
Amendment of 
section 12.

5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
3
Establishment 
of National 
Right to 
Education 
Fund.
(c) in case of further non-compliance, such schools shall be reviewed 
by recognised authorities under the Act and shall be de-recognised for 
continued non-compliance provisions of Section of clause (c) of sub-
section (1) of section 12.”.
4. After Chapter V of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections 
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:
“Chapter VA 
Establishment, Management and Utilisation of National and State Right to 
Education Fund
34A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, constitute a Fund, hereinafter referred to as the National Right to 
Education Fund to whom shall be credited,—
(a) amounts as collected from schools under sub-section (ii) of clause 
(a) and sub-section (ii) of sub-section (2B) of section 12; 
(b) any income from investment from the amount credited in the 
National Right to Education Fund; and 
(c) any other such amount, donations, transfers as mandated under the 
Act or otherwise credited to the National Right to Education Fund.
(2) The National Right to Education Fund shall be monitored by an authority, 
hereinafter referred to as the National Right to Education Fund Monitoring 
Authority consisting of the following, namely: 
(a) Union Minister for Education, ex officio – Chairperson; 
(b) Union Minister of State for Social Justice and Empowerment,  
ex officio - Deputy Chairperson; 
(c) Union Minister of State for Tribal Affairs, ex officio - Deputy 
Chairperson; 
(d) Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy under 
Ministry of Education- Ex-officio Convenor;
(e) Chairperson, National Commission for Scheduled Tribes-ex-officio 
Member; 
(f) Chairperson, National Commission for Scheduled Castes-ex-officio 
Member; 
(g) Chairperson, National Commission for Protection of Child Rights- 
ex-officio Member;
(h) Economic Advisor, Department of Education and Literacy-  
ex-officio Member; 
(i) five Members of Parliament of the House of the People belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes community appointed for 
a period of two years to be nominated by the Speaker, House of the People, 
as per the procedure established; 
(j) five experts in the field of education, child rights and literacy to be 
appointed by the Central Government for a term of five years-Members. 
Insertion of 
new Chapter 
VA .

4
Establishment 
of State Right 
to Education 
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
(3) The members of the National Right to Education Fund Monitoring 
Authority shall face disqualification on the following grounds,—
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment by a competent 
court; or
(b) is of moral turpitude; or
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(d) is of unsound mind so declared by the competent court; 
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or 
other interest in the National Authority or any State Authority as is likely to 
affect the duties discharged by him of his function as a member.
(4) The salary and allowance payable to and other terms and condition of 
service of members appointed under clause (j) of sub-section 2 shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
(5) The functions of the National Right to Education Fund Monitoring 
Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
34B. (1) Every State Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, constitute a fund, to as the (Name of State) Right to Education 
Fund to which shall be credited to this Fund,—
(a) amounts as collected from schools under sub-clause ( i) of  
clause (a) and sub-section (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (2B) of section 12; 
(b) any income from investment from the amount credited in the 
State Right to Education Fund;
(c) any other such monies, amount, donations, transfers as 
mandated under the Act or otherwise credited to the Fund by recognised 
authorities under the Act.
(2) The State Right to Education Fund shall be monitored by an authority, 
hereinafter referred to as the State Right to Education Fund Monitoring 
Authority consisting of the following individuals, namely: 
(a) State Minister for Education- ex officio – Chairperson;
(b) State Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment or its equivalent- 
ex officio - Co- Chairperson;
(c) State Minister for Tribal Affairs or equivalent- ex officio – Co 
Chairperson;
(d) Secretary, State Department of School Education and Literacy-  
ex-officio Convenor; 
(e) Chairperson, State Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes- Ex-officio Member;
(f) Chairperson, State Commission for Protection of Child Rights-  
ex-officio Member;
(g) Economic Advisor, State Department of Education and Literacy- 
ex-officio Member; 

5
Accounting 
and Audit of 
the National 
RTE Fund 
and State RTE 
Fund.
Disbursement 
and Utilisation 
of National 
RTE Fund and 
State RTE.
5
10
15
20
25
30
40
35
(h) five members of Legislative Assembly, three from the Scheduled 
Castes and two from Scheduled Tribes appointed for a period of two years, 
nominated by the concerned Speaker of the Assembly concerned-as per 
established procedure; 
(i) five experts in the field of education, child rights and literacy 
appointed by the State Government for a term of five years as Members. 
(3) The members of the above specified Committee shall face disqualification 
on the following grounds: 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment by a competent 
court; or
(b) is of moral turpitude; or 
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by the competent court; 
(e) has, in the opinion of the State Government, such financial or other 
interest in the concerned State Welfare and Education as is likely to affect 
the duties discharged by him of his function as a member.
(4) The salary and allowance payable to and other terms and condition of 
service of members appointed under clause (i) of sub-section 2 shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
(5) The functions of the State Right to Education Fund Monitoring Authority 
shall be such as may be prescribed.
34C. (1) All sums credited to the National Right to Education Fund and State 
Right to Education shall be utilised by the National Right to Education Fund 
Monitoring Authority and the State Right to Education Monitoring respectively 
for the following four purposes: 
(a) school infrastructure including hygienic washrooms particularly 
for female students and staff, ramps and other such provisions for disabled 
students and potable water filters; 
(b) teacher training to carry out and provide teacher training programs 
for the benefit of teachers across schools in India and provide for their 
continuous development for the benefit of teachers; 
(c) development of scientific temperament amongst students to provide 
students of all age groups access to literature, equipment and laboratories to 
develop scientific temperament and thought; and
(d) scholarships, sports and training equipment to provide students with 
sports and training infrastructure along with educational/artistic and sports-
oriented scholarships for supporting their all-round development.
34D. The Central Government and respective State Governments shall 
prepare and maintain proper accounts of all transportation and other relevant 
records in relation to the National RTE Fund and the State RTE Fund and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.”.

6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 represents 
a pivotal step towards guaranteeing the fundamental right of every child to free and 
compulsory education. This landmark legislation mandates, the provision of high-
quality education to all children within the age bracket of six to fourteen years. 
While the existing Act was introduced to give access to the schooling system to 
all children as a fundamental right, such access is largely available in government 
schools, even in rural areas, section 12 (1) (c) goes as step further to give access to 
quality education that is available in unaided school.
However, this provision in the Act was grossly and comprehensively not 
complied with. Therefore, there is an imperative need to address the same and hence 
this Bill has been proposed to bring the tenements of the original legislation to 
fruition. 
The proposed Bill not only provides for stringent action against schools at fault 
for not implementing section 12 (1) (c) of the RTE Act, it also intends to introduce 
a fund at the national and State level to increase financial support towards India’s 
education sector and the National and State Right to Education Fund are primarily 
concerned with the development of schools, teacher training programs, developing 
a scientific temperament and thought amongst the future generations and potential 
scholarships along with sports infrastructure for their all round development. 
The Right to Education Act, while providing access to education to millions, is 
also empowering them to participate in nation building. To fully harness its potential, 
it is imperative to strengthen its implementation through rigorous enforcement, 
enhanced awareness, and active community participation. By adopting these 
measures, we can ensure that every child in India has the opportunity to receive a 
high-quality education. 
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi; KRISHNA PRASAD TENNETI
January 20, 2025

7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill vide proposed section 34A provides for constitution of 
National Right to Education Fund by the Central Government. It also provides for 
establishment of National Right to Education Fund Monitoring Authority by the 
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees one hundred 
crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum. 
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved. 

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and  
Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
(Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti, M.P.)