Short title
and com-
mencement.
THE PRISONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI MULLAPPALLY RAMACHANDRAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prisons Act, 1894.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called as the Prisons (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Prisons Act, 1894, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 3,—
(i) after clause (8), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(8A) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the State
Government under this Act.".
(ii) after clause (9) the following clauses shall be added at the end, namely:—
“(10) "rigorous imprisonment" means imprisonment combined with manual
Bill No. 54 of  2016
5
Amendment
of section 3.
10
9 of 1894.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
hard work for not less than eleven hours in a day in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(11) "simple imprisonment" means imprisonment with normal or routine
work for not more than seven hours in a day in such manner as may be
prescribed.”.
3. Section 9 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section ( 1), and after
sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(2) No officer or other employee of a prison shall provide or make available
prohibited articles relating to means of communication like mobile phones, wireless,
i-phones, laptops or other modern digital means of communication to any prisoner.".
4. In Chapter IV of the principal Act, after section 26, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
"26A. (1) In case of a pregnant prisoner, her diet and work allocation shall be
determined as per medical advice.
(2) A pregnant prisoner shall be entitled to grant of conditional parole for thirty
days from the expected date of delivery or thirty days from the date of delivery if the
delivery takes place while she is in prison.".
5. In section 29 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"Provided that the Jailor shall ensure that the cell used for solitary confinement
is maintained with basic hygiene, light and air.".
6. In Chapter VIII of the principal Act, after section 39, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
"39A. The Jail authorities shall be responsible to ensure basic hygiene in the
jail premises and precincts of a prison by putting the prisoners on the job of
maintaining hygiene and in the absence or unavailability of prisoners, by appointing
temporary workers in such manner as may be prescribed.".
7. In Chapter IX of the principal Act, after section 41, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘‘41A. No visitor shall take inside or be permitted to take inside a prison any prohibited
article relating to means of communication like mobile phones, wireless, i-phones, laptops
or other modern digital means of communication with a view to provide or make available
such article to any prisoner.’’.
8. In Chapter XII of the principal Act, after section 58, the following sections shall be
inserted namely:—
"58A. The State Governments shall establish separate prisons to keep habitual and
hardcore offenders separately from the first time offenders and the offenders convicted
for lesser crimes.
58B. The Superintendent or other officer of prison shall inspect and review periodically
on a regular basis the condition of prison and submit a report in this regard to State
Government in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
58C. The Superintendent shall take all necessary steps to ensure that prisoners do
not indulge in mental or physical conflict either individually or in groups.
Amendment
of section 9.
Insertion of
new section
26A.
Special
Provisions
with respect
to pregnant
prisoners.
Amendment
of section 29.
Amendment
of section 39.
Maintenance
of Hygiene.
Amendment
of section 41.
Amendment
of Chapter
XII.
Establishment
of separate
prisons.
Review and
inspection of
prisons.
Measures to
prevent
mental and
physical
conflict.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
58D. (1) The officer of a prison shall ensure that prisoners of cybercrimes, treason or
anti-national activities do not have access to any electronic equipment or digital means of
communication.
(2) The prisoners referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall not be entitled to the facilities
referred to in sections 58E and 58F.
58E. The State Government shall provide skill training including computer classes,
tailoring, carpentry, cooking, gardening, and language classes, in such manner as may be
prescribed, to the prisoners.
58F. (1) The officers of a prison shall conduct workshops and seminars on such
subjects as would be helpful for rehabilitation of and for educating the prisoners.
(2) The officers of a prison shall ensure active participation of prisoners in attending
such workshops and seminars.
58G . For the purposes of sections 58E and 58F, the State Government shall appoint
adequate number of professionals, educators and counsellors in such manner as may be
prescribed.".
Prisoners not
to have
access to
electronic
equipments or
digital means
of communi-
cation.
Skill training
in Prisons.
Workshops
and seminars.
Appointment
of profession-
als, educators
or
counsellors.
5
10
15

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The provisions of the Prisons Act, 1894, are almost a century old, which are not only
obsolete but also not in tune with the principles of the Constitution or the policies of the
Government. There is a need to provide rules and regulations for the management of the
prisons in the present context.
It is also essential to reform the environment of the prisons and to ensure humanitarian
consideration of prisoners so as to ensure that prisons do not create hardened criminals. It
is also essential to create an atmosphere to rehabilitate and socialize prisoners to enable
them to re-enter the society.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives by amending the Prisons Act, 1894 with
a view to:—
(a) prohibit making available means of communication to prisoners;
(b) make special provisions with respect to pregnant prisoners;
(c) ensure maintenance of hygiene in prison and surrounding areas;
(d) establish separate prisons for different types of offenders;
(e) ensure review and inspection of prisons at regular intervals;
(f) prescribe measures to prevent mental and physical injuries among the
prisoners;
(g) provide skill training to inmates of prisons;
(h) conduct workshops and seminars for prisoners; and
(i) appoint professionals, educators and counsellors for the rehabilitation and
welfare of prisoners.
N
EW DELHI; MULLAPPALLY  RAMACHANDRAN
February 11, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the appointment of temporary workers for maintenance
of hygiene in the jail premises and its precincts. Clause 8 provides for establishment of
separate prisons for separate types of offenders. It also provides for providing skill training
and appointment of professionals, educators or counsellors for conducting workshop or
seminars in prisons. The expenditure relating to States shall be borne out of the consolidated
Fund of State Governments concerned. However, the expenditure relating to Union territories
shall be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, if enacted, is likely to  involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. A recurring expenditure of about rupees
two hundred and twenty crore is likely to be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of  the Bill provides for the appointment, in such manner, as may be prescribed
by rules made under this Act, of temporary workers for maintenance of hygiene in the jail
premises and its precincts by Jail authorities. Clause 8 provides for providing skill training
and appointment of professionals, educators or counselors  for conducting workshop or
seminars in prisons by the State Government in such manner, as may be prescribed by rules
made under this Act. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prisons Act, 1894.
————
(Shri Mullappally Ramachandran, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4407LS(S3)—01.03.2016.