THE NATIONAL ACCREDITA TION REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR
HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
O
BLIGATION FOR ACCREDITATION OF HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND PROGRAMMES
CONDUCTED THEREIN
4. Accreditation to be mandatory.
CHAPTER III
NATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
5. Establishment of National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational
Institutions.
6. Composition of Authority.
7. Qualification for appointment as Chairperson or other Member.
8. Selection Committee.
9. Term of office, salaries and allowances of Chairperson and other Members.
10. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Members.
11. Prohibition as to holding of office by Chairperson or other Member on ceasing to be
such Chairperson or Members.
12. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases.
13. V acancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
14. Resignation.
15. Staff of Authority.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY
16. Powers and functions of Authority.
17. Power of Authority to engage experts.
18. Power of audit and inspection by Authority.
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTRATION OF ACCREDITATION AGENCIES
19. Registration of accreditation agency.
20. Application for registration.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 54 of 2010

CLAUSES
21. Eligibility for registration as an accreditation agency.
22. Procedure for grant of certificate.
23. Grant of certificate of registration.
24. Renewal of certificate of registration.
25. Accreditation agency not to do certain things.
26. Amendment to certificate of registration.
27. Suspension or revocation of certificate of registration.
28. Appeal against any order of Authority.
CHAPER VI
D
UTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF ACCREDITATION AGENCIES
29. Duties and obligations of accreditation agencies.
30. Procedure of accreditation by accreditation agency.
31. Application to Authority on accreditation by accreditation agency.
CHAPTER VII
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
32. Grants by Central Government.
33. National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Education Institutions Fund.
34. Accounts and audit of Authority.
35. Annual report of Authority.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
36. Compensation to affected higher educational institution.
37. Penalty in case of contravention.
38. Penalty for obstructing or impersonating an officer of Authority.
39. Punishment for contravening the provision of section 19.
40. Punishment for false information.
41. General provisions relating to offences and fine.
42. Offences by companies.
43. Offences by society, trust and institutions.
44. Cognizance of offences.
45. Adjudication of penalty.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
46. Power to call for information.
47. Returns and reports by accreditation agencies.
48. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
49. Power to exempt.
50. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.
51. Bar of jurisdiction.
52. Members and staff of Authority to be public servants.
53. Protection of action taken in good faith.
(ii)

CLAUSES
54. Act to have overriding effect.
55. Application of other laws not barred.
56. Power of Central Government to make rules.
57. Power of Authority to make regulations.
58. Laying of rules, regulations and notification.
59. Power to remove difficulties.
(iii)

1
THE NATIONAL ACCREDITA TION REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR
HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to make provisions for assessment of academic quality of higher educational institutions,
programmes conducted therein and their infrastructure through mandatory accredi-
tation by independent accreditation agencies and to establish a statutory Authority
for the said purpose and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for
Higher Educational Institutions Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. This Act shall apply to all higher educational institutions other than the higher
educational institutions engaged mainly in agricultural education and research and the
programmes of study conducted therein.
3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “academic quality” means the quality of teaching, learning and research and
consequently their contribution to enhancement of knowledge and includes physical
Short title,
extent and
commen-
cement.
Application of
Act.
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 54 of 2010

2
infrastructure, human resources (including faculty), administration, course curricula,
admission and assessment procedures, governance structures, of the higher educa-
tional institution;
(b) “accreditation” with its grammatical variations means the process of quality
control in higher education, whereby, as a result of evaluation or assessment or by
any other scientific method followed by accreditation agencies, a higher educational
institution or any programme conducted therein is recognised by it as conforming to
parameters of academic quality and benchmarking of such academic quality
determined by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority;
(c) “accreditation agency” means an agency registered under section 23;
(d) “appropriate statutory regulatory authority” means any regulatory authority
established under any law for the time being in force, for co-ordinating or determining
or maintaining the standards of higher education;
(e) “Authority” means the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for
Higher Educational Institutions established under section 5;
(f) “certificate of registration” means the certificate of registration of an
accreditation agency granted under section 23;
(g) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under
section 6 of this Act;
(h) “code of ethics” includes integrity, objectivity, professional competence,
professional conduct, avoidance of conflict of interest, transparency and information
disclosure and such other ethical principles as may be specified by regulations;
(i) “college” means any institution, whether known as such or by any other
name which provides for a course of study for obtaining any qualification from a
university and which, in accordance with the rules and regulations of such
university, is recognised as competent to provide for such course of study and
present students undergoing such course of study for the examination for the award
of such qualification;
(j) “degree” means any such degree, as may, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, be specified in this behalf by the University Grants Commission,
by notification in the Official Gazette, under section 22 of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956;
(k) “diploma” means such award, not being a degree, granted by a higher
educational institution certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a
course of study of not less than nine months duration;
(l) “distance education system” means the distance education system as
defined in clause (e) of section (2) of the Indira Gandhi National Open University Act,
1985;
(m) “higher educational institution” means an institution of learning including
a university, an institution deemed to be university, a college, an institute, an
institution of national importance declared as such by an Act of Parliament, or a
constituent unit of such institution, which is imparting (whether through conduct of
regular classes or distance education system) higher education beyond twelve years
of schooling leading to the award of a degree or diploma;
(n) “institution deemed to be University” means an institution declared by the
Central Government as deemed to be a university under section 3 of the University
Grants Commission Act, 1956;
(o) “Member” means Member of the Authority appointed under of section 6
and includes the Chairperson;
3 of 1956.
50 of 1985.
3 of 1956.

3
(p) “memorandum of association” means, in case of a company, such
memorandum as defined under sub-section ( 28) of section 2 of the Companies Act,
1956, or in case of a society, such memorandum as specified under section 2 of the
Societies Registration Act, 1860;
(q) “National Educational Tribunal” means the National Educational Tribunal
established under the Educational Tribunals Act, 2010;
(r) “non profit organisation” means an organisation being a company registered
under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 or a society formed and registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or a trust formed under the Indian Trusts Act,
1882 or any other law for the time being in force, which—
(i) undertakes any venture, profession, vocation or business without
profit motive or gainful objective;
(ii) applies its surplus or other income in promoting its objects;
(iii) prohibits payment of any of its surplus or other income to its members,
except by way of salaries or allowances payable for services rendered for
carrying out such venture, profession, vocation or business;
(s) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” with its cognate meanings and grammatical variation shall be
construed accordingly;
(t) “programme” means a course or programme of study leading to the award of
a degree or a diploma in a higher educational institution;
(u) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government
under this Act;
(v) “regulations” means regulations made by the Authority under this Act;
(w) “State Educational Tribunal” means a State Educational Tribunal established
under the Educational Tribunals Act, 2010;
(x) “university” means a university established or incorporated by or under a
Central Act, a Provincial Act or a State Act, and includes an institution deemed to be
university;
(y) “Vice Chancellor” means the chief executive of a university, by whatever
name called, and includes a Head of an institutions of national importance declared as
such by an Act of Parliament.
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and not inconsistent with this Act shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.
CHAPTER II
O
BLIGATION FOR ACCREDITATION OF HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND PROGRAMMES
CONDUCTED THEREIN
4. Every higher educational institution and every programme conducted therein shall
be accredited in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations
made thereunder and assessment of such accreditation shall be made before such
institution starts the process of admission to such programme:
Provided that a higher educational institution, (other than a higher educational
institution engaged mainly in medical education) existing before the commencement of this
Act, shall, within a period of three years from the date of such commencement, make an
application to an accreditation agency for accreditation of such institution or programme
conducted therein under this Act:
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.
3 of 1956.
Accreditation
to be
mandatory.

4
Provided further that a higher educational institution engaged mainly in medical
education and existing before the commencement of this Act, shall, within a period of five
years from the date of such commencement, make an application to an accreditation agency
for accreditation of such institution or programme conducted therein under this Act:
Provided also that the accreditation agency, to whom such application for accreditation
has been made by such higher educational institution, shall, within a period of one hundred
and eighty days from the date of such application, undertake and complete accreditation
under this Act:
Provided also that the higher educational institution which has been accredited before
the commencement of this Act by an agency setup by or under any law for the time being in
force, shall be deemed to be accredited under this Act for the period of accreditation by
such agency:
Provided also that in case the higher educational institutions referred to in the first or
second proviso fails, to, make an application for accreditation or obtain accreditation of
such institution or programme conducted therein, within the specified period, such institution
shall, without prejudice to any action that may be initiated by the appropriate statutory
regulatory authority or proceedings under any law for the time being in force be liable for
penalty under section 41 of this Act.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL ACCREDITATION REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish, for the purposes of
this Act, an Authority to be known as “the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority
for Higher Educational Institutions”.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the
said name, sue or be sued.
(3)The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
6. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and four other Members, of whom at
least one shall be woman, to be appointed by the Central Government.
7. (1) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the Chairperson, if such person—
(a) is not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge and
experience of at least twenty-five years in dealing with matters relating to higher
education and research;
(c) is, or has been, a Vice Chancellor of any University, or a Head of an institution
of national importance.
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Member, if such person—
(a) is not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge and
experience of at least twenty-five years in higher education and research or legal
matters.
(3) Out of the four members referred to in section 6, one each shall be chosen from
amongst—
(a) Professors in the field of medical education in any University or an institution
of national importance;
Establishment
of National
Accreditation
Regulatory
Authority for
Higher
Educational
Institutions.
Composition
of Authority.
Qualification
for
appointment
as
Chairperson
or other
Member.

5
(b) Professors in the field of science or technology in any University or an
institution of national importance;
(c) Professors in the field of social sciences or humanities in any University or
an institution of national importance;
(d) persons having knowledge and experience in legal matters.
8. (1) The Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the
Central Government from a panel of names recommended by a Selection Committee consisting
of—
(a) Cabinet Secretary ..........Chairperson;
(b) Secretary in charge of higher education in the Ministry of Human Resource
Development of the Government of India..........Member;
(c) an expert in the field of medical education ..........Member;
(d) an expert in the field of agricultural education and research ..........Member;
(e) an expert in the field of legal education .........Member;
(f) Chairman, University Grants Commission…… Member.
(2) The Secretary to the Government of India dealing with the higher education shall
be the convenor of the meetings of the Selection Committee.
(3) The experts in the fields specified in clauses (c) to (e) of sub-section (1) shall be
nominated, in such manner as may be prescribed, by the Central Government.
(4) The term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of names
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Authority shall be invalid
merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) to (5), the Selection Committee may
regulate its own procedure.
9. (1) The Chairperson and the other Members of the Authority shall hold office as
such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall not
be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that the Chairperson or the Member shall not hold office as such after he
has attained the age of seventy years.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
10. (1) The Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson or any
Member, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid
employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson
or other Member; or
(
e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
the exercise of his functions as such Chairperson or other Member; or
Term of office,
salaries and
allowances of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Selection
Committee.

6
(g) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(h) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour; or
(i) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Chairperson or a Member shall
not be removed from his office on the grounds specified in clause (f) or clause (g) or clause
(h) of sub-section (1), except by an order made by the Central Government after an inquiry
made in this behalf in which such Chairperson or such Member has been informed of the
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those
charges.
(3) In the event of inquiry instituted under sub-section ( 2), the Central Government
may suspend such Chairperson or other Member against whom inquiry has been instituted
for a period not exceeding six months if it consider necessary in public interest.
(4) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the inquiry
referred to in sub-section (2).
11. On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or other Member, as the case may be,
subject to the provisions of this Act, shall be ineligible, for a period of five years from the
date on which they cease to hold office, for further employment (including as consultant or
expert or otherwise) in any higher educational institution under the Central Government or
a State Government or any private higher educational institution or in any institution whose
matters had been before such Chairperson or Member.
12. Any Member having any direct or indirect interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise,
in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Authority, shall, as soon as
possible after the relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature
of his interest at such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of
the Authority, and the Member shall not take any part in any deliberation or decision of the
Authority with respect to that matter.
13. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the
Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of
the case.
14. The Chairperson or a Member of the Authority may, by notice in writing under his
hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall, unless he is permitted by the
Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry
of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as
his successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the
earliest.
15. (1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist the Authority in the discharge of its
functions and provide the Authority with such officers and other employees as it may think
fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the Authority shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence of the Chairperson.
Prohibition as
to holding of
office by
Chairperson or
other Member
on ceasing to
be such
Chairperson or
Members.
Member not to
participate in
meetings in
certain cases.
V acancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Authority.
Resignation.
Staff of
Authority.

7
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY
16. ( 1) The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and rules and
regulations made thereunder and regulations made under any law for the time being in force
by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority, take measures to develop and to regulate
the process of accreditation of higher educational institutions and programmes conducted
therein, and to monitor the functioning of accreditation agencies.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the measures
referred to in sub-section (1), may, inter alia, provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) regulate accreditation agencies (registration of the accreditation agencies);
(b) lay down norms and policies for assessment of academic quality in higher
educational institutions or of any programme conducted therein, by accreditation
agencies;
(c) undertake periodical review of norms and policies referred to in clause (b);
(d) undertake audit and cause to be audited the adherence to code of ethics
including policies on obviating conflict of interest, disclosure of information, evolving
transparency in processes and procedures of accreditation;
(e) lay down policies for providing information to the public in regard to all
aspects of quality and performance of higher educational institutions and programmes
conducted therein (including student achievement, faculty availability and
qualifications and research);
(f) specify and monitor standards on selection and training of experts for the
purposes of accreditation by any accreditation agency;
(g) levy of fees or other charges under this Act;
(h) recommend for improvement of academic quality while respecting the higher
educational institution’s responsibility to set its priorities;
(i) advise the Central Government or any State Government or the appropriate
statutory regulatory authority on any policy matter concerning accreditation which
may be referred to it;
(j) take measures for development of methodologies of accreditation in
collaboration with accreditation agencies or universities;
(k) promote research and innovation in assessment and accreditation;
(l) collect, compile and disseminate information regarding accreditation of higher
educational institutions and programmes conducted therein to the public including
stakeholders;
(m) monitor adherence to such norms, guidelines and standards of academic
quality, as may be specified under any law for the time being in force by the appropriate
statutory regulatory authority, in higher educational institutions;
(n) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
17. The Authority may engage, on such fee and remuneration and for such period as
may be prescribed, for discharging its functions under this Act, such experts having such
qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed.
Power of
Authority to
engage
experts.
Powers and
functions of
Authority.

8
18. (1) The Authority may, at any time, by order in writing, direct any person (hereinafter
referred to in this section as “Accreditation Audit Committee”) specified in the order to
audit or inspect or inquire into the affairs of any accreditation agency or any higher
educational institution in matters of accreditation and to report to the Authority on any
audit or inspection made by such Accreditation Audit Committee.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “person” shall include such experts
engaged in the manner provided in section 17.
(2) It shall be the duty of every chief executive or officer or other employee of the
accreditation agency and every chief executive or teacher or officer or other employee of
the higher educational institution, as the case may be, to produce before the Accreditation
Audit Committee directed under sub-section ( 1), all such papers and other documents in
his custody or power and to furnish him with any statement and information relating to the
affairs of the accreditation agency or higher educational institution, as the case may be, as
the said Accreditation Audit Committee may require of him within such time as the said
Accreditation Audit Committee may specify.
(3) The Accreditation Audit Committee, directed to audit or inspect or inquire under
sub-section (1), may examine on oath, any chief executive or officer or other employee of
the accreditation agency in relation to accreditation of any higher educational institution or
programme conducted therein, and may administer oaths accordingly.
(4) On receipt of any report under sub-section ( 1), the Authority may, after giving
such opportunity to the accreditation agency to make a representation in connection with
the report as, in the opinion of the Authority, seems reasonable, by order in writing,—
(a) require the accreditation agency, to take such action in respect of any matter
arising out of the report as the Authority may think fit; or
(b) modify terms and conditions of certificate of registration as it thinks fit, and
terms or conditions so modified shall be binding upon and be observed by the
accreditation agency and shall be of like force and effect as if they were contained in
the certificate of registration; or
(c) revoke the certificate of registration of the accreditation agency.
(5) The Authority shall, place the report submitted by the Accreditation Audit
Committee under sub-section ( 1) and the action taken thereon by the Authority on its
website.
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTRATION OF ACCREDITATION AGENCIES
19. No accreditation agency shall, except under, and in accordance with the conditions
of a certificate of registration obtained from the Authority under this Act, and in accordance
with rules and regulations made thereunder, undertake accreditation of any higher educational
institution or any programme conducted therein:
Provided that any agency set up by or under any law for the time being in force, which
is carrying out the work of accreditation of higher educational institutions or programmes
conducted therein, on or before the date of commencement of this Act, may continue to do
so until the certificate of registration is granted to it by the Authority under this Act:
Provided further that such agency shall, within a period of one hundred and eighty
days from the date of establishment of the Authority under this Act, make an application
under sub-section ( 1) of section 20 for registration as an accreditation agency under this
Act:
Provided also that the Authority shall, within a period of one hundred and twenty
days from the date of such application, either issue the certificate of registration or reject
the application under section 23.
Registration
of
accreditation
agency.
Power of audit
and inspection
by Authority.

9
20. (1) Every application for registration as an accreditation agency shall be made to
the Authority in such form and manner and accompanied by such other documents and on
payment of such fees as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Every application under sub-section ( 1) shall be accompanied by the following,
namely:—
(a) a detailed mechanism for detecting any potential conflict of interest between
the applicant or its employees or experts and a higher educational institution;
(b) a credible mechanism for transparency in respect of the financial status and
financial dealings of the applicant;
(c) a reliable public information disclosure policy for accreditation of any higher
educational institution or any programme conducted therein;
(d) complete process and procedure to be followed by the applicant in the
accreditation of any higher educational institution or any programme conducted
therein;
(e) such other documents as may be specified by regulations.
21. No application for grant of a certificate of registration under section 20 shall be
considered by the Authority, unless the applicant satisfies the following conditions,
namely:—
(a) the applicant is—
(i) a company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 or
a society formed and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or a
trust formed under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or any other law for the time
being in force;
(ii) such company, society or trust is formed or controlled by the Central
Government or a State Government or any authority or board or institution
established under any Central or State Act;
(b) the applicant is a non-profit organisation;
(c) the applicant has, in its memorandum of association or in the trust deed,
specified accreditation of higher educational institutions as one of its main objects;
(d) the applicant has adequate infrastructure, to enable it to provide accreditation
services in accordance with the provisions of this Act or such infrastructure as may
be specified by regulations;
(e) the applicant and the promoters of the applicant, have professional
competence, financial soundness and general reputation of fairness and integrity to
the satisfaction of the Authority;
(f) the applicant, or its promoters, or any member of the governing body of the
applicant or its promoter, is not involved in any legal proceeding connected with any
higher educational institution except in course of any accreditation proceedings carried
out in pursuance of the provisions of this Act and regulations made thereunder;
(g) the applicant, or its promoters, or any director, or member, or trustee has, at
any time in the past, not been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude or
any economic offence;
(h) the applicant has, in its employment, persons having adequate professional
and other relevant experience to the satisfaction of the Authority;
(i) the applicant, or any person directly or indirectly connected with the
applicant, has in the past not been—
(i) refused by the Authority a certificate of registration under this Act; or
Eligibility for
registration
as an
accreditation
agency.
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.
Application
for
registration.

10
(ii) subjected to any proceedings for contravention of this Act or of rules
or regulations made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force;
(j) the applicant, in all other respects, is a fit and proper person for the grant of
a certificate;
(k) the applicant conforms to such other conditions as may be specified by
regulations.
22. (1) The Authority shall, on receipt of the application under section 20 for grant of
certificate of registration, issue a public notice, in such form and manner as may be specified
by regulations, and place the application together with all documents received with the
application, for a period of sixty days from the date of issue of such public notice, on the
website of the Authority.
(2) Any person may, within a period of said sixty days referred to in sub-section (1),
submit his comments or objections, if any, on the application or part thereof, to the Authority.
(3) The Authority may, within the period of sixty days referred to in sub-section (1),
require the applicant to furnish such other information or clarification as it may consider
necessary.
(4) The Authority may obtain the advice of such experts, as it deems fit, for the
specific purpose of evaluating the competency of the applicant.
(5) The applicant shall, within a period of seven days after making the application
under sub-section (1), forward a copy of such application with other documents to all State
Governments.
(6) The State Governments shall, within a period of forty-five days after the receipt of
the copy of the application referred to in sub-section (5), send its recommendations, if any,
to the Authority.
(7)The applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to submit his response on the
comments or objections received under sub-section (2) or clarifications sought under sub-
section (3) or recommendations made by the State Government, if any, under sub-section
(6):
Provided that such response shall be submitted within a period of thirty days from
the expiry of the period of sixty days referred to in sub-section (2).
(8) The Authority shall, before granting a certificate of registration under section 23,
conduct a public hearing, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, to consider all
comments or objections or clarifications or recommendations, if any, and the response of
the applicant thereto, including any other matter as the Authority may deem fit for such
consideration.
23. (1) The Authority shall, as far as practicable within a period of six months from the
receipt of such application, after considering the comments or objections or clarifications or
recommendations under sub-section (8) of section 22, —
(a) issue a certificate of registration as an accreditation agency, on such terms
and conditions as may be specified in such certificate, subject to the provisions of
this Act and rules and regulations made thereunder; or
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing if such application
does not conform to the provisions of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder
or the provisions of any other law for the time being in force:
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an
opportunity of being heard.
(2) The Authority shall, while issuing a certificate of registration, approve the
documents referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (2) of section 20 as such or with
such modifications, as it may deem fit, and thereupon the accreditation agency shall follow
the procedures and conditions so approved in the process of accreditation.
Procedure for
grant of
certificate.
Grant of
certificate of
registration.

11
(3) The documents approved under sub-section (2) shall be considered as an integral
part of the certificate of registration which shall not be modified or altered without the
approval of the Authority.
(4) The Authority may, if it so deems fit, in the certificate of registration granted to an
accreditation agency, limit the area or programme for which such accreditation agency may
exercise its duties and responsibilities of accreditation.
(5) A certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of ten years unless such
certificate is revoked earlier in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
24. (1) A certificate of registration granted under section 23 may, on an application
made by the accreditation agency, be renewed by the Authority for such period and on
payment of such fees as may be specified by regulations.
(2) No application for renewal of the certificate of registration made under sub-section
(1) shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in the matter.
25. No accreditation agency shall, without the prior approval of the Authority effect
any change in its ownership, or governing body or board of trustees, or the memorandum
of association or articles of association or the trust deed.
26. The Authority may, in the public interest or for ensuring advancement of academic
quality, on an application of the accreditation agency or otherwise, make such alterations
and amendments in the terms and conditions of the certificate of registration as it thinks fit,
in accordance with such procedure as may be specified by regulations.
27. (1) If the Authority, on a complaint or otherwise, and after making such enquiry as
it deems fit, is satisfied that public interest so requires, it may revoke the certificate of
registration in any of the following cases, namely:—
(a) where the accreditation agency, in the opinion of the Authority, makes wilful
or continuous default in any act of commission or omission as required by or under
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder;
(b) where the accreditation agency commits breach of any of the terms or
conditions of the certificate of registration which is expressly declared by such
certificate of registration to render it liable to revocation;
(c) where the accreditation agency fails, within the period fixed in this behalf by
his certificate of registration, or any longer period which the Authority may have
granted therefor, to show, to the satisfaction of the Authority, that such agency is in
a position fully and efficiently to discharge the duties and obligations imposed on it
by its certificate of registration;
(d) where in the opinion of the Authority the financial position of the
Accreditation Agency is such that such agency is unable fully and efficiently to
discharge the duties and obligations imposed on it by its certificate of registration;
(e) the accreditation agency has ceased to exist.
(2) No certificate of registration shall be revoked under sub-section ( 1) unless the
Authority has given to the accreditation agency not less than thirty days notice, in writing,
stating the grounds on which it is proposed to revoke the certificate of registration, and has
considered any cause shown by the accreditation agency within the period of that notice,
against the proposed revocation.
(3) Where in its opinion the public interest so requires or for ensuring the advancement
of academic quality, the Authority may, on conclusion of the enquiry under sub-section (1),
suspend the certificate of registration granted to the accreditation agency till such time as
a decision on the revocation of such certificate of registration or otherwise, is taken by the
Authority.
(4) Where the Authority revokes a certificate of registration under this section, it
shall serve an order of revocation upon the accreditation agency and fix a date on which the
Renewal of
certificate of
registration.
Accreditation
agency not to
do certain
things.
Amendment
to certificate
of registration.
Suspension or
revocation of
certificate of
registration.

12
revocation shall take effect; and such revocation shall be without prejudice to the action
which may be taken against it under any other law for the time being in force.
(5) The Authority may, instead of revoking a certificate of registration under sub-
section (1), permit it to remain in force subject to such further terms and conditions as it
thinks fit to impose, and any further terms or conditions so imposed shall be binding upon
and be observed by the accreditation agency and shall be of like force and effect as if they
were contained in the certificate of registration.
(6) The Authority shall publish on its website any action initiated under this section
and the final decision on the revocation of the certificate of registration or otherwise together
with all documents and reasons for such decision.
(7) Where the certification of any accreditation agency has been revoked under sub-
section (4) on grounds referred to in sub-section (1), the Authority shall, within a period of
sixty days from the date of such revocation, conduct an audit of all the higher educational
institutions accredited by such agency within a period of one year before the date of such
revocation.
(8) The Authority shall, while suspending or revoking a certificate of registration,
take, or cause to be taken, such measures which may be necessary to protect the interests
of students.
28. Any person, aggrieved by an order or decision of the Authority under this Chapter
or section 31, may prefer an appeal, against such order to the National Educational Tribunal
within a period of sixty days from the date of the order, in such form and manner and
accompanied with such documents and such fees as may be prescribed:
Provided that the National Educational Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant has sufficient cause
for not preferring the appeal within the period of sixty days.
CHAPTER VI
D
UTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF ACCREDITATION AGENCIES
29. ( 1) While undertaking accreditation of a higher educational institution or
programme conducted therein, the accreditation agency shall have regard to following
principles in discharging its obligations for the advancement of knowledge, namely:—
(a) advancement of academic quality;
(b) enabling uniform reference of standards of academic quality in any class or
classes of higher educational institutions or any one or more programmes conducted
therein;
 (c) informing stakeholders (including students and employers) about the quality
of the higher educational institution or any programme conducted therein;
(d) rendering assistance to higher educational institutions in managing and
enhancing their academic quality working towards the development of explicit intended
learning outcomes;
(e) adherence to such other principles for advancement of knowledge which
may evolve from time to time.
(2) The accreditation agency shall, while undertaking accreditation of higher
educational institutions or any programme conducted therein, follow the standards in respect
of academic quality specified by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority.
(3) Every accreditation agency shall abide by the code of ethics.
Appeal against
any order of
Authority.
Duties and
obligations of
accreditation
agencies.

13
30. (1) Every accreditation agency shall accredit a higher educational institution or a
programme conducted therein on an application made to it by such institution in such form
and manner, and on payment of such fees, as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The process and procedure for accreditation of a higher educational institution or
a programme in such institution shall be such as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The accreditation of a higher educational institution or a programme in such
institution shall be done at such intervals and after such periods as may be specified by the
appropriate statutory regulatory authority.
(4) The accreditation agency shall, while undertaking accreditation of a higher
educational institution or a programme in such institution, provide an opportunity to the
stakeholders in the higher educational institution, including students and employees, to
submit their views on matters of academic quality.
(5)The accreditation agency shall give a reasonable opportunity to the higher
educational institution to file suggestions or objections, if any, on the draft accreditation
prepared by it and shall take note of such suggestions or objections, if any, while finalising
the accreditation of such institution or any programme conducted therein.
(6) The accreditation agency shall publish on its website the accreditation together
with all documents and reasons for such accreditation.
31. (1) Any person, aggrieved by the accreditation decided by any accreditation
agency under this Chapter, may apply to the Authority for withdrawal of such accreditation
or its modification.
(2) The Authority shall take a decision on an application made under sub-section (1)
within ninety days.
CHAPTER VII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
32. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as the Central Government
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
33. ( 1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National Accreditation
Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Fund and there shall be credited
thereto—
(i) any grants and loans made to the Authority by the Central Government;
(ii) all fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and
(iii) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be
decided upon by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund referred to in sub-section (1) shall be applied for meeting—
(i) the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, other
Members, officers and other employees of the Authority; and
(ii) the expenses of the Authority incurred in the discharge of its functions and
for purposes of this Act.
34. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Procedure of
accreditation
by
accreditation
agency.
Application
to Authority
on
accreditation
by
accreditation
agency.
Grants by
Central
Government.
National
Accreditation
Regulatory
Authority for
Higher
Educational
Institutions
Fund.
Accounts and
audit of
Authority.

14
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights
and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the office of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Authority and the
Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
35.  (1) The Authority shall prepare in every year, in such form and at such time as may
be prescribed, an annual report giving a full account of its activities during the previous
year, and copies thereof along with copies of its annual accounts and auditor’s report shall
be forwarded to the Central Government and the Government shall cause the same to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
(2) The Authority shall also forward a copy of the annual report so prepared under
sub-section (1) to all appropriate statutory regulatory authorities.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
36. If an accreditation agency fails to comply with the obligations referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 29 and the adherence to the code of ethics referred to in sub-section
(3) of that section, without prejudice to any penalty which may be imposed under this Act,
it shall be liable to pay such compensation, to the higher educational institution for any loss
or damages suffered by such institution, as may be determined by the State Educational
Tribunal:
Provided that before determination of any compensation under this section, the
accreditation agency shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard by the State
Educational Tribunal.
37. Any accreditation agency, which contravenes—
(a) any provision of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder; or
(b) the standards specified under any law for the time being in force by the
appropriate statutory regulatory authority; or
(c) the terms and conditions specified in the certificate of registration,
shall, without prejudice to proceeding for prosecution under the provisions of this Act or
any other law for the time being in force, be liable to a penalty which may extend to five lakh
rupees.
38. If a person, without reasonable excuse, resists, obstructs, or attempts to obstruct,
impersonate, threaten, intimidate or assault an officer of the Authority or any person assigned
to discharge any function under this Act, or in exercising his functions under this Act, he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
Annual report
of Authority.
Compensation
to affected
higher
educational
institution.
Penalty in
case of
contravention.
Penalty for
obstructing or
impersonating
an officer of
Authority.

15
39. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 19 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees or with both.
40. If any person provides any information or produces any document under this Act
or under any rule or regulation made thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which
is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
41. If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention
of the provisions of this Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder, for which no
punishment is provided elsewhere in this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees or
with both.
42. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part
of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
43. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or trust or
agency or institution, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the society or trust or agency or institution for the
conduct of the business of the society or trust or university, as well as the society or trust
or agency or institution, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a society or trust or agency or institution and it is proved
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to,
any neglect on the part of any governors, vice-chancellor, directors, committee, trustees,
registrar or other officer, such governors, directors, committee, trustees, registrar or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Punishment
for
contravening
the provision
of section 19.
Punishment
for false
information.
General
provisions
relating to
offences and
fine.
Offences by
companies.
Offences by
society, trust
and
institutions.

16
44. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or the
rules or regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Authority or any
officer or person authorised by it.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial
Magistrate shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
45. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all matters under section 36 (including
determination of compensation thereunder) shall be adjudicated by the State Educational
Tribunal having jurisdiction.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all matters under section 37 (including the
penalties leviable thereunder) shall be adjudicated by the National Educational Tribunal.
CHAPTER IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
46. (1) The Central Government may, by a general or special order, call upon the
Authority to furnish, periodically or as and when required any information concerning the
activities carried on by the Authority or any accreditation agency or higher educational
institution in matters concerning accreditation, in such form as may be prescribed, to enable
that Government, to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority may, by a general or special order, call upon any accreditation
agency or higher educational institution to furnish, periodically or as and when required
any information concerning the activities carried on by such accreditation agency or
institution, in such form as may be specified by regulations, to enable the Authority, to
carry out the purposes of this Act.
47. (1) The accreditation agency shall furnish to the Authority at such time and in
such form and manner as may be specified by regulations or as the Authority may direct,
such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to accreditation of higher
educational institutions by such agency, as the Authority may, from time to time, require.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the accreditation agency
shall, within a period of ninety days after the end of each financial year, submit to the
Authority a report along with audited statement of accounts in such form, as may be
specified by regulations, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and
programmes in regard to accreditation of higher educational institutions by such agency
during the previous financial year.
48. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority shall,
in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by
such directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to technical and
administrative matters, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
49. If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the
interests of the general public so to do, or for advancement of knowledge, it may, by
notification and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt
any class or classes of higher educational institutions from the operation of all or any of the
provisions of this Act and may, as often as may be necessary, revoke or modify such
notification.
Cognizance of
offences.
Adjudication
of penalty.
Power to call
for
information.
Returns and
reports by
accreditation
agencies.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power to
exempt.

17
50. (1) If at anytime the Central Government is of the opinion—
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is
unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying with any
direction given by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of
this Act; or      
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so
to do,
the Central Government may, by notification and for reasons to be specified therein,
supersede the Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in
the notification:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give
a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed
supersession and shall consider representations, if any, of the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the
Authority is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by the
Central Government or such authority as the Central Government may specify in this
behalf;
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority
is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the
notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the
Authority by a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and other Members and in such case
any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be
deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( 1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to
such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
51. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect
of any matter which the Authority or a State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational
Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted
by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of
any power conferred by or under this Act.
52. The Chairperson and other Members and the officers and other employees of the
Authority shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
53. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or against the Chairperson or any other Member, as the case may be, for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any
rule or regulation made thereunder in the discharge of official duties.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Authority.
Bar of
Jurisdiction.
45 of 1860.
Members and
staff of
Authority to
be public
servants.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.

18
54. Subject to the provisions of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the
provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
55. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
56. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of nomination of experts in the concerned field of knowledge to
the Selection Committee under sub-section (3) of section 8;
(b) the term of Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names under sub-section ( 4) of section 8;
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority under sub-section
(2) of section 9;
(d) the other disqualifications for removal of the Chairperson or other Members
under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(e) the procedure for the inquiry under sub-section ( 4) of section 10;
(f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-section (3) of
section 15;
(g) the other functions which the Authority may perform under clause ( n) of
sub-section (2) of section 16;
(h) the fees and remuneration payable to, the period, qualifications and experience
of, and the manner in which the Authority may engage experts under section 17;
(i) the form and manner in which an appeal may be preferred and the documents
to be accompanied with it and the fees payable therewith under section 28;
(j) the form for maintaining proper accounts and other relevant records and the
annual statement of accounts of the Authority under sub-section ( 1) of section 34;
(k) the form in which, and the time at which, the annual report of the Authority
shall be prepared under section 35;
(l) the information concerning the activities carried on by the Authority or any
accreditation agency or higher educational institution in matters concerning
accreditation to be furnished to the Central Government under sub-section ( 1) of
section 46;
(m) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in
respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
57. (1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations,
consistent with the provision of the Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a)
 the code of ethics and such other ethical principles to be adhered to by an
accreditation agency under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3;
3 of 1956.Act to have
overriding
effect.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Power of
Authority to
make
regulations.

19
(b) the form and manner in which an application may be made and the documents
to be accompanied with it and the fee payable therewith under sub-section ( 1) of
section 20;
(c) such other documents that an applicant has to submit along with his
application for grant of certificate of registration as may be specified under clause (e)
of sub-section (2) of section 20;
(d) the infrastructure that an applicant shall possess for providing accreditation
services under clause (d) of section 21;
(e) the other conditions of eligibility for grant of certificate of registration under
clause (k) of section 21;
(f) the form and manner in which the public notice may be issued under sub-
section (1) of section 22;
(g) the manner of conducting public hearing by the Authority under sub-section
(8) of section 22;
(h) the fees payable and the period for which the certificate of registration
granted to an accreditation agency may be renewed under sub-section (1) of section
24;
(i) the procedure for grant of approval in respect of any change in the ownership
structure or the memorandum of association of an accreditation agency under section
25;
(j) the procedure for making amendment or alteration in the terms and conditions
of the certificate of registration under section 26;
(k) the form and manner in which an application may be made for accreditation
of any higher education institution or any programme therein and the documents to
be accompanied with it and the fee payable therewith under sub-section (1) of section
30;
(l) the procedure and process to be followed by the accreditation agency for
accreditation of any higher educational institution or any programme conducted
therein under sub-section ( 2) of section 30;
(m) the information concerning the activities carried on by the accreditation
agency or the higher educational institutions to be furnished to the Authority under
sub-section (2) of section 46;
(n) the time at which and the form and manner in which the returns and statements
and particulars in regard to accreditation of higher educational institutions by the
accreditation agency under sub-section ( 1) of section 47;
(o) the form and manner in which the report, along with audited statement of
accounts, giving a true and full account of activities, policy and programme in regard
to accreditation of higher educational institutions by the accreditation agency under
sub-section (2) of section 47;
(p) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulation
or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
58. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act and every notification issued
under section 49 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each
House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or notification, as the case
may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or notification, as the case may be,
Laying of
rules,
regulations
and
notification.

20
should not be made or issued, the rule or regulation or notification, as the case may be, shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification, as the case may
be.
59. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

21
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Assessment and accreditation in the higher education, through transparent and in-
formed external review process, are the effective means of quality assurance in higher educa-
tion to provide a common frame of reference for students and others to obtain credible
information on academic quality across institutions thereby assisting student mobility across
institutions, domestic as well as international. Presently, accreditation is voluntary as a
result of which less than one-fifth of the colleges and less than one-third of all universities
have obtained accreditation. Mandatory accreditation in the higher education would enable
the higher education system in the country to become a part of the global quality assurance
system.
2. Mandatory accreditation in the higher education would require a large number of
competent and reliable accrediting agencies to be recognised, monitored and audited for
academic competence through an independent but accountable institutional mechanism.
Such a mechanism would find acceptability among peer group of international accreditation
bodies, necessary for student and teacher mobility and institutional collaborations, within
and across borders. Consequently, there is a need for an autonomous institutional structure
with statutory backing to recognise and regulate competent professional agencies charged
with the task of accreditation.
3. The process of assessment and accreditation in the higher education is required to
be performed by recognised agencies on the basis of norms and standards of academic
quality specified by the concerned appropriate statutory regulatory authority in the field of
knowledge in higher learning. Registered agencies would accredit higher educational insti-
tutions through transparent processes and assessment of academic quality in teaching,
learning and research and their contribution to enhancement of knowledge. The assessment
would include physical infrastructure, human resources (including faculty), administration,
course curricula, admission and assessment procedures, governance structures including
infrastructure and governance structures of the institution.
4. In view of the above, it is proposed to establish a regulatory authority to register,
monitor and audit the functioning of accreditation agencies which would be invested with
the responsibility of accrediting higher educational institutions including universities,
colleges, institutes, institutions of national importance and programmes conducted therein.
Institutions imparting higher education beyond twelve years of schooling would be
mandatorily accredited. Higher educational institutions engaged mainly in agricultural
education and research have been kept out of the purview of the proposed legislation.
5. The proposed National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational
Institutions Bill, 2010, inter alia, provides that—
(a) every higher educational institution and every programme conducted therein
shall require accreditation in the manner provided in the proposed legislation;
(b) the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational
Institutions shall be established by the Central Government for regulating the process
of accreditation which shall consist of a Chairperson and four other Members, (at least
one of whom shall be a woman), to be appointed by the Central Government on the
recommendation of  a Selection Committee;
 (c) the functions of the Authority, inter alia, shall be to promote the development
and regulate the process of accreditation of higher educational institutions and to
register and regulate the working of accreditation agencies; lay down norms and
policies for assessment of academic quality in higher educational institution or any
programme conducted therein and its periodical review; undertake audit and monitor

22
the adherence to a Code of Ethics to be observed by accreditation agencies; lay down
norms, standards and policies requiring higher educational institution to provide
information to the public on their performance in regard to all aspects of academic
quality; recommend for improvement of academic quality in higher educational
institutions; advise the Central Government or any State Government or the statutory
regulatory authorities on any policy matter concerning accreditation which may be
referred to it; initiate measures for development of methodologies of accreditation in
collaboration; promote research and innovation in assessment and accreditation;
collect, compile and disseminate information regarding accreditation of higher
educational institutions for public information including stakeholders and perform
such other functions as may be prescribed;
(d) the Authority may call for any information and record from, or undertake
audit or inspection of or inquiry into, any higher educational institution to verify the
credibility of accreditation done by an accreditation agency;
(e) only the registered accreditation agencies shall undertake accreditation of
any higher educational institution or any programme conducted therein and the
accreditation agencies established under any law for the time being in force continue
to function as such till they are registered by the Authority under the proposed
legislation;
(f) the accreditation agency shall have, while undertaking accreditation of a
higher educational institution or programme, regard to its obligations for advancement
of academic quality and inform all stakeholders including students and employers
about the quality of the higher educational institution or any programme conducted
therein;
(g)  any person aggrieved by accreditation of higher educational institutions
may apply to Authority for withdrawal or modification;
(h) in case, an accreditation agency fails to abide by the Code of Ethics or other
obligations, it shall be liable to pay compensation for damages to the higher educational
institution as may be determined by the State Educational Tribunal (proposed to be
established under the proposed Educational Tribunals Act, 2010);
(i) if any accreditation agency contravenes any provisions of the proposed
legislation or rules or regulations made thereunder or standards specified under any
law for the time being in force by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority or the
terms and conditions specified in the certificate of registration shall, without prejudice
to proceedings for prosecution, be liable to a penalty which may extend to five lakh
rupees.
6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KAPIL SIBAL
The 19th April, 2010.

23
Notes on clauses
Clause 2. —This clause provides that the proposed legislation shall apply to all
higher educational institutions other than the higher educational institutions engaged
mainly in agricultural education and research and the programmes of study conducted
therein.
Clause 3.—This clause defines certain words and expressions used in the proposed
legislation.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for mandatory accreditation of higher educational
institutions and programmes conducted therein. It provides that every higher
educational institution and every programme conducted therein shall be accredited in
accordance with the provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules and regulations
made thereunder and assessment of such accreditation shall be made before such
institution starts the process of admission to such programme. It further provides that
a higher educational institution, other than an institution engaged mainly in medical
education, existing before the commencement of proposed legislation, shall make an
application to an accreditation agency for accreditation of such institution or programme
conducted therein, within a period of three years from the date of commencement of  the
proposed legislation whereas a higher educational institution engaged mainly in medical
education and existing before the commencement of the proposed legislation shall
make such application to an accreditation agency within a period of five years from the
date of such commencement.
It also provides that the accreditation agency to whom an application for
accreditation has been made by a higher educational institution, shall undertake and
complete accreditation within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of
such application. It also specifies that a higher educational institution which has been
accredited before the commencement of  the proposed legislation by an agency set up
by or under any law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to be accredited under
of  the proposed legislation for the period of accreditation by such agency.
It also provides that in case a higher educational institutions existing at the time
of commencement of the proposed legislation fails to make an application for
accreditation or obtain accreditation of the institution or programme conducted therein
within the specified period, the institution shall, without prejudice to any action that
may be initiated by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority or proceedings under
any law for the time being in force, be liable for penalty specified under clause 41 of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 5.—This clause empowers the Central Government to establish a National
Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions (hereinafter
referred to as the "Authority") to exercise the powers conferred upon it under the
proposed  legislation. It further provides that the Authority shall be a body corporate
by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract,
and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued and that its head office shall be at New
Delhi.
Clause 6.—This clause provides that the Authority shall consist of a Chairperson
and four other Members, of whom at least one shall be woman, to be appointed by the
Central Government.
Clause 7.—This clause specifies the qualifications for appointment as Chairperson
or Members of the Authority. Sub-clause (1) provides that a person shall be qualified to
be appointed as the Chairperson of the Authority, if such person is not less than fifty-
five years of age and is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge

24
and experience of at least twenty five years in dealing with matters relating to higher
education and research and is, or has been, a Vice Chancellor of any University, or a
Head of an institution of national importance. Sub-clause (2) provides that a person
shall be qualified to be appointed as a Member of the Authority, if such person is not
less than fifty-five years of age and is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate
knowledge and experience of at least twenty-five years in higher education and research
or legal matters. Sub-clause (3) provides that out of the four other members, one shall
be chosen from amongst Professors in the field of medical education in any University
or an institution of national importance;  one from amongst Professors in the field of
science or technology in any University or an institution of national importance; one
from amongst Professors in the field of social sciences or humanities in any University
or an institution of national importance and one from amongst persons having knowledge
and experience in legal matters.
Clause  8. —This clause provides for selection of the Chairperson and other
Members of the Authority. Sub-clause (1) provides that the Selection Committee shall
comprise the Cabinet Secretary as its Chairperson, the Secretary in charge of higher
education in the Ministry of Human Resource Development, the Chairman, University
Grants Commission and three experts, with one each from the fields of medical education,
agricultural education and research and legal education respectively as its Members.
The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of names to the Central Government
for appointment. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Secretary in charge of higher
education in the Ministry of Human Resource Development shall be the convenor of
the meetings of the Selection Committee. Sub-clause (3) provides that the three experts
in the fields of education specified in sub-clause (1) shall be nominated in a manner to
be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government. Sub-clause (4) provides that
the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of names shall
be prescribed by rules by the Central Government. Sub-clause (5) states that no
appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Authority shall be invalid merely by
reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee. Sub-clause (6) provides that the
Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure in its deliberations.
Clause  9.—This clause provides that the Chairperson and Member of the
Authority shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which they enter
upon office and shall be eligible for reappointment, but shall not hold office after they
have attained the age of seventy years. Sub-clause (2) provides that the salaries and
allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson
and other Members shall be prescribed by rules by the Central Government.
Clause 10.—This clause provides the manner of removal of the Chairperson or a
Member of the Authority. The grounds for removal include where the Chairperson or a
Member has been is an adjudged an insolvent, has engaged at any time during his term
of office in any paid employment, has been convicted of an offence which in the opinion
of the Central Government involves moral turpitude, has become physically or mentally
incapable, is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court, has acquired
such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise of his
functions, has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest, has been guilty of proved misbehavior or has such other
disqualifications as may be prescribed under rules made by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (2) provides that no Chairperson or a Member of the Authority shall be
removed from his office on the grounds specified in clause ( f) or clause (g) or clause (h)
of sub-clause ( 1) in this clause, except by an order made by the Central Government
after an inquiry made in this behalf in which the Chairperson or Member has been
informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Sub-clause (3) provides that in the event of inquiry instituted against the Chairperson
or Member, the Central Government may suspend such Chairperson or Member against
whom inquiry has been instituted for a period not exceeding six months if it considers

25
necessary in public interest. Sub-clause (4) empowers the Central Government to regulate
the procedure for the inquiry.
Clause 11.—This clause provides for the prohibitions as to holding of offices by
Chairperson or Member on ceasing to be such Chairperson or Member of Authority.
The clause specifies that the Chairperson or Member shall be ineligible for a period of
five years from the date on which they cease to hold office, for further employment,
including as consultant or expert or otherwise, in any higher educational institution
under the Central Government or a State Government or any private higher educational
institution or in any institution whose matters had been before such Chairperson or
Member.
Clause 12.— This clause provides that any Member having any direct or indirect
interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter coming up for consideration at
a meeting of the Authority, shall, as soon as possible after the relevant circumstances
have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and
such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and the Member
shall not take any part in any deliberation or decision of the Authority with respect to
that matter. This clause is intended to provide for self-disclosure of issues in which
conflict of interest in respect of the Chairperson or any Member that may arise in the
course of performance of duties by the Authority.
Clause 13.—This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the Authority shall
be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or any defect in the constitution of the
Authority or any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the
Authority or any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits
of the case.
Clause 14.—This clause provides the manner in which the Chairperson or a Member
of the Authority shall resign office. It provides that the Chairperson or Member may, by
notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office
and shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office
sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt
of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon office or
until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
Clause 15.—This clause empowers the Central Government to determine the nature
and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Authority in
the discharge of its functions and provide the Authority with such officers and other
employees as it may think fit. Sub-clause (2) provides that the officers and other
employees of the Authority shall discharge their functions under the general
superintendence of the Chairperson of the Tribunal. Sub-clause (3) empowers the Central
Government to make rules to provide for the salaries and allowances payable and the
other terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the
Authority.
Clause 16.—This clause provides for the powers and functions of the Authority.
It specifies that the Authority shall, subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation
and rules and regulations made thereunder and regulations made under any law for the
time being in force by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority, take measures to
develop and to regulate the process of accreditation of higher educational institutions
and programmes conducted therein and monitor the functioning of accreditation
agencies. The measures may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely
regulate accreditation agencies including the registration of the accreditation agencies;
lay down norms  and policies for assessment of academic quality in higher educational
institutions or of any programme conducted therein by accreditation agencies; undertake
periodical review of norms and policies;  undertake audit and cause to be audited the
adherence to code of ethics including policies on obviating conflict of interest, disclosure
of information, evolving transparency in processes and procedures of accreditation;

26
lay down policies for providing information to the public in regard to all aspects of
quality and performance of higher educational institutions and programmes conducted
therein including student achievement, faculty availability and qualifications and
research; specify and monitor standards on selection and training of experts for the
purposes of accreditation by any accreditation agency; levy of fees or other charges;
recommend for improvement of academic quality while respecting the higher educational
institution's responsibility to set its priorities; advise the Central Government or any
State Government or the appropriate statutory regulatory authority on any policy matter
concerning accreditation which may be referred to it; take measures for development of
methodologies of accreditation in collaboration with accreditation agencies or
universities; promote research and innovation in assessment and accreditation; collect,
compile and disseminate information regarding accreditation of higher educational
institutions and programmes conducted therein to the public including stakeholders;
monitor adherence to norms, guidelines and standards of academic quality in higher
educational institutions, as may be specified under any law for the time being in force
by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority and perform such other functions as
may be prescribed by rules by the Central Government.
Clause 17.—This clause provides that the Authority may engage, on such fee and
remuneration and for such period, such experts having such qualifications and
experience, as may be prescribed by rules by the Central Government, for discharging
its functions under the legislation.
Clause  18.—This clause provides for powers of audit and inspection by
Authority. It provides that the Authority may, at any time, by order in writing, direct any
person (hereinafter referred to as "Accreditation Audit Committee") specified in the
order, to audit or inspect or inquire into the affairs of any accreditation agency or any
higher educational institution in matters of accreditation and to report to the Authority
on any audit or inspection made by the Accreditation Audit Committee. Sub-clause (2)
provides that it shall be the duty of every chief executive or officer or other employee of
the accreditation agency and every chief executive or teacher or officer or other employee
of the higher educational institution, as the case may be, to produce before the
Accreditation Audit Committee, all such papers and other documents in his custody or
power and to furnish him with any statement and information relating to the affairs of
the accreditation agency or higher educational institution, as the case may be, as the
Accreditation Audit Committee may require of him within such time as the Accreditation
Audit Committee may specify. Sub-clause (3) provides that the Accreditation Audit
Committee, directed to audit or inspect or inquire, may examine on oath any chief
executive or officer or other employee of the accreditation agency in relation to
accreditation of any higher educational institution or programme conducted therein,
and may administer oaths accordingly. Sub-clause (4) provides that on receipt of any
report by the Accreditation Audit Committee, the Authority may, after giving such
opportunity to the accreditation agency to make a representation in connection with
the report as in the opinion of the Authority seems reasonable, by order in writing,
require the accreditation agency to take such action in respect of any matter arising out
of the report as the Authority may think fit; or modify terms and conditions of certificate
of registration as it thinks fit and the terms or conditions so modified shall be binding
upon and be observed by the accreditation agency and shall be of like force and effect
as if they were contained in the certificate of registration; or revoke the certificate of
registration of the accreditation agency.  Sub-clause (5) provides that the Authority
shall, place the report submitted by the Accreditation Audit Committee and the action
taken thereon by the Authority on its website to ensure transparency in the process.
Clause 19.—This clause provides that no accreditation agency shall, except under,
and in accordance with the conditions of a certificate of registration obtained from the
Authority under the proposed legislation and in accordance with rules and regulations
made thereunder, undertake accreditation of any higher educational institution or any

27
programme conducted therein. It further provides that any agency set up by or under
any law for the time being in force, which is carrying out the work of accreditation of
higher educational institutions or programmes conducted therein, on or before the date
of commencement of this Act, may continue to do so until the certificate of registration
is granted to it by the Authority. It also provides that existing agency carrying out the
work of accreditation shall make an application for registration as an accreditation
agency under this legislation within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the
date of establishment of the Authority. It also provides that the Authority shall either
issue the certificate of registration or reject the application within a period of one
hundred and twenty days from the date of such application.
Clause 20. — This clause provides that every application for registration as an
accreditation agency shall be made to the Authority in such form and manner and
accompanied by such other documents and on payment of such fees as may be specified
by regulations. Sub-clause (2) provides that every application shall be accompanied
with a detailed mechanism for detecting any potential conflict of interest between the
applicant or its employees or experts and a higher educational institution, a credible
mechanism for transparency in respect of the financial status and financial dealings of
the applicant, a reliable public information disclosure policy for accreditation of any
higher educational institution or any programme conducted therein, complete processes
and procedures to be followed by the applicant in the accreditation of any higher
educational institution or any programme conducted therein and such other documents
as may be specified by regulations by the Authority.
Clause 21.—This clause provides for the eligibility criteria and conditions for an
applicant to be registered as an accreditation agency. It provides that no application for
grant of a certificate of registration shall be considered by the Authority, unless the
applicant is a non-profit organization being a company registered under section 25 of
the Companies Act, 1956 or a society formed and registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 or a trust formed under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or any other
law for the time being in force and such company, society or trust is formed or controlled
by the Central Government or a State Government or any authority or board or institution
established under any Central or State Act. It further provides the applicant must satisfy
the following other conditions, namely; that the applicant has, in its memorandum of
association or in the trust deed, specified accreditation of higher educational institutions
as one of its main objects; the applicant has adequate infrastructure to enable it to
provide accreditation services in accordance with the provisions of the proposed
legislation or such infrastructure as may be specified by regulations by the Authority;
the applicant and the promoters of the applicant have professional competence, financial
soundness and general reputation of fairness and integrity to the satisfaction of the
Authority; the applicant or its promoters or any member of the governing body of the
applicant or its promoter is not involved in any legal proceeding connected with any
higher educational institution except in course of any accreditation proceedings carried
out in pursuance of the provisions of the proposed legislation and regulations made
thereunder; the applicant or its promoters, or any director , or member, or trustee has, at
any time in the past, not been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude or
any economic offence; the applicant has, in its employment, persons having adequate
professional and other relevant experience to the satisfaction of the Authority; the
applicant or any person directly or indirectly connected with the applicant has in the
past not been refused by the Authority a certificate of registration or subjected to any
proceedings for contravention of the proposed legislation or of rules or regulations
made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force; the applicant in all other
respects, is a fit and proper person for the grant of a certificate and the applicant
conforms to such other conditions as may be specified by regulations.
Clause  22. —This clause provides that the Authority shall, on receipt of the
application for grant of certificate of registration, issue a public notice in a form and

28
manner as may be specified by regulations by the Authority, and place the application
together with all documents received with the application on the website of the Authority
for a period of sixty days from the date of issue of the public notice. Sub-clause (2)
provides that any person may, submit his comments or objections, if any, on the
application or part thereof, to the Authority within a period of sixty days from the date
of issue of the public notice. Sub-clause (3) provides that the Authority may require the
applicant to furnish such other information or clarification as it may consider necessary
within the period of sixty days from the date of issue of the public notice. Sub-clause (4)
provides that the Authority may obtain the advice of such experts, as it deems fit, for
the specific purpose of evaluating the competency of the applicant. Sub-clause (5)
mandates that the applicant shall, within a period of seven days after making the
application, forward a copy of the application with other documents to all State
Governments and sub-clause (6) requires that the State Governments shall send its
recommendations, if any, to the Authority within a period of forty-five days after the
receipt of the copy of the application. Sub-clause (7) provides that the applicant shall
be afforded an opportunity to submit his response on the comments or objections
received or clarifications sought or recommendations made by the State Government, if
any. It also provides that the response shall be submitted by the applicant within a
period of thirty days from the expiry of the period of sixty days from the date of issue of
the public notice. Sub-clause (8) provides that the Authority shall, before granting a
certificate of registration, conduct a public hearing, in a manner as may specified by
regulations, to consider all comments or objections or clarifications or recommendations,
if any, and the response of the applicant, including any other matter as the Authority
may deem fit for such consideration.
Clause 23. —This clause provides that the Authority shall, as far as practicable
within a period of six months from the receipt of such application, and after considering
the comments or objections or clarifications or recommendations, issue a certificate of
registration as an accreditation agency on such terms and conditions as may be specified
in such certificate; or reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing if such
application does not conform to the provisions of the proposed legislation or rules or
regulations made thereunder or the provisions of any other law for the time being in
force. It further provides that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has
been given an opportunity of being heard. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Authority
shall, while issuing a certificate of registration, approve the documents submitted by
the applicant under clause 19 as such or with such modifications as it may deem fit, and
thereupon the accreditation agency shall follow the procedures and conditions so
approved in its process of accreditation. Sub-clause (3) provides that the documents
so approved shall be considered as an integral part of the certificate of registration
which shall not be modified or altered without the approval of the Authority. Sub-
clause (4) provides that the Authority may, if it so deems fit, in the certificate of
registration granted to an accreditation agency, limit the area or programme for which
such accreditation agency may exercise its duties and responsibilities of accreditation.
Sub-clause (5) provides that a certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of ten
years unless such certificate is revoked earlier in accordance with the provisions of the
proposed legislation.
Clause  24. —This clause provides that a certificate of registration may, on an
application made by the accreditation agency, be renewed by the Authority for such
period and on payment of such fees as may be specified by regulations but no application
for renewal of the certificate of registration shall be rejected unless the applicant has
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Clause 25.—This clause provides that no accreditation agency shall, without the
prior approval of the Authority effect any change in its ownership, or governing body
or board of trustees, or the memorandum of association or articles of association or the
trust deed.

29
Clause 26.—This clause provides that the Authority, may, in the public interest or
for ensuring advancement of academic quality, on an application of the accreditation
agency or otherwise, make such alterations and amendments in the terms and conditions
of the certificate of registration as it thinks fit, in accordance with the procedure as may
be specified by regulations by the Authority.
Clause 27. —This clause provides for suspension or revocation of certificate of
registration. It provides that if the Authority, on a complaint or otherwise, and after
making such enquiry as it deems fit, is satisfied that public interest so requires, it may
revoke the certificate of registration where the accreditation agency, in the opinion of
the Authority, makes wilful or continuous default in any act of commission or omission
as required by or under the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made
thereunder; or where the accreditation agency commits breach of any of the terms or
conditions of the certificate of registration which is expressly declared by such certificate
of registration to render it liable to revocation or where the accreditation agency fails,
within the period fixed in this behalf by its certificate of registration or any longer
period which the Authority may have granted for the purpose, to show to the satisfaction
of the Authority, that such agency is in a position fully and efficiently to discharge the
duties and obligations imposed on it by its certificate of registration or where in the
opinion of the Authority the financial position of the accreditation agency is such that
such agency is unable fully and efficiently to discharge the duties and obligations
imposed on it by its certificate of registration or if the accreditation agency has ceased
to exist. Sub-clause (2) provides that no certificate of registration shall be revoked
unless the Authority has given to the accreditation agency not less than thirty days
notice, in writing, stating the grounds on which it is proposed to revoke the certificate
of registration, and has considered any cause shown by the accreditation agency against
the proposed revocation. Sub-clause (3) requires that where the Authority is of the
opinion that the public interest so requires or for ensuring the advancement of academic
quality, it may, on conclusion of the enquiry under sub-clause (1), suspend the certificate
of registration granted to the accreditation agency till such time as a decision on the
revocation of such certificate of registration or otherwise, is taken by the Authority.
Sub-clause (4) provides that where the Authority revokes a certificate of registration, it
shall serve an order of revocation upon the accreditation agency and fix a date on
which the revocation shall take effect and the revocation shall be without prejudice to
the action which may be taken against it in under any other law for the time being in
force. Sub-clause (5) provides that the Authority may, instead of revoking a certificate
of registration, permit it to remain in force subject to such further terms and conditions
as it thinks fit to impose, and any further terms or conditions so imposed shall be
binding upon and be observed by the accreditation agency and shall be of like force
and effect as if they were contained in the certificate of registration. Sub-clause (6)
requires the Authority to publish on its website any action initiated against any
accreditation agency and the final decision on the revocation of the certificate of
registration or otherwise together with all documents and reasons for its decision. Sub-
clause (7) provides that where the certification of any accreditation agency has been
revoked, the Authority shall conduct an audit of all the higher educational institutions
accredited by such agency within a period of one year before the date of the revocation
within a period of sixty days. Sub-clause (8) requires the Authority to take or cause to
be taken measures which may be necessary to protect the interests of students while
suspending or revoking a certificate of registration.
Clause 28.—This clause provides that any person aggrieved by an order made by
the Authority in respect of an accreditation agency or in respect of a matter under
clause 31 may prefer an appeal against the order to the National Educational Tribunal
both on facts and law, within a period of sixty days from the date of the order. It further
provides that the National Educational Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry
of the period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for
not preferring the appeal within this period.

30
Clause 29. —This clause specifies the duties and obligations of an accreditation
agency while undertaking accreditation of a higher educational institution. It provides
that the accreditation agency, while undertaking accreditation of a higher educational
institution or programme conducted therein, shall have regard to following principles in
discharging its obligations for the advancement of knowledge, namely; advancement
of academic quality; enabling uniform reference of standards of academic quality in any
class or classes of higher educational institutions or any one or more programmes
conducted therein; informing stakeholders including students and employers about
the quality of the higher educational institution or any programme conducted therein;
rendering assistance to higher educational institutions in managing and enhancing
their academic quality working towards the development of explicit intended learning
outcomes and adherence to such other principles for advancement of knowledge which
may evolve from time to time. Sub-clause (2) requires the accreditation agency to follow
the standards in respect of academic quality specified by the appropriate statutory
regulatory authority while undertaking accreditation of higher educational institutions
or any programme conducted therein. Sub-clause (3) requires every accreditation agency
to abide by the code of ethics.
Clause 30.—This clause provides that every accreditation agency shall accredit a
higher educational institution or a programme conducted therein on an application
made to it by the institution in a form and manner, and on payment of such fees, as may
be specified by regulations by the Authority. Sub-clause (2) provides that the processes
and procedures for accreditation of a higher educational institution or a programme
shall be specified by regulations by the Authority. Sub-clause (3) provides that the
accreditation of a higher educational institution or a programme in such institution
shall be done at such intervals and after such periods as may be specified by the
appropriate statutory regulatory authority. Sub-clause (4) provides that the accreditation
agency shall, while undertaking accreditation of a higher educational institution or a
programme, provide an opportunity to the stakeholders in the higher educational
institution, including students and employees, to submit their views on matters of
academic quality. Sub-clause (5) requires the accreditation agency to give a reasonable
opportunity to the higher educational institution to file suggestions or objections, if
any, on the draft accreditation prepared by it and it shall take note of suggestions or
objections received, if any, while finalising the accreditation. Sub-clause (6) provides
that the accreditation agency shall publish on its website the accreditation together
with all documents and reasons for such accreditation.
Clause  31. —This clause provides that by any person aggrieved by the
accreditation decided by any accreditation agency  may apply to the Authority for
withdrawal of such accreditation or its modification and the Authority shall take a
decision on an application within ninety days.
Clause 32. —This clause provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of
such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the
purposes of the proposed legislation.
Clause  33. —This clause provides for constitution of a Fund to be called the
"National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Fund".
It further provides that all grants and loans made to the Authority by the Central
Government; all fees and charges received by the Authority; and all sums received by
the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the Central
Government, shall be credited into the Fund. Sub-clause (2) provides that the Fund
shall be applied for meeting the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the
Chairperson, other Members, officers and other employees of the Authority and the
expenses of the Authority incurred in the discharge of its functions and for purposes of
the proposed legislation.

31
Clause 34.—This clause provides that the Authority shall maintain proper accounts
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in a form as
may be prescribed by the Central Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India. The accounts of the Authority shall be audited at specified
intervals by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India. The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority
shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit
as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production
of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect
any office of the Authority. The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf
together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government by the Authority and the Government shall cause the same to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Clause 35.—This clause provides that the Authority shall prepare every year in a
prescribed form and times, an annual report giving a full account of its activities during
the previous year, and copies thereof along with copies of its annual accounts and
auditor's report shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Government shall
cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. Sub-clause (2) provides
that the Authority shall also forward a copy of the annual report so prepared to all
appropriate statutory regulatory authorities.
Clause 36.—This clause provides that if an accreditation agency fails to comply
with the obligations referred to sub-clause (1) of clause 29 and the adherence to the
code of ethics referred to sub-clause (3) of clause 29, it shall be liable to pay such
compensation, to the higher educational institution for any loss or damages suffered
by such institution, as may be determined by the State Educational Tribunal without
prejudice to any penalty which may be imposed under the proposed legislation. It
further provides that before determination of any compensation, the accreditation
agency shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard by the State Educational
Tribunal having jurisdiction over the institution.
Clause 37. —This clause provides for punishment to an accreditation agency for
contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation. It provides that an
accreditation agency which contravenes any provision of this Act or rules or regulations
made thereunder, or the standards specified under any law for the time being in force by
the appropriate statutory regulatory authority, or the terms and conditions specified in
the certificate of registration, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to five lakh
rupees without prejudice to proceeding for prosecution under the provisions of this
Act or any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 38. —This clause provides that if a person, without reasonable excuse,
resists, obstructs, or attempts to obstruct, impersonate, threaten, intimidate or assault
an officer of the Authority or any person assigned to discharge any function, or in
exercising his functions under the proposed legislation, such person shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 39. —This clause provides that that whoever contravenes the provisions
of clause 19 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 40.—This clause provides for punishment for knowingly providing false
information. It provides that if any person provides any information or produces any
document under the proposed legislation or under any rule or regulation made
thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which is false, and which he either

32
knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, such person shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 41.—This clause provides that if any person contravenes or attempts to
contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation or
of any rules or regulations made thereunder, for which no punishment is provided
elsewhere in the proposed legislation, such person shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to
ten lakh rupees or with both.
Clause  42. —This clause provides that where an offence under the proposed
legislation has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence
was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
It further provides that if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence, then such person shall not be liable to the punishment. It also provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (1), where any offence under the
proposed legislation has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence
has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect
on the part of director , manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company shall also be deemed to be guilty of
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. It
also explains the expressions "company" and "director" used in this clause.
Clause  43. —This clause provides that where an offence under the proposed
legislation has been committed by a society or trust or agency or institution, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the society or trust or agency or institution for the conduct of the business of the
society or trust or university, as well as the society or trust or agency or institution,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly.
It further provides that if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence, then such person shall not be liable to the punishment. It also provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (1), where any offence under the
proposed legislation has been committed by a society or trust or agency or institution
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of,
or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any governors, vice-chancellor, directors,
committee, trustees, registrar or other officer, such governors, directors, committee,
trustees, registrar or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause  44. —This clause provides that no court shall take cognizance of any
offence under the proposed legislation, except on the complaint in writing of the person
authorised by the Authority and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate
or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under the
proposed legislation.
Clause 45.—This clause provides for adjudication of certain matters by the State
Educational Tribunals and the National Educational Tribunal. It provides that except as
otherwise provided in the proposed legislation, all matters under clause 36, including
determination of compensation thereunder shall be adjudicated by the State Educational
Tribunal having jurisdiction. Sub-clause (2) provides that except as otherwise provided
in the proposed legislation, all matters under clause 37, including the penalties leviable
thereunder shall be adjudicated by the National Educational Tribunal.

33
Clause  46.—This clause empowers the Central Government to call upon the
Authority, by a general or special order, to furnish, periodically or as and when required
any information concerning the activities carried on by the Authority or any
accreditation agency or higher educational institution in matters concerning
accreditation, in a prescribed form, to enable that Government, to carry out the purposes
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) similarly empowers the Authority to call
upon any accreditation agency or higher educational institution, by a general or special
order, to furnish, periodically or as and when required any information concerning the
activities carried on by such accreditation agency or institution, in such form as may be
specified by regulations, to enable the Authority, to carry out the purposes of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 47. —This clause provides that the accreditation agency shall furnish to
the Authority at specified times and in specified form and manner or as the Authority
may direct, its returns, statements and particulars in regard to accreditation of higher
educational institutions, as the Authority may, from time to time, require. Sub-clause (2)
states that without prejudice to the provisions of sub-clause (1), the accreditation
agency shall submit to the Authority a report along with audited statement of accounts
in a form specified by regulations, within a period of ninety days after the end of each
financial year, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes in
regard to accreditation of higher educational institutions by the agency during the
previous financial year.
Clause 48.—This clause empowers the Central Government to issue directions on
questions of policy. It provides that without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of
the proposed legislation, the Authority shall be bound by such directions on questions
of policy, other than those relating to technical and administrative matters, in exercise
of its powers or the performance of its functions under the proposed legislation, as the
Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time. It further provides that
the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views
before any direction is given to it. Sub-clause (2) provides that the decision of the
Central Government on whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.
Clause 49.—This clause empowers the Central Government to exempt any class
or classes of higher educational institutions from the provisions of the proposed
legislation. It provides that if the Central Government is  of  opinion  that  it  is necessary
or expedient in the interests of the general public so to do, or for advancement of
knowledge, it may, by notification and subject to such  conditions  as may  be  specified
in the notification, exempt any  class or classes of higher educational institutions from
the operation of' all or any of the provisions of  this Act and may, as often as may be
necessary, revoke or modify such notification.
Clause  50. —This clause empowers the Central Government to supersede the
Authority for specified reasons. It provides that if at anytime the Central Government is
of the opinion that on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it
is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of the proposed legislation or that the Authority has persistently made
default in complying with any direction given by the Central Government under the
proposed legislation or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the duties
imposed on it by or under the provisions of the proposed legislation or that
circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do, the Central
Government may, by notification and for reasons to be specified therein, supersede the
Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the
notification. It also provides that before issuing any such notification, the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make representation
against the proposed supersession and shall consider representations, if any, of the
Authority. Sub-clause (2) provides that upon the publication of a notification
superseding the Authority, the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date

34
of supersession, vacate their offices as such and all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of the proposed legislation, be exercised or
discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall be exercised and discharged by the
Central Government or such authority as the Central Government may specify in this
behalf until the Authority is reconstituted under sub-clause (3), and all properties
owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted under
sub-clause (3), vest in the Central Government. Sub-clause (3) provides for the
reconstitution of the Authority and states that on or before the expiration of the period
of supersession specified in the notification, the Central Government shall reconstitute
the Authority by a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and other Members and in
such case any person who had vacated his office at the time of its supersession shall
not be deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment. Sub-clause (4) requires the Central
Government to cause the notification issued for supersession of the Authority
accompanied with a full report of any action taken under this clause and the
circumstances leading to the action, to be laid before each House of Parliament at the
earliest.
Clause 51.—This clause provides bar of jurisdiction of civil court. It provides that
no court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any dispute or proceeding in respect of any
matter which the Authority or the National Educational Tribunal is empowered by or
under the proposed legislation to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of
any power conferred by or under the proposed legislation.
Clause 52. —This clause provided that the Chairperson, other Members and the
officers and other employees of the Authority shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 53. —This clause seeks to provide protection to the Central Government,
the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the proposed legislation or any rule
or regulation made thereunder in the discharge of official duties.
Clause 54.—This clause provides that subject to the provisions of the University
Grants Commission Act, 1956, the provisions of the proposed legislation shall have
overriding effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any
other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any
law other than the proposed legislation.
Clause 55.—This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation
shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the
time being in force.
Clause 56. —This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules, by
notification in the Official Gazette, for carrying out the provisions of the proposed
legislation. It further specifies the matter for which the Central Government may make
rules.
Clause  57. —This clause empowers the Authority to make regulations, by
notification in the Official Gazette, for carrying out the provisions of the proposed
legislation. It further specifies the matter for which the Authority may make regulations.
Clause  58. —This clause provides that the every rule made by the Central
Government,  every regulation made by the Authority and every notification issued
under clause 49 for supersession of the Authority shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 59. —This clause provides for provisions for removal of difficulties. It
provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed
legislation, the Central Government, may, by order published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation

35
as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty. It further provides that
such order shall be made within a period of two years from the date of commencement
of the proposed legislation. It also provides that every order made under this clause
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

36
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Accreditation
Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institution to exercise the powers conferred on
it by or under the proposed legislation. Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the said Authority
shall consist of a Chairperson and four other Members. Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 of the Bill
provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other Members shall be determined by the Central Government
by rules made by it. Sub-clause (1) of clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government
to determine the nature and categories of officers and other employees required to assist the
said Authority. Sub-clause (3) of said clause provides that the salaries and allowances
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other employees
of the said Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
2. On a representation basis, the recurring annual expenditure on salary of the
Chairperson, Members and officers and other employees of the Authority and other
administrative expenses is estimated to be ten crore rupees and one-time capital investment
is estimated to be about one crore fifty lakh rupees. The manpower requirement and the total
financial implication in terms of recurring and non-recurring expenditure would however, be
determined after the appointment of the Chairperson and Members of the proposed Authority.
Hence, it would be difficult to work out the exact expenditure, both recurring and
non-recurring at this stage.

37
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 56 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by notification in
the Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These
matters, inter alia, include—(a)  the manner of nomination of experts in the concerned field
of knowledge to the Selection Committee under sub-section (3) of section 8; (b) the term of
Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of names under sub-section (4) of
section 8; (c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority under sub-section (2) of
section 9; (d) the other disqualifications for removal of the Chairperson or other Members
under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 10; (e) the procedure for the inquiry under sub-
section (4) of section 10; (f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of, the officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-
section (3) of section 15; (g) the other functions which the Authority may perform under
clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 16; (h) the fees and remuneration payable to, the
period, qualifications and experience of, and the manner in which the Authority may engage
experts under section 17; (i) the form and manner in which an appeal may be preferred and the
documents to be accompanied with it and the fees payable therewith under section 28; (j) the
form for maintaining proper accounts and other relevant records and the annual statement of
accounts of the Authority under sub-section (1) of section 34; (k) the form in which, and the
time at which, the annual report of the Authority shall be prepared under section 35; (l) the
information concerning the activities carried on by the Authority or any accreditation agency
or higher educational institution in matters concerning accreditation to be furnished to the
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 46; and (m) any other matter which is
required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in respect of which provision is to be made by
rules.
2. Clause 57 of the Bill empowers the National Accreditation Regulatory Authority
for Higher Educational Institutions to make, by notification in the Official Gazette,
regulations for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2)
specifies the matters in respect of which such regulations may be made. These matters,
inter alia , include—(a)  the code of ethics and such other ethical principles to be
adhered to by an accreditation agency under clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section 3;
(b) the form and manner in which an application may be made and the documents to be
accompanied with it and the fee payable therewith under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(c) such other documents that an applicant has to submit along with his application for
grant of certificate of registration as may be specified under clause (e) of sub-section
(2) of section 20; (d) the infrastructure that an applicant shall possess for providing
accreditation services under clause (d) of section 21; (e)  the other conditions of
eligibility for grant of certificate of registration under clause (k) of section 21; (f) the
form and manner in which the public notice may be issued under sub-section (1) of
section 22; (g) the manner of conducting public hearing by the Authority under sub-
section (8) of section 22; (h) the fees payable and the period for which the certificate of
registration granted to an accreditation agency may be renewed under sub-section (1)
of section 24; (i) the procedure for grant of approval in respect of any change in the
ownership structure or the memorandum of association of an accreditation agency
under section 25; (j) the procedure for making amendment or alteration in the terms and
conditions of the certificate of registration under section 26;  (k) the form and manner in
which an application may be made for accreditation of any higher education institution
or any programme therein and the documents to be accompanied with it and the fee
payable therewith under sub-section (1) of section 30; (l) the procedure and process
to be followed by the accreditation agency for accreditation of any higher educational
institution or any programme conducted therein under sub-section (2) of section 30;

38
(m) the information concerning the activities carried on by the accreditation agency or
the higher educational institutions to be furnished to the Authority under sub-section
(2) of section 46; (n) the time at which and the form and manner in which the returns and
statements and particulars in regard to accreditation of higher educational institutions
by the accreditation agency under sub-section (1) of section 47; (o) the form and
manner in which the report, along with audited statement of accounts, giving a true and
full account of activities, policy and programme in regard to accreditation of higher
educational institutions by the accreditation agency under sub-section (2) of section
47; and (p) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulation
or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
3. The rules made by the Central Government under clause 56 and regulations
made by the Authority under clause 57 of the Bill, shall be laid, as soon as they are
made, before both the House of Parliament under clause 58 of the Bill.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matter of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the
Bill itself. The delegation of legislative powers, therefore, of  a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to make provisions for assessment of academic quality of higher educational institutions,
programmes conducted therein and their infrastructure through mandatory accredita-
tion by independent accreditation agencies and to establish a statutory Authority for
the said purpose and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development.)
GMGIPMRND— 1852LS(S5)—21-04-2010.