1
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI NIHAL CHAND, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 6 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act,
2009, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
Bill No. 54 of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Insertion of
new section
6A.
5

2
"6A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, the Central
Government shall establish at least one Kendriya Vidyalaya or Navodaya Vidyalaya in
each district within a period of  two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall provide such number of teachers, officers,
staff and technical experts to the schools established under sub-section (1) for effective
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of teachers, officers and staff of the school established under sub-section (1)
shall be such as may be prescribed.".
Central
Government
to establish
Kendriya
Vidyalaya and
Navodaya
Vidyalaya.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Quality education is an important need to achieve success and progress in life for all.
It does not only instill confidence but also helps in developing one's personality. Education
is an important medium for all to achieve success and to do something different in life.
Education is the best tool to face the challenges in life. School education plays a vital role
in life. Every level of education has its importance and role in development of an individual.
We all want to see our children to be successful in life which is only possible through
quality and right education.
Education has become very important in today's modern technical world and the most
important thing which matters is the quality of education that determines standards of
education.
In today's time, so many measures are being taken to improve the standard and
quality of education. Now the entire mechanism of education has changed. The challenge
before India is to impart quality education to ensure that the students belonging to lower
and middle income class are able to face the challenges in life. It is the primary responsibility
of the Government to impart quality education to the children of the country.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009 with a view to establish at least one Kendriya Vidyalaya or Navodaya
Vidyalaya in each district of the country by the Central Government to ensure free and
compulsory school education to all children in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NIHAL CHAND
January  16, 2020.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 6A provides for establishment of a Kendriya
Vidyalaya or Navodya Vidyalaya in each district of the country. It also provides for required
teachers, officers, staff and technical experts for the better operation and functioning of
these schools. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees four hundred crores will be involved as
recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 6A empowers the Central Government to
make rules regarding salary and allowance payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of teachers, officers and staff of Kendriya Vidyalayas and Navodaya Vidyalayas. As
the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal
character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009
________
(Shri Nihal Chand, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5353LS—25-02-2020.