Short title,extent and 
commencement.
Aඌ ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
 Bill No. 54 of 2024
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SCHOOLS UPTO SENIOR
SECONDARY LEVEL BILL, 2024
 By
Aൽඏ. Cඁൺඇൽඋൺ Sඁൾ඄ඁൺඋ Aඓൺൽ, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish schools imparting education upto senior secondary level free of cost to all 
children in the country.
Bൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Establishment of Schools Upto Senior Secondary 
Level Act, 2024. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government of that State and 
in all other cases, the Central Government; and 
(b) “child” means a boy or a girl who is below the age of eighteen years.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of schools 
upto senior secondary level to impart education to children from class first to senior 
secondary level.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the appropriate Government may, if it 
deems necessary, upgrade any of the existing primary, middle or secondary school to 
senior secondary level.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), there shall be at least one senior 
secondary school per one thousand population in every area.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities to every child 
enrolled in a school established or upgraded under section 3:—
(i) cost of admission and all other expenditure including tuition fee;
(ii) books, notebooks and all other stationary items free of cost;
(iii) free hostel facilities, whenever necessary; and
(iv) scholarship in deserving cases.
5. (1) It shall be compulsory for every parent to admit their wards in school for the 
purpose of education upto senior secondary level.
(2) No person shall employ any child in any job which prevents him from attending 
school.
6.  Whoever prevents any child from getting education upto senior secondary level shall 
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide to the State Governments by way of grants such sums of 
money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilized for the purposes of 
this Act.
8. The provision of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law, for the time being in force in relation to any of the matters provided under this Act.
Definitions.
Establishment 
of schools  upto 
senior secondary 
level.
Facilities to 
be provided to 
the students 
enrolled in 
schools.
Duty of parents 
to send their 
wards to 
schools.
Grants by the 
Central 
Government.
Penalty.
Act not in 
derogation of 
other laws.

9 (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
    (2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.
   (3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Power to make 
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
While a large number of primary, middle and secondary schools have been established, 
the students, especially in big cities, have to face hardships in securing admission to senior 
secondary schools because, in most of the cases, the last attended school imparts education 
upto primary, middle or secondary level. Students are compelled to run to district education 
office, schools and other authorities to get recommendations or relevant certificates to fulfil 
the formalities for admission in senior secondary schools. In such a situation, it is quite 
natural that the children as well as parents have to suffer mental agony.
Therefore, it has become necessary in the public interest to provide for the 
establishment of schools imparting education from classes first to twelfth or upgrade the 
existing primary, middle or secondary level schools to senior secondary level.
Hence this Bill.  
Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං;                                                                CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD
June 26, 2024.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of adequate number of schools or 
upgrade the existing primary, middle or secondary level schools upto senior secondary lev-
el. Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall bear the cost of admission and 
all other expenditure including providing of free of cost books, notebooks, stationary item, 
hostel facility and scholarship to the students enrolled in schools. Clause 7 provides that 
the Central Government shall provide funds to the State Governments for establishment 
of schools. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum. 
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees seventy five crore is also likely to be
 involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to establish schools imparting education upto senior secondary level free of cost to all 
children in the country.
_______ 
(Adv. Chandra Shekhar Azad, M.P .) 