As INTRODUCED IN Lok SaBia

Aires

Bill No. 54 of 2001
—$<—_—_—_—.

THE RESERVATION IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (FOR CHILDREN OF
PARENTS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE) BILL, 2001

By
‘Suri IQBAL AHMED Saranot, M.P,
A
Bu

to provide for reservation of seats in all educational and technical educational
institutions for children whose parents are living below poverty line.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) The Act may be called the Reservation in Educational Institutions (For Children Short title
of Parents living Below Poverty Line) Act, 2001. extent,

5 (2) Ttextends to the whole of India. 4 मर लि,

(3) It shall come into force at once.

(4) It shall apply to every educational institution which is maintained by the Central
or a State Government or receiving grant-in-aid from either Government or recognized by
the Central or State Government or University established by an Act of Parliament or a State

10 Legislature or deemed University.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
State and in other cases, the Central Government;


cducational
institutions.

Appropriate
Government
to bear
expenditure
incurred on
education.

Power to

make rules.

2

(b) “persons living below poverty line” means all such persons who |
to norms fixed by the Central Government from time to time arc living below poverty
line.
3. There shall be reserved twenty-five per cent of seats in all educational institutions
and technical educational institutions including higher technical educational insiiiwiions 5
for children of parents living below poverty line: :
Provided that such benefits shall be restricted to only one child.

4. The appropriate Government shall bear all expenditure incurred on education of
children of parents living below poverty line.

5. The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Itis true that during the post-independent period, there has been considerable expansion
in educational facilities and enrolment in educational institutions as revealed by successive
surveys. Both the Central and State Governments have been expanding the provisions of
formal and non-formal education to realize the goal of universalisation of education.
Consequently, literacy rate has improved from time to time. According to National Sample
Survey estimates, the literacy rate has increased by about 12 percentage in a period of six
years from 52.21 in 1991 to 64.20 per cent by 1997. However, there is a considerable size of our
population who still remain illiterate, ‘The primary cause of illiteracy is poverty prevalent in
the country. Still 27 per cent of our population are living below poverty line. Their income is
so meager that they have to fight for their subsistence. These poor people are unable to
afford the expenditure incurred on education of their children, Itis, therefore, necessary that
some percentage of seats be reserved for children whose parents are living below poverty
line in all educational institutions. It will not only help in eradicating illiteracy from the
country but will also protect the interests of economically weaker section of the society.

New DELHI IQBAL AHMED SARADGI
June 21,2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall bear the entire
expenditure incurred on education of children whose parents are living below poverty line in
the country, the provision of which shall be made by the respective Governments in annual
budget. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, will involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees one hundred crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be incurred.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made will relate to matters of details only, the
"delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOKSABHA

A
BILL
to provide for reservation of seats in all educational and technical educational |
institutions for children whose parents are living below poverty line.

: (Shri Iqbal Ahmed Saradgi, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—932LS—14-7-2001.