AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
  Bill No. 54 of  2022
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI APARUPA PODDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as follows,—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2022.
   (2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 72 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the
Code), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“72A. No person convicted of any offence shall be kept in solitary confinement
except for offence or duration of punishment as specified in section 73.”.
Short title and
commencement.
5 Insertion of
new section
72A.
Solitary
Confinement
for certain
offences.
45 of 1860.

3. For section 73 of the Code, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“73. Whenever any person is convicted of an offence—
(i) of direct or indirect involvement in any terrorist act or activities under the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967; or
(ii) for which under this Code or under any other law for the time being in force,
the Court sentences him to imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years,
the Court may, by its sentence, order that the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement
for such portion or portions of the imprisonment to which he is sentenced, as may be specified
in the sentence order.
4. In section 74 of the Code, for the words “three months”, the words “ten years”,
shall be substituted.
Substitution
of  new
section for
section 73.
Solitary
confinement.
37 of 1967.
5
Amendment
of section
74.
10
2

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Solitary Confinement is defined as confinement and imprisonment of human beings
without human contact for long periods of time. As per the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Mandela Rules), it is defined as “solitary
confinement shall refer to the confinement of prisoners for 22 hours or more a day without
meaningful human contact. Prolonged solitary confinement shall refer to solitary
confinement for a time period in excess of 15 consecutive days”.
However, the practice of solitary confinement is inhumane, violative of international
laws and conventions as well as directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. In the
case of Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration 1980 SCR (2) 557, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
of India held the practice of solitary confinement under Section 30 of the Prisons Act, 1894
to be violative of the Constitution of India. The Hon’ble Supreme Court went a step ahead
in the case of Unni Krishnan v. State of Andhra Pradesh 1993 SCR (1) 594 and held that
right against solitary confinement is envisaged under the ambit of Article 21. Furthermore,
in the recent observation of the Hon’ble Uttarakhand High Court, In the case of State of
Uttarakhand v. Mehtab, Sushil and  Bhura, held that the convict shall not be isolated till
the death sentence has become final, conclusive and indefeasible which cannot be challenged
or further annulled or voided by any procedure.
In the Death Penalty India Report, published under Project 39A of NLU Delhi, the
majority of convicts belong to the deprived class either socially or economically. This
makes them more vulnerable with regards to the ill effects of provisions like solitary
confinement, as they don’t enjoy proper and adequate resources in order to avail the
services of top legal professionals for safeguarding their rights. To make things worse,
various national and international studies indicate that solitary confinement has
psychological effects on the prisoner such as hallucination, hypersensitivity and anxiety.
Solitary confinement or separate confinement is a cause of concern for many making
situations worse for both the convict and the family. India being a welfare state must adhere
to the principles of human rights, international conventions as well as the moral and
constitutional obligations.
The present Bill seeks to amend provisions of Indian Penal Code, 1860 for providing
safeguards against the practice of solitary confinement.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;   APARUPA PODDAR
16 January, 2022
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
* * *  *
73. Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this Code the Court
has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence, order that
the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any portion or portions of the imprisonment
to which he is sentenced, not exceeding three months in the whole, according to the following
scale, that is to say—
• a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall not exceed six
months;
• a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed six months
and [shall not exceed one] year;
• a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed one year.
* * *  *
74. In executing a sentence of solitary confinement, such confinement shall in no case
exceed fourteen days at a time, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of not
less duration than such periods; and when the imprisonment awarded shall exceed three months,
the solitary confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whole imprisonment
awarded, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of not less duration than
such periods.
* * *  *
4
Limit of
solitary
confinement.
Solitary
confinement.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
.
————
(Shrimati Aparupa Poddar, M.P .)