., 
• 
_. 
31 of 1956. 
As INTRODUCED IN LeK SABHA ON 
1 J- SI ~ 19f.§--------------
Bill No. 5S of I"S· 
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956. 
BE it enacted iby Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Life 
(Amendment) Act, 1965. 
Insurance Corporation Short 
title. 
5 2. In the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (hereinafter refer-
red to as the principal Act), in section 2~, far the words "business ::::t!i' , 
of the Corporation, including a valuation of the liabilities of the section 26. 
CorPoration", the words "life insurance business of the 
Corporation, including a valuation of the liabilities of the Corpora-
10 tion in respect thereto" shall be substituted. 
,-

Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section for 
section 28. 
Surplus 
from lite 
insurance 
business 
how to be 
utilized. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
28A. 
Profits 
from any 
business 
(other 
than life 
insurance 
business) 
how to be 
utilized. 
2 
3. For section 28 of the principal Act, the following--s-ection shall-----
be substituted and shall be deemed always to have been so substitu-
ted, namely:-
"28. U as a result of allY investi,ation undertaken by the 
Corporation under section 26 any surplus emer~, ninety-five 5 
per cent. of such surplus or such hi,her percentace thereuf RS 
the Central Governm.eDt may approve shall be aDocated to or 
reserved for the life insurance policy-holders of the-::'Corpora-
tion and after meetinl the liabilities of the Corporation, if any, 
which may arise under section 9, the remainder shall be paid to 10 
the CentrBl Government or, if that Government so directs, be 
utilized for such purposes and in such manner as that Govern-
ment may determine.". 
4. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
section 
1C28A. If for any financial year profits accrue from any busi-
ness (other than life insurance business) carried on.. by the 
Corporation, then, after making provision for reserves and other 
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient, the balan-
15 
ce_ of such proftts shall be paid to the Central Government.". IS 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 28 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, provides 
that where an actuarial valuation under section 26 discloses a sur-
plus, the remainder of the surplus after allocation of not less than 
95 per cent. thereof to policy-holders, "may be utilized for such 
purposes and in such manner as the Central Government may deter-
mine". This provision was intended to eoeII1e: Government to ap-
propriate this portion of the surplus to the Central Government 
revenue, if they so desired. Accordingly, during each of the last 
four valuations, a part of the surplus was appropriated to Central 
revenues. In a recent case, the Supreme Court observed that while 
the Central Government may determine the manner in which tIle. 
remainder of the surplus may be utilized, it could not appropriate 
it as revenue. The amendmeDt, which is retrospective, is designed 
to give II!ftect to the orfljnal intention, while making it clear that 
the liabilities which devolved on the Corporation under section 9 
of the Act but which were not payable out of the Life Insurance 
Fund would constitute a first charge on the surplus remaining after 
allocation to policy-holders. 
2. Opportunity is taken to clarify that the profits of any insu-
rance business, other than life insurance business, carried on by the 
Corporation would be payable to Government. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; T. T. KRISHNAMACHARr. 
The 30th August, 1965. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDE&- ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter dated September 3, 1965 from Shri T. T. Krishna-
machari Minister of Finance to the Secretary, Lok Sabha]. , 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of 
the Bill further to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 . 
recommends, under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of the Consti-
tution, the introduction and f>nsideration of the said Bill in the 
Lok Sabba during its current Session. 
3 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill amends with retrospective e1fect section 28 
of the Act to regularise payments hitherto made under the section 
to the Central Government to the extent that such payments are in 
excess of the liabilities of the Corporation under section 9. The 
liabilities under section 9 relate to certain deposits which some erst-
while insurers had collected and whicb·~. repayable only out of 
surpluses disclosed at future valuations. In a recent case, the 
Supreme Court has held that such deposits will have to be repaid 
out of the balances left over after payment to the policy-holders of 
not less than ninety-five per cent. of the surpluses disclosed at the 
valuations of the Corporation. Such deposits together with interest 
amount to about Rs. '18 lakhs and will' have to be repaid out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India as, in the past, the balances were ap-
propriated to Central Revenues without meeting such liabilities. 
4. 

ANNEXURE--
.--------~----------
ExTRAcTS .--oM THE LU'I INSUltANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1958 
(31 OF 1956) 
• • • • • 
28. The Corporation shall, once at least in every two years, cause Actua-
an -investigation to be made by actuaries into the financial condition rial 
of the 'business of the COrp&r8tion; including a valuation of the Iiabi- V:alua. 
lities of the Corporation, and submit:""D-:!\ltport of the actuaries to tiona. 
the Central Government. 
• • • • • 
28. If as a result of any investigation undertaken by the Corp~ 
ration under section 28 any surplus emerges, not less than 96 per 
cent. of such surplus shall be allocated to or reserved for the policy-
holders of the Corporation and the remainder may be utilised for 
such purposes and in such m8lUler as the Central Government may 
determine. 
-. • • • • 
\. , , ...... 
Surplua 
how to 
be 
utlllHd. 

LOIC SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 . 
• 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamat:hari, 
Minister of FinImt:s.) 