1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
UlK SABHA. 
OOl1RIGENDA 
to· 
THE RESEARCH AND LEVELUPMENf CESS BILL, 1986 
(To be/As introduced in 10k Sab:tll!) 
Page 1, line 15,-
!:D.!:. "section 4; 11 read-
"!::ection 5; II 
Page 3, line 10,-
after "interest, II' insert _ 
"it m~," 
Page 4, -
for lines 4 and 5, read ,-
-
"thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as 
the ~ase may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment 11 
,Page 6, line 7,-
!Q!:. "It has I1.ot been ll ~_ 
"It is n'o\' 11 
NEW DlilllI· , 
£1av 5, 198~ 
\i aisakha 1 , 1908 (Saka) 

• 
• 1801 19M. 
BiD No. 55 of 1916. 
THE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CESS BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collectl:on of a cess on all payments made 
for th.e import oj technology for the purposes of en.couraging /the 
commercial application of indigenously developed technology and 
for adapting imponed technology to wider domestv. application and 
for matters COnnected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Research and Development Cess 
Act. 1986. 
Short 
title. 
extent 
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and and 
10 
15 
Kashmir. commen. cement. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may. bY'notification in the Offtcial Gazette, appoin.t. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-
(a) "cess" means the cess levied under ·section 3; 
(b) "Development Bank" means the Industrial Development 
Bank of India established under section. 3 of the Industrial Develop-
ment Bank of India Act, 1964; 
(c) "Fund" me~nl'j th4;l VeQture Capital Fund formed under 
section 4; 
lIeftni-
tiona. 

Levy and 
collection 
otceuon 
payments 
made 
towards 
importot 
techno-
logy. 
Crediting 
proceeds 
'ofceu to 
Consoli-
dated 
Fund of 
India. 
Venture 
Capital 
Fund. 
2 
(d) "import", in relation to any technology, means the bringing 
into India of, such technology from a place outside India; 
(e) "industrial concern" has the meaning assigned to it in 
clause (c) of section 2 of the Industrial Development Bank of India 
Act, 1964, and includes any other person in whose favour a foreign 5 
collaboration involving the import. of technology is approved by the 
Central Government;, 
(f) ~'prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(9) ''5pecified agency" means- 10 
(i) the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934; or 
(ii) the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank 
of India Act, 1955; or 
(iii) such other bank or institution as may be specified in 15 
this behalf by the Central Government; 
(h) "teehnology" means any special or technical knowledge or 
any special service required for any purpose whatsoever by an 
industrial concern under any foreign collaboration, and includes 
designs, drawings, publications and technical personnel. ao 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected, for the purposes of this Act, 
a cess at such rate not exceeding five per cent. on all payments made 
towards the import of technology, as the Central Government may, from 
time to.time, specify, by notification, in the Official Gazette. 
(2) The cess shall be payable to the Central Government by an indus. 25 
trial concern, which imports technology, on or before making any pay-
ments towards such import and shall be paid by the industrial concern 
to any specified agency. 
4. The proceeds of the cess le,vied and collected under section 3 shall 
first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, and the' Central Gov- 30 
ernment may, if Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf 
so provides, pay to the Development }3ank, from time to time, from out 
of such proceeds (after deducting the cost of collection), such sums of 
money as it may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the Fund. 
5. (1) There shall be formed for the purposes of this Act a Fund to 35 
be called the Venture Capital Fund and such Fund shall form part of 
the Development Assistance Fund established by the Development Bank 
under section 14, of the .Indu:strial Development Bank of India Act, 1964, 
and the provisions of Chapter V of that Act shall, save as otherwise 
expressly provided in this Act, apply to such Fund. 
(2) There shall be cre,di.ted to the Fund-
(a) all amounts paid under section 4; 
(b) any amount given as grants by the Central Government. for 
~he purposes of this Act; 
, (c) any amount given to the Fund from any other source; and 
(d) any income from investment of the amount in 'the Fund,.~ 
45 
18 of 1984. 
a of 19U. 
23 of 1955. 
18 of 1984. 

•. 'The Fund shall be applied by the Development Barlk' to meet the 
expenditure incurred in connection with the' measures and facilities 
whicll; in the opinion 'of the Development Bank, are neceSsary or 
expedient to provide equity capital or any other form of financial 
5 assistance to industrial concerns attempting 'commercial applications of 
indigenous technology or adapting imported technology to wider domestic 
applications. ' • 
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the 
In public interest, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be speci.fied therein, exempt any industrial 
concern from the payment of the cess payable under this Act for the 
import of such technology as may be specified in such notification. 
8. The Development Bank may require an industrial concern to 
15 furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other informa-
tion in such form and within such period as may be prescribed. 
9. (1) If any cess payable by an industrial concern is not paid on or 
before making payments towards the import of technology, it shall be 
deemed to be in arrears and the same shall be recovered by the Deve-
gO lopment Bank in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Development Bank may, after such inquiry as it deems fit, 
impose 01') the industrial concern, which is in arrears under sub-section 
(1), a penalty not exceeding five times the amount in arrears: 
Provided that before imposing such penalty, such industrial concern 
g5 shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and if, after 
such hearing. the Development Banik is satisfied that the default was 
for any good and sufficient reason, no penalty shall be imposed under 
this sub-section. 
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
30 Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
" . 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for the following matters, namely:-
(a) the form in which and the period within which the infor-
mation under section 8 may be furnil&hed; 
35 (b) the manner in which the arrears of cess may be recovered 
under sub-section (1) of section 9; 
(c) any other matter which is required ~o be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
45 be after it is made" before each HoU'se of Parliament, while it is in ses-
sion, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
lession or in'two or more successive sessions, and ff, before the expiry 
AppUca-
tlon of 
Fund, 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
exempt. 
PowertG 
call for 
inf'1rma-. 
tion. 
Penalty 
for non-
payment 
ofee ... 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

• 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive ses-
sions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification Or annulment 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 5 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It was envisaged in the Long Term Fiscal Policy announced in De-
cember, 1985 that a ClResearch and Development celli" would be imposed 
on all payments made for import of technology. The proceeds of the 
cess so levied shall be paid to the Industrial Developnient Bank of India 
after due appropriation by Parliament by law for being utiliaed for the 
purposes of the Venture Capital Fund. The proposed Venture Capital 
Fund shall be utilised for ,providing further incentivE'S for the commer· 
cial application of indigenously developed technology and to adapt im-
ported technology to, wider domestic, applications. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the abnve objectives. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 1st May, 1986. 
JANARDHANA POOJARY. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATIONS UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 1 I 41 86-F1&T, dated the 2nd May, 1986, from 
Shri Janardhana Poojari. Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance, 
to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Research and Development Cess Bill, 1986, recommends under clauses 
(1) and (3) of article 117 of the Constitution of India the introduction in 
and consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabba. 
a . . • ~ ..... ..;; 

rlMANCIAL MEMoRANDUM 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Govemment may, if 
Parliament, by appropriation made by law in this behalf, sO prcmdel. 
pay to the'Development Bank, from time to time. from out of such 
proceeds (after deducting the cost of collection), suclt sUms of money as 
it may think nt. The collection of the cess wlll involve some expenditure 
from the COIlIOlidated FuDd of India. It- has not been posSible at this stage 
to estimat. the amount of such expenditure. However, it is tentatively 
estimated that the collection of the cess will be about Rs. 15 crores per 
annum on an average. The expen8811 of collection would reasonably 
come to about Rs. 15 lakhs per annum. As only the balance of the pro-
ceeds, after deducting' the cost of collection, wlll be utiUsed for making 
payments to the Industri~l Development Bank of India, there will, in 
effect, be no net outgo from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. The expenditure on the collection of the cess will be of a recur-
ring nature and the Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether 
of a recurring or non-recurring nature. 
I '. 
" j,;t 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks 1"0 empower the Central Government to 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
The matters with respet to which rules may be made relate to the form 
in which and the period within which information is to be furnished, 
the manner of recovery of the arrears of the cess and any other matter 
which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
7 

LOg SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on all payments made 
for the import of technology for the purposes of encouraging the 
commercial application of indigenously developed technology and 
for adapting imported technology to wider domestic application and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Ja.n.a.rdho.na. Poojary, 
Minister of State in the Mi,.;,.try of Finance) 