, .;; .. , .. 
am No. 55 of 1177. 
THE YOGA UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT) 
BILL,1977 
A 
BILL 
to pTovide lOT the taking over of the mAnagement of the undertaki'lg' 
. oJ the two Yoga Societies for a limited period in the public interest 
and in ~Tder to secure the pToper management theT'eof and faT matters 
connected therewith or incident,d thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic 
01 India as folJows:-
CHAPTER I 
.' ... 
P'RILXMINARY 
S I," (1) ThiS Act may be called the Yoga Undertakings (Taking Over ~:;rt title 
O~ Mknagemen;t) Act, 1977. com-
. (2) It .hall, be deemed to have come into force on the 24th day of May. mence!_ 
! 1977. ment. 
10 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-' 
(a) "Administrator" means the person or body of persons 
" appointed as the Administrator under section 4; 
Ib) "aopointeq dalY" me~ the 24th day of Mav. 1977; 
Deftnl-
tion .. 

Manale-
ment 
of the 
under-
takings 
of the 
two 
Yoga 
f'o~ie­
ties. 
2 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(d) "Societies Registration Act" means the Societies Registration 
Act 1860 as in force in the Union territory of Delhi; , , 
(e) "two Yoga Societies" means the---
21 of 1880. 
(i) Vishwayatan Yogashram. a society registered under the S 
Societies Registration Act and having its registered oftlce at B-35, 
Defence Colony, New Delhi, and 
(ii) Central Research Institute for Yoga, a society register-
ed under the Societies R~gistration Act, and having its register-
ed office at Yogashram, Ashok Road, New Delhi, 
and the expression "Yoga Society" shall be construed as referring 
to one of the two Yoga Societies; 
(t) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defin-
ed in the Societies Registration Act shall have the meanings, respec-
tively, assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPI'ER II 
TAKING .oVER OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE UNDERTAKINGS 01' THE TWO YOGA 
SocIETIES 
JO 
3. U) On and from the appointed day, and for a period of two years 
thereafter, the management of the undertakings of the two Yoga Socie- 20 
ties ahlill'vest in the Central Government: 
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that in order 
to secure the proper management of the undertakings of either, or both, 
of the Yoga Societies, it is expedient that such management should 
continue to vest in the Central Govenament after the expiry of the said 2$ 
period of two years, it may, frolllt time to time, issue directions for the 
continuance of such manag~nt for such period, not exceedihg one year 
at a time, as it may thinkftt; so, however, that the'wti.l period'idr which 
suchmanagemettt shall continue to vest in the Central'Gov~rnrtlent shall 
not, in any case, exceed ftve years. 
(2) The undertaking of each of the two Yoga 'SbCleties sJ;lall be deemed 
to include all assets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities and prtvileges 
and . all property, movable and immov...ble, including lands, build-
jngs, works, workshops, project., . stoi"eS, instruments, machinery, 
aircraft, automobiles and other vehicles,cash balances, reserve fund., 
investments and book debts and all other rights and interests. arisina 3$ 
out. of such, property as were irnmediatelybefore the appointed day in 
the ownership, possession, power or control of each of the two Yep 
Seci·eties, whether within or without India, and all books of account, 
registers, maps, plans· and· all otAer ,documents· of wbateYer 'lUl*ure .ril1at- 40 
ing thereto. 
(3) Any contract, whether expN8s or implied, or other arranganmt, 4$ 
in so far as it relates to the man~ement of the businesj; and affairs of 
the undertakings of either, or both, of the Yoga Societies, and in force 
immediately before the appninted day, shall be deemed to have tE'..rtQbult· 
cd on the appointed day . 
. ' 
, ' 

',J 
(4) All, persona in charge of the llUlnagement of eiUler of the two 
Yo. Societies. including persons holding offices as d.il::ooturll. managers, 
mem:ben of the Governing Body or Hoard 01 TCU5teas Ol' any other 
manaprialpersonnel af either. or both, of the Yoga Socie'ies wunediately 
S bMfwe: tlw appointed day shall be deemed to have vacated their ofilceI 
u. 5UCh on the appe.inted day. 
4. (1), r.be ~1 Gu"ellllUeUt Bball, ~ frwu the 8JJIWwted daf, 
apPQuat a peI'II!&D or a bod)' of pel"&OOS as the Adminiltrator ottbe 1mQel--
tQiDp of the two Yop Societies for the puqose ot takio, over the 
10 ..... acemeat thereof and the Admiaistrator »ball carry OIl the man., •• 
meat of the uadertakings of the two Yop. Societiet fw and loll bebalf 
of tbe Ceatl'al Government. 
(02) The Central GoverWIlent may illsue such uirections (including, 
directions as to initiating, defending or continuing any legal proceedings 
IS before any court. tribunal or other authority) to the A.d.a\iDlitrator· as 
to bis powers and dutles as that Government may deem desirabl{. and 
tne Administrator may apply to the Central Government at any time 
for instructio1li as to the manner in which he shall conduct the manaje.-
m@t of the undertaktngs of the two Yoga Societies or in re18tion to any 
ao matter arising in the course of such management. 
(3) Subject to t~le other provisions of this Act and the rules maGe 
thereunder and to the control of the Central Government. the Adminis-
trator shall be entitled. notWithstanding anything contaiDed in ~he,Socie­
ties Registration Act or in any other law for the time bei.l:lg in force, to 
25 exercise. m relation to the undertakings of the two Yog~ Societies, the 
powers of the Governing Body, or, a. the case may be, tbe Board of 
'l'rustees, of the respective Yoga Society. including the powers to cUspo&e 
of any property or assets of such society, whether such powers are deriv-
ed under any law for the time being in iorce or from the memoradum and 
3P ~u:::~~~nd regulatloni of the concerned Yoga Society or Irom any otner 
.. ..., - .--
(4) Every person having postession, custody or control of any property 
forming part of any undertaking of either of the two Yo,a SOCIeties shalJ 
deliver torthwith such property to the Administrator or to li!'y officer 
35 oJ:!od:ler employee of the Central Government, as may be authorised by 
tile' Central Government in this behalf. , 
ti) Any person who. on the appointed day, has in his possession or 
undel' hi&oontrol any books, papers or other documents relating to any 
UDdItr1ak.ing of either of the two Yoga Societies. including tne minutea 
books containing the re,solutions of the persons in charge of the manage, 
40 ment of the concerned Yoga Society before the appointed day. the current 
cheque books relating to the undertakings of the concerned Yoga Society, 
aQ¥' leUera, memoranda, notes or other communications between him 
BIUi. ei~er of the two Yoga Societies shall, notWithstanding anything 
coatainec;tin an)" other law for the time being ill force, be liable to account 
45 for the books, papers and other documents (including such minutes books. 
cheque boo~, letters, memoranda, notes or other communications) tu 
/the Adminiatrator or to any such person (being an officer or other em-
ployee of the Central Government) as may be authorised by the Central 
$0 Government in this behalf. 
Admlnia. 
trator of 
the two 
Yoga 
Societies. 

No right 
to com-
penS8-
tion for 
prema-
ture 
termina-
tiod of 
a con-
tract. 
Relin-
quish-
m'ent of 
manage-
ment of 
the two 
Yoga 
Societies. 
Applica-
tion of 
Act. 21 of 
1880. 
.:.& 
(6) Every person in charge of the management of the undertakings 
of either of the two Yoga Societies immediately before the appointed 
day shall, within ten days from that d~ or within such further period 
as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, furnish to the 
Administrator a complete inventory of all the properties and assets (In- S 
cluding particulars of book debts and investments and .belongings) form-
ing part of the undertakings of the concerned Yoga Society im~ediately 
before the appointed day and of all the liabilities and obligatfons of thto 
concemed Yoga Society, in relation to its undertakings, subsisting imme-
diately before that day, and also of aU agreements entered into by either, 
or both, of the Yoga Societies in relation to its or their undertakings 10 
and in force immediately before that day. 
(7) The Administratol' shall receive from the funds of the two Yoga 
Societi~ sueh J'eIIluneration as the Cenfa"al Govemment may fix. 
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being IS 
in force. no person in respect of whom any con trod of management or 
other arrangement is terminated by reason ·of the provisions contained 
in sub-eection (3) of section 3 or who ceases to hold any office by reason 
of the provisions contained in sub-section (4)1 of that section, shall be 
entitled to claim any compensation for the premature termination of 20 
the contt'act of management or other arrangement or for the loss of his 
office. 
•. (1) N~twithstanding anything contained in suh-section (1) of sec-
tion 3, if, at any time before the expiry of the period referred to in that 
sub-section, it appears to the Central Government that the purposes ~t 2S 
the vesting of the management of the undertakings of either, or both, of 
the Yoga Societies in that Government have been fulfilled or that for any 
other reason it is not necessary that the management of the undertakings 
o~ either, or both, of the Yoga Societies should remain vested in that 
Government, it may, by order published in the Official Gazette, reUn- 30 
quish the management of the undertakings of either, or both, of the Yoga 
Societies with effect from such date as may be speCified in the order. 
(2) On and from the date specified under sub-section (1), the 
management of the undertakings of the con<:erned Yoga Society shall 
vest in the Governing Body (by whatever name called) of the concern- 3S 
cd Yoga Society and such management shall be carried on in &ccordance 
with the. provisions of the Societies Registration Act, so, however, ~t 
the steps, if any, in relation to the managament of the undertakings of,. 
the concerned Yoga Society may be taken after the publication of the 
order under suh-section (1). . 4 0 
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Societies Registra-
tion Act or in the memorandum and rules and regulations of either of the 
two Yoga SOCieties, but subject to the proviSions of 'sub-section (2) of sec-' 
tiol'J 6, so long as the management of the undertakings of the two Yoga 
Societies remains vested in the Central Govemment,- 45 
(0) it shall not be lawful for the members of either of the two 
Yoga Societies or any other person to nominate or appoint any per-
son to be a member of the Governing Body (hy whatever name 
caUed) of either of the two Yoga Societies; 

• 
. (b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the members ot 
either of the two Yoga SOCieties or at any meeting of the Governing 
Body (by whatever name' called) of either of the two Yoga Societies, 
Oft or after the appointed day, shall be given effect to unless approv-
ed by the Central ,Government; 
(c) no proceeding for the dissolution of either of the two Yoga 
Societies or for their merger with any other society or for the ap-
~oi~tment of a Receiver in respect of any undertaking thereof shall 
be lD any court except with the consent of the Central Government. 
10 (2) Subject to the provisions contained in SUb-section (1) and subject 
to such other exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as may be 
prescribed, the Societies RegistratIon Act shall continue to apply to the 
concerned Yoga Society in the same m~,nner as it applied thereto before 
the appointed day. 
IS CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANBOUS 
8. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possession or custody or under his control Bny 
property forming part of any undertaking of either of the two Yoga 
SOCieties, wrongfully withholds such property from the Administra-
tor or any person authorised under this Act, or 
(b) wrongfully obtains posseSSion of any such property, or 
(c) wiUully retains, or fails to deliver, any property forming part 
of any of the undertakings of either of the two Yoga Societies or ~ 
25 moves or detroys it, or • 
(d) wilfully withholds or fails to account for any books, papers or 
other documents which may be in his possession or custody or under 
In!! control to the Administrator or any person authotised under thil 
Act, or 
30 (e)' faiIs, withoitt any reasonable cause, to furnish information 
or particulars as provided in sub-section (6) of SectiOD 4, 
shall be punishable wlth imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
Penal-
tia. 
35 t. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Otrenca 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was by com-
in charge of, and was responSible to, the company lor the conduct of the paniel. 
business of the company as well as the company, shan be deemed to be 
guilty of the oftence and shall be liable to be pr~ded against and 
40 punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-tiection shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had ext-,rcised all due diJ ' 
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 

'2U!ABS
PUg
IB<,.d;}H(r
JOi
l{~..
'sajn.r
;}}{BW
o;l;}MOd
'lU;}W
-A:o[dw;) lJR1l
JO f;:JBlfal{l.It.
-UO;) ;}fBU 'sno.rai
-tuztail~al{lOl '
Of .l;}MOd -Ao[dwa
1•
-lDKSABRA
CORRIGENDA
to
THE YOGAUNDERTAKINGS CTAKING OVER OF MANj
BILL, 1977
LTo be introducedin
Page3,line29,-
2. Page5,line25,-
3. Page6, line36,-
forl1interest11
4.
NEW DELHI;
June20, 1977
Jyaistha30, 1899(Saka)


Exclu-
sion of 
periOd of 
operation 
of Act. 
Act to 
have 
over-
riding 
'effect. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken 
In ,ODd 
faith. 
Contracts 
in bad 
faith ma,y 
be • 
cancel-
led or 
varied. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything cOQtained in i\lb·sectio.a (1). where 
ally offence under this Act bill been COJWnitted by a colDjllJJf. and it 1 ... 
proved that the offence bas been conumtted with the. ~ .or CCMUli-
vance of, or is attributable to, ally neglect on the part of all)' d'JreQtor, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the CODlpalJYJ iUc.b direetor, mana- ! 
ger, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
aDd shall be liable to be proceeded against and' puniD.ed accordingly. 
E;qilana.tion.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporaie and includes a firm 
or other association o! individuals; and 10 
(b) "director", in relation to a firIQ, means a parUler ip. the,finn, 
J8. In computing the period of limitation prescribftd. by, IUJ)' . law fw 
the time being in force for any SUit or application again.t an~ pe&'aon by 
either of the two Yoga Societies in respect of any matter arising t.:ut 01 
any transaction in relation to their undertakings, the tune during which 15 
thIS Ad is in force shall be e"cluded. 
11. The provisions o! this Act or any notification, order or rule Inade 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any law other than this Act or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or in. any decree 20 
or order of any court. 
12. (1) Np suit, prosecution or other le,glll proc~dma shall .lie ag~st 
the Administrator or any officer or other employee of the Central Gov-
ernme.ot for anything whi~h i8 in good faith dolle or intended to be done 
under this Act. 25 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie a~inst tlle Central 
Government or the Administrator or any of the officers or oth.er em-
ployees of the Central Government for any damage caused or likely to 
be, caused by anytbing whi~h i. in good 1aitb done or intende. to be 
done undlU' this Act. 30 
13. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied, after such inq~ as 
jt may think fit, that any contract or agreement entered into at any timE: 
within one year immediately _preceding the appointed day,' between 
either of the two Yoga Societies, and any other person in so far a. such 
cont~ct or agreement relates to any undtu:tak.iDg of sUQb Yoga, SOCiety,. 35 
has,been en~red into in had faith, or is detrimantalto the interest oftbe 
concerned Yoga SOCiety, it may make an order cancelling orvll'1'iq 
(either unconditionally or subject to such condi~ions as it may think fit 
to impose) such contract· or agreemen~ and thereafter the contract or 
agreement shall have effect accordingly: 40 
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varWQ 
eXllept after giving to the parties to the contract '()1'>'agreement a reaSOD" 
able opportunity of being heard. 
(a) Any pen;on aggrieved by an orda" under sulHection (n may 
malic! an application to the High Court at Delhi for the variation or 45 
reversal of such order aDd thereupon such court may conftrm, modify 
or reverse such order. 

B of 1977. 
7 
It. If the Administrator is of opinion that any contract of employ-
ment entered into by either of the two Yoga Societies in relation to their 
undertakings, at any time before the appointed day, i~ unduly onerous, 
he may, by giving to the employee one month's notice in writing or the 
5 salary or wqes for one month in lieu thereof, terminate such contract 
of employment.' 
11. (1) The Central' Government may, by notification in the 0ftIei1l1 
'Gszette, 'make'ru:es for carrying'out the provisions of. this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
10 IIhaU be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, bt-fore each Howle 
.fParliamen·t while it is in . session for a total period of thirty days which 
·may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive session'i, 
and .it, before the expiry of. the session immediately following the lIesaion 
. or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
IS medifteationin the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
,not·be made, the rule shall thereafter h!lveeffect onfy in such :modifted 
form·or be of no effect, as the case may be; 10, Iaowevcr, that any St· 
modiftcation or annulment shall he without prejudice to the validity of 
anything ,preViously done under that rule. 
ao 18. (1) The Yoga Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) 
'Ordinance, 1977, is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have 1aeen done or 
taken under the corresponding provision of this Art. 
Power to 
telmi-
nate con-
tract of 
employ-
ment, 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
Repeal 
and 
savin •. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of India in the Ministry of Health and Family Wel-
fare (Department of Health) have given a total grant of RI. 16,OI~~1,fj5 
to the Vishwayatan Yogashram, New Delhi, from the year 1969 to 31-12-
1975 through the Central Council for Research in Indian Medicine and 
Homoeopathy f~r running a Clinical Research Unit (Yoga). Subse-
quently, a Central Research Institute (Yoga) was established as a regis-
tered society in the Yogashram with effect from the 1st January, 1976 to 
study the effects of yoga in various diseases like d'iabetes, asthma, etc. 
and to study the effects of yogic kri?,"aS on various organs of healthy per-
sons. A sum of Rs. 10,40,000 was given as grant-tn-aid to the Central 
Research Institute during the period from 1-1-1976 to 31-3-1977. Shri 
Dhirendra Brahamachari was Managing Trustee of the Vishwayatan 
Yogashram and Director of the Central Research Institute for Yoga. 
Consequent on an inquiry into the utilisation of the funds sanctioned 
to the Clinical Research Unit (Yoga) at the Vishwayatan Yogashrarr. 
and later to the Central Research Institute (Yoga), New Delhi, it has 
been found that the money given as grant-in-aid has been systematically 
siphoned 'away by falsification of accounts by the Managing Trustee of 
the Yogashram and Director of the Central Research Institute (Yoga) 
by adopting the following methods:-
(i) non-maintenance of full particulars and accounts of costly 
scientific instruments, apparatus, and equipments said to have 
been purchased from time to time and declaring the assets 
under arbitrary classification at a value not verifiable by the 
Auditors; 
(il) charging depreciation on assets at undisclosed rates and not 
enabling the Auditors to verify the correctness of the deopre-
ciation charged on any item; 
(iii) not carrying out physical verification of the assets in any year 
to ensure that the assets were physically present and were 
approximately of the declared value; and 
(iv) creation of buildings and assets of. doubtful value by fictitious 
transfers. 
Even in relation to the grants given by the Ministry of Education 
and Social Welfare to the Yogashram, there have been adverse audit 
comments. Further, the land given to the Vishwayatan Yogashram near 
~ew Delhi G.P.O., New D~:hi, by the Ministry of Works and Housing has 
not been put to proper use. In these circumstances, it has been consi-
dered necessary both in the public interest as well as to aecurP. proper 
management that the manggement of the Vishwayatan Yogashram as 
well as the management of the Central Research Institute (Yoga) be 
tRken over by the Central Government initially for a period' of two years 
with powers to extend the period up to an aggregate period of five years. 
As Parliament was not in session, it was considered expedient in the 
public interest to promUlgate an Ordinance viz. "The Yoga Undertakings 
S 

9 
(Taking Over of Management) Ordinance, 1977-No. 8 of 1977" for tak-
ing over of the management of the Vishwayatan Yogashram and ita 
Centre at Katra Vaishnodevi and Central Research Institute (Yoga) and 
appointment of an AdiniDiltratot th6teof. 
The Government of India ate now tak1Jig steps to aeeel~rate the 
research prograinme in the yoga syste~. in the abtlri:-mentioned Insti-
tutes on sound footings and to f2rovid~ eftlcient Iri~e.l ~d to the public 
in the yoga System. The aill is intended to achieve these obJectives 
and to replace the Ordinance. 
Nsw Da.Hl; RAJ NARAlN. 
The Ifth June, urn. 

, , 
.. 
FINANCIAL I4EMORANDUI4, 
, The Bill provides for the taking over of the management of two re-
,gistered, societies'nBmely Vishwayatan Yogashram (near'Gole Dak Khana, 
New Delhi and its centre at Katra Vaishnodevi) and the Central Research 
Institute for Yoga 'which is also functioning in the Yogashram at New Delhi." ,- '" ' 
, '2. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a c»erson or a 
body of persons as the Administrator of the undertakings of the two Yoga 
Societies and further provides that the Administratotlha~ ,receiv. frO,m 
the funds of the two Yoga Societies such remuneration as the Central 
Government may fix. 
3. The management of the two Yoga Societies will involve a recurring 
annual expenditure of RI. lO.33lakhs to meet the on-going activities. The 
Bill, if enacted. is not likely to involve any non-recurring expenditure 
during the current flnancial year. In case there arises any need to Incur 
any non-recurring expenditure, it would be incurred from the budget 
grant of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
10 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Claus.e 15 of the 'Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to Carry out the purposes of this Act. These rules mainly relate to 
the efticient management and working of the Vishwayatan Yogashram at 
New Delhi and its Centre at Katra Vaishnodevi and Central Research 
Institute for Yoga, New Delhi. 
2. The matters in resPeCt of which rules can be made are generally 
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable 
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legisla~ve power 
is thereflore of a normal character. 
II 

Mem0r4H14m reg",.d.ing c1uJ,nge. in the Bill to t'ep~ tIN 'foga 
Undertakit&f1l (Taking 0ve7' 0/ Ma.nagement) OrdinAtw:e,l977 
.. Besides D~ drafting and consequential cws;es, in sub-clauiie 
(1) of clause 13, the words "one year" have beeJlsubstituted for the wordi 
"three years". This has been done as one 01 the two Yoga Societies wu 
regJltered as a lOCiety with dect flom l ... l.lr1o. 
12 

LOK SABHA 
A 
Bn..L 
to provide for the taking over of the management of the undertakings of 
the two Yoga Societies for a limited period in the public interest and 
in order to secure the proper management thereof and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri R4; Narain, Minilter fOT Health and Family WeI/are). 