8W No. 55 of 1"3 
THE SPECIFIC RELIEF BILL, 1962 
.. 
(To BE INTRODUCED IN LOIC SABRA) 

tHE sPEciFIC RELIEF BIi.L, 1962 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Savings. 
4. Specific relief to be granted only for enforcing individual civil 
rights and not for enforcing penal laws. 
PART II 
SPECIFIC RELIEF 
CHAPTER I 
RECOVERING POSS~ION OF PROPER'l'Y 
5. Recovery of specific immovabJe property. 
6. Recovery of specific movable property. 
7. Liability of person in possession, not as owner, to deliver to 
persons entitled to immediate possession. 
CHAPTER II 
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS 
8. Defences respecting suits for relief based on contract. 
CONTRACTS WHICH CAN BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
9. Cases in which specific performance of contract enforceable. 
10. Cases in which specific performance of contracts connected 
with trusts enforceable. 
11. Specific performance of part of contract. 
12. Rights of purchaser or lessee against person with no title or 
imperfect title. 
CONTRACTS WHICH CANNOT BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
13. Contracts not specifically enforceable. 

ii 
PERSONS FOR OR AGAINST WHOM CONTRACTS MAY BE Sl"liCIFICALLY 
ENFORCED 
CLAUUB 
14. Who may obtain specific performance. 
15. Personal bars to relief. 
16. Contract to sell or let property by one who has no title, not 
specifically enforceable. 
17. Non-enforcement except with variation. 
18. Relief against parties and persons claiming under them by 
subsequent title. 
DISCRETION AND POWERS OF COURT 
19. Discretion as to decreeing specific performance. 
20. Power to award compensation in certain cases. 
21. Power to grant relief for possession, partition, refund of 
earnest money, etc. 
22. Liquidation of damages not a bar to specific performance. 
23. Bar of suit for compensation for breach after dismissal of suit 
fo~ specific performance. 
ENFoRCEMENT OF A WARDS AND ;DIRECTIONS TO EXECUTE SETTLEMENTS 
24. Application of preceding sections to certain awards and testa-
mentary directions to execute settlements. 
CHAPTER III 
RECTIFICATION OF INSTRUMENTS 
25. When instrument may be rectified. 
CHAPTER IV 
RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS 
26. When rescission may be adjudged or refused. 
27. Rescission in certain circumstances of contracts for the sale 
or lease of immovable property, the specific performance 
of which has been decreed. 
28. Alternative prayer for rescission in suit for specific perfor-
mance. 
29. Court may require parties rescinding to do equit¥. 

,,-.. ~-
iii 
CHAPTER V 
CANCELLATION OF INSTRUMENTS 
CLAUSES 
30. When cancellation may be ordered. 
31. What instruments may be partially cancelled. 
32. Power to require benefit to be restored or compensation to 
be made when instrument is cancelled or is successfully 
resisted as being void or voidable. 
CHAPTER VI 
DECLARATORY DECREES 
33. Discretion of court as to declaration of status or right. 
34. Effect of declaration. 
PART III 
" PREvENTIvE RELIEf' 
CHAPTER VII 
INJUNCTIONS GENERALLY 
35. Preventive relief how granted. 
36. Temporary and perpetual injunctions. 
CHAPTER VIII 
PERPETUAL INJUNCTIONS 
37. Perpetual injunction when granted. 
38. Mandatory injunctions. 
39. Damages in lieu of, or in addition to, injunction. 
40. Injunction when refused. 
41. Injunction to perform negative agreement. 
42. Amendment of Act 10 of 1940. 
43. Repeal. 
.. 

BUI No. 55 .f I"Z 
THE SPECIFIC RELIEF BILL, 1962 
(To BE INTRODUCeD IN Lox: SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to define and amend the law relating to certain kinds of specific 
relief· 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
PART I 
PRELIMIN ARY 
S 1. (J) This Act may be called the Specific Relief Act, 1962. Short title, extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu conuneuce-
and Kashmir. ment. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
10 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Dcfinitioos. 
(a) "obligation" includes every duty enforceable by law; 
(b) "settlement" means an instrument (other than a will 
or codicil as defined by the Indian Succession Act, 1925) 
whereby the destination Of devolution of successive interests in 
15 movable or immovable property is disposed of or is agreed to 
be disposed of; 
20 
(e) "trust" has the same meaning as in section 3 of the 
Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and includes an obligation in the nature 
of a trust within the meaning of Chapter IX of that Act; 
(d) "trustee" includes every person holding property in 
trustj 
(e) all other words and expressions used herein but not 
defined, and defined in the Indian Contract Act, 1872, have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.,., 

.'''hlp. 
2 
3. Except as otherwise provided herein, nothing in this Act shan 
be deemed-. 
(a) to deprive any person of any right to relief, other. than' 
specific performance, which he may have under any contract; or 
(b) to affect the operation of the Indian Registration Act, S 
1908, on documents. I' of 1901. 
s~ 4. Specific relief can be granted only for the purpose of enforc-
=~: ~y ing individual civil rights and not for the mere purpose of enforc-
for eDforciu& ing a penal law. 
ladividual 
civD lilhtl 
and not for 
eDfon:fDa 
penal ]aws. " PART II 
SPECIFIC RELIEI' 
CHAPTER I 
RECOVERING POSSESSION OF PROPERTY 
10 
Recovery of 5. A person entitled to the possession of specific immovable pro-
::':=vable perty may recover it in the manner provided by the Code of Civil IS 
property. Procedure, 1908. 
Recovery of 
specific 
movable 
property. 
6. A person entitled to the possession of specific movable pro-
perty may recover it in the manner provided by the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908. 
Explanation l.-A trustee may sue under this section for . the 20 
possession of movable property to the beneficial interest in which 
the person for whom he is trustee is entitled. 
Explanation 2.-A special or temporary right to the present pos-
session of movable property is sufficient to support a suit under this 
section. 25 
::r!!~% of !. Any person having the possession or control of a particular 
POlleslioD, artIcle of movable property, of which he is not the owner, may be 
~:td~i~:rn:! compelled specifically to deliver it to the person entitled to its 
persons immediate possession, in any of the following cases:-
entitled to • 
immediate (a) when the thing claimed is held by the defendant as the 30 
p oaseslion. agent or trustee of the plaintiff; 
(b) when compensation in money would not aftord the 
plaintiff adequate relief for the loss of the thing claimed; 
(c) when it would be extremely difficult to ascertain the 
actual damage caused by its lossi 3S 
S of 1901. 
s of 1901. 

3 
(d) when the possession of the thing claimed has beei1 
wrongfully transferred from the plaintiff. 
ExpZaMtion.-Unless and until the contrary is provM, the court 
shall, in respect of any article of movable property claimed under 
5 clause (b) or clause (c) of this section, presume-
(a) that compensation in money would not afford the plain-
tiff adequate relief for the loss of the thing claimed, or, as the 
case may be; 
(b) that it would be extremely difficult to ascertain the 
10 actual damage caused by its loss. 
CHAPTER II 
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS 
8. Except as otherwise provided herein, where any relief is Defenc~1 
claimed under this Chapter in respect of a contract, the person against ~!i~~~nl 
IS whom the relief is claimed may plead by way of defence any ground relief based 
h ' h . 'I bi t h' d I I t' t t t on contract. W lC IS aval a e 0 1m un er any aw re a 109 a can rac s. 
CONTRACTS WHICH CAN BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
9. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the specific per- Cases in 
formance of any contract may, in the discretion of the court, be wfichichJpecl-penorm-
20 enforced- ana: of 
(a) when there exists no standard for ascertaining the ~~~~~::'ble. 
actual damage caused by the non-performance of the act agreed 
to be done; or 
(b) when the act agreed to be done is such that compensa-
25 tion in money for its non-performance would not afford adequate 
relief. 
Explanation.-Unless and until the contrary is proved, the court 
shall presu.me-
(i) that the breach of a contract to transfer immovable 
30 property cannot be adequately relieved by compensation in 
money; and 
(ii) that the breach of a contract to transfer movable pro-
perty can be so relieved except in the following cases:-
(a) where the property is not an· ordinary article of 
35 commerce, or is of special value or interest to the plaintiff, 
or consists of goods which are not easily obtainable in the 
market; 
(b) where the property is held by the defendant as 
the aient or trustee of the plainti1f. 

Cases in 10. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, specific per~ 
wfichich .. speci- formance of a contract may, in the discretion of the court, be per.orm- • 
anee of enforeed when the act agreed to be done is in the performance 
contracts wholly or partly of 8 trust. connected 
with trusts 
enforceable. (2) A contract made by a trustee in excess of his powers or in S 
breach of trust cannot be specifically enforced. 
Specific 11. (1) Except as otherwise hereinafter provided in this section, performance of part of the court shall not direct the specific performance of a part of a 
contract. contract. 
(2) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole IO 
of his part of it, but the part which must be left unperformed bears 
only a small proportion to the whole in value and admits of com-
pensation in money, the court may, at the suit of either party, 
direct the specific performance of so much of the contract as can be 
performed, and award compensation in money for the deficiency. IS 
(3) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole 
of his part of it, arid the part which must be left unperformed 
either-
(a) forms a considerable part of the whole, though admit-
ting of compensation in money; or 20 
(b) does not admit of compensation in money; 
he is not entitled to obtain a decree for specific performance; but 
the court may, at the suit of the other party, direct the party in 
default to perform specifically so much of his part of the contract 
as he can perform, if the other party- 2S 
(i) in a case falling under clause (a), pays or has paid the 
agreed consideration for the whole of the contract reduced by 
the consideration for the part which must be left unperformed 
and in a case falling under clause (b), the consideration for the 
whole of the contract without any abatement; and 30 
(ii) in either case, relinquishes all claims to the performance 
of the remaining part of the contract and all right to compen-
sation, either·· for the deficiency or for the loss or damage sus-
tained by him through the default of the defendant. 
(4) When a part of a contract which, taken by itself, can and 3S 
ought to be specifically performed, stands on a separate and indepen-
dent footing from another part of the same contract which cannot 
or ought not to be specifically performed, the court may direct 
speciflc performance of the former part. 

.. 
~ 
EzpZa.ft4tion..-For the purposes of this section, a party to a con" 
tra~t ~ be ~ to be unable to pedorm the whole of his part 
of It if a portion of its subject-matter eXlstmg at the date of the 
contract has ceased to exist at the time of its performance • 
S 12. (1) Where a person contracts to sell or let certain immov- Riah f 
able property having no title or only an imperfect title, the pur- C:.c:, or 
chaser or lessee (subject to the other provisions of this Chapter), = 
has the following rights, namely: - peraoDt with 
10 
( ) if h no title or 
ate vendor or lessor has subsequently to the contract imperfect 
acquired any interest in the property, the purchaser or lessee tide. 
may compel him to make good the contrRct out of such interest; 
(b) where the concurrence of other persons is necessary 
for validating the title, and they are bound to concur at the 
request of the vendor or lessor, the purchaser or lessee may 
l5 compel him to procure such concurrence, and when a convey-
ance by other persons is necessary to validate the title and they 
are bound to convey at the request or the vendor or lessor, the 
purchaser or lessee may compel him to procure such convey-
20 
30 
35 
anee; .. .. ....... .; ..... JJd, 
(c) where the vendor professes to sell unencumbered pro-
perty, but the property is mortgaged for an amount not exceed-
ing the purchase money and the vendor has in fact only a right 
to redeem it, the purchaser may compel him to redeem the 
mortgage and to obtain a valid discharge, and, where necessary, 
also a conveyance from the mortgagee; 
(d) where the vendor or lessor sues for specific perform-
ance of the contract and the suit is dismi6ised on the ground of 
his want of title or imperfect title, the defendant has a right 
to a return of his deposit, if any, with interest thereon, to his 
costs of the suit, and to a lien for such deposit, interest and costs, 
on the interest, if any, of the vendor or lessor in the property 
which is the subject-matter of the contract. 
(2) The provisiOns of sub-section (1) shall also apply, as far as 
may be, to contracts for the sale or hire of movable property. 
CONTRACTS WlUCH CANNOT BE SPJ'.CmCALLY ENFORC~ 
13. (1) The following contracts cannot be specifically enforced, Contract, not .pecifi-
namely:- caUy 
«I) a contract for the non-performance of which compen- IDforeable 
_tion in money is an adequate relief; 
(b) a contract which runs into such minute or numerous 
details or which is so dependent on the personal qualificatioJUI 

~ 
.. volition of the· parties, or otherwtae from its· nature Is 1NcJi. 
that the court cannot enforce specific performan~ of its maW-
rial terms; 
(c) a contract which is in its nature determinable; 
(d) a contract the performance of which involves the per- S 
formance of a continuous duty which the court cannot super-
vise. 
(2) Save as provided by the Arbitration Act, 1940, no contract 10 of J,..o. 
to refer present or future differences to arbitration shall be specifi-
cally enforced; but if any person who has made such a contract 10 
(other than an arbitration agreement to which the provisions of the 
said Act apply) and has refused to perform it, lUes in respect of any 
subject which he has contracted to refer, the existence of such 
contract shall bar the suit. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4) or clause IS 
(c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1), the court may enforce specific 
performance in the following cases:-
(4) where the suit is for the enforcement of a contract,-
(i) to execute a mortgage or furnish any other security 
for securing the repayment of any loan which the borrower 20 
is not willing to repay at once: 
Provided that where only a part of the loan has been 
advanced the lender is willing to advance the remaining 
part of the loan in terms of the contract; or 
(ii) to take up and pay for any debentures of a com- 2S 
pany; 
(b) where the suit is for,-
(i) the execution of a formal deed of partnership, the 
parties having commenced to carry on the business of the 
partnership; or 30 
(i.i) the purchase of a share of a partner in a fu:m; 
(c) where the suit is for the enforcement of a contract for 
the construction of any building or the execution of any other 
work on land: 
Provided that the following conditions are fUlft11ed, 35 
namely:-
(i) the building or other work is described in the 
contract in terms sufficiently precise to enable the court to 
determine the exact nature of the buUding or work; 

·7 
(U) the plaintiff has a ·substantial interftt in the per-
formance of the contract and the interest is of IUCh a nature 
that compensation in mODey for non-perfOl'Jbance of the 
contract Is not an adequate relief; and 
(iii) the defendant has, in pursuance of the contract, 
obtained possession of the whole or any part of the land on 
which the building is to be constructed or other work ·is to 
be executed. 
PERSONS FOR OR AGAINST WHOM CONTRACl'S MAY BB SPBCD'ICALLY 
fO DI'ORCED 
IS 
20 
25 
35 
1'. Exoept as otherwise provided by this Chapter, the speciftc Who .., . obtaiD performance of a contract may be obtained by- apec;ific 
(eI) any party thereto; perfOrJDoo IDCC. 
(b) the representative in interest or the principal, of Itny 
party thereto: 
Provided that where the learning, skill, solvency or any 
personal quality of such party is a material ingredient in the 
contract, or where the contract provides that his interest shall 
not be assigned, his representative in interest or his principal 
shall not be entitled. to specific performance of the contract, 
unless such party has already performed his part of the contract, 
or the performance thereof by his representative in interest, or 
his principal, has been accepted by the other party; 
(c) where the contract is a settlement on marriage, or a 
compromise of $ioubtful rights between members of the same 
family, any person beneficially entitled thereunder; 
(d) where the contract has been entered into by a tenant 
for life in due exercise of a power, the remaindermen; 
(e) a reversioner in possession, where the agreement is a 
covenant entered into with his predecessor in title and the re-
versioner is entitled to the benefit of such covenant; 
(I) a reversioner in remainder, where the agreement 11 
such a covenant, and the reversioner is entitled to the benefit 
thereof and will sustain material injury by reason of its breach: 
(g) when a company has entered into a contract and sub-
lequently becomes amalgamated with another company. the 
new company which arises out of the amalgamationj 

8 
. (h) w:hen the promoters of a company have, before its 
incorporatIon, entered into a contract for the purposes ot the 
company, imd such contract is warranted by the terms of· the 
incorporation, the company: 
Provided that the company has accepted the contract and S 
has communicated such acceptance to the other party to the 
contract. 
PenoDal 15. Specific performance of a contract cannot be enforced in 
at .. to ICUcf. tavour of a person-
Contract to 
tell or let 
property by 
ODe who baa 
no title, not 
lpecifically 
enfoNeable. 
(a) who would not be entitled to recover compensation for 10 
its breach; or 
(b) who has become incapable of performing, or violates 
any essential term of, the contract that on his part remains to 
be performed, or acts in fraud of the contract, or wilfully acts 
at variance with, or in subversion of, the relation intended to IS 
be established by the contract; or 
(c) who fails to aver and prove that he has performed or 
has always been ready and willing to perform the essential 
terms of the contract which are to be performed by him, other 
than terms the performance of which has been prevented or 20 
waived by the defendant. 
"""-'. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of clause (e) ,-
(i) where a contract involves the payment of money, 
it is not essential for the plaintiff to actually tender to the 
defendant or to deposit in court any money except when 1'10 25 
directed by the court; 
(ii) the plaintiff must aver performance of, or readiness 
and willingness to perform, the contract according to its 
true construction. 
IG. (1) A contract to sell or let any immovable property cannot 30 
be specifically enforced in favour of a vendor or lessor-
(a) who, knowing himself not to have any title to the pro-
perty, has contracted to sell or let the property; 
(b) who, though he entered into the contract believing that 
he had a good title to the property, cannot at the time fixed by 3S 
the parties or by the court for the completion' of the sale or 
letting, give the purchaser or lessee a title free from reasonable 
doubt. 

9 
(2) The provisiona of su}).seetion (1) shall alIo apply, IS far as 
may be, to contracts for the sale or hire of movable property. 
17. Where a plaintiff seeks specific performance of a contract in NOA-eJI-
writing, to which the defendant sets up a varia-tion, the plaintiff !=,'~:~ 
5 C8DDot obtain the performance sought, except with the variation 10 variatJOIl. 
set up, in the following cases, namely:-
(a) where by fraud, mistake of fact or mis-representation, 
tlie written contract of which performance is sought is in its 
terms or effect different from what the parties agreed to, or does 
10 not contain all the terms agreed to between the parties on the 
basis of which the defendant entered into the contract; 
(b) where the object of the parties was to produce a certain 
legal result which the contract as framed is not calculated to 
produce; 
IS (e) where the parties have, subsequently to the execution 
(If the contract, varied its terms. 
..,......- .. ~ 
18. Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, specific per- ~ 
formanee of a contract may be enforced against- ~~: aacl 
penon. 
(a) either party thereto; =~ID 
bymh-
20 (b) any other person claiming under him by a title arising 1CqueQ& title. 
subsequently to the contract, except a transferee for value who 
has paid his money in good faith and wfthout notice of the 
original contract; 
(e) any person claiming under a title which, though prior 
25 to the contract and known to the plaintiff, might have been 
displaced by the defendant; 
(d) when a company has entered into a oontract and sub-
sequently becomes amalgamated with another company, the 
new company which arises out of the amalgamation; 
30 (e) when the promoters of a company have. before its 
Incorporation, entered into a contract for the purpose of the 
company and such contract is warranted by the terms of the 
incorporation, the company: 
Provided that the company has accepted. the contract and 
35 communicated such acceptance to the 9th~r party to the con-
tract. ~ 

10 
l>JacumoR AND pOWDUJ OF C01JRT 
DlaetiOD II. (1) The jurisdiction to decree specific performance is disere-. 
•• to decree- tl d h iDa apec:ific onary, an t e court is not bound to grant such relief merely 
peri'ozmaDce. because it is lawful to do so; but the discretion of the court is not 
arbitrary but sound and reasonable, guided by judicial principles S 
and capable of correction by a court of appeal 
(2) The following are cases in which the cOurt may properly 
exercise discMtion not to decree speciflc perfonnance-
(a.) where the terms of the contract or the conduct of the 
parties at the time Of entering into the ccmtract or the other 10 
circumstances under which the contract was entered into are 
such that the contract, though not voidable, gives the plaintiff 
an unfair advantage over tlie defendant; or 
(b) where the performance of the contract would involve 
some hardship on the defendant which he did not forsee, IS 
whereas its non-performance would involve nO such hardship 
on the plaintiff; 
(e) where the defendant entered into the contract under 
circumstances which though not rendering the contract void-
able, makes it inequitable to enforce specific performance. 20 
E~ I.-Mere inadequacy of consideration, or the mere .. 
fact that the contract is onerous to the defendant or improvident in 
its neture, Shall not be deemed. to constitute an unfair advantage 
within the meaning of clause (a.) or hardship within the-meaning of 
clause (b). 25 
Ezplana.tion. 2.-The question whether the perfonnance of a con-
tract would involve hardship on the defendant within the meaning of 
clause (b) shall, except in cases where the hardship has resulted 
from any act of the plaintiff subsequent to the contract, be deter-
mined with reference to the circumstances existing at the time of 30 
the contract. 
(3) The court may properly exercise discretion to decree specific 
performance in any case where the plaintiff has done substantial 
acts or suffered losses in consequence of a contract capable of 
specific performance. 35 
(4) 'nle court shall not refuse to any partyspeciftc performance 
of a contract merely on the ground that the contract is Dot enforce-
able at the instance of the other party. 

ti 
20. (1) In a suit for specific perfonnance of a contract, the Power to 
plaintiff may also claim. compensation for its breach, eibher in adeli-=::.m.; 
tfon to, or in substitution of, such perfonnauce. c:ertaiD 
(2) If, in any such suit, the court decides that specific perfonn-
S anee ought not to be granted, but that there is a contract between 
the parties which has been broken by the defendant, and that the 
plaintiff is entitled to compensation for that breach, it shall ",ward 
him such compensation accordingly. 
(3) If, in any such suit, the court decides that specific perfor.m-
10 anoe ought to be granted, but that it is not sufficient to satisfy the 
justice of the case, and that some compensation for breach of the 
contract should also be made to the plaintiff, it shall award him 
such compensation accordingly. 
(4) In determining the amount of any compensation aw-arded 
I S under this section, tke court shall be guided by the principles 
specified in section 73 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. 
(5) No compensation shall be awarded under this section unless 
the plaintiff has claimed such compensation in his plaint: 
eaaet. 
Provided that where the plaintiff has Dot claimed any such 
20 compensation in the plaint, the court shall, at any stage of the pro-
ceeding, allow him to amend the plaint on such terms as may be 
just, for including a claim for such compeDlAUcm. 
EoTP1a:nation.-The circumstances that the contract has become 
incapable of specific performance does Dot preclude the court from 
2.5 exercising the jurisdiction conferred by this section. 
21. (1) Notwithstanc!ling anything to the contrary contained in Pewerto 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, any person suing for the /ipecific ~-;~: 
performance of a contract for the transfer of immovable property a!on, parti-
. . t k f r tlon, rcfuDd may, m an appropna e case, as 0 - ofeameat 
30 (a) possession, or partition and separate possession, of the lDOIley, etc. 
property, in addition to such performance; or 
(b) any other relief to which he may be entitled, including 
the refund of any earnest money or deposit paid or made to 
him, in case his claim for specific performance is refused. 
35 (2) No relief under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
shall be granted by the court unless it has been specifically claimed: 
Provided that where the plaintiff has not claimed any such 
relief in the plaint, the court shell, at any stage of the proceeding, 
allow him to amend the plaint on such terms as may be just for 
40 iD.cluding a claim for such relief. 

Liquldadol1 
of damages 
not a bar to 
lJ)eCific per-
formance. 
Bar of .uil 
for c:ompen-
.tiou for 
breach after 
clilmiasal of 
luit for 
lpec:ific per-
forJDaQ(:C. 
Application 
of preceding 
eectiona to 
certain 
award,and 
testamentary 
clirectioal to 
eucute 
118ttlemCQt,. 
ti 
(3) The Power of the court to grant relief under clause (b) 01 
sub-section· (1) shall be without prejudice to its powers to award 
compensation under section 20. . 
22. (1) A contract, otherwise proper to be specifically enforced, 
may be so enforced, though a sum be named in it as the amount to S 
be paid in case of its breach and the party in default is willing to 
'pay the same, if the court, having regard to the terms of the contract 
and other attending circumstances, is satisfied that the sum was 
named only for the purpose of securing performance of the contract 
and not for the purpose of giving to the party in default an option 10 
of paying money in lieu of specific perfonnance. 
(2) When enforcing specific performance under this section, the 
court shan not also decree payment of the sum so named in the 
contract. 
23. The dismissal of a suit for specific performance of a contract IS 
or part thereof shall bar the plaintiff's right to sue for compensation 
for the breach of such contract or part, as the case may be, but 
shan not bar his right to sue for any other relief to which he may 
be entitled, by reason of such breach. 
ENFORCEMENT OF AWARDS AND DIRECTIONS 'to IxZCUTE SI:'l'TLEMENTS 20 
24. The provisions of this Chapter as to contracts shall apply 
to awards to which the Arbitration Act, 1940, does not apply and 
to directions in a will or codicil to execute a particular settlement. 
CHAPTER III 
REcTD'ICATION OF INSTRUMENTS 2S 
10 of INo. 
When iDe- 25. (1) When, through fraud or a mutual mistake of the parties, 
~::t a contract or other instrument in writing (not being the articles 
of association of a company to which the Companies Act, 1956, r of 1956. 
applies) does not express their real intention, then-
(a) either party or his representative in interest may 30 
institute a suit to have the instrument rectified; or 
(b) the plaintiff may, in any suit in which any right ariSing 
under the instrument is in issue, claim in his pleadiftg that the 
instrument be rectified; or 
(c) a defendant in any such suit as is referred to ~ clause 35 
(b), may, in tlddition to any other defence open to him, ask for 
rectification of the instrument. 

13 
(2) If, in any suit in which a contract or other instrument 11 
sought to be rectified under sub-section (1), -the court finds that the 
instrument, through fraud or mistake, does not expre!;s the real 
intention of the parties, the court may, in its discretion, direct 
5 rectification of the instrument so as to express that intention, so far 
as this can be done without prejudice to rights acquired by third 
persons in good faith and for value. 
(3) A contract in writing may first be rectified, and then if the 
party claiming rectification has so prayed in his pleading and the 
10 court thinks fit, may be specifically enforced. 
(4) No relief for the rectification of an instrument shall be 
granted to any party under this section unless it has been specifically 
claimed: 
Provided that where a party has not claimed any such relief in 
15 his pleading, the court shall, at any stage of the proceeding, allow 
him to amend the pleading on such terms as may be just for includ-
ing such claim. 
CHAPTER IV 
REscISSION 01' CONTRACTS 
20 26. (1) Any person interested in a contract may sue to have it When rc-
rescinded, and .such rescission may be adjudged by the court in any ::j~O:CS=-1 
of the following cases, namely:- or refuaed. 
(a) where the contract is voidable or tenninable by the 
plaintIff: 
25 (b) where the contract is unlawful for causes not apparent 
on its face and the defendant is more to blame than the plainti1f. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1). the 
court may refuse to rescind the contract-
(a) where the plaintiff has expressly or impliedly ratified 
30 the contract; or 
(b) where, owing to the change of circumstances which 
has taken place since the making of the contract (not being 
due to any act of the defendant himself), the parties cannot be 
substantially restored to the position in which they stood when 
- 'i the contract was made; or . 
(e) where third parties have, during the subsistence of the 
contract, acquired rights in good faith without notice and for 
value; or 

14 
(d) where only a part of the contract is BOUght to be reldnd-
ed and such part is not severable from the rest of the contract. 
Ezplanation.-In this section "contract", in relation to the terri-
tories to which the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, does not extend, .. of 188:1. 
means a contract in writing. 5 
It.CIC~sio~ in 27. (1) Where in any suit a decree for specific performance of a 
cenam ell'- h . QlJDStanCes contract for t e sale or lease of unmovable property has been made 
~ CODtrlCta and the purchaser or lessee does not, within the period allowed by 
~or tbe sale .' or lease of the decree or such further perIod as the court may allow, pay the 
immovable purchase money or other sum which the court has ordered him to 10 
~~ffic pay, the vendor or lessor may apply in the same suit in which the 
~rfo~ decree is made, to have the contract rescinded and on such applica-
has ~ tion the court may, by order, rescind the contract either so far as 
decreed. regards the party in default or altogether, as the justice of the case 
may require. 15 
(2) Where a contract is rescinded under sub-section (1), tile 
court-
(a) shall direct the purchaser or the lessee, if he has obtain-
ed possession of the property under the contract, to restore such 
possession to the vendor or lessor, and 20 
(b) may direct payment to the vendor or lessor of all the 
rents and profits which have accrued. in respect of the property 
from the date on which poBsession was so obtained by the 
purchaser or lessee until restoration of possession to the vendor 
or lessor, and, if the justice of the case so :oequires, the refund 25 
of any sum paid by the vendee or lessee as earnest money or 
deposit in connection with the contract. 
(3) If the purchaser or lessee pays the purchase money or other 
sum which he is ordered to pay under the decree within the period 
referred to in sub-section (1), the court may, on application made 30 
in the same suit, award the purchaser or lessee such further relief 
as he may be entitled to, including in appropriate cases all or any 
of the following reliefs, namely:-
(a) the execution of Ii proper conveyance or lease by the 
vendor or lessor; 35 
(b) the delivery of possession, or partition and separate 
possession, of the property on thf: eX~1,ltlon Qf such conveyanee 
or l~M~, ... 

160f 1908. 
I! 
(4) No separate suit in respect of any relief which may be claim. 
ed under this section shall lie at the instance of a vendor, purchaser, 
lessor or lessee, as the case may be. . 
(5) The costs of any proceedings under th •• section shall be in 
S the discretion of the court. 
!S. A plaintift instituting a suit for the specific performance of a Altemat ive 
contract in writing may pray in the alternative that, if the contract ~J:i~~r 
cannot be speeiftcally enforced, it may be rescinded and delivered up in ~t for 
to be cancelled; and the court, if it refuses to enforce the contract f~~~r-
10 specifically, may direct it to be rescinded and delivered up accord-
ingly. 
21. On adjudging the rescission of a contract, the court may Court JDaJ 
require the party to whom such relief is granted to restore, so far as reqrt~e' • • pa 1. rc-may be, any benefit which he may have receIved from the other IICindJas to 
IS party and to make any compensation to him which justice may re- do equity. 
quire. 
CHAPl'ER V 
CANCELLATION OF INSTRUMENTS 
30. (1) Any person against whom a written instrument is void or Whcncan-
20 VOidable, and who has reasonable apprehension that such instrument, :!~~on 
if left outstanding may cause him serious injury, may sue to have it ordered. 
adjudged void or voidable: and the court may, in its discretion, so 
adjudge it and order it to be delivered up and cancelled. 
(2) If the instrument has been registered under the Indian Regis-
2S tration Act, 1908, the court shall also send a copy of its decree to the 
oftlcer in whose office the instrument has been so registered; and such 
omcer shall note on the copy of the instrument contained in his books 
the fact of its cancellation. 
31. Where an instrument is evidence of different rights or difter- What ins-
30 ent obligations, the court may, in a proper case, cancel it in part and !:~:t8 
allow it to stand for the residue. partially 
Cl.l¥:CUed. 
3Z. (1) On adjudging the cancellation of an instrument, the court Power to 
may require the party to whom such relief is granted, to restore, so ~equ~e be 
tar as may be any benefit which he may have received from the r:c:n.~oor 
35 other party and to make any compensation to him which justice c!Jmpcnaa-
• tlOD to be 
may reqwre. made when 
(2) Where a defendant successfully resists any suit on the ~~~l~~ 
ground- or is SUCCCI8-
fully resi.ted 
(4) that the instrument sought to be enforced against him in as .beiDI 
40 the suit is voidable, the court may, if the defendant has received ~~::'~~e. 

"i .. _ 
Dil(:letiOll 
ofcourta. 
to dc<:lara-
don « 
status 01' 
ript. 
Meet of 
dec.laratiOll. 
Preventive 
IdJcfhow 
paatcCl. 
Te'mpo~ 
and~-
~~ 
i~ 
iiiybeneftt undt!r the instrwnent from the other party, require 
him . to r~store, so far as may be, such benefit to that party or to 
make compensation for it; 
(b) that the agreement sought to be enforced against him in 
the suit is void by reason of his not having been competent to 5 
contract under section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, the 9 of 1872 • 
court may, if the defendant has received any benefit under the 
agreement from the other party, require him to restore, so far as 
may be, such benefit to that party, to the extent to which he or 
his estate has benefited thereby. 10 
CHAPI'ER VI 
DECLARATORY DECREES 
33. Any person entitled to any legal character, or to any right as 
to .any property. may institute a suit against any person denying, or 
interested to deny, his title to such character or right, and the court IS 
may in its discretion make therein a declaration that he is so en-
titled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further 
relief: 
Provided that no court shall make any such declaration where 
the plaintiff, being able to seek further relief than a mere declara- 20 
tion of title, omits to do so. 
E:r:pZanation.-A trustee of property is a "person interested to 
deny" a title adverse to the title of some one who is not in existence, 
and for whom, if in existence, he would be. a trustee. 
34. A declaration made under this Chapter is binding only on the 2S 
parties to the suit, persons claiming through them respectively, and, 
where any of the parties are trustees, on the persons for whom, if 
in existence at the date of the declaration, such parties would be 
trustees. 
PART III 
PREVENTIVE RELIEF 
CHAPTER VII 
INJUNCTIONS GENERALLY 
35. Preventive relief is granted at the discretion of the court, by 
injunction, temporary or perpetual. 
38. (1) Temporary injunctions are such as are to continue until 
a specified time, or until the further order of the court, and they may 
be granted at any stage of a suit, and are regulated by the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908. 
35 
(2) A perpetual injunction can only be granted by the decree 40 
made at the heariftg and upon the merits of the suiti the defendant 
is thereby perpetually enjoined from the assertion of a right, or from 

i' the commission of an act, which would be contrary. to the rights 01 
the plainti1f. . 
CHAPTER VIII 
PERI'E'ruAL INJUNCTIONS 
5 37. (1) Subject to the oth~r provisions contained in or referred r~ 
to by this Chapter, a perp~tual injunction may be granted to the ~lOQ 
plaintiff to prevent the breach of an obligation existing in his favour, gnuted. 
whether expressly or by implication. 
(2) When any such obligation arises from contract, the court 
10 shall be guided by the rules and provisions contained in Chapter n. 
(3) When the defendant invades or threatens to invade the plaIn-
tiff's right to, or enjoyment of, property, the court may grant a per-
petual injunction in the following cases, namely:-
(a) where the defendant is trustee of the property for the 
I S plaintiff; 
20 
(b) where there exists no standard for ascertaining the 
actual damage caused, or likely to be caused, by the invasion; 
(c) where the invasion is such that compensation in money 
would not afford adequate relief; 
(d) where the injunction is necessary to prevent a multIpli-
city of judicial proceedings. 
38. When, to prevent the breach of an obligation, it is necessary ~o., 
to compel the performance of certain acts which the court is capable iDJ\lJICtloaa 
of enforcing, the court may in its discretion grant an injunction to 
25 prevent the breach complained of, and also to compel performance 
of the requisite acts. 
3 •. (1) The plaintiff in a suit ior perpetual injunction under D •• 
section 37, or mandatory injunction under section 38, may claim ~uu:r.or 
damages either in addition to, or in substitution for, such injunc- to,·::= 
30 tion and ·the court may, if it thinks ftt, award such damages. don. 
(2) No relief for damages shall be granted under this section 
unless the plaintiff has claimed such relief in his plaint: 
Provided that where no such damages have been claimed in 
the plaint, the court shall, at any stage of the proceeding, allow 
35 the plaintiff to amend .the plaint on such terms as may be just for 
inclu~ng such claim. 
(3) The dismissal of a suit to prevent the breach of an obliga-
tion existing in favour of the plaintiff shall bar his right to sue for 
damages for sa breach. 

tldunc:tion 
when 
refused. 
40. An injunction cannot be granted-
(a) to restrain U:lY person from prosecuting a judicial pro-
ceeding pending at the institution of the suit in which the in-
junction is sought, unless such restraint is necessary to prevent 
a multiplicity of proceedings; 5 
(b) to restrain any person from instituting or prosecuting 
any proceeding in a court not subordinate to that from which 
the injunction is sought; 
(c) to restrain any person from applying to any legislative 
body; 10 
(d) to restrain any person from instituting or prosecuting 
any proceeding in a criminal matter; 
(e) to prevent the breach of a contract the perionnance of 
which would not be specifically enforced; 
(f) to prevent, on the ground of nuisance, an act of whicb 15 
it is not reasonably clear that it will be a nuisance; 
(g) to prevent a continuing breach in which the plaintiff 
has acquiesced; 
(h) when equally efftcacious relief can certainly be obtained 
by any other usual mode of proceeding except in case of breach 20 
of trust; 
(i) when the conduct of the plaintiff or his agents has been 
such as to disentitle him to the assistance of the court; 
(;) when the plaintiff has no personal interest in the matter. 
IDJun.;tion to 41. Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of section 25 
perform 40, where a contract comprises an aftlrmative agreement to do a Deptive 
aarecmcnt. certain act, coupled with a negative agreement, express or implied, 
not to do a certain act, the circumstances that the court is unable 
to compel specific performance of the a1Brmative agreement shall 
not preclude it from granting an injunction to perform the negative 30 
agreement: 
Provided that the plaintiff has not failed to perform the contract 
so far as it is binding on him. 
AmeDdmeDt 42. In section 32 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, after the words "nor 
of Act 10 of shall any arbitration, agreement or award be", the word "enforced" 35 
1940. shall be inserted. 
Repeal. G. The Specific Relief Act, 1877, is hereby repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks to implement the recommendations of the Law 
Commission contained in its Ninth Report on the Specific Relief Act, 
1877, except in regard to section 42 which is being retained as it now 
stands. An eaxlier Bill on the subject introduced! in the Lok Sabha 
on the 23rd December, 1960, lapsed on its dissolution. The notes on 
clauses, extracted from the Report of the Law Commission, explain 
the changes made in the existing Act. 
NEW DELHI; 
The &th JUM, 1962. 
ASOKE K. SEN. 

Nates on cla.Ule. 
Clause 2.-The definition of trust in the existing Act is not sati .. 
factory inasmuch as it refers to express, implied and constructive 
trusts without defining them. The expression is now being defined 
as in the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, as there should be parity between 
the two enactments. Consequential changes have been made in the 
definition ,,1 trustee. 
Clause 3. (Existing section 4) .-Clause (a) of existing section 4 
has been omitt!!d as unnecessary. Under section 2 (h) of the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872, only an agreement enforceable by law is a 
contract. A mere agreement is not enforceable in law. In view ot 
clause 2 (e) of the Bill, clause (a) of section 4 is unnecessary. (See 
also notes under clause 8): 
The existing sections 5 and 6 have been omitted as being too ele-
mentary. Section 9 has been omitted for the reasons given in para-
graph 16 of the Report of the Law Commission. 
Clause 4. (Existing section 7) .-Instead of being cast in the nega-
tive form as at present, the revised clause brings out the principle 
more clearly by saying that specific relief being a civil remedy, the 
plaintiff must show some individual right to it in every case. 
Clauses 5 and 6 reproduce existing sections 8 and 10 with the 
substitution of the word "provided" for the word "prescribed" in 
both the sections. 
Clause 7. (Existing section 11) .-An Explanation modelled on the 
Explanation to the existing section 12, is addled whereby the burden 
of prov:ng that the case does not fall within clause (b) or clause (c) 
is laid on the defendant. In such cases it should be for the defen-
dant to prove that the article in respect of which possession t. 
claimed is an ordinary article of commerce having no specia] value or 
interest to the plaintiff or that the damage is assessable in money. 
Clause B.-This is new. In India the defences that are available 
unde!.' the law of contract. such as, incapacity of parties, absence of 
a concluded contract, the uncertainty of the contract, coercion, 
fraud, mis-representation. mistake, illegality or want of authority are 
all dealt with under the Contract Act. Clause 8 prescribes in a 
compendious way all the defences that are open to a defendant; and 
Incidentally makes the existina section 4 (a). which has now been 
omitted, all the more unnecessary. 

2r 
Clause 9. (Existing section 12) .-Clause (a) of existing section 12 
which refers to an obligation arising out of a trust is now beln, 
Incorporated in clause 10 with the other provision relating to trusts 
now to be found in section 21 (e). 
Clause (d) of the existine; section 12 seems to sanction the doubt-
ful d:octrine that insolvency of the defendant is a ground far decree-
ing specific performance. It is totally inconsistent with the principle 
followed in t.he grant of specific relief, namely, the non-existence or 
inadequacy of the remedy at law, but not merely the impractica-
bility of enforcing such a remedy. It is, therefore, being omitted. 
The Explanation is being amended so as to specify the exceptional 
cases where courts in India and jn England grant specific perfor-
mance of contracts to transfer movable property on the presump-
tion that damages would not in such cases give adequate reUef. 
The exception as respects goods not easily obtainable in the market 
has been engrafted from American law where courts have enforce!! 
specific pcrfoTmance of contracts to furnish gas, water or other 
necessary mAterials to a manufactUring establishment where the 
thing contracted for is not immediately available from other sources 
Rnd a breach of contract would stop the operations of the plaintiff's 
establishment. 
ClaUSE 10.-The provir;ions relating to trusts now found in sectIon 
12 (a) and section 21 (e) are being grouped together. Section 12 (a) 
is ~ut of placp. in that section as that section relates to executory 
r.ontracts whereas in the case of an obligation arising out of a trust 
it arises out of an executed contract. 
Clause n.-Sections 14 to 17 deal with claims for specific reliet 
of a part of.a contract and section 13 enshrines a principle generally 
applicable to cases falling within sections 14 to 17. All these sections 
have now been grouped together. 
Sub-clause (1) corresponds to section 17. 
Sub-clause (2) corresponds to section 14, 
Sub-clause (3) corresponds to section 15. 
BU,t on .. important change which has been made in sub-clause (3) is 
that ,when the part which must be left unperformed forms a consi-
derable portion of the whole but admits of compensation in money, 
the plaintiff is allowed a proportionate abatement of the considera-
tion when he is to :relinquish all claims to further performance or any 
furthe!' compensation for the breach. In this respect the existinS 
position js inequitable. 

22 
Sub-clause (4) corresponds to section 16. 
Thp. Explanation reproduces section 13 with verbal changes. 
Clause 12.-This is section 18 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing amendments:-
(a) it is made clear that this clause applies also to absence 
of title: 
(b) by inserting the words "subject to the other provisions 
of this Chapter", it is made clear that other provisions of this 
Chapter, like clause 11, apply to cases under sub-clause (a); 
(c) in sub-clause (a), for the words "sale or lease", the word 
"contract" has been substituted so that it is made clear that the 
sub-clause applies only to contracts to sell, lease or hire; 
(d) sub-clause (b) is modified so that a plaintiff would also 
be enabled to require a vendor to get a conveyance from a per-
son who is bound to convey at the request of the vendor; 
(e) in sub-clause (c) the addition of the words "wherever 
necessary" makes it clear that a re-conveyance need be obtained 
only when it is required under law. 
With respect to sub-clause (2), see notes under clause 16. 
Clause 13.-This is section 21 of the existing Act with the follow-
Ing amendments:-
(i) in sub-clause (1), clause (c) of section 21 has been omit-
ted as unnecessary in view of section 29 of the Indian Contract 
Act, 1872; 
(il) clause (f) of section 21 has been omitted in view of 
clause 8 of the Bill; 
(iii) in item (d), the word 'determinable' has been substitut-
ed for the word 'revocable' as the expression 'revocable contract' 
is not accurate; 
(iv) clause (e) of section 21 has been incorporated in clause 
12 of the Bill; 
(v) in item (d) [clause (g) of section 21] tQe limit of three 
years, which is artificial and arbitrary, has been omitted, and 
the proper rule applicable in such cases substituted; 
(vi) sub-clause (3) is new and incorporates the exceptional 
cases in which specific performance is l1'anted, notwithstanding 
the provisions of sub-clause (1). 

23 
Clause 14.-This clause reproduces section 23 with the followin, 
modifications-
(i) in sub-clause (b) it is made clear that, in a contract of a 
personal nature, perfonnance by a third party is not to be 
imposed on the other party to the contract except where he has 
accepted such substituted performance; 
(ii) sub-clauses (c), (d), (e) and: (f) could be substituted by 
a simple provision providing that a third party to a contract who 
is entitled to a benefit thereunder or has an interest therein 
may sue on the contract subject to certain limitations. This 
substitution would, however, have to await a suitable amend-
ment being made in this behalf in the Contract Act, and the 
clauses have been reproduced as they stand for the time being; 
(iii) in sub-clauses (g) and (h) the word 'public' has been 
omitted since the nature of these provisions is such that they 
should apply to all companies. Further in sub-clause (h) it is 
provided that the contract would be enforceable by or against 
a company only if it has accepted the contract and has signified 
its acceptance to the other party to the contract. 
Clause 15.-This is section 24 of the existing Act with the follow-
Ing modifications:-
(i) in sub-clause (a) for the words "is not entitled", the 
words "would not be entitled" have been substituted in order to 
make the meaning clear; 
(ii) in sub-clause (b), follOWing the principles enunciated by 
case-law, it has been provided that specific performance cannot 
be enforced where the plaintiff has acted in fraud of the con-
tract or acts at variance with or in subversion of the relationship 
intended to be established by the contract; 
(iii) clause (c) of section 24 has been omitted as unnecessary 
in view of Order II, r. 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; 
(iv) clause (d) of existing section 24 gives effect to a provi-
sion of English law as it stood under a Statute of the sixteenth 
century, but the law has since been changed. A prior settle-
ment of property would divest the title of the settlar imme-
diately and any conveyance thereafter from the settlor to 
another, even if it be for consideration, would be ineffective to 
convey any title. This provision is therefore totally unneces-
sary; 

24 
(v) sub-clause (c) is a new provision which incorporates the 
principles laid down by case-law that in a suit for specific ier-
formance the plaintiff must show that all conditions precedent 
have been fulfilled and also allege and prove a continuous readi-
ness and willingness to perform the contract on his part from 
the date of the contract to the time of hearing of the suit. The 
plaintiff, however, need net prove performance of or over-readi-
ness or willingness to perform non-essential terms; 
(vi) by an Explanation it is made clear that it is not essen-
tial that the plaintiff should tender money payable under a con-
tract, say, for sale to the defendant or to deposit it in court 
ex~ept when so directed. Further, the plaintiff should be 
entitled to specific perfonnance if he avers performance or 
readiness or willingness to perform the contract according to its 
trlie construction. 
Clause 16.-This is section 25 of the existing Act with the follow-
Ing modifications:-
Clause (c) of section 25 is omitted for the reasons given 
against clause 15 in respect of the omission of clause (d) of 
section 24. 
Although section 25 refers to both movable and immovable 
property, it is not clear how far sections 18 and 25 apply to 
controcts for the letting of movable property. Sub-clause (1) 
is therefore confined to immovable prvperty, but sub-clause (2) 
provides [as in the case of clause 12 (2)] that the provisions of 
sub-clause (1) will also apply to movable property in so far as 
such application is possible. 
Clause 17.--Clause 17 is section 26 with the following changes:-
(i) sub-clause (a) amalgamates clauses <a), (b) and (c) of 
section 26; 
(ii) -in sub-clause, (c) for the words "contracted to vary", the 
wOIds "varied its terms" have been substituted! as a drafting 
change. 
Clause 18 is. section 27 of the existing Act with the following 
ehanges:-
(i) in sub-clause (d), the word "public" has been omitted 
as this provision should apply to all companies; 
(ii) sub-clause (e) has been modified on the lines proposed 
In: respect of section 23 (b) . [See notes under clause 14 (h) ]. 

Clm.ue 19.-This clause reproduces section 22 of the Act with the 
following modifications-
(i) sub-section (2) (a) is item I of section 22. The existing 
proViisfon is somewhat vague. There are circumstances in which 
a court of equity refuses to decree specific performance on the 
ground of unfairness even though in le.w t,he circumstances are 
not such as to render the contraot voidable. The scope of this 
sub-clause is therefore widened to provide that the unfair advan-
tage may be due to circumstances which may not be sufficient to 
render the contract voidable; 
(ii) the two Explanations based on case-lew seek to explain 
in wbat cases unfair advantage or hardship shall not be presum-
ed and with reference to what circumstances hardship should 
ordinarily ,be determined; 
(iii) the doctrine that a contmct to be specifically enforce-
able must as a general rule be mutual has now very little scope 
for application in India. That doctrine is now being abolished 
and in its place, the folloWing principle is laid down, namely. 
that the fact thet the remedy of specific enforcement is not 
available to one party is not a sufficient reason for refusing it to 
the other party. 
Sub-clause (4) gives effect to this new principle. 
Clauae 20.-This is section 19 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing changes:-
(i) sub-clause (4) makes it clear that the compensation to 
:be awarded is to be determined on the basis of section 73 of the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872; 
(ii) it is provided in su:b-clause (5) that compensation has 
to be specifically asked for before it can be granted, and that the 
court should allow tke plaintiff to amend his plaint at any stage 
of the proceeding for the purpose. 
Clause 21.--Clause 21 is new. Sub-clause (1) (a) introduces a 
rule, now settled by judicial decisions, that in order to avoid a 
multipIIcity of proceedings the plaintiff may claim a decree for pos-
session in a suit for specific performance. even though strictly speak-
ing the right to possession accrues only when specific perfonnanee 
is decreed. 
in some cases it has been held that the court may, in a suit for 
specific -performance, direct a refund of earnest money while refwin, 

It ." t r 
specific performance if the facts disclose a case for such a refund. 
Sub~lause (b) gives effect to this and also permits the p1aintift to 
claim any other relief. 
It is, however, provided that any such relief will not be granted 
unless a claim in that behalf is made by the plaintiff either initially 
or by an amendment at a later stage, but that does not prejudice 
his right to compensation under clause 20. 
Clause 22.-This is section 20 of the existing Act amplified so as 
to codify the law on the subject. In applying section 20 courts have 
tried to ascertain the intention of the parties, that is, whether the 
party bound to performance has on alternative choice given to him 
by the contract, to perform or to pay the agreed sum; or whether he 
is bound to do a certain thing, with a penal sum or sum by way of 
liquidated damages attached as secqrity. In the latter CLc;e, thP 
court, notwithstanding the penal clause, enforces performance if the 
contract be such that without the penal clause it would have been 
proper to enforce specific performancp.. 
Clause 23 is section 29 of the existing Act. Provisions have been 
included in the Bill enabling the plaintiff to esk for reliefs such as 
refund of earnest money, etc., and by way of abundant caution it is 
made clear in this clause that the dismissal of a suit for specific per-
formance shall not bar a suit for any relief other than damages. 
Clause 24 is section 30 of the existing Act. After the passing of 
the Arbitration Act, 1940, the provisions of this clause should be 
confined to cases of a'rbitration under other laws the operation of 
which is saved by sections 46 and 47 of the Arbitration Act, 1940. As 
respects cases to which the Arbitration Act, 1940, applies, that Act 
prescrihes the procedure to be followed for their enforcement 
Section 27 A of the existing Act is omitted for the reason that 
suitable provision is to be made in this behalf in the Registration 
Act and section 28 has been omitted for the reason the materia) 
·provisions thereof have been incorporated in their appropriate places 
in the Bill. 
Clause 25.-This js section 31 of the existing Act with the follow· 
ing modifica.tions:-
(i) under section 31 of the Companies Act, 1956, the arUcles 
of association of a company may be altered ,by the company by 
special resolution, and it is, therefore, advis::l.b1e to exclude arti-
cles of association from the scope of this clause; 

27 
(if) it is provided in sub-clause (1) that the relief of rectift· 
eation may be obtained not only in a suit specifically brought for 
the purpose as at present, but also in a suit in which any right 
arising under the contract or other instrument is in issue. It is 
further provided that the relief will be open to either party but 
only if it is specifically asked for in his pleading whether initially 
or 'by amendment; 
(iii) section 32 of the existing Act has been omitted as it is 
ambiguous; and if it means that the court will not rectify an 
invalid instrument, it is not necessary; 
(iv) section 33 of the existing Act has been omitted as 
unnecessary as this provision seeks to merely enjoin the court to 
discover the real intention of the parties. In any event, chusp 
25 of the Bill renders this section unnecessary; 
(v) section 34 of the existing Act has been incorporated in 
SUlb-clause (3). 
Clause 26.-':ntis is section 35 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing modifications:-
(i) section 35 (c) of the existing Act and the two para~Dhs 
succeeding it have been omitted in view of clause 27 of this Bill; 
otherwise sU'b-clause (1) is a reproduction of section 35; 
(,Ii) sub-clause (2) codifies the principles followed by courts 
in refusing to rescind a contract; 
(iii) the requJrement of "writing" at the beginning of section 
35 has been omitted by the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, in 
relation to territories where that Act is in force; Hence th~ 
Ex·planation. 
Clause 27.-This is new. Under section 35(c) of the existing 
Act, the vendor or lessor has the option of bringing a separate suit 
for the rescission of 9 contract or to apply for rescission in the same 
suit under the third paragraph of the section, but there is no reason 
why the vendor or lessor should be allowed to harass the other 
party in a separate proceeding when the relief of rescission can be 
made available in thp same suit. At the same time suitr!ble reliefs 
should also be made available to the purchaser or lessee when he 
makes the payments due. but the vendor or lessor does not compJy 
with the terms of the decree. The new clause therefore seeks to 
provide complete relief to both the parties in terms of the decree 
for specific performance in the same suit without having to resort to 
separate proceedings. 

28 
Section 36 of the existing Act has been omitted as it is in conftict 
with section 22 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, and does nDtappear 
to enshrine any sound principle. 
Clause 28.-<Clause 28 is section 37 of the existing Act. 
Clause 29.-This is section 38 of the existing Act amplified to pro-
vide that while decreeing rescission the court might direct not only 
payment of compensation to the defendant but also restoration of 
any benefit received by the plaintiff under the contract. 
Clause 30.-This is section 39 of the existing Act. 
Clause 31.-This is section 40 of the existing Act. 
Clause 32.-Under section 41 of the existing Act a plaintiff who 
obtains cancellation of an instrument may be required to make com-
pensation to the defendant. This provision has been expanded to 
provide for the following matters:-
(i) the plaintiff may I'Jlso have to restore any benefit which 
he may have obtained under the instrument; 
(ii) the above principle has been extended to apply in favour 
of a plaintiff in a case where the defendant successfully resists 
a suit on the ground tha·t it is void or that it is voidable and he 
ms avoided it: 
(iii) it is, however. provided that in the case of a contract, 
which is void by reason of the defendant bein~ a minor or luna-
tic at the time of the contract. the defendant must restorp. any 
benefit, whether proprietary or monetary, which he has actually 
received under the contract. There is, however, no question of 
any liability for making compensation in such a case. 
Clause 33.-This is section 42 of the existing Act. 
Clause 34 is .section 43 of the existing Act. 
Clause 35.-This reproduces section 52 of the existing Act 
Clause 36.-This reproduces section 53 of the existing Ad. 
Clause S7.--This is section 54 of the existing Act with the follow-
Ing changes:-
(i) for the word "applicant", the word "plaintiff" has been 
substituted as the former expression is inaCCUnlte; 
(ii) section 54 (d) of the Act has been omitted for the reaSON 
given against clause 9 in respect of the orniasion of section 12(d). 

29 
Clause 38.-This is section 55 of the existing .Act. 
Clause 39.-This clause is new and gives e1fect to the principles 
aU'eady accepted that the court can, in an action for injunction, exer-
cise its discretion to award damages either in addition to or in sub-
stitution for an injunction. 
Clause 4O.-Th,js is section 56 of the existing Act with the follow-
ing changes:-
(i) the expression "to stay proceedings" in clauses (a), (b) 
and (c) of section 56 has given rise to a controversy as to whe-
ther any injunction can be directed against the court itself before 
which the ,proceeding is pending. An injunction is a remedy in. 
personam which is di,rected against the liltigwtt and this is now 
made clear; 
(ii) section 56(d) has been omitted; the first part of it is 
inconsisten.t wi.th article 361 (1) of the Constitution, and the 
second part is unnecessary. 
Clause 41.-This is section 57 of the existing Act. 
Clause 42.-This clause makes a consequential amend~nt in the 
Ar.bitration .Act, UMO. 

Har of ~Uils 
conCelling 
ubitration 
.. reement 
or award. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT PROM THB: AasrrRATlON ACT, 1940 
(10 OF 1940) 
• • '. • 
32. Notwithstanding any law for the time being' in torce, no 
suit shall lie on any ground whatsoever for a decision upon the 
existence, effect or validity of an arbitration agreement or a\Wlrd, 
nor shall any arbitration agreement or award ·be set aside, amended, 
modified or in any way affected otherwise than as provided in this 
Act. 
'. • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to define and amend the luw relating to certain kinds of specific 
relief 
(Shri Asoke K. Setl, 
Minister of LafD)-