THE NATIONAL VOLUNTEER FORCE 
BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOIC SABHA) 

'BtU No. 55 or 1m 
11m NATIONAL VOLUNTEER FORCE BILL, 1955 
(As INTROUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Volunteer Force for 
impMti~ mUtary trrainil1g to citizens ,of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of i,mia as foHows:- -Short title 
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Volunteer Force Act, andextcnt. 
1955. 
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
2. l1Il this Act, unless the context otherwise Tequires,-
(a) 'camp' means any place established under section 4 as 
a eamp where any 'body Of volunteers is ,for the --time being 
undellQOilBg training; 
10 (b) 'Force' means the National Volunteer Force 'constitut-
15 
20 
'ed under this Act; 
(c) 'prescribed' means prescribed by raE made undel' 
this Act; 
l{d) 'superior afticer' means any ,officer, junior eommission-
ed officer, warrant officer or non-commissioned officer 
iof the regular Army or of the Territorial Army; 
(e) <Volunteer' means a ]!Ierson enrolled in the ~ce un-
der this Act; 
(f> all words and expressions used in this Act and not, 
de'fined but defined in the Army Act, 1950, or in the Territorial 
Army Act, 1948, shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in the said Acts. 
Definitions. 

Constitution 
of the 
National 
Volun~r 
Force. 
Establish-
ment of 
campti. 
Enrolment. 
Duties of 
Volunteers. 
~ 
3. There shall be raised and maintained by the Central Govern-
ment a force to be designated the National Volunteer Force by the 
enrolment of volunteers in the manner hereinafter provided. 
4. Th~ Central Government may establish such number ot 
camps for the purposes of the Force as it thinks fit and may close S 
down or re-establish any such camps. 
5. Any citizen of In,dia not below the age of eighteen years and 
not above the age of forty years may offer himself for enrolment 
as a volunteer and may, if he satisfies the prescribed conditions, Pe 
enrolled in the prescribed manner by the prescribed authority for 10 
such period and subject to such conditions as maybe prescribed 
6. No person shall, on the ground only of being a volunteer be 
liable for military service, but subject thereto a volunteer may be 
called upon to undergo such training as may be prescribed, and 
while undergoing such training shall perform such duties and dis- IS 
charge such obligations as the prescribed authority may, by gene-
. ral or sJliecial order, direct. . 
Diachargc. 7. Every volunteer shall be entitled to receive his discharge 
from the Force on the expiration of the period for which pe was 
enrolled, but may, prior to the expiration of that period, be dis- 20 
charged from the Force by such authority and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed. 
Offences and 8. (1) If any volunteer commits any of the following offences, 
penalties. that is to say,-
(i) without sufficient cause fails to attend at any place 2S 
when· duly required to do so; or 
(ii) while in camp on duty-
(a) absents ~imself from the camp without leave; 
(b) uses criminal force or uses threatening or insub-
ordinate language to a superior officer or assaults a supe- 30 
riorofficer; 
(c) disobeys any lawful command of a superior officer; 
(d) neglects to obey any standing, general or other 
orders by the officer commanding the camp; 
(e) uses criminal force to, or assaults, any volunteer 3S XLVI 0' 
or any person subject to the Army Act, 1950, or the Ter- 1950. 
ritorial Army Act, 1948; LVI of 
(f) knowingly d~ any act which is prejudicial to 1948. 
the maintenance of good order or military discipline in 
camp; 40 
he shall be punished summarily by order of the prescribed autho-
ritr with fine which may extelld to fifty rupees or, in default, by 
bemg confined to barracks for a term which may extend to seven 
days. 
(2) Any fine imposed by order of the prescribed authority under 4S 
sub-section (1) may, on application made in this behalf by the pre-
scribed authority to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the place 

3 
v or 189 • 
where the volunteer resides or has a place of business, De recover-
ed in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898, as if it were a fine imposed by such magistrate. 
9. If any volunteer wilfully or negligently causes lo~s of, or Lia~llity for 
5 damage to, any property. of the Government, the prescribea autho- c:usmct::s 
rity may, after giving him an opportunity of being heard and after ~ or Govc:. 
making such inquiry into the matter as it thinks nt, make an order ment 
requiring him to make good the loss or damage within such time property. 
as may be specified in the order or within such further time as 
10 may be allowed by the prescribed authority in this behalf, and 
where the amount thereof as determined by the prescribed autho-
rity is not paid within the time allowed, it shall, on application 
made by the prescribed authority to the Collector of the district 
in which the volunteer resides or has a place of business, be 
I S recovered from him in the same manner as an arrear of land re-
venue. 
10. Where a volunteer is required by or in l'ursuance of any Presumption 
rule made under this Act to attend at any place, a certificate pur- d' to certain 
porting to be signed by the prescribed officer stating that the ocuments. 
20 volunteer so required to attend failed to do so in accordance with 
such requirement shall. without proof of the signature or appoint-
ment of such officer, be evidence of the matters stated therein. 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Power to 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. make rules. 
2S (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fol-
lowing matters, namely:-
(a) the authorities by which, the manner in which, the 
period for which, and the conditions subject to which, any 
30 person may be enrolled as a volunteer; 
(b) the training, discipline, duties and obligations which a 
volunteer has to undergo, observe, perform or discharge under 
this Act; 
(c) the authorities by which, and the conditions subject 
35 to which, a volunteer may be discharged; 
(d) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to 
which, a volunteer may be called out for training or duties; 
(e) the determination of authorities for the purposes of 
this Am; 
40 (f) the officers by whom certificates may be signed under 
section 10; and 
(g) any other matter which under this Act is to be or may 
be prescribed. 

s:I"ATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of the scheme envisaged in the Bill is to provide 
for the constitution of a National Volunteer Force for imparting 
military training to the members of the public with a view to in-
culcating among them a sense of discipline, security and self-
reliance and' interest in national service. Military training will be 
giv.en in camps, which will be set up at convenient places and, 
wherever possible, in the vicinity of community projects. All 
able-bodied male citizens between the ages of 18 and 40 are eligible 
to join' the National Volunteer Force. 
The Bill' seeks to provide the legal basis for the imparting of 
training, the establishment of training camps and the exercise of 
disciplinary control over the trainees while in the camps. Matters 
of administrative details connected with training, remuneration 
payable to trainees, issue of sto:r:es and the like will be regulated 
by means of rules to be framed under the proposed law. 
K. N. KATJU. 
Nsw DEn.HI; 
The 21st September, 1955. 
4 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The forIllaJ:ion of the National Volunteer Force, originally cal~ 
led Auxiliary Territorial Army subsequently renamed as Auxiliary 
Territorial FOl!ce. involves expenditure from the Consolidated 
]j'und of India. At the Auxiliary Territorial Force rural camps, the 
trainees were provided with free rations and tented or other 
accommodation for the period of training. Trainees in Urban camps 
were not required to stay in camps but they were entitled to a 
small refreshment allowance. All trainees were given an out·of-
pocket allowance of Rs. 5/- on completion of training. A rural 
camp was of one week's duration (subsequently increased to 10 
~) and in urban camps, training v.:as g·:ven for 3 hours per day 
for two weeks. In the National Volunteer Force the duration of 
training will be 30 days on completion of which an out-of'pucket 
allowance of Rs. 15/- per trainee will be given. Each camp is 
i,ntended to train 500 persons. 200 such camps will be held each 
year. The scope of tra':ning will be more comprehensive. 
2. The cost of training will depend on the number of persons 
to be trained. It is estimated that the expenditure involved in its 
implementation would amount to approximately Rs. 1 crore per 
annum which will be partly met by reducing non~ssential equip-
ment and personnel in the Territorial Army. Necessary financial 
provision has been included in the Defence Service Estimat~s fQf 
195~56, 
5 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The broad features of the scheme envisaged in the Bill, namely, 
the constitution of the National Volunteer Force, the establishment 
and closure of camps, the recruitment of citizens of India as mem-
bers of the Force and the penalties to which they will be liable 
are laid down in the Bill itself. Sub-~lause (1) of clause 11 of the 
Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Act. The particular matters in relation to 
which such rules may be made have been enumerated in sub-
clause (2) of that clause. These matters are matters of adminis-
~rative detail necessary for the il1lplementation of the scheme and 
day-to-day administration of the Act and deal with such things 
as the prescription of the authorities by which members of the 
Force may be recruited, the manner in which, the period for which, 
and the conditions subject to which, such persons may be enrolled, 
the training, discipline, duties and obligations which such persons 
may undergo, observe, perform or discharge, the manner in which, 
and the conditions subject to which, such persons may be called 
out for training, the allowances or other remuneration to be paid 
to such persons, the conditions subject to which such persons may 
be discharged and so on. The d~legation of legislative powers is 
thus of the normal type, because it is both unnecessary ahd diffi-
cult to lay down matters of administrative deta:ls in the ennctment 
itself. 
6 

1..0K SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the constitution of a National Volunteer Force 
for imparting military training to citizens cf India. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article I 17 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to the Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M, N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Dr. Kailas Natk Katju, 
Minister of Defence) 