As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 55 of 1987 
THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH (AMENDMENT) 
BU,L, 1987 
A 
BILL 
to amend the State of Arunach41 Pradesh Act, 1986. 
-
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tbirty4ighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the State of Arunachal 
(Amendment) Act, 1987. 
Pradesh Short title 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have corne into force on the 20th day of 
February, HlS7. 
10 
IS 
2. In section 11 of the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986,-
(4) in sub-section (1), for the words "which shall consist of 
members elected by the territorial constituencies of the Legislative 
Assembly of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh". the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"which shall consist of-
(a) members elected by the territorial constituencies 
of; and 
(b) members nominated to, 
and com-
mencement. 
Amend-
ment of 
IACt 69 of 
1986. 

, 
the Legislative- Assembly of the existing Union terri+.ory of 
Arunachal Pradesh"; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be subs-
tituted, namely:-
., (3) For so long as the provisional Legislative Assembly 5 
constituted under this section is in existence,-
(a) it shall be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly 
of the State of Arunachal Pradesh duly constituted under 
the Constitution and shall he competent to discharge all the 10. 
functions of a Legislative Assembly of a State under the 
Constitution; and 
(b) the members thereof, referred to in clause (a) of 
sub-section (1), shall be deemed to be the members of the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh 1,1 
duly elected under the Constitution.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
. In the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile Union territory of Aru-
nachal Prad('sh, there were thirty elected members and three nominated 
members. Section 11 of the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 pro-
vides that on and from the appointed day and until the Legislative As-
sembly of that State has been duly constituted and sununoned to meet 
for the first session, there shall be a provisional Legislative Assembly 
which shall consist of members elected by the territorial constituencies 
of the, Legisl~tive Assembly of the existing Union territory of Arunachal 
PraQ.e5h. It is proposed to provide in that section that the three nomina-
ted members of the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory 1)£ 
Arunachal Pradesh will also continue as members in the provisional 
State Legislative Assembly on and from the appointed day. Opportunity 
is also propoged to be availed of to make a clarificatory amendment in 
that section to provide that the said elected members of the Legislative 
Assembly (If the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall also be 
deemed to have been duly elected for the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Arunachal Pradesh. 
2. This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DEUII; 
BUTA SINGH. 
The 6th May, 1987 . 
• 
3 

Provi-
sional 
Legisla-
tive As-
sembly. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADEsH ACT, 1986 
(69 OF 1986) 
• • • • 
11. (1) l'iotwithstanding anything contained in this Act (including 
provisions relating to the strength of the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Arunachal Pradesh), on and from the appointed day and until 
the Legislative Assembly of that State has been duly constituted and 
summoned to meet for the first session, there shall be a provisil)nal 
Legislative Assembly which shall consist of members elected by the ter-
ritorial constituencies of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union 
territory of Arunachal Pradesh. 
• • • • • 
(3) The provisional Legislative Assembly constituted under this sec-
tion shall, for so long as it is in existence, be deemed to be the Legisla-
tive Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and shall be compe-
tent ,to. discharge all the functions of a Legislative Assembly of n State 
under the Constitution. 
• • • • • 
4 

LOX SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986. 