"'-.".. ",~' 
• 
.UNo. SS of 1"1 
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) Bn.L, 1963 
A 
BILL 
to amend tM Delhi DeueZopmft,t Ad" 1957 . 
BI it ,nacted :by Parliament in the l"ourteelltb Y_ ef ,the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Delhi Development (Amendment) Short 
Act, 1983. titl .. 
IJI of lD5'1. S , Z. In section 2 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 '(hereinafter Ame,nd .. 
referred to 8S the 'principal Aet) , for clause (l), the fo}k)wing clause ment Of 
shall be, and shall be deemed always to have beeft, su'bstitute4, leetloa~, 
!W:Ialy: ...... 
r of 1894. 1-0 
I (0 the e~ression l'laDd" shall have the meaning Uligned 
to ;it in action a of the Land Acquisition Act, 189t:'. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,-:", 
(0) in sub-section (3), forelause (g), the following 
Ihall Be su~titute<l, namely:-
I' (g) tbNe otherpel'4lOll8 to be nommated :by ltbeCetral 
Go~rnment, of whom one shall be a person wJt.h .experience 
of town planning or architectur.ej Il)d".; 
(b) after Bub-section (3), the WlowiDgsub .e,ction shall be 
... .w, namel,.:--
"(3A) The appointment of the vice-chairman may be 
either whole-time or part-time as the Central Government 
may think fit but tbe appointment of the ftnance IUld 
accounts member and the engineer membet' shall be whole-
~"'; 
'I 
j 
,j 
:1 
i 
j:.~, 
.. 
, , 
i 
I.,! 
I
',t,; 
. I 
I 
j 
'" ",~ 
~,~ 
1~ 
4 

Iaeert.t.on 
of new 
MCtioft 
IA. 
CcmItl-
tuUonot 
com. 
mitteea. 
) .I' • 
I 
(c) for I!ub-sections (4) and (5), tlte following sub-seetions 
shan be substituted, namelY:-
"(4) The vice-chairman, if he is a whole-time member, 
the finance and accounts member and the engineer member 
shall be entitled to receive from the funds of the Authority S 
such salaries and such allowances, i! any, and governed by 
such conditions of service as may be determined by rules 
made in this behalf. . 
(5) The vice-chairman, i! he is a part-time member, and 
other members specified in clause (e), clause (f) and 10 
clause (g) of sub-section (3) may be paid from the funds of 
the ~uthoI1ty such allowances, if any; as may be fixed by the 
Central Government in this behalf."; 
(d) in sub-section (6), for the words "two members", the 
words "three members" shall be substituted. 
C. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-seet1on (1), for the 
weds "th~ zonal development plans and generally on the planning of 
development of Delbi and on such other matters", the words "on such 
other matters relating to the ,planning of development, or" shall be 
substituted. 
5. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section IIhall 
be inserted, namely:-
"5A. (1) The Authority may constitute as many committees 
consisting wholly of members or wholly of other persons or partly 
IS 
20 
of members and partly of other persons and for such purpose or 25 
purposes as it may think fit. 
(Z) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at 
such time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be 
determined by regulations made in this behalf. 30 
(3) The members of a committee (other than the members 
of tlae Authority) shall be paid such fees and allowances for 
attending its meetings and for attending to any other work of the 
Authority, as may be detennined by regulations made in tbia' 
behalf.". 35 
Am.,,· 6. In section 7 of the principal Act, after sub·section (I) t the 
ment of following sub.section shall be inserted, namely:-
MCtloG', 
u (3) The master plan may provi~ for any other matter whick 
Is necessary fot the proper development of Deihl.", 
• 

s 
10 
20 
35 
7. After Chapter In, the following Chapter shall 
namely:-
"CHAPTER IlIA 
be inserted, I~ 
of DeW 
Chapter 
lIlA. 
MOD1I'ICATIONS '1'0 TIm MASTER PLAN AND THE ZONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
llA. (1) The AuthOrity may make any modiftcations to the Mod1ftca-
master plan or the-zonal development plan as it' thinks fit, being tloaa to 
modifications which, in its opinion, do not effect important plaa., 
alterations in the character of the plan and which do not relate 
to the ex:tent of land-uses or the standards of population density. 
(2) The Central Government may make any modifications 
to the master plan or the zonal development plan whether such 
modifications are of the nature specified in sub-section (1) or 
otherwise. 
(3) Before making any modifications to the plan, the Autho-
rity or, as the case may be, the Central Government shall publish 
a notice in such form and manner as may be prescribed by rules 
made in this behalf inviting objections and suggestions from any 
person with respect to the proposed modifications before such 
date as may be specified in the notice and shall consider all 
objections and suggestions that may be received by the Autho-
rity or the Central Government. 
(4) Every modification . made .nder the provisions of this 
section shall be published in such manner as the Authority or 
the Central Government, as the case may be, may specify and-
the modifications shall come into operation -either on the date 
of the publication or on such other date as the Authority or the 
Central Government may fix. 
(5) When the Authority makes any modifications to the 
plan under sub-section (1), it shall report to the Central Gov-
ernment the full particulars of such modifications within thirty 
day. of the date on which such modifications come into opera-
tion. 
(6) If any question arises whether the modifications pr~ 
ed to be made by the Authority are modifications which effect 
important alterations in the character of the plan or whether 
they relate to the extent of land-uses or the standards of popu-
lation density, it shall be referred to the Central Government 
whose decision thereon ahall be final. 
.,-

Amend-
IDent of 
..acm:1S. 
, 
(7) ADy refereDCe in any other Chapter, except Chapter In, 
to the master plan or the zonal development plan shan be COD-
strued as a reference to the master plan or the zonal developJ;D.ent 
plan as modified under the provisions of this section.". 
8. In section 12 of the principal Act,- S 
(a.) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sectlon ahan be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) As soon as may be after. the commencement of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare any area in Delhi to be a deve- 10 
lopment area for the purposes of this Act: 
PrOY'lded that no such declaration shall be made unless 
a proposal for such declaration has been referred by the 
Central Government to the Authority and the Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi for expressing their views thereon IS 
within thirty days from the date of the receipt of the refer-
ence or within such further period as the Central q~vem­
ment may allow and the period so specified or allowed has 
.........H-"" • ...... y'-A ....... , 
(b) In the proviso to sub-section (3), after the word "may", 20 
the words, figures and letter "subject to the provisions of sec-
tion 53A" shall be inserted. 
Sw.titu- t. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
tion of be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
new lee:-
tiOD. tor 
sectiaD 
15-. 
C~ 
pulam'y 
acqulsl-
tion of 
Iud. 
"15. (1) If in the opinion of the Central Govemment, any 2S 
land is required for the purpose of development, or for any 
c1ther purpose, under this Act, the Central Government may 
acquire sueb land UDder the provisions of the Land Acquisition 
Ad, 1894. 1 of 1896. 
(2) Where any land has been acquired by the Central 30 
Govenunent, that Government may, after it has taken possession 
of the land, transfer the land to the Authority or any local 
authority for the purpose for which the land has been acqlolired 
on payment by the Authority or the local authority of the 
compensation awarded under that Act and of the charges incur- 3S 
red by the Government tn eonnection with the acquisition.". 

5 
10 
IS 
30 
35 
i 
10. Sections 16 to 20 of the prmcipal Act lhall be, aDd shall be 0ntiIIi0D 
deemed, always to have been, omitted. of lee-
tiODS 18 
to 20. 
11. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion 
ab.all be inserted, namely: _ of new section 
22A. 
H22A,. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) Powerof 
of sec:t1on 12, the Authority may, if it is of opinion that it is Authority 
~~ d und k to deve-e_.-..-ent to 0 so, erta e or carry out any development of lop land 
any land which has been transferred to it or placed at its dis- in non-
posal under section 15 or section 22 even if such land is situate develop-
in any aree whieh is not a development area!'. ment 
area. 
12. In section 23 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(a) in sub-section (1), after clause (a), the following clause :n:U~nOf 
shall be inserted, namely:- 23 . 
.. (04) all moneys borrowed by the AuthOrity from 
sources other than the Central Government by way of loans 
or debentures;" i 
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-eections shall be 
iftserted, namely:-
If (5) The Authority may borrow money by way of loans 
or debentures from such sources (other than the Central 
Government) and on such terms and conditions as may be 
approved by the Central Government. 
(6) The Authority shall maintain a sinking fund for the 
repayment of moneys borrowed under sub-section (5), and 
shall pay every year into the sinking fund such sum &s may 
be sufficient for repayment within the period fixed of all 
moneys so borrowed. 
(1) The Sinking fund or any part tbereof shall be 
applied fn, ar towards, the discharge of the loan for which 
.uch fund was created, and until such loan is wholly dt. 
charged it shall not be applied for any other purpoae.". 
13. In section 29 of the pri1\elpal Act, in sub-fJection (2) , the Amend-
follOWing shall be inserted at the end, namely:- ment 01 section 
"and ill the case of a continuing offence, with further fine which 29. 
may· extend to two hundred and fifty rupees for every day dur-
ing . which such oftence cOI1tillues after conviction for the first 
. commission of the ofteDA:e". 

Amend-
ment of 
aec:tion 
30. 
14. In section 30 of the principal Act,-
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-lecticms Iha1l be 
substituted, namely:-
.. (1) Where any development has been commenced or 18 
being carried on or has been completed in contravention of 5 
the master plan or zonal development plan or without the 
permission, approval or sanction referred to in section 12 or 
in contravention of any conditions subject to which such 
permission, approval or sanction has been granted,-
(i) in relation to a development area, any ofBcer of 10 
the Authority empowered by it in this behalf, 
(ii) in relation to any other area within the local 
limits of a local authority, the competent authority 
thereof, ~ 
may, in addition to any prosecution that may be instituted 15 
under this Act, make an order, directing that such develop-
ment shall be removed by demolition, filling or otherwise 
by the owner thereof or by the person at whose instance 
the development has been commenced or is being carried 
out or has been completed, within such period (not being 20 
less than five days and more than fifteen days from the date 
on which a copy of the order of removal, with a brief state-
ment of the reasons therefor, has been delivered to the 
owner or that person) as may be specified in the order and 
on his failure to comply with the order, the officer of the 25 
Authority or, as the case may be, the competent authority 
may remove or cause to be removed the development and 
the expenses of such removal shan be recovered from the 
owner or the person at whose instance the development 
was commenced or was being carried out or was completed 30 
as arrears of land revenue: 
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the 
owner or the person concerned has been give,1 a reasonable 
opportunity to show cause why the order should not be 
made. 35 
(1A) If any development in an area other than a deve-
lopment area has been commenced or is being canied on or 
has been completed in contravention of the master plan or 
zonaJ. development plan or without the approval or sanction 
referred to in section 12 or In contravention of any condi- 40 
tions subject to which such approval or sanction hu been , 
granted and the competent authority has failed to remove 

10 
15 
20 
25 
T 
or cause to be removed the development within the time 
that maybe specUled in this behalf by the Administrator of 
the Union· territory of Delhi, the Administrator may, after 
observing such procedure as may be prescribed by rules 
made in this behalf, direct any ofBcer to remove or cause to 
be removed such development and that ofBcer shall be bound 
to carry out such direction and any expenses of such removill 
maybe recovered from the owner or the person at whose 
instance the development was commenced or was being 
carried out or was completed as arrears of land evenue."; 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Any person aggrieved by the direction of the 
Administrator under sub-section (lA) may appeel to the 
Central Government within thirty days from the date thereof, 
and the Central Government may after giving an opportunity 
of hearing to the person aggrieved, either allow or dismiss 
the appeal or may reverse or vary any part of the direction."; 
(iii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) The decision of the chairman or the Central Gov-
ernment on the appeal and subject only to such decision 
the order under sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, the 
direction under sub-section (lA). shall be final and shall not 
be questioned in any court. 
(4) The prOvisions of this section shall be in addition 
to, and not in de~ogation of, any other provision relating to 
demolition of buildings contained in any other law for the 
time being in force!'. 
30 15. For section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substttu-
be substituted, namely: - tion of 
35 
"31. (1) Where any development in any area has been com-
menced in contravention of the master plan or zonal develop-
new 
section 
for lee-
tion 81. 
ment plan or without the permission, approval or sanction refer- Power to . 
red to in section 12 or in contravention of any conditions subject ~op 
to which such permission, approval or sanction has been grant- =.09-
ed,-
(t) in relation to a development area, the Authority or 
any ofBcer of the Authority empowered by it in thiI behalf, 

8 
(li) in relation to any other area within the local limite 
of a local authority. the competent authority thereof, 
may, in addition to any prosecution that may be instituted under 
this Act, -make an order requiring the development to be ~­
continued on and from the date of the service of the order, and 5 
su.ch order shall be complied with aceordingly. 
(2) Where 6ueh develop.1nent is not discontinued in pur-
BuaBee of the order under sub-seetlon (1), tbe Authority 
or the ofticer of the Authority or th~ competent authority, as the 
case may be, may require any police officer to remove the person 10 
by whom the development has been commenced and all his 
assistants and workmen from the place of development within 
sueh time as may be specified in the requisition and such police 
ofticer shall comply with the requisition accordingly. 
(3) If any development in an area other than a development 'IS 
area has been comm.en~ed in contravention of the master plan 
or zonal development plan or without 'the approval or sanction 
referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any conditions 
subject to which such approval or sanction mas been «ranted and 
the competent authority has failed 'to make en order -under sub- 20 
section .(1) or, as the case may be, a requisition under sub-
section (2), within the time that may be spp.cifled in this behalf 
by the Administrator of the Union territory of Delhi, the Admin-
istrator may, after observing such procedure as may be prescrib-
ed by rules made in this behalf, direct any officer to make the 25 
order or reqUisition, as the case may be, and that officer shall 
be bound to mrry out -such di!'@Ction and the onder or requisition 
made by him in pursuance of the direction ·shall be ,~omplied 
with aecM'tlingly. 
(4) After the requisition under sub-section (2) or sub- 30 
section (3) has been comnliE'd with, the Authority or the com-
petent authority or the officer to whom the direction was tssued 
by the AdminIstrator under sub-section (3). as the case may be, 
may depute by a written order a police officer or an officer or 35 
employee of the Authoritv or local authority concerned to watch 
the 'Place in order to ensure that the deve-l~ent is Jlot conti-
DUM. 
(5) Any persol'l failing to comply with an order under .sub-
section (1) or, as the case may .be, under sub.secticm (3), ,hall 40 
be punishable with flne which may extend to two hundre.d r.upees 
for every day during which the non-compliance eontinues after 
the service of the order. 

(6) No compensation shall be claimable by any person for 
any damage which he may sustain in consequence of the removal 
of any development under section 30 or the discontinuance of 
the development under this section. 
S (7) In section 30 and in this section, "competent authority" 
in relation to a local authority means any authority or officer of 
that local authority empowered or authorised to order demoli-
tion or stoppage of buildings or works, in accordance with the 
provisions mad~ by or under the law governing such local 
10 authority. 
(8) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, any other provision relating to stoppage of 
building operations contained in any other law for the time 
being in force.". 
IS 16. In section 34 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the Amend_ 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- :~~i~:;4. 
20 
30 
3S 
II (1) Any offence made punishable by or under this Act 
may, either before or after the institution of proceedings, be 
compounded-
(i) in the case of an offence referred to in sub-sec-
tion (2) of section 49, by the Administrator of the Union 
territory of Delhi or any officer authorised by him in this 
behalf by general or special order; and 
(ii) in any other case, by the Authority or, as the case 
may be, the local authority concerned or any person au-
thorised by the Authority or such .local authority by general 
or special order in this behalf. ". 
17. Fo section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall ~ubstitu-. tlon of be substItuted, namely:- new sec-
tion for 
section 35. 
"35. (1) If the Authority, after holding a local enquiry or Defaultof 
upon report from any of its officers or other information .in its the ~ower 
possession, is 'satiSfied that any amenity in relation to any land ~U:h:rit 
in a development area has not been provided in relation to that y. 
land which in the opinion of the Authority is to be provided, 
or that any development of the land for which permission, 
approval or sanction has been obtained under this Act has not 

Subatitu-
tion 
of new 
.ectiOD far 
eec:tiOD 37. 
Power of 
Authori17 
tole¥7 
betterment 
eharaes. 
10 
been carried out, it may, after affording a reasonable Ilpportunity 
to show cause, serve upon the owner of. the land Of' upon the 
person providing or responsi~le for providing the amenity a 
notice requiring him to provide the amenity or carry out the 
development within such time as may be specified in the , 
notice. 
(2) If any amenity is not provided or any such development 
i. not carried out within the time lpecifted in the notice, then 
the Authority may itself provide the amenity or carry out the 
development or have it provided or carried out through such 10 
agency as it deems fit: 
Provided that before taking any action under this Eub-
section. the Authority shall afford reasonable opportunity to 
the owner of the land or to the person providing or responsible 
for providing the amenity to show cause as to why such action Ij 
should not be taken. 
(3) All expenses incurred by the Authority or the agency 
employed by it in providing the amenity or carrying out the 
development together with interest at such rate as the Central 
Government may by order fix from the date when a demand ~ 
for the expenses is made until payment may be recovered by 
the Authority from the owner or the person providing or res-
ponsible for providing the amenity as arrears of land revenue!'. 
18. For section 37 of. the principal Act, the following aection shall 
be substituted, namely=- ~, 
"37. (1) Where, in the opmlOD of the AuthOrity, as a 
consequence of any development having been executed by the 
Authority in any development area, the value of any property 
in that area or in any area other than the development area, 
which has been benefited by the development, has increased or 30 
will increase, the Authority shall be entitled to levy upon the 
owner of the property or any person having an interest therein 
a betterment charge in respect of the increase in value of the 
property resulting from the execution of the development: 
Provided that no betterment charge shall be levied in respect Jj 
of landa owned by Government within Delhi: 
Provided further that where any land belODging to Gov-
ernment hu been let out by Govermnent to any perIOD, tbeD 
that land and any building aituate thereon aball be subject to 
• betterment charge under this section. 40 

5 of 1108. 
11 
(2) Such betterment charge shall be an amount-
(i) in re.pect of any property situate in a development 
area, equal to one-third of the amount, aDd 
(ii) in respect of property situate in any other area, not 
S exceeding one-third of the amount, 
by which the value of the property on the completion of the 
execution of the development scheme estimated as if the pro-
perty were clear of buildings exceeds the value of the property 
prior to such execution estimated in like manner: 
10 Provided that in levying betterment charge on any property 
under clause (ii), the Authority shall have regard to the extent 
and nature of benefit accruing to the property from the deve-
lopment and such other factors as may be prescribed by rules 
made in this behalf.". 
IS 11. In section 39 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the AJJ'lan."",ent 
following sub-secti.on shall be inserted, namely: _ ot section 38 . 
~o 
.. (2A) Th.e arbitrators shall, for the purpose of determining 
any matter referred to them, have the same powers as are 
vested. in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
when trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(4) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
person and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of docu-
ments; 
25 (c) administering to any party to the arbitration such 
30 
tntelTOgatories as may, in the opinion of the arbitrator.. be 
necessary." . 
•. After section .0 of the principal Act, the following section ln8ertion olnewleC-
IIhall be iDaerted, namely: - tion 4OA. 
1C4OA., Any money due to the Authority on account of fees or Mode of 
charges, or from the disposal of lands, buildings or other p~ ~~ 
perties, movable or immovable, or by way of rents and profits due ~ 
may, if the recovery thereof is not expressly provided for in Authority. 
any other provision of this Act, be recovered by the Authority 
IS arrea1'W of land revenue .... 

12 
Amend_ 21. In section 41 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the 
ment of following sUb-section shall be inserted, namely:-section 41. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section for 
section 42. 
Returns 
and ins-
pection. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 49. 
., (3) The Central Government may, at any time, either on 
its own motion or on application made to it in this behalf, call 
for the records of any case disposed of or order passed by the 5 
Authority for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality 
or propriety of any order passed or direction issued and may 
pass such order or issue such direction in relation thereto as it 
may think fit: . 
Provided that the Central Government shall not pass an 10 
order prejudicial to any person without affording such person 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard.... .,. 
22. For section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"42. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Govem- IS 
ment such reports, returns and other information as that Gov-
ernment may from time to time require. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), 
the Central ~ernment or any officer authorised by the Central 
Government in this behalf, may call for reports, returns and 20 
other information from the Authority or local authority in regard 
to the implementation of the master plan. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Central Government or 
the officer referred to in sub-section (2) may enter into or upon 
any land with or without assistants or workmen for ascertaining 2S 
whether the provisions of the master plan are being or have been 
implemented, or whether the development is being or has been 
carried out in accordance with such plan. 
(4) No such entry shall be Diade except between the hours 
of sunrise and sunset and without giving reasonable notice to 30 
the occupier, or if there be no occupier, to the owner of the land 
or building .... 
23. Section 49 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
section (1) thereof, and-
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, after the words 35 
"under this Act", the words, brackets and figure "other than an 
offence referred to in sub-section (2) ,f shall be inserted; 

13 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (2) No prosecution for any offence for failure to com-
ply with the order of the officer referred to in sub-section 
S (3) of section 31 and punishable under sub-section (S) of 
that section shall be instituted except with the previous 
sanction of the Administrator or any officer authorised by 
him. in this behalf.". 
U. Section 52 of the principal Aci shall be re-numbered as sub- Amend_f . m~to 
10 sectlon (1) thereof, and-
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, after the words 
"local authority", the words, figure and letter "or committee 
constituted under section 5A" shall be inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following 
IS sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: ....... 
.. (2) The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it 
under this Act, except the power to make rules, may also 
be exercised by su'ch oftlcer as may be mentioned therein, 
in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may 
be specified therein. 
(3) The Administrator of the Union territory of Delhi 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any 
power exercisable by him under this Act may also be exer-
cised by such officer as may he mentioned therein, in such 
cases and subj~ to such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified therein.". 
section 52. 
25. In section 53 of the principal Act, in sub-section 
words ··Save as aforesaid", the following shall ,be 
th Amend-(2), for e ment of 
substituted. section 53. 
30namely:-
"Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (4) of section 30 
or sub-section (8) of section 31 or sub-section (1) of this 
section". 
It. After section 53 of the principal· Act, the follOwing sections Iofosertion new sec-
35 shall be inserted. namely:- tions 53A 
and 53B. 
u53A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law Restriction . . on power for the time helDg in force, no rule, regulabon or bye-law shan of a local 
be made or amended by a local authority in respect of matters authority 
specifled in sub-section (2) unless the Authority, upon cOJUdde- to make 
rules, 

1ftIDR.~ 
or bye-
laws in 
respect of 
certain 
matters. 
Notice to 
be given 
of suits. 
Amend-
ment 
of 1IeC-
tion H. 
14 
ration of such rule, regulation or bye-law, cerWlea that it does not 
contravene any of the provisions of the :master plan or the zonal 
development plan. 
(2) The matters referred to in sub-aection (1) are the 
following, Il8mely:- 5 
(a) water supply, drainage and sewage dispoa8l; 
(b) el'e9tion and re-erection of bullding8, including grant 
of building permissions, licences and imposition of restric-
tions on use and sub-division of buUdings; 
(c) sub-division of land into building sites, roads and [0 
lanes, recreational sites and sites for community facilities; 
and 
(d) development of land, improvement schemes, and 
housing and re-housing schemes. 
53B. (1) No suit shall be instituted aga1nst the_Authority, or IS 
any member thereof, or any of its otBcera or other employees, or 
any person acting under the directions of the Authority or any 
member or any ofBcer or other employee of the Authority in 
respect of any act done or purporting to have been done in pur-
suance of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder 20 
until the expiration of two months after notice in writing has 
been, in the caSe of the Authority, left at its office, and in any 
other case, delivered to, or left at the office or place of abode of, 
the person to be sued and unless such notice states explicitly the 
cause of action, the nature of relief sought, the amount of com- 25 
pensation claimed and the name and place of residence of the 
intending plaintift and unless the plaint contains a statement that 
such notice has been so left or delivered. 
(2) No suit such as • d.escribed, in sulHection (1) sball, 
unless it is a suit for recovery of immovable property or for • 30 
declamtion of title thereto, be instituted after the expiry of aU 
months from the date on which the cause of action arises. 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to 
apply to a suit in which the only relief claimed is an injunctlOD 
of which the object would be defeated by the giving of the 35 
notice or the postponement of the institution of the suit.". 
ft. In aection t55 of the prlnc1pal Act,-
(i) in sub-4ection (1) ,-
(a) the words uunder the provlalons of this Act Dr, as 40 
the case may be, of any other law relating t.o acquisition of 

l' 
immova~le property, by the authority for the time being 
charged ~th the development of the area in which the land 
ill situated" shan be, and shall be deemed always to have 
been, omitted; 
S (b) for the words "serve on the authority a notice", the 
wards "serve on the Central Government a notice" shall be 
substituted. 
(ii) in sub-secUon (2), for the words uIf the authority for 
the tUne being charged with the development of the area", the 
10 words uIf the Central Government" shall be substituted. 
II. In section 56 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- Amend-
mentot 
(a) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, :~on 
name1y:- . 
.. (dd) the stages by which the development of any 
IS particular features of a zone may be carried out;"; 
(b) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, 
JWDely:-
.. (g) the form and maDDer in which notice under sub-
section (3) of section llA shall be pUblished;"; 
20 (c) clause (i.) shall be, and shall ·be deemed always to have 
been, omitted; 
(d). after clause (;), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
umely:-
U (;;) the procedure ·to be observed by the AdminJstrator 
under section 30 or section 31: 
(;;;) the factors to be taken into consideration in deter-
mining the rate of betterment charge in respect of propelty 
situate in any area outside the development area;": 
(e) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, 
30 namely:-
U(mm) the procedure to be followed for bonowiIDg 
moneya by way of 108Dl or debentures IDcl their repay-
mea.t:". 

Amend-
ment of 
section 57, 
Valida-
tion of 
certain 
acquiBi-
tiODI. 
16 
21. In section 57 of the principal Act, in sub-section (l),-
(4) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
" (04) the swnmoning and holding of meetings of a 
committee constituted under section 5A, the time and place 5 
where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business 
at such meetings, and the number of members necessary to 
form a quorum thereat and the fees and allowances pay-
able to the members for attending the meetings or any 
other work of the Authority;"; 
(b) clause (g) shall be, and shall be deemed always to have 
been, omitted. 
30. If any acquisition of land has been made under the provisions 
10 
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for any purposes of the principal 
Act Or any notification bas been issued or order has been made or IS 
any proceeding has been instituted or any action has been taken in 
connection with acquisition of any land for such purpose, such 
acquisition, notification, order, proceeding or action shall not be 
deemed to be invalid merely on the ground that it was made, issued, 
instituted or taken under the said provisions. 2C' 
1 of 1894. 

STATEMEN't OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Delhi Development Act, 1957, requires the Delhi Development 
Authority to prepare a master plan for Delhi and to promote and 
secure 'the development of Delhi according to that plan. The master 
plan came into force with effect from the 1st September, 1962. Under 
the provisions of the present Act, the Imlster plan has become a 
very rigid document and it is considered that there should be an easy 
procedure for making modifications and minor deviatiol'lS in the plan 
which are found necessary in the process of actual development. 
Some changes are inevitable and unless these can be expeditiously 
effected, the actual work of development would be greatly hampered 
from time to time. 
It is also felt that the provisions of the Delhi Development Act, 
1957 regarding acquisition and disposal of land operate to the disad-
vantage of the public and Government consider that the land for 
development of Delhi should be acquired under the ordinary law, 
viz., the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. ' 
The, working of the Delhi Development Act has also revealed 
the need for certain other amendments to ensure smooth and speedy 
implementation of the master plan for the Capital. These amend-
ments inter alia provide for the constitution of committees, con-
ferment of power OH the Authority to cany out development when 
expedient even in areas not formally declared as development area, 
borrowing money with the approval of the Central Government and 
the creation of a sinking fund for certain purpose", conferment of 
power on the Administrator of the Union territory of Delhi to ter-
minate by demolition or otherwise any contravention of the master 
plan where a local authority has faHe,d to take the necessary action, 
levy of betterment charges on properties situate outside develop· 
ment areas which have substantially benefited by the development 
work and power to provide for the prior examination of rules, regu-
lations or byelaws proposed by local authorities to secure compliancte 
with the provisions of the m~ster plan. 
The Bill seeks to give effect to these changes. 
NEW DELHI; SUSHILA NAYAR. 
The 2nd December, 1963. 

Ptt!SInENTts R!coMMENnATIoN UNDER Ak'tICLE 11'7 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.13-16/62-MG, dated the 3rd December, 1983 
from Dr. Sushila Nayar, Minister of Health to· the Secretary, Lok 
'Sabha]. 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Delhi Development (Amendment) Bill, 1963, recommend. under 
article 1.1'7 (3) of the Constitution of India the consideration. of the 
BUt in the Lok Sabha. 
'l '. 
18 ... 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The land required for development in Delhi is acquired· by ,the 
Chief Commissioner, Delhi. on behalf of the Central Govemment 
under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and then the same is placed 
at the disposal of the Delhi Development Authority, local bodies, the 
Government and the various Co-operative House Building Societies 
according to their requirement. The cost of the land acquired is 
met Initially from the Revolving Fund of Rs. 5 crores placed at the 
disposal of the Chief Commissioner but the same is recouped from 
the Delhi Development Authority and other bodies when land is 
transferred to them. During the last two years, approximately 15,000 
acres of land have been acquired and allotted for development to 
the various agencies referred to above. It is estimated that during 
the next five years the Chief CommiSSioner, Delhi, will be acquirin~ 
about 20,000 more acres of land for the proper implementation of the 
master plan, at an estimated cost of about Rs. 2'7' 2 crores, as indi-
cated below:-
(i) Acquisition of 16,000 acres of land 
in the urbanisable area of Delhi @ 
Rs. 15,000 per acre (average rate). Rs. 24' 00 crores. 
(ii) .Acquisition of 4,000 acres of land 
in Narela Ring Town @ Rs. 8,000 per acre 
(average rate). Rs. 3' 20 crores. 
TOTAL: Rs. 27' 20 crores. 
It is expected that the whole land acqUisition programme would 
be financed from the Revolving Fund already available with the 
Chief Couunissioner, ' 
" ' . .. ,. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill which seeks to insert new section 5A in the 
Delhi Development Act, 1957, enables the Authority to constitute 
committees and provides for regulations to be made for the S\lIIl-
moning and holding of meetings of the committees, the time and 
pl~ of such mee~ings, the conduct of business thereat and the fees 
and allowances payable to the members for attending the meetings, 
etc., of the committees. The proposed section llA under new Chap-
ter IDA, provides for certain modifications to the master plan and 
the zonal development plan. Sub-section (3) thereof contemplates 
framing of rules for prescribing the form and manner of the notice 
which the Authority or the Central Government, as the case may be, 
are required to publish before making any such modifications. The 
proposed sub-section (lA) of section 30 and sub-6ection (3) at 
section 31 of the Act also provide for the framing of rules by the 
C.tral Government forpcescribing procet\ure which the Admiais-
trator of the Union territory of Delhi will be required to observe 
before taking any action thereunder. Similarly, Central Govern-
ment has been empowered· to frame rules fol' ind~cating factol'S fol' 
the guidance of the Authority in levying betterment charge on pro-
perties referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of the proT'osed 
section 3'7. Other amendml!'lltfl proposed in sections 56 and 57 RTe 
of a consequential nature. All these matters to bf' Sl)eetfted in the 
regulatioDS and the rules are matteI'S of detail and the delegRtlon of 
legislative power i~ of a normal character. 
30 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1957 
No. 61 OF 1957 
• • • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(l) the expression "land". and the expression "person inter-
ested" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
section 3 of the Land Acquisition Act, 18H. 
CHAPTER n 
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND ITS OBJ'ECTS 
3. (1) • • • • • • 
(3) The Authority shall consist of. the following members, 
nam.ely:-
• • • • • • 
(g) two other persons to be nominated by t11e Central Gov-
ernment; and . 
• • • • • • 
(4) The vice-chainnan, the finance and accounts member and the 
engineer member shall be whole-time paid members of the Autho-
rity and shall be entitled to receive from the fllnds of the Authority 
such salaries and such allowances, if any, and governed by such con-
ditions of service as may be determined by rules made in this 
behalf. 
(5) The members specified in clause (e), clause (f) and clause 
(g) of sub-section (3) may be paid from the funds of the Authority 
such allowances, if any, as may be fixed by the Central Government 
in this behalf. , 
(6) The vice-chainnan, the finance ·and accounts member, the 
engineer member Bnd the two members referred to in clause (g) of 
sub-section (3) shall hold office during the plea !:lure of the Central 
Government and the two representatives of the Advisory Commit-
tee of Delhi referred to in clause <f) of suh-section (3) shall hold 
office for so long only as they continue to be members thereof . 
• • • • • • 
The Delhi 
Develop-
ment 
Authority . 

22 
Advilol7 5. (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, constitute an 
counciL advisory council for the purpose of advising the Authority on the 
preparation of the master plan and the zonal development plans and 
generally on the planning of development of Delhi and on such 
other matters arising out of, 0 r in connection with, the administra-
tion of 'this Act as may be reI erred to it by the Authority . 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER IV 
DEVELOPMENT OF LANDS 
Declaration 12. (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act 
of d~p- the Central Government after consultation with the Authority 
:~n d::~8 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any area in 
lopmen.t of Delhi to be a development area for the purposes of this Act: 
land in 
those and 
~er 
areu. 
Provided that after the establishment 
ration of Delhi no such declaration shall 
consultation with that Corporation also . 
• • • • 
of the Municipal Corpo-
be made except after 
• • 
(3) After the commencement of this Act no develoDment of land 
shall be undertaken or carried out in any area by any person or body 
(including a department of Government) unless,-
(i) where that area is a development area, permission for 
such developm~nt has been obtained' in writinj;( from the Autho-
rity in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 
(ti) where that area is an area othpr than a development 
area, approval of, or sanction for. such development has been 
obtained in wrttinj;( from the local authority f'oncerned or any 
oftlcer or authority thereof emoowered or authort~ed in this 
behalf. in accordance with the provision!"! made by or under the 
law J(overnin~ such authority or until such provisions have ha,..·-
made, in accordance wff:h the proviflion'l of the regulations relat-
ing to the grant of nermis.lion fl')T development made under the 
l)elhl (Control of BuUdinj;( Operations) Act. 1955. and in force 53 of 1955. 
Immediately before the commencement of this Act: 
Provided that the local authority concerned may amend those 
regulations in' their application to such area. 
• • • • • • 

21. 
CHAPTER V 
AcQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF LAND 
15. (1) ~ in the opinion of the Central Government any land is ComP~ 
required for the purpose of development. or for any other purpose, a~qu1S~t10n 
under this Act, the Central Government may acquire such laDd by 0 Ian. 
publishing in the OfB.ciaI Gazette a notice specifying the particular 
purpose for which such land is required and stating that the Central 
Government has decided to acquire the land in pursuance of this 
section. • I 
(2) Before publishing a notice under sub-section (1), the Central 
Government shall by another notice call upon the owner of the land 
and any other perlOn who in the opinion of the Central GoverDment 
may be interested therein, to mow cause within such time as may be 
specified in the notice, why the land should not be acquired. 
(3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the owner of 
the land and by any other person interested therein and after giving 
such owner and person an opportunity of being heard, the Central 
Government may pass such orders as it deems fit. 
(4) When a notice under sub-section (1) is published in the 
Official Gazette, the land shall on and from the date of such publica-
tion, vest absolutely in the Central Government free from all encum-
brances. 
• • ~.' ..• I.. ... 
(5) Where any land is vested in the Central Government under 
sub-section (4), the Central Government may, by notice in writing, 
order any person who may be in possession of the land to surrender 
or deliver possession thereof to that Government or any person duly 
authorised by it in this behalf within thirty days of the service of 
the notice. 
(6) If any person refuses or fails to comply with an order made 
under sub-section (5), the Central Government may take possession 
of the land and may for that purpose use such force 81 may be 
n~essary. • ! 
(7) Where the land has been acquired for the Authority or any 
local authority, the Central Government shall, after it'has taken 
possession of the land and on payment by the Authority or the local 
authority concerned of the amount of compensation detennined 
under section 16 and of the other charles incurred by the Go'Yern-

• 
ment in connection with the acquisition, transfer the land to the 
Authority or that local authority for the purpose for which the land 
has been acquired. 
~om.pensa- 16. (1) Where any land is acquired by the Central Government 
telon fOfl Wlder this Act, the Central Government shall pay for such acquisition, ompu - .. . . sory compensatIon the amoWlt of WhICh shall be determined m accordance 
acquisition with the provisions of this section. 
otland. 
(2) Where the amount of compensation can be determined by 
a,greement between the Central Government and the person to be 
compensated, it shall be de1lermined .in accordance with such agree-
ment. 
(3) Where no such agreement can be reached, the Central Gov-
ernment shall refer the case to the collector for determination of the 
- amoWlt of compensation to be paid for such acquisition as also the 
person or persons to whom such compensation shall be paid. 
(4) Before finally determining the amoWlt of compensation, the 
collector shall give an opportunity to every person. to be compen-
sated to state his case as to the amount of compensation. 
(5) In determining the amount of compensation, the collector 
shall be guided by the foHowing principles, name1y:-
(11) no allowance shall be made on account of the acquisi-
tion being compulsory; 
(b) the value of the land shall be taken to be-
(i) the market value of the land on the date on which 
the notice calling upon the owner to show cause why the land 
should not be acquired is issued under SUb-section (2) of 
section 15 (hereinafter referred to as 'the date of notice'), 
such market value being determined on the basis of the use 
of the land on that date, or 
(ii) an amount equal to the sum total of the three'follow-
Ing amounts, that ia to say, an amount equal to the market 
."alue of the land on thalst day of October, 1955, lUCh·market 
."alue being de1el1llined on the bais Cif the use at. the land 
on that date, 'an amount equal to twenty-Aile per cat .. 0£ the 
increase, 11 any, (not including, however, any increase con-
sequent qn any development carried out OIl .e laRd) in tM 
market value of the land durin, the period between the lit 

25 
day of October, 1955, and the date of notice, and an amount 
which in the opinion of the collector represents the reaSOD-
able cost of development, if any, (including in the case of 
agricultural land, the cost of any improvement carried out 
thereon in the course of agricultural operations) carried out 
on the land during that period, 
whichever is less; 
(c) the special suitability or adaptability of the land for 
any purpose shall not be taken into account if that purpose is a 
purpose to which it would be applied only in pursuance of sta-
tutory powers, or for which there is not a market apart from 
the special needs of a particular purchaser or the requirements 
of any department of Government or any local or public 
authority; 
(d.) where the value of the land is increased by reason 
of the use thereof or of any premises thereon in a manner which 
could be restrained by any court, or is contrary to law, or is 
detrimental to the health of the inmates of the premises, or to 
public health, the amount of that increase shall not be taken 
into account. 
(6) For the purpose of detennining the amount of compensa-
tion-
(a) the collector shall have the power to require any per-
BOD to deliver to him such returns and assessments as he con-
siders necessary; 
(b) the collector shall also have the power to require any 
., ~·lmown OT believed to be interested in the land to deliver 
to' him a statement containing, as far as may be practicable, the 
. name of every ,ather person having any interest in the land as 
c&-owner, mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, and the nature of 
such interest, and of the rents and profits (if any) received or 
receivable on account thereof for three years next preceding 
the date of the statement. 
'(7) Every person required to deliver a return, assessment or 
statement under sub-section (6) shall be deemed to be legally bound 
to do so within: the meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the 
.. of 1880. Indian Penal Code. 
(8) The collector may hear expert witnesses if it be necessary 
to do so in any particular case. 

• 
,: 26 
'l~) . .7'he.:F~'1tor Ifjh,4lll.lh~'l'l}~~, tq ~ter ',:OD \1Il4~.inspect any 
ll~~ \V~~ ~ :~. ,.ubject of p~qc~gs,before ~bim. 
(10) The collector shall. dispose of every case . referred to him 
under Bub-section (3) for det.ermination of c,?mpensatio~, as expedi-
tiously as possible .and in ,any .case within ~uch ~ime as may be 
prescribed by rules. ' 
(11) The collector shall determine the amount of costs incurred 
",in ,.lIlly ",case 4isposed"of ,by ~m"W1der,the'..f8Ction.,and by what 
, ~1OB8. ~d. in what..pwporti.ons',they .ar~to.be .paid. 
Appeal to ,,17., (1) Any per~on~g~iE;veQ by' the ,~ec~sio~ of ~he"cpllector 
the diltri~ determining the amount of c.oDlP.en~!~ipn may ,wi~pi~ ¢.:ldy cD.tYs from 
~=:n ' . t;he dat~ "of. such decision, a.pE~al ,to ,the "c.o~rt _. ot ~e 4~ric~ judge 
d .. of of Delhi. " ec1S1Dn 
the Col-
lector. 
Disputes 
as to 
apportiOll-
ment of 
the com-
pensation. 
(2) The decision of the court of the, district judge on liIuch appeal, 
_d subject only to such decision, the decision of the, ~ollector 
,determining the amount of compensation shall be ftnal.~d shall not 
be questioned in any ·court. 
" ,'1&, If ~yj idilPu.tearises. ·as, to .the .appci}l'tiODmentof compensation 
among persons claiming to be entitled thereto the-,Cemnl 'Govern-
ment shall refer such dispute for the ~ecision of the court. of. the dis-
trict judge of Delhi and, the decision of that court thereon shall, be 
final. 
Payment ."J.8., (lhW!u~~re'the".aIQaunt .;of ,llOIIlpensation ,is determined by 
Of c~-\,J,g~~lN.nt.',t;h. Centraf,QQ.vern.m6llt;shall, pay such,.amount to the 
:n:::~t person or persons entitled thereto. 
of the 
same in 
court. 
" (2t.W~,~reltJl~1 ~~unt ;:oCc~~~tWn:: ~ 4~~ned by the 
~o~ecto~ ,\l~erth, p~o.~~ions ,of ~~9~,,16,: t~ ~~al" 9oy'~ent 
_,~h~lt~de~.,p,ll,Ym~n~ o~ ~he ~~e~~ ~~~~~:tqt~~person • 
, ~~mU~ltq'r~to"ac,~o~'Mngto'I~Pch.f~~~lWt.lo~,~q: ~,pay to 
. t.h.~m>4,¥n~~ ~J'ev~t~~"bYns<ffile. ~e :or_~ore" ot t~,~gencies 
'P:~n~ipned, in: the q.ext"suQ~~~c~Wn. 
(3), If. the persons entitled to compensation according to the 
decision of the collector do not consent to receive it, or·' if there be 
no person competent to ,alienate .th~)~ or if t,~ere, be ~y, c;Uspute 
as to the title to receive the comp~nsationt the Central Gover~ent 
~~all. d~posit 'the, amo:unt _of the~?m'p'~~s~,~~~~..iri ~.h~ ¢.?~ I ~f 'the 
district judge of Delhi: 
PrOvided that any person admitted to be interested may receive 
. ~~ ,.p&>.'m~, .u~de~ ,PI;O.test,;8S t~, U1e ,~~y ,of t.be ~9unt of 
compensation: 

27 . . -"'I 
'Px'ovfded further that nothing 'herein contained shall aifeet the 
UabiUty of any perSOn who may receive' the whole or_ any' partof" 
any compensation determined under this Act, to pay toe Same to the'" 
person lawfully entitled thereto. 
20. Where any amount of compensation has been deposH:ed in Invest-
court under section 19, the court may either of its own motion or on tmhent of t . e amoun the appbcation made by or on behalf of any party interested . or of com-
claiming to be interested in such amount, order the same to be pensation 
in,"*ci '. in weB· GoverDflileilt I or . 'otber . approved seeurHies . as1t dePbi;itlcf·· .. 
may· 'think proper, and'may· direct the 'interest or other' proceeds in court;·· 
of an,.' such investment to beaceumUlated and paid in sucb--marmer-. 
as . wfllr, 111 :its Opinion, 'gift-the parties interested' therein' the" saMe 
beneftt therefrom as they might, have- had from 'the land"in'-respect' 
wh&reof such amount has' been depomted 'oras neat' thereto' as-may, 
be. .• - -i • I : -""'I ,....~ .... r ... r 
'" '" '" '" '" 
CHAPTER' VII 
SuPPLEMENTAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
'" '" '" '" '" 
21. '(1) '" '" '" '" '" 
(2) "Any person' who' 'tts.:!S-' i:lny . lana . orbunBfritffn "con'tiil\i@iiffdri" 
of ' the proflrlbttif of"lectron'T4 'at' fD contra~rill6n r6f J 'arlffl lertni~tr; 
cottdifloi'\s" -pr~fl5ec!' by' !t~Jtnfo'll~~'i:irideY f tlte ~rcAA!6r\o "tflaf:lwr r 
ttmi' thait"'He"pttHiift'tMlle· Wffhtfltfi! 'fiMt!K~" ~I!ffb lfv~ :UiduMHtcf'J 
ru~etI:': 
'" '" '" '" '" 
Penalties. 
30. (1) Where the erection of any building in any development erder of 
a~_1PbNfYcomtn~tleee:'Gr'ft l:1eln"M'C!ati'ied'ltn.;'br'has ~ 'eom- demolition 
pteted fb:(!OntNVM1ttbn ~6ftb~ 'ffiftt@tt1fSISt1brIJ:offaJ/tieve'l\St:lin@ftf pfw of build· 
or' Wl!tlfJutTth&'»emtftfstdrt 't'ef~t to tn' ~fft>n'12 nt·fh etm'trlt\r~J1tIfOjr ing. 
of:any' eondttiorf mlb'jecf to '\Vhit!h·9\u!ti. :penn~sl~i\''''haYtJe4wt"lr~''h~c!~ 
any ;oflle@t"of thi:! 'Autb~ri't'· errtpOWe~ Hy ff in 'thhrbehalf ma,.;" in 
addfttcm;to any' ~ros~ion thAt' may be tnst1tittedun~(' this . 'Act';' 
make an order directing that such erection shall be demolished by the' 
owner thereof within such period not exceeding two months as may 
be Speeifterd hi theorder,"snd'o'n the" failure t)f fhe'oWTi'e'r" to 'comply 
with,the ordet( the offte8" fha'y" 'liimY~ caust! the' erection' to be 
d __ tshed andr:the"'exp@t\fJes 'of sticlf:deJW6fftion 'S"harFbe'i'et'!'dV'erttblt 
from the owner as arrears Qf land revetl~'!" 

2 
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the owner has 
been given a reasonable opportunity to show cause why the order" 
should not be made . 
• • • • • 
, 
(3) The decision of the chairman on the appeal and subject only 
-to such decision the order under sub-section (1), shali be final and, 
shall not be questioned in any court. 
Power to 31. (1) Where the erection of any building in any area has been 
~:ding commenced in contravention of the master plan or zonal develop· 
operations. mentplan or without the permission, approval or sanction referred 
to in section 12 or in contravention of any condition subject to whieh 
such permission. approval or sanction has been granted, but such 
erection has not been completed, the Authority in relation to a de-' 
velopment area and the local authority concerned o't any officer or 
authority thereof empowereq or authorised in this behalf, in relation 
to an area other than a development area, may, in addition to any 
prosecution that may be instituted under this Act, make an order 
requiring the building operations in relation to such erection to bo 
discontinued on and from the date of the service of the order. 
(2) Where such, building operations are not discontinued in pur-
suance of the requisition under sub-section (1), the Authority or, as 
the ~ase may be, the loeal authority concerned or the oftieel' 8r 
authority the~eof authorised or empowered . as aforesaid, may 
require any police ofticer to remove the person by whom the erection 
of the building has been commenced and all his asaiatantl· and work .. 
men from the place of the building within luch time as may be 
specifted in the requisition and such police oftleer shall oompl)' 
with the requisition accordingly. 
(3) After a requisition under sub-section (2) has been complied 
with, the Authority or, as the case may be, the local authority con~ 
cerned or the officer or authority thereof authorised or empowered 
as aforesaid may, depute by a written order a police oftlcer or an 
officer or employee of the Authority or local authority.: concerned, to 
watch the place in order to ensure that the erection of the buildlDS' 
is not continued. J 
(4) Any person failing to comply with an order under Bub-section' 
(1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred 
ru-pees for every day during which the non-compliance ~nt'DuOit 
after the service of the order. 

29 
(5) No compensation shall be claimable by any person for any 
damage which he may sustain in consequence of the discontinuance of 
the erection of any building . 
• • • • • 
34. (1) The Authority or as the case may be, the local authority 
concerned or any person authorised by the Authority or such local 
authority by general or special order in this behalf may either before 
or after the institution of the proceedings compound any offence 
made punishable by or under this Act . 
• • • • 
Composi-
tion Of 
oftences. 
35. (1) If the Authority after holding a local inquiry or upon Default 
report from any of its officers or other information in its possession, power. of 
is satisfied that the owner of any land in a development area has Authority. 
failed to provide any amenity in relation to the land which in the 
opinion of the Authority ought to be provided or to carry out any 
development of the land for which permission has been obtained 
under this Act, it may.serve UpO:1 the owner a notice requiring him 
to provide the amenity or carry out the development within ~~h 
time IJS may be specified in the notice, . 
(Z) If any such amenity is not provided or any such development 
is not carried out within the time specified in the notice, then, the 
Authority may itself provide the amenity or carry out the develop. 
ment or have it provided or carried out through such 8geney as tt 
deoJas At: 
Provided that before taking any action under this SUb-section the 
Authority shall aftord reasonable opportunity to the owner of th, 
Iud • show cause 81 to '\Vhy such action should not be taken.· 
(3) All expenses incurred by the Authority or the agency em-
ployed by it in providing the amenity or carrying out the develop-
ment together with interest at such rate as the Central Govern-
ment may by order fix, from the date when a demand for the 
expenses is made until payment may be recovered by the Authority 
from the owner as arrears of land revenue. 
• • • • • 
37. (I) Where as a consequence of any development scheme Power ~ 
having been executed by the Authority in any area, the value of tAUlthonty 
• 0 evy 
any property in that area, in the opinion of the Authonty, has betterment 
increased or will i~rease, the Authority shall be entitled to levy charges, 

3~ . 
upon. the. ow..ns.,ofthe . property or any person having an interest 
therei:D .& betterment charge in respect of the increase in value . of 
the p!..operty resulting from the execu tWn of, the development 
scheme. 
(Z) Such betterment charge shall be an amount equal to one-third 
of the amount by which the value of the property on the completion 
of the execution of the development scheme estimated as if the pro-
perty were clear of buildings exceeds the value of the property prior 
to such execution estimated in like manner. 
• • • • • 
ReturDa 42 .. The .Authority shall furnish to the Central Government such 
ancJ~ repPrts, returns and other information as that Gover-nrneat may 
mation. fr,om time to time require. 
Sanction 
of prose-
cution. 
POWeI'te 
dele,ate. 
Effect of 
• • • • • 
41. No prosecution for any. offence punishable under this Act 
shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the 
Authority or as the case may be, the local authority concerned or 
any o:flicer authwisedby the Authority or such local authority in 
this behalf. 
.. • • • 
52. The Authority may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, 
di~i' that any power exercisable by it under this Act except the 
power tqmake regul.ations may also be exercised by such oftleer or. 
loeal authority as may be mentioned thet'ein, in sueh cases and sub--
ject,to such conditions. if any,as may.,be speciAed therein . 
5.3.(1) • • • • • 
other laws. (2) Save as aforesaid, the pro~sions. of this ht..and the rules and 
Pl~st.o 
stand" . 
modifled 
in cit •. 
tain 
casel. 
re~tiQDS made ther~r .shal1.haveeff~ct.notwjthstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewitb. contained in any other law. 
• • • • • 
55. 0) Where any land situated in any area in Delhi is required 
by the I master plan or a zonal development plan to be kept as . an 
open space or unbuilt upon ·oris designed in any such plan JiS 
subject to compulsory· acqubitioD, thea, if at the· ex.piration of 
ten years from the date of operation of the plan under section 11 

.~t 
... .., 
or where such land has been so required or designated by any 
amendment of such plan, from t~e date of operation of such amend-
ment, the land is not compulsorily acquired under the provisions 
of this Act or, as the case may be, of any other law relating to 
acquisition of immovable property, by the authority for the time 
being charged with the development of the area in which the land is 
situated, the owner of the land may serve on the authority a notice 
requiring his interest in the land to be so acquired. 
(2) If the authority for the time being charged with the develop-
ment of the area fails to acquire the land within a period of six 
months from the date of receipt of the notice, the master plan or, as 
the case may be, the zonal development plan shall have effect, after 
the expiration of the said six months as if the land were not required 
to be kept as an open space or 'unbuilt upon or were not designated 
as subject to compulsory acquisition. 
56. (1) • • • • • Power to 
(2) In partIcular and without prejudice to the generality of the ma1ke . ru es. foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
• • • • '. 
(g) the periodical amendment of the master plan and a zonal 
development plan, the period at the expiration of which such 
amendment may be taken up, the procedure to be followed in making 
such amendment and the date of operation of such amendment . 
• • • • • 
(i) the time within which cases referred to the collector under 
sub-section (3) of section 16 for determination of compensation shall 
be disposed of; 
• • · , 
• • 
57. (1) The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Power to 
Central Government, make regulations consistent with this Act and make 
the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of this Act, and r,egula-
without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations tll:tDS 
may provide for-
• • • • • 
(9) the manner of publication of the notice under section 15; 
• ••• • • • 

tOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
, to amend the Delhi Development Act, 1957. 
(Dr. Sushi/a Nayar, 
Minister of Health.) 