LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE ESSENTIAL OO~ODITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1966 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha). 
1. P~ge 6, line 9,-
.iJu: "(ii) It ~ "(iii)'~ 
2. Page 6, line 7 from bottom,-
,W' "implemeting" ~ "implementing" 
3. Page 7, line 4 from bottom,-
for "forefi ture" read "forfeiture" 
NE~ DELHI; 
Au~_st 1 7. 1 g66 
Sravana 26. 1888 CSaJ~:!] __ ~ ... ~~_ 
-,~ 

( r 
.A.s INTRODUCED IN LoK SAlIHA ON 
l 9 
• 
I~.·'.··<··· 
rt' ..... 
1,:, 
.,'''' 
Bm No. 55 of 196' 
THE ES~ENTIAL COMMODITIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1966 . 
;\'r . 
.... H .,. 
A 
BILL 
fuTther to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
~..L) BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year ~f the 
K~ .Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Essential Commodities (Amend- Short 
f.~:''''' 
ment) Act, 1966. title. 
L~, . Z. In the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred Amend-
~i .teras the principal Act), in section 3, after sub-section (3A). the me~t ot 
~'follOWing sUb-section shall be inserted, namely:- sechon3. 
~.i.-'.!~\' '(3B) Where any person is required by an order made with 
reference to clause (f) of sub-section (2) to sell any grade or 
ft';~riejty of foodgrains, edible oilseeds or edible oils to the Central 
""~~~llDllent or a State Government or to an officer or agent of 
such Government and either no notification in respect of such 
. ._~oodgrains, edible oilseeds or edible oils has been issued under 

• 
2 
sub-section (3A) or any such notification having been issued has 
ceased to remain in force by efflux of time, then, notwithstand-
ing anything contained in sub-section (3), there shall be paid 
to that person such price for the foodgrains, edible oilseeds or 
edible oils as may be specified in that order having regard to- ~ 
(i) the controlled price, if any, fixed under this section 
or by or unlier any other law for the time being in force for 
such grad~ or variety of food grains, edible oilseeds or edible 
oils; and ' 
(ii) the price for such grade or variety of foodgrAins, 10 
edible oil seeds or edible oils prevailing or likely to prevail 
during the post-harvest period in the area to which that 
order applies. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "post-
harvest period" in relation to any area means a period of three 1$ 
months beginning from the las't day of the fortnight during 
which harvesting operations normally commence.'. 
Insertion 3. Mter section 6 of the principal Act. the following sections shall 
of new be inserted, namely:-
sections 
6A to6D. 
Confisca-
tion ot 
food-
grains, 
edible 
oilseeds 
and edible 
oill. 
Issue of 
show-
cause 
notice 
before 
confisca-
tion of 
food-
Il"ains. etc. 
1'-, 
"GA. Where any foodgrains, edible oil seeds or edible nils are 20 
seized in pursuance of an order made under section 3 in relation 
thCttet~. th~ may be produced, without any unreasonable delay, 
before the Collector of the district or the - Presidency-town,· in 
which such fOodgrains, edible oilseeds or edible oils are trelzed 
and whether or not a pl'()5«ution is instituted for the contra- 2, 
vention of such order, the Collector, if satisfied that there hos 
been a contravention of the order. ma:v order confiscation of the 
food grains, edible oilseeds or edible oils. 
6B. No order confiscating any foodgrains, edible oilseeds or 
edible oils shall be made under section 6A unless the owner of 30 
such articles or the person from whom they are seized-
(a) is given a notice in writing informing him of the 
grounds on which it is proposed to confiscate the articles: 
(b) is given an opportunity of making a representation 
in writing within such reasonable time as may be specified 3S 
. in the notice against the grounds of confiscation; and 
(c) is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
the matter: 
Provided. that the notice referred to in clause (a) or -the 
representation referred to in clause (b) may, at the request 40 
ot. the person concerned, be oral 

... 
11'" 
.- , ' 
6C. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of confiscation Appeal. 
Under section 6A may, within one month from the date of the 
communication to him of such order, appeal to the State Gov-
ernment concerned and the State Government may, after giving 
5 an opportunity to the appellant to be heard, pass such order as 
it may think fit, confirming, modifying or annulling the order 
appealed against. 
10 
15 
(2) Where an order under section 6A is mocUfied or 
annulled by the St~te Government, or where in a prosecution 
instituted for the contravention of the order in respect of which 
an order of confiscation has been made under section 6A, the 
person concerned is acquitted, and in either case it is' not possible 
for any reason to return thefoodgrains or edible oilseeds or 
edible oils seized, such person shall be paid the price therefor 
as if the foodgrains, edible oil seeds or edible oils, as the ease 
may be, had beensGlld to the Government; and such price shall 
be determined in accordance with the provisions of sub:i.sectlon 
(38) of section 3 . 
20 
-"BD:-The award of any confiscation under this Act by the 
'Collector shall not prevent the infliction of any punishment to 
which the person affected thereby is liable under this Act.". 
Award of 
confisca-
tion not to 
interfere 
,. / 
. ' 
with other 
punish-
ments. 
4. In section 7 of the principal Act, in clause (b) of sub- Amend-
section (1).- 'irient of 
. " _ " . . . section 7. 
, (a) in the opening paragraph, after the words "seem fit", 
, . the wordS ~"incluQing, in the case of an order relating to food-
grains, any pa-ckages, cov'etiIigs or receptacles in which they are 
found and any animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used 
in carrying foodgrains" shall be inserted; 
(b) in the proviso, after the words "any part of the pro-
perty", the words "or any packages, coverings or receptacles or 
any animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance" shall be 
inserted . 
5. (1) The Essential Commodities (Amendment) Ordinance, 1966, Repeal 
is hereby repealed. arid 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
. taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance 
&hall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act 
u amended. by this Act as if this Act had come into force on the 
12th day of July" 1966. 
savin,. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Consequent upon the decision to restrict the application of the 
Defence ·of India Act, 1962 (51 of 1962), and the rules made there-
under, namely, the Defence of India Rules, 1962, in areas other than 
border areas, to purpOses connected only with the defence of India, 
civil defence, etc., the provisions of that Act and those rules will not 
be available in such areas for regulating the supply and distribution 
of essential commodities. Some of the State Governments have 
issued orders under rule 125(3) (c) of the Defence of India Rules, 
1962, fixing prices for foodgrains compulsorily acquired from pro-
ducers, traders and millers by imposing a levy. & Government have 
now assumed a p~itive role in holding the price line following 
devaluation and for procurement of substantial stocks of foodgrains, 
edible oilseeds and edible oils at prices specially fixed, for release at 
reasonable prices particularly to people in areas hit by scarcity, it 
has become absolutely necessary that the Government should be 
clothed with the power to fix prices as mentioned above. The Bill, 
therefore, seeks to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 
of 1955), for conferring such power on the Government as also the 
powers specified below. 
In order to make the administration of the Essential Commodities 
Act more strict, it is proposed to provide for the forfeiture of pack-
ages, vehicles, animals, etc., involved iIi the contravention of orders 
issued under that Act by amending section 7 of that Act. Such 
power is now available under rule 125 (9) (b) of the Defence of India 
Rules, 1962 . 
. 
It is also proposed to insert new provisions in the Essential Com-
modities Act, 1955, for the confiscation, by Collectors of districts, of 
the foodgrains, edible oil seeds and edible oils which have been seized 
ior contravention of any order issued under that Act and for appeals 
from the orders of the Collectors to the State Governments. Specific 
provision is also proposed to be made for the return, if possible, of 
the articles seized or for payment of the value thereof if the person 
aggrieved by the order of confiscation succeeds in appeal or is 
acquitted by ~ourt where prosecution is launched for the same con-
travention. This follows the pattern of rule 125 (8) of the Defence 
of India Rules, 1962, but has been strengthened with a view to ensure 
the observance of the principles of natural justice. 
4 

As Parliament was not in session, an Ordinance was promulgated 
on the 12th July, 1966, amending the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955, taking powers in regard to the matters specified above. The 
present Bill seeks to replace the Essential Commodities (Amend-
ment) Ordinance, 1966. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 25th July, 1966. 
MANUBHAISHAH 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.26(7) Com-Genl/66, dated the 12th August, 
1966 from Shri Manubhai Shah, Minister of Commerce to the Secre-
tary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Essentiul Commodities (Amendment) Bill, 1966, recommends under 
article 117 (3) of the Constitution of India, the consideration of the 
Bill in the Monsoon session of the Lok Sabha, 1966. 
t 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
ror taking certain powers, similar to those contained in rule 125 
of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, under the Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955, in respect of 'foodgrains, edible oilseeds and edible oils, it is 
proposed to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. This Bill 
provides for (i) fixing the price for foodgrains, edible oilseeds-and 
edible oils acquiretl by Government under the Act, (ii) confiscation 
of these commodities where an order issued under the Act is contra· 
vened, and (ii) for forfeiture of packages, coverings or receptacles in 
which foodgrains are carried and animals, vehicles, vessels or 
other conveyances used in carrying them. 
The proposed amendments seek to confer certain statutory powers 
on the executive as well as on the courts. For implemeting the pro-
visions in respect of confiscation of commodities in relation to Union 
territories. under orders of Collectors, it may become necessary to 
employ additional staff. Even an approximate estimate of the addi. 
tional expenditure cannot be made at this stage as it is not possible 
to foresee the number of cases in which resort to confiscation may 
become necessary. , 
6 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EsSENTIAL COMMODITIES Acr, 1955. 
(10 OF 1955) 
• • • • 
7. (1) If any person c~ntravenes any order made under section 3-- Penaltiet. 
• • • • 
(b) any property in respect of which the order has been contra-
vened or such part thereof as to the Court may seem fit shall be 
forfeited to the Government: 
Provided that if the Court is of opinion that it is not necessary to 
direct forefiture in respect of the whole or, as the case may be, any 
part of the property, it may, for reasons to be recorded, refrain from 
doing so_ 
• • • • 
, .. 
1., .... ,' 
;."w \ .. , , 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 
(Slzri MamdJhai Shah, 
Minister of Commerce) 