As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
Bill No. 55 of 196. 
THE DIRECT TAXES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1964 
A 
BILL 
further to amend certain laws relating to direct ta.res. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
I .. This Act may be called the Direct Taxes (Amendment) Act, Short title. 
1964. 
S 2. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred Amend-
10 
to as the Income-tax Act), in Explanation 2 to clause (22), after the ment of 
words "date of liquidation", the following words shall be, and shall ~::n~ 
be deemed always to have been, inserted, namely: - of 1961. 
"but ,shall not, where the liquidation is consequent on the 
compulsory acquisition of its undertaking by the Government or 
a corporation owned or controlled by the Government under any 
law for the time be.ing in force, include any profits of the com-
. pany prior to three successive previous years immediately pre-
ceding the previous year in which such acquisition took place". 
IS 3. In section 10 of the Income-tQ Act, after clause (13), the fol- Amend-
lowing clause shall be inserted, namely:- mentot . section 10. 
"(l3A) any special allowance specifically granted to an 
aBSessee by his employer to meet expenditure actually incurred 
on payment of rent (by whatever name called) in respect of 
residential accommodation occupied by the assessee, to such ex-
tent (not exceeding three hundred rupees per month) as may 20 
be prescribed having regard to the area or place in which such 
accommodation is situate and other relevant considerations;". 
908 (B) LS-l. 

Amend-
mentof 
section 17. 
Amend-
mentOf 
secUone8. 
Amend-
mentOf 
section 
183. 
Amend-
mento! 
eect10n 
1M. 
2 
4. In section 17 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (3), in sub-clauae 
(ii). for the words, brackets and figures "or clause (12)". the words, 
brackets, figures and letter ",clause (12) or clause (13A)" shall be 
substituted. 
5. In section 88 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after clause (i), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
.. (ia) as donations to the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial 
Fund referred to in the Deed of Declaration of Trust adopt-
5 
ed by the National Committee at its meeting held on the 10 
17th day of August, 1964;"; 
(b) in sub-section (3), in the second proviso, for the words 
"to the National Defence Fund set up by the Central Govern-
ment", the words, brackets, figures and letter "to any fund re-
ferred to in clause (i) or clause (ia) of sub-section (I)" shan be IS 
substituted. 
6. In section 153 of tlle Income-tax Act.-
(a) in sub-section (3), in clause (H), after the figures 
"264", the following shall be inserted, namely:-
"or in an order of any court in a proceeding otherwise than 20 
by way of appeal or reference under this Act"; 
(b) in Explanation 2 and in Explanation 3, for the words 
and figures "under section 250, 254, 260, 262, 263 or 264", the 
words, brackets and figures "referred to in clause (ii) of sub-
section (3)" shall be substituted. 25 
7. In section 154 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) in clause (b), for the words and figures "in appeal 
under section 250", the words and figures "under section 250 
or section 271" sooll be substituted; 30 
(ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be in-
serted, namely:-
.. (bb) the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner may 
amend any order passed by him in any proceeding under 
sub-section (2) of section 274;"; 35 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, name'ly:-
"(1 A) Where any matter has been considered and deci-
ded in any proceeding by way of appeal or revision relating 
to an order referred to in sub-section (1). the authority 40 
passing such order may, notwithstanding anything contafn-

~ 
~ in any law for the time being in force, amend the order 
under that sub-section in relation to any matter other than 
the matter which has been so considered and decided.". 
8. In section 209 of the Income-tax Act, for clause (d), the 
5 lowing clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(~) in cases where--
fol- Amend .. 
ment of 
sectian. .. 
201. 
(i) the total income of the latest previous year [being 
a year later than the previous year referred to in clause 
(a.)] on the basis of which tax has been paid by the auessee 
10 under section 140A or a provisional assessment has been 
made under section 141, exceeds the total income referred to 
in clause (a). or 
(ii) the Income-tax Officer makes an amended order 
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 210 on the basis of 
1,5 the total income on which tax has been paid by the assessee 
under section 140A, or in respect of which a provisional 
assessment has been made under section 14l. 
20 
30 
3S 
the total income referred to in clause (a) shall be substituted,-
(1) in a case falling under sub-clause (i), by the total 
income on the basis of which tax has been paid under sec-
tion 140A or, as the case may be, the provisional assessment 
has been made under section 141, whichever relates to the 
latest previous year and where both relate to the same 
latest previous year, whichever is higher, and 
(2) in a case falling under sub-clause (ii), by the total 
income on the basis of which the amended order under sub-
section (3) of section 210 is made.". 
t. In section 210 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3),- Amend-
mentor 
(i) after the words "of the financial year,", the words, section 
figures and letter "tax is paid by the assessee under section 140A, 210. 
or" shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words "determined for the purposes of the regu-
lar assessment or the provisional assessment aforesaid", the fol-
lowing shall be substituted, namely:-
-----_ .fII 
"on which tax has been paid under section 140A or in res-
pect of which the regular assessment or the provisional 
assessment aforesaid has been made,". 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
230A. 
RMtric-
tiouon 
repnra-
tionof 
transfers 
ofimmov-
able pro-
perty in 
certain 
cases. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
236A. 
ReUefotb 
.. cel1lln 
charitable 
instltu-
tiona or 
funds in 
respect of 
certain 
dividends. 
4 
10. After section 230 of the Income-tax Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
·'230A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, where any document required to 
be registered under the provisions of clauSe (a) to clause (e) of S 
sub-section (1) of section 17 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, 18 ot 1908. 
purports to transfer, assign, limit or extinguish the right, title or 
interest of any person to or in any property (other than agri-
cultural land) valued at more thanftfty thousand rupees, no 
registering officer appointed under that Act shall register .. any )0 
such document, unless the Income-tax Officer certifies that-
(a) such person has either paid or made satisfactory 
provislOn for payment of all existing liabilities under this 
Act, the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940, the Business Profits 15 of 1940. 
Tax Act, ]947, the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, the Wealth- IS 21 of 1947. 11 of 1922. 
tax Act, 1957, the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957, and the Gift- 27 of 1957. 
tax Act, 1958, or 29 of 1957. 
18 of 1958. 
(b) the registration of the document will not prejudi-
cially affect the recovery of any existing liability under any 
of the aforesaid Acts. 
(2) The application for the certificate required under sub-
section (1) shall be made by the person referred to in that sub-
section and shall be in such form and shall contain such parti-
culars as may be prescribed.". 
11. In Chapter XVIII of the Income-tax Act, after section 236, 2S 
the following sectlOn shan be, and shall be deemed to have been, 
inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1964, namely:-
"236A. (1) In the case of an institution or fund referred to 
in clause (ui) of sub-section (2) of section 104, credit shall be 
given to the institution or fund against the tax. if any, payable 30 
by it, of a sum calculated in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (2), in respect of its income from dividends (other 
than dividends on preference shares) declared or distributed 
during the previous year relevant to any assessment year be· 
ginning on or after the 1st day of April, 1964. by such a company 35 
as is referred to in the said clause, and where the amount of 
_. -credit so calculated excee~ the tax, if any, payable by the said 
institution cr fund, the excess shall be refunded. 

S 
(2) The amount to be given as credit under'sub-o&ection (1) 
shall be a sum which bears to the amount by which the -rebate 
of super-tax admissible to the company under the provisions of 
the annual Finance Act is, under the provisions of the said Act, 
S reduced with reference to any amount of dividends declared or 
distributed by it during the previous year relevant to any assess-
ment year beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 1964, the 
same proportion as the amount of the dividends (other than 
-dividends on preference shares) received by the institution or 
10 fund from the company bears to the total amount of dividends 
(other than dividends on preference shares) declared or distribu-
ted by the company during the said previous year.". 
IS 
20 
35 
12. In section 253 of the Income-tax Act.-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
Amend-
mento! 
section 
(i) in clause (a), after the word and figures "section 2153. 
131,", the word and figures "section 154," shall be inserted; 
(ii) in clause (b), after the words "Inspectini Assist-
ant Commissioner under", the words and figures "section 
154 or" shall be inserted; 
(iii) in clause (c), the following shall be inserted at 
the end, namely:-
"or under section 285A or an order passed by him under 
section 154 amending his order under fM!Ction 263"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words "Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner under", the words and ftgures"section 154 or': 
shall be inserted. 
13. In section 280B of the Income-tax Act, in clause (1),- Amend-
(i) in sub-clause (b) (iv) , the word "and" occurring at ::!: 
the end shall be omitted; 280B. 
(ii) in sub-clause (b) (v), the word "and" shall be inser-
ted at the end; and 
(iii) after sub-clause (b) (v), the following sub-clauae shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(vi) any annuity due, or commuted value of any 
annuity paid, under the provisions of section 280D.". 
14. In section 280E of the Income-tax Act,- Amend-
. mentof (i) in sub-clause (\i) of clause (a), after the words, brae- section 
kets, letter and figure "or sub-clause (b) (v) ", the words, brae- 280E. 
kets, letter and figures "or sub-clause (b) (vi)" shall be inserted; 

Amend-
mentof 
Ieclion 
280F. 
Substitu-
tion of 
neW sec-
tionfor 
lNIdion 
~. 
6 
(ii) 10r clause (c), the following clause shall be substitu~ 
ted, namely:-
"(c) in cases where-
(i) the total inco~e of the latest previous year 
[being a year later than the previous year referred to S 
in clause (a)] on the basis of which tax has been paid 
by the depositor under section 140A, or a provisional 
assessment has been made under section 141, exceeds 
the total income referred to in clause (4), or 
(ii) the Income-tax Oftlcer makes an amended ar- 10 
der referred to in sub-section (3) of section 280F on the 
. basis of the total income on which tax has been paid 
by the depositor under section 140A, or in respect of 
which a provisional assessment has been made under 
. section 141, IS 
the total incomE' referred to in clause (4) shall be substi-
tuted,-
. (1) in a case falling under sub-clause (i), by the 
total income on the basis of which tax has been paid 
under section 140A or, as the case may be, the provi- 20 
sional assessment has been made under section 141, 
whichever relates to the latest previous year and where 
both relate to th~ same latest previous year, whichever 
is higher, and 
(2) in a case falling under sub-clause (ii), by the 25 
total income on the basis of which the amended order 
under sub-section (3) of section 280F is made.". 
15. In section 280F of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (3) ,-
. (i) after the words "of the financial year,", the words, 
figures and letter "tax is paid by the depositor under section 30 
140A, or" shall be inserted; 
(it) for the words "determined under the regular a&Be8S-
ment or the provisional assessment aforesaid", the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"on which tax has been paid under section 140A or in 35 
respect of which the regular assessment or the provi-
sional assessment aforesaid has been made,". 
16. For section 280Q of the Inco:co.e-tax Act, the following section 
shall be, and shall be deemed to have been, substituted, with effect 
from the first day of April, 1964, namely:- 40 

7 
"28OQ. The amount of any deposit to be made under this Roundinl 
Chapter shall be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ten oft. 
rupees and where such amount contains a part of ten rupees, 
then, if such part js five rupees or more, it shall be increased to 
5 ten rupees and jf such part is less than five rupees, it shall be 
ignored:' 
Provided that where the amount so computed is required 
under any provision of this Chapter to be deposited in two or 
more equal instalments and the amount of each instalment cal-
10 culated for this purpose is not a multiple of ten rupees, the 
amount of each such instalment, other than the last instalment, 
shall be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ten rupees and 
the balance shall be the amount of the last instalment .... 
17. In section 280U of the Income-tax Act, for the words tttwenty_ Amend-
15 five per cent. of his adjusted total income", the words "twenty-five ::tot 
per cent. of the income from such profession included in his total 2BOU~ 
income" shall be, and shall be deemed to have been, substituted, 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1964: 
18. After section 285 of the Income-tax Act, the following section Insertion 
20 shall be inserted, namely: _ ot new 
section 
285A. 
"28SA. (1) Where any person (hereinafter referred to as Informa-
the contractor) enters into a contract for the construction of a tion by 
b 'ldi f h I f d i' t' contrac-Ul ng or, or t e supp y 0 goo s or serv ces 10 connec Ion tors in 
therewith to, any other person, the value of which exceeds certain 
25 fifty thousand rupees, he shall, within one month of the making cases. 
of the contract, furnish to the Income-tax Officer having juris-
diction t9 assess the contractor such particulars relating to the 
contract and in such form as may be prescribed. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law 
~ 0 for the time being in force, where any contractor contravenes 
the provisions of sub-section (1), the Commissioner may impose 
upon him such fine not exceeding fifty rupees as he thinks fit 
for every day during which the contravention continues, so, 
however, that the amount of fine so imposed shall not, in the 
3S aggregate, exceed twenty-five per cent. of the value of the con-
tract. :. 
(3) The Commissioner shall, on making an order under this 
section imposing a fine. forthwith send a copy of the same to 
the Income-tax Officer.". 

Amend~ 
mentof 
Act 34 of 
1953. 
Relief from 
estate duty 
where tax 
has been 
paid on 
capit'll 
gains. 
Payment 
of duty by 
transfer of 
property. 
8 
19. In the Estate Duty Act, 1953-
(a) in Part VI, after section SOA, the following section shall 
be, and shall be deemed to have been, inserted with effect from 
the 1st day of April, 1964, namely:-
"SOB. Where any property on which estate tiut.y is 5 
leviable under this. Act is transferred within a period of two 
years following the death of the deceased and. tax under 
the Incom~tax Act, 1961 has been paid in respect of the 43 of 1981. 
capital' gains arising from such transfer, the estate duty 
payable shall be reduced by a sum which bears to the total 10 
amount of tax so paid the same proportion as the amount 
paid towards estate duty out of the pror.P.eds of the transfer 
bears to the gross proceeds of such transfer: 
Provided that the Board may, on an application of the 
accountable person, extend the period of two years aforesaid I~ 
if it is sat.isfted that the accountable t)P.rson had sufficient 
cause for not eifectiQg the transfer of the property within 
that period.";' 
Ib) for section 52, the following section Rhall be substitu-
ted, namely: - 20 
"52. (J) The Central Government may, on an appliea-
doe ef. the penoa, aeeountable for estate duty, accept in satis-
faoti.oD. of the whole or ally part of suell duty any property 
....iag OD the death of the deceased at such price as may be 
agNed upon ltetweee the Ceutral Government and that 2S 
penoIl, aa4. tlaeNIUpoD such .... on shall dellver poesession of 
tIae property to such authority as may be specified by that 
Govemme.t in this behalf. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, on the date the possession 30 
of the property is delivered to the authority under su~ 
section (1)-
(i) the property shall vest in the Central Govern-
men.t: and 
(ii) the Central Government shall, where necessary, 3' 
intimate the registering authority concerned according-
ly: 
and the author-tty shall administer the nroperty in such man-
ner as the Central Government may direct. 

Hot 1908, IQ 
9 
(3) Where the price referred to ,in sub-section (1) 
exceeds Hie aggregate of the amounts due under this Act 
in respect of the estate of the deceased, the excess shall be 
applied in the following order to the payment of any tax. 
penalty, interest or other amount-
(i) which the legal representative of the deceased is 
liable to pay in respect of the income, expenditure 01 
wealth of, or gift made by, the deceased under any of 
the Acts referred to in clause (c) of section 2 of the 
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963; 
(ii) which the executor is liable to pay under any 
of the Acts 'aforesaid in respect of the estate of the de-
ceased for the period of the administration of the estate; 
(iii) which the person beneficially entitled to the 
property in question is liable to pay under any of those 
Acts; 
and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the accountable 
person.". 
20. In the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957, in section 5, in the proviso 
20 to clause (j), after the words "as the case may be, or", the words, 
brackets and figures "except where such gift, donation or settlement 
is not chargeable to gift-tax under sub-section (1) of section 5 of 
. that' 'Act"; shall be, arid shall be deemed to have been, inserted 'with 
. Offect !tOIn th.dlrst 'day of AprU,l964. 
908 (B) LS-2. 
Amend· 
mentot 
Act 29 of 
1957 • 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961, the 
Estate Duty Act, 1953 and the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957 with a view 
to removing unintended hardship and providing relief to assessee! 
in certain cases. Opportunity is also being taken to make some other 
amendments which have been found necessary in the light of ex-
perience gained in the operation of these Acts. The notes on clausee 
explain the various provisions of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
Th.e 29th August. 1964. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION uNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No.1 (321) 64-TPL, dated the 3rd September, 1964 
from Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the Secre-
tary, Lok Sabha]. 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Direct Taxes (Amel'1d.ment) Bill, 1964 has recommend~ 
under Articles 117(1) and 274(1) of the Constitution' the irltrO-:-
duction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha, and under article 117 (3) of the 
Constitution, its consideration by the Lok Sabha. 
10 

Notes 0ftI claU8~8 
Clause 2 seeks to amend retrospectively, Explanation 2 to clause 
(22) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The effect of this 
amendment will be that where a company goes into liquidation con-
sequent on the compulsory acquisition of its undertaking by Gov-
ernment or any corporation owned or controlled by Government 
under any law for the time being in: force, the distribution made by 
the liquidator of the company to its shareholders will not be charge-
able to tax as 'dividend' to the extent such distribution is attribu-
table to the accumulated profits of the company relating to any 
period prior to the three successive previous years immediately pre-
ceding the previous year in which the undertaking of the company 
is acquired. .. , ..:.. ..... u... j 
Clause 3 seeks to insert a new sub-clause (13A) in" section 10 of 
the Income-tax Act. It provides for the exclusion from the total 
income of an assessee of any special allowance speCifically granted 
to him by his employer to meet expenditure incurred on payment 
of "rent for the residential accommodation occupied by the assessee 
to such extent (not exceeding three hundred rupees per mensem) 
as may be prescribed by the Central Board of Direct Taxes in the 
Rules framed under the Income-tax Act. It has also been provi-
ded that the limit up to which such allowance may be excluded 
from the total income of an assessee will be prescribed in the Rules 
haVing regard to the area or place in which the residential accommo-
dation is situate and other relevant considerations. 
Clause 4 seeks to amend sub-clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of 
section 17 of the Income-tax Act. The effect of this amendment 
will be that the payment referred to in clause (13A), sought to be 
inserted in section 10 of the Income-tax Act by clause 3 of this Bill, 
wHl not be treated as "profits in lieu of salary". 
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 88 of the Income-tax Act. The 
effect of this amendment will be that the entire amount paid by 
an assessee during the previous year as donation to the Jawaharlal 
Nehru Memorial Fund referred to in the Deed of Declaration of Trust 
adopted by the National Committee on 17th August, 1964 will qualify 
for rebate of Income-tax under section 88 of the Income-tax Act, 
without application of the monetary limit laid down in sub-section (3) 
II 

u 
bf section 88 of the Income-tax Act (viz., 10 per cent of the total 
income of the assessee or two hundred thousand rupees, whichever 
is less). It has been laid down i~ this behalf that donations to the 
aforesaid fund will not be taken iDto accoUDt m calculating the above-
mentioned monetary limit. 
Clause 6 seeks to amend clause (ll) of sub-section (3) of section 
153 :of the Income-tax Act. It provides that the period of limitation 
for makina an order of assessment (as laid down in sub.,section. (1) 
of the aforesaid section) will not apply in a case where an assess-
ment, re-assessment or recomputation is made in conseql,Ience of, 
or to give effect to any finding or direction contained in an order 
of any court other than an order on an appeal or reference under the 
Income-tax Act. The amendment proposed in Expl8llations 2 and 3 
is of a consequential nature. 
Clause 7 seeks to amend section 154 of the Income-tax Act. 
Under this clause, on Appellate Assistant Commissioner and an Ins-
pecting Assistant Commissioner will be enabled to rectify any mis-
take apparent from the record in an order of imposition of penalty 
passed by them. Further, the Income-tax Officer, the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner, the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner and 
the Commissioner of Income-tax will be enabled to rectify any mis-
take in an order passed by them even where such order has been 
considered and decided in any proceeding by way of appeal or revi-
Sion, except where the mistake relates to matters which have been so 
considered and decided. 
Clause 8 seeks to substitute cleuse (d) of section 209 of the In-
come-tax Act by a new clause. The effect of this amendment will 
be that in making the first order for payment of advance tax for 
a financial yror, the Income-tax Officer will be enabled to compute 
such demand with reference to the total income of. the latelt Pf&o 
vious year on the basis of which the assessee has paid tax on ,self· 
assessment under section 140A or has beeD. assessed: provisionally 
under section 141 of the Income-tax Act, if such total. income ret-
lates to a year later than the latest year for which he has been 
assessed on regular assessment and is higher than the total income 
determined on such regular assessment. Where s\li:h ,self"aasessJIlent 
and provisional assessment relate to the same year, the. demand of 
advance tax will be computed on the basis of the total income 
which is the higher of the twoJ 
It has also been provided that if after making the first order fl)f 
payment of advance tax for a financml year, the Income-tax Officer 
seeks to revise the demand with reference to the total income of 

13 
a later year o.n the basis of which tax has been paid by the assessee 
on self-assessment, the revised demand will be computed on the basis 
of such total income. 
Clause 9 seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 210 of the 
Income-tax Act. Under this provision, the Income-tax Officer will 
be enabled to revise the original demand of advance tax made by 
him with reference to the total income on the basis of which tax 
has been paid by the assessee on self-assessment under section 140A 
of the Income-tax Act, if such total income relates to a previous 
year later than that on the basis of which the original demand was 
made. I I 
Clause 10 seeks to insert a new section 230A in the Income-tax 
Act. This prohibits a registering authority appointed under the 
Indian Registration Act, 1908 from registering any document pur-
porting to transfer, assign, limit or eX!tinguish the right, title or in-
terest of any person to or in any property (other than agricultural 
land) valued at more than fifty thousand rupees, unless the persoR 
concerned produces before such authority a mx clearance certifi-
cate from the Income-tax Officer in respect of his liability under 
the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940, the Busi-
ness Profits Tax Act, 1947, the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, the 
Wealth Tax Act, 1957, the Expenditure Tax Act, 1957 and the Gift 
Tax Act,. 1958. This provision applies to documents which are requir-
ed to be registered under the provisions of clause (a) to clause (e) of 
sub-section (1) of section 17 of the Indian. Registration Act, 1908. 
Clause 11 seeks to insert a new section 236A in Chapter XVIII 
of the Income-mx Act. Under this provision, an institution or 
fund referred to in clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of section 104 of 
the Income-tax Act, being a charitable institution or fund which 
holds shares in a company referred to in that clause, and receives a 
dividend on equity shares from such a company. will be entitled to a 
credit in its assessment for a proportionate amount of the super-tax 
payable by the company under the annual Finance Act in respect of 
the dividend on equity capital decJared or distributed by it during 
the· previous year for the assessment year 1964-65 or any Jater year. 
This provision will have effect from 1st April 1964. 
Clause 12 seeks to amend section 253 of the Income-tax Act. It 
en6bles aSS'eiSees to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
against an order of rectification of a mistake passed by the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner, the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner and 
the Commissioner of Income-tax, and also against an order passed 

14 
by the Commissioner of Income-tax imposing a fine under the new 
section 285A, which is sought to be inserted in the Income-tax Act 
by clause 18 of the Bill. 
It also enables the Commission.er of Income-tax to direct the 
Income-tax Officer to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
against an order passed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 
rectifying a mistake in his order. 
Clouse 13 seeks to amend section 280B of the Income-tax Act. 
It provides that the amount of any annuity due or the commuted 
value of any annuity paid under the provisions of section 280D of 
the Income-tax Act (which is chargeable to tax as income) will be 
excluded from the "adjusted total income" of an assessee for the 
purpose of computing the amount of annuity deposit required to 
be made by him under the provisions of Chapter XXIIA of the said 
Act. I 
Clause 14 seeks to ffi'lke two amendments to section 280E of the 
Income-tax Act relating to computations of advance annuity 
deposit~ 
Under one of the amendments, the amount of annuity due or the 
commuted value of any annuity paid under the provisions of sec-
tion 280D of the Income-tax Act will be excluded from the total in-
come of the assessee on the baSis of which the amount of advance 
annuity deposit required to be made by the assessee is calculated. 
The next amendment seeks to bring the provisions relating to the 
compu1&tion of advance annuity deposit in line with the provisions 
in clause (d) of section 209 of the Income-tax Act relating to the 
computation of advance tax (as sought to be amended by clause 8 
of the Bill). 
Clause 15 seeks to amend the provisions in sub-section (3) of 
section 280F of the Income-tax Act relating to amendment by the 
Income-tax Officer of the original order issued by him in regard to 
demand of advance annuity deposit. By this amendment, the pro-
visions of the aforesaid sub-section will be brought in line with the 
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 210 of the Income-tax Act 
(as sought to be amended by clause 9 of the Bill) relating to the 
amendment of the original order of demand of advance tax. 
Clau.se 16 seeks to amend section 280Q of the Income-tax Act 
relating to the !fOunding off of the amount of annuity depgpits. The 
effect of the amendment will be that the amount of any annuity 
deposit to 'be made under Chapter XXIIA will be rounded off to the 
nearest multiple of Rs. 10/- instead of Rs. 5/- as under the existing 
provision. I i I 

15 
Instalments of annuity deposit will also be rounded off in a 
similar manner. I 
This amendment will hl:lve effect from the 1st April, 1964. 
Clause 17 seeks to amend section 280U of the Income-tax Act. 
The effect of this amendment will be that in the case of authors. 
playwrights, artists, musicians or actors, who under the existin. 
provisions of the aforesaid section Ilre permitted, at their option, 
to make an addit.ional annuity deposit up to 25% of the amount of 
their "adjusted total income", such additional annuity deposit will 
be allowed to be mJde only in respect of the income derived from 
carrying on a profession as an author, playwright, artist, Ill\,lsician 
, or actor, and not in respect of income from any other source, 
This amendment will have effect from 1st April, 1964. 
Clause 18 seeks to insert a new section 285A in the Income-tax 
Act. Under tl:tis provision, persons securing contracts of a value 
exceeding Rs. 50,000 for the construction of a building or the sup-. 
ply of ~oods or services in connection therewith, will be required 
to furnish relevant information relating to such contracts to the 
Income-tax Officer concerned within one month of making the 
contract, failing which they will be liable to imposition of a ftne by 
the Commissioner of Income-tax not exceeding Rs. 50/- for each 
day of default, subject to a further limit of 25% of the value of the 
contract. The particulars to be furnished by such persons wlll be 
prescribed by the Central Board of Direct 'I\.lxes in the rules framed 
under the Income-tax Act. I I 
Clause 19 seeks to amend the Estate Duty Act, 1953. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a new section 50B in Part VI of 
the Estate Duty Act. The effect of this amendment will be that 
where the accoontJ.lble person transfers any property comprised in 
the estate of the deceased and utilises the proceeds for payment of 
the estate duty, a deduction will be allowed from the estate duty 
of a proportionate amount of the tax which becomes chargeolble 
under the Income-tax Act on the capital gains arising from the 
transfer of the property. 
This amendment will have effect from 1st April, 1964. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to substitute the provisions of section 52 
of the Esi'3te Duty Act by a new provision, enabling the Central 
Government 1:1 accept at an agreed price, the assets comprised in sn 
estate passing on the death of the deceased towards payment of the 
estate duty, if the accountable person so off~rs. Provision is also 
, . ',', ~',~, 

16 
made that any balance of the price left after satisfying the amounts 
due under the Estate Duty Act will be adjusted against amounts due 
under the other direct taxes Acts from the deceased, his estate and 
the accountable person beneficially entitled to the ~t in question 
in that order. 
Clause 20 seeks to amend the proviso to clause (j) of section 5 
of the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957. The effect of this amendment 
will be that an assessee will be exempt from expenditure-tax on 
, the expenditure incurred by him on making a gift which is speci-
fically exempt from gift-tax under sub-section (1) of section 5 of 
the Gift-tax Act, 1958. ' 
Thi~ amendment will have effec~ frolll 1st April, 1964. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM· 
Under the new provision sought to be introduced in the Estate 
Duty Act, 1953 by sub-clause (b) of clause 19 of the Bill, the 
Central Government will appoint an authority to take over and ad-
minister the assets comprised in an estate passing on the death of the 
deceased which are offered by the accountable persons to the Gov-
ernment towards the payment of estate duty. In the initial stages 
it is the intention to utilise the existing machinery of Government for 
this purpose and to add to it only by stages as the work expands. 
The additional expenditure on this account during the current ftnan-
cial year is not likely to exceed Rs. 20.000: 
17 
eoe(B)UJ-I. 

MEMORANDUM MlGARDBlG DI'.LEGA'lr.IlD LEGISLATION 
Clauses 3, to aad 18 empower the Central ·Boarcl ,af JMeat a'axes 
to ;maR rules . inreprd to certain matters. Theae matters Jnclude 
the _*t .towhich any allowance in the '~Ulle ·of ,a h.UI&IHIIt 
allowaDee lDay be excluded (subject to a ceiling limit of ntptte& ,thNe 
hundr«l per mooth) from the total income (tf: aD ~yeeJ thefOl'Dl 
ift which ,an application for the tax clearance eertlicatemay De made 
ey a pe!'I!JOnl8ltldftg to regi.&ter certain docwneDts !!elating to uanaier 
(){ ~inproperties M18 the form in which a cODtActorwiU·.»e r. 
quiMd te iW"nietl pariieulars reaanijng housHiluilding contracts ·af 
over rupees fifty thousand. 
The matters in respect of whicb such rules may be made are mat-
ters of procedure or administrative detail. The delegation of legisla-
tive power is thus of a normal character. 
18 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTs FROM THE INCOM£.TAX AC'r, llWli 
... ... ... • 
z. In this Act, unless the context otherwistf requltes,-
..... ..,........ 
... ... ... ... ... 
(22) 'Idividend" include&-
(a) any distribution by a company of' accumulated 
prafit&, whether· capitallaed.·or lH).t,if web distribution entails 
the release- by the company to its sliKehQlQer~ of all or any 
part of. tbe assets of the· company; . 
(b) any distribution to its shareholders by a company 
of debentures, debenture-stock, or deposit certificates in any 
fcmu,.wa.tD.rwith or. witb!IIK interest, ami· my distribution 
tit. its p1'8feNDOe' ~rI"of: shares' by way' of b&nus, 
to the estent: to whlch. the company peaseeses aceunm]ated 
profits, whether- capitaUaed) or net; 
(c)' anydtstrtbution made to the shateholden of a com-
puny- on' its Uquichttem, to' the extent' to . Which the dlsttibu-
tiMi is attributable to the accumulated proftts of' the com-
pany il'Mlediately before- itIJ liquidation; whether capitalised 
or not; 
(d) any distribution to its shareholders by a company on 
the reduction of its capital, to the extent to whieh the com-
pany possesses accumulated profits which arose after the end 
of the previous year ending next before the 1st day of April, 
1933, whether sum; accumulMed proftts' have -been capita-
lit;ed or not; 
(e) an)" payment by a company, not bema· a company 
in which the public are substantially- inter .. ted, of any sum 
(whether .I'repre.entlni.a part of th.~of tAe«mpany 
or otherwise) by way of advance or lou to .. ehveholder, 
bt~ing a person who has a substantial interest in the com~ 
pany, or any payment by any such company on behalf, or 
19 
Defini-
tions . 

"Salary", 
''perqui-
site" and 
"profttsin 
lieu of 
salary" 
deftned 
for the individual benefit, of any such sharehoider. to the 
extent to which the company in either cue poll"'. 
accumulated profits; 
but "dividend" does not includ.-
(i) a distribution made in accordance with sub-clause 
(c) or sub~lause (<1) in respect of any share Jasued for full 
cash consideration, where the holder of the share is not 
entitled in the event of liquidation to participate in the 
surplus assets; .. . ~ ........... . 
(ii) any advance or loan made to a shareholder by a 
company in the ordinary course of ita ,business, where the 
lending of money is a substantial part of the business of the 
company; 
(iii) any dividend paid by a company which is set oft 
by the company against the whole or any part of any sum 
previously paid by it and treated as a dividend wnhin the 
meaning of sub~lause (e), to the extent. to which it is 10 
set off. 
Ezplanation 1.~The expression "accumulated proftta", wher-
ever it occurs in this clause, shall not include capital gains arising 
before the 1st day of April, 190t6, or after the 31st day of March, 
1948, and before the 1st day of April, 1956. 
Explanation Z.-The expression "accumulated profits" in sub-
clauses (a), (b), (d) and (e), shall include all profit. of the 
company up to the date of distribution or payment referred to in 
those sub-clauses, and in sub-clause (c) shall include all profits 
of the company up to the date of liquidation; 
• • • • • 
1.7. For the purposes of sections 15 and 16 and of this section,-
• • • • • 
. (3) "profits in lieu of salary" includes-
• • • • • 
(ii) any payment [other than any payment referred to 
in· clauae (10), claUJe (11) or clause (12) of seot1on 10], due 
to or received by an auesaee from an employer or a former 
employer or from a provident or other fund (not being an 
approved sUperannuation fund), to the extent to which it 
doeal not consist of contributions by the assessee OIl' 1ntereM 
on such contributions. 
• • • • • 

as. (i) • • • • • Donations 
for chari-
(3) No deduction shall be made under sub-section (1) in relipect table pur-
of any sums paid in excess of seven and a half per cent. ot the poses, etc. 
assessee's total income as reduced by any portion thereot on which 
income-tax is not payable under any provlSion of this act and by 
any amount in respect of which a deduction of income-tax have 
been granted under any other provision of this Chapter, or one 
hundred and fifty thousand rupees, whichever is less: 
Provided that in respect of any such sums paid during any pre-
vious year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st 
day of April, 1963 or any subsequent aasessment year, this sulMection 
shall have effect as if for the words 'seven and a half per cent.' and 
the words 'one hundred and fifty thousand rupees', the words 'ten 
per cent.' and 'two hundred thousand rupees' baa been, respectively, 
substituted: 
Provided further that where any sum paid during the previ0us 
year includes any donation to the National Defence Fund set up by 
the Central Government the amount covered by that donation shall 
be excluded in calcUlating the limits specified in this sub-section . 
• • • • • 
153. (1) • • • • • Time 
limit for 
comple-
tionol 
.. eu-
menta and 
reaaeas-
(3) The prOvisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not apply menta. 
to the following classes of assessments, reassessments and recompu-
tations which may be completed at any time-
-.. 
(i) where a fresh assessment is made under section 146; 
(ii) where the assessment, reassessment or ' recomputation 
is made on the assessee or any person in consequence of or to 
give effect to any finding or direction contained in an order 
under section 250, 254, 260, 262, 263 or 264; 
• • • • ., 
Ezp14na:tion 2.-Where, by an order under aection 250, 254, 200, 
'282, 263 or 264, any inoome is excluded from the total income of the 
bSeSsee for an assessment year, then, an assessment of such income 
fot another assessment year shall, for the purposes of aection 160 and 
this section, be deemed to be one made in consequence of ortogiye 
effect to any finding or direction contained in the 8Ilid ord ... 

Rectifica_ 
tion of 
mistake. 
Computa-
tion of 
advance 
tax. 
Order by 
Ineome-
tuOfBcer. 
as 
f:rplanation 3.-Where, by an order under section 250, 2M. 260, 
262, 263 or 264, any income is excluded from the total income of one 
person and held' to be the income of' another person, then, an assess-
ment of sueh income on such other person shall, for the purpeses of 
section 150 and this section, be deemed to be one made in consequence 
of or to give effect to any finding or direction contained in the said 
order, provided such other person was given an opportumty of/being 
heard· before- the Mid order' W81I passed. 
154. (1) With os view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the 
reeo1"1-; 
(a) the Income-tax Officer may amend anl order ol. aue.u-
ment or of refund or any other order paased by him; 
(b) the Appellate A.istant C~ may amend any 
ordeJ' pasaed by him in,appeal. under, sectklll 2&0; 
• • • • • 
zot. The amount of advance tax payab1e by an ass~ in the 
financial year shall be computed as follows:-
III 
• • • 
(d) in cases where the Income-tax Officer makes an 
amended order referred to in sub-section (3) of section W on 
the basis of a provisional assessment, the total income on the 
basis of which the relevant provisional assessment had been 
made shall be substituted for the total income referred t.o. in 
clause «(1). 
Expla.tJ4twn.-If the assessee is a partner of a registered firm and 
•. aBs.tanen~ of the ftan l¥a8 beeIa. OOIIIpleted far a· previous year 
l~ ~ll thEl _\aU pnytoUJ yeu. for- which the ....... It ....... 
ment has been complet~ .bis ' share . in. the inCUlft·oI the·Arm aIiaU, 
for the purposes of clauses «(1) and (b), be included in his total in-
come Oft the- basis of the said assessment of the firm. 
Z1I. (1) • • • • • .. 
(3) li, after the making of en order by the Income-;tax OfBcer 
under this section and before the IMh day of February ot the 
ftfteDetIIlyear; a regullr aueument or a provlaioDtl' ..... ",.t 
1IIlder' 1ICtter1' 141 at the UII!!IIee (or of the r8a1ttered' firm. of which 
he ii a partn8'l') is made in respect· of a previOus year later than that 
Mle!I'ed'to tIt, the ord*r' rIf the Income-tax Oftlcer, the Incotne-tu 
oacer may make an amended . order requirina the asaeuee tQ pay in 

23 
one instalment on the specified date, or in equ81 instalments on· the 
specified dates, if more than one, faDing after the date 01 the 
amended oI'der, the advance tax .computed on the basis of the total 
income determined for the purposes of the regular assessment or 
the provisional assessment aforesaid as reduced by the amount, if 
any, paid in accordance with the original order. 
• • • • • 
253. (l) Any apeuee aggrieved hy any of the following orders Appeals 
may appeal to the AppeUate Tribunal agamst such order- =llate 
(a) an order passed by an Appellate Assistant Commis-
sioner under sub..section (2) of section 131, section 250 or sec-
tion 271.; or 
(b) en order paned by an Inspecting Aaaistant Comml .. 
sioner under 'lub-secti6D (2) ofsec!tion 2'74; or 
(c) ·an order passed by a Oommissioner unaer section 283 . 
.(2) The Commissioner may. if he objects to any or.der paaaed 
by an Appellate Assistant Commissioner under aectioD ,250, dil'ect 
the Income-tax Officer to appeal to the Appellate Trihunal against 
the order. . 
• • • • • 
Tribunal. 
18OE. The amount of advance deposit to be made by a depositor Computa-
in the financial year shall be computed as follows: - tion of 
a<ivance 
(a.) (i) his total income for the latest previous yar tn deposit. 
respect of which he has been asseSledo, lNY ofregulrar fiI880 
ment shall first be ascertained; 
(ii) the amount of income of the nature referred to jn sub-
d ... (b) (i) or 1Mb-daua tv) (tii)t>rIUN*-e"(b) (tiIJ or 
SLtb-dauee (b) (w. or lub-clatlBe (b)(.,) el clause (l) of aection 
88OB, if ny, iDduded tn 8IilCb ineome shaD be 4educted there-
from, and 0IIl the balaRce annuity ~it 'slall De allculilted at 
the ra .. in foree in the ftnenc:ial year; 
• • • • . . 
(c) in cases where the Income-tax Ofticer makes an amend-
ed order referred to in sub-section (3) of section 280F on the 
basis of a provisional assessment, the total income on the basis 
of which the relevant provisional assessment had been made 

Order by 
Income_ 
tax Oftlcer. 
Roundinl 
alt. 
Special 
provisions 
for 
authors, 
plary-
wrilhts, 
. artist&, 
musicians 
and. 
actors. 
2,4 
shall be substituted for the total income referred to in. clause 
(4») . 1 I I 
• • • • • 
280F. (1) • • • • • 
(o?) If, after the making of an order by the Income-tax Officer 
under this section Qlld before the 15th day of February of the finan-
cial year, a regular assessment or a provisional assessment under 
section 141 of the depositor (or of the registered firm of which he 
is a partner) is made in respect of a previous year later then that 
referred to in the order of the Income-tax Officer, the Income-tax 
Officer may make an amended order requiring such depositor to 
make in one instalment on the specified date, or in equal instalments 
on the specified dates, if more than one, falling after the date of the 
amended order, the advance deposit computed on the basis of the 
adjusted total income calculated with reference to the total income 
determined under the regular assessment or the provisional assess-
ment aforesaid as reduced by the deposit, if any, made in accordance 
with the original order. I ! 
• • • • • 
Z8OQ. The amount of any deposit to be made under this Chap-
ter shall be rounded off to the nearest multiple of five rupees and 
where such amount contains a part of five rupees, then, if such 
part is two rupees and fifty naye paise or more, it shall be increas-
ed to five rupees and if such part is less than two rupees and fifty 
naye paise, it shall be ignored. 
• • • • • 
Z88U. Any individual, being an author, playwright, artist, musi-
cian or actor, may, in addition to the amount of annuity deposit 
required to be made by him in respect of any assessment year, make 
a further deposit of an amount not exceeding twenty,.;ftve per cent. 
of his adjusted total income asseesable for that assenment year, 
and if he does so, the further deposit made by him, shall, for the 
purposes of this Chapter, be included in the annuity deposit requir-
ed to be made by him. I I 
• • • • • 

25 
ExTRACT FROM THE ESTATE DUTY ACT, 1953 
(34 01' 1963)1 
• • • • • 
52. The Board may prescribe that Government securities shall Payment 
be accepted in payment of estate duty on such terms as it thinks fit. of duty may ,be 
ExTRCAT FROM THE EXPENDITURE-TAX ACT, 1957 
(29 OF 1957) 
• • • • • 
accepted. 
in pres-
en'bed. 
Govern-
ment secu-
rities. 
5. No expenditure-tax shall be payable under this Act in res- Exemp-
peet of any such expenditure illS iB 1teferred to in the following tion from 
clauses, and Illlch -expenditure shall not be included in the taxable expendi-
expenditure of an asSeSsee- r ture-tax 
in certain 
• • • • • c ... 
(j) any expenditure incurred by the assessee by way of, 
or in respect of, any gift, donation or settlement on trust or 
otherwise for the benefit of any other person: 
Provided thot the assessee is either chargea-ble to gift-tax 
under the Gift-tax Act, 1958 (18 of 1958),· in respect of such 
gift, donation or settlement, as the case may be, or has deposit-
ed to the credit of the Central Government before the comple-
tion of his assessment for the relevant assessment year under 
this Act, a sum of four per cent. of the moneys or the value 
of the property comprised in such gift or donation or settle-
ment, as the case may be, by way of payment of expenditure-
tax for the relevant assessment year, such payment being in 
addition to the amount of expenditure-tax with which he is 
otherwise chargeable under the provisions of this Act. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend certain laws relating to direct taxes. 
(Shri T. T. KriJlmamacltari, 
Minister of Finance.) 