,I 
,I 
'. 
~. 
to 
'IRE :;'TDUSmIAL RE01NS'JRU(l?ION BANK OFIND~ BILL, 19r.4 
(To bel ~.,3 intro duced in 10 k Sabha) 
1. pa ge (ii), 3.gnin;:;t clause 32,-
!gj: ,"Corpora. tion" ~ ''Preparation'' 
2. Page (11), against'"clause 41,-
m "transfer" ~ "primary or" 
3. Page (iii), :a.gain~.,clause 64,-
0JII1.1 "Under this Act" 
4. Page 3, line 27,-
ru '~regulations" ~ "regulation" 
5. page 4, lin,e 19,-
!su: ''Reconstructions'' ~ ''Reconstruction'' 
6. Page 4, line 20,-
after "section 5," insert "of" 
7. Pa~ It, line 26,-
!o.l:. "ca.pitas" ~ "capital" 
8. P9.ge ~, lh 
aft el' "0 r " in s er t "in" 
9. page~, lil'e 38,-
!.c.l: "ovserves" ~ "observes" 
10. Page, 7, line 4,-
after "provident" wsert "or" 
11 • Pa ge 7, liDe 12, -
.tb+. "0 r th e!' ...r ea "! "0 f th e " 
12. Page 7, line 31,-
after "Wlere" om1i "a" 
13. page 7, l1ne 45,-
before ''amount " insert "the" 

-.... -
14. Page ;,-
against clause 11, insert the marginal headlllg -
HDisqualificat10ns of membership of the 
Board." 
15. page 9, line ~7,-
M - lIpar_ time" . ~ "part- time" 
16. page 10, in the marginal heading to c'~E1l3e ·14,-
lb1: "Meet~ng of th e Boards. " 
~ "Meetings of the Board. " 
17. pa ge 10, lin e 15,-
18. 
19. 
~ ''nBard'' ~ "Board" 
Page 10, line 19,-
!c.r. "sub- section ()" ~ "sub- section (3) '! 
pa ge 10, in th e marginal heading to clause 15, - . . .. 
!c.I. "Executive Committees" 
~ "Executive Committee" 
20. page 10, line "11,-
!Q.I. "a fer wards " ~ "afterwards" 
21 • Page 1 0, lin e 41,-
!cl: ''act'' ~ "Act" 
22. Page 11, in the marginal heading to clause 17,- .-
!o...r. Ila 110 wan ce dir e c to r s " 
~ "allowances of directors" 
23. page 11, in the mar..g1pal heading to cla use 18, .... 
!cl: 'Reconstruc-" ~ ''Reconstruction'' 
2+ • p!\ ge 11, lin e 1 A, -
after "assist" insert "and" .r,'; 
25. page 11, line 20,-
!c.r. "business" ~ "businesse:::" 
2~. Page 12, line 8,-
after "ma.naging" insert "industrial. -ooncerns" 

-. 3-
27. page 12, line 1J,-
o.m;Lt. "or undertaking" 
28. page 12, line 22,-
... 
..fb!: "p\!rpo se fI ~ lip urpo sa s " 
29. page 13, lin\.. 20,-
m ''holds'' ~ ''hold'' 
•• 
30. Page 13, against line 32, in;2ert the marginal citation,-
"1 0 f 195"." 
31. page 14, against line 24, in the mrgina'l: citation,-
.nu: "2 of 1984." ~ "2 of -1934. " 
32. Page 14, against line' 3}, insert tile ~rginal citation,-
"2 0 f 1882." 
33. Page 18, line 4, ... 
$fter ".fund" insert "to" 
34. page 20, Une 13,-
. after "discharge" insert "its" 
35'. page 2J, line 43,':" 
am1.:t. "a stile ca se F_' y be, " 
JI't. Page 22, line 4,-
~ 'Recorfstrua tion" r~ "Reconstruction" 
37. Pag~ 23, line 2,-
~ ~ . . 
o.m1t. ''0 f clause (b) If 
38. page 23" line 11,-
!o.i: ''p 1 ed ge " ~ ''p 1 ed ged " 
:51. Pa ge 23, line 20 ,-
m "shally th,e" read "shall apply the" 
i 
1'0. Page 24, line 4,-' 
after "shall" in ser t "apply" 
41. Page 24,against'line 2J, jJ1Sert th,e'ma~g1nal c1tatLo n ,-
"5 of 1908." 

_ 4-
42. page 24, against line 31, ins,art the marginal citat:Lon~-
"5 0 f 1908." 
4 3. P? ~e 25, in th e mar gina 1 h ea.01n g to cl1\~se 41,-
I ' •• 
..tJ:ll: "co llacteral" ~ "colla te-ral" 
.' ... ,. I 
44. Page 25', line 25~-
.1bJ: "·",ith the" .~ .. "wi tb hi;" 
45. Page 25, against line 33,-
fo r th e mar ginal ci ta tipn .. IIj,j o,f 19 56.: tI 
~ "4 of 1882.,',' 
,,4'.' Pa,g9 25" in the aarginal·h.eading to clause 42,-
,:1 
.1lU: ttconcen" ~ 'ooncern" 
, . ,. 
, " 4-7. ~age 2", in the marginal hea,,~g to, clause 44,-
!oJ: "tn d rt ~ "an d " 
f48. page 28, line 13,- -.. 
.ro.r. "obligation" ~ ''obligat~nsrt .' y. 
49. Page 2B, lin e 33,-
, . 
IsJI "aoapa t1ons" ~. "adap,~ tien,s" 
50. Pc. 69 29, line 15,-
om! t ,1'z d1 t1o!} t:f1. " 
51. page 30, line 35,-
.!ol: ''Bark'' ~ "Bank" 
52. Page 31, line 13,-
''I 
Wi ''0 f tho se ,~ 
53. pa ge 32, in th e !!J8.r gina,~,. h eatUn.g to· <¥a..'lse 50,-
.!al: ''11 Cb ur t" x:.ea.d'" Cb ur t,,, . ........ ~ .. . " 
54. page 33, _in the ·narginal ha3.d1ng to: c~~uge 51,-" ' . ,~ .... 
!.2!. "D1s~rict Ma'hst~atg" ,~''n1:str1ct Mi!i~a~ate" ~ 
55. Page 33,11oe 41,-
.tP1:., "rules· or schemes" ~ "rule .or scheme", 
, 
P.T.D. 

- ) ... 
5~. Fage 34, line 17,-
-.1b.I.: "1981." ~ "1891., II 
57. page 36 , in the rrarginal heading to clause '4, ... 
~ "under this Act" 
58. Page 37, line 18,-
,!Q,r "he II road "the" 
59. pa ge 37, in til e ma,'rgj,J"lal h 00. din g to clause 68,_ 
for ''Po\·rers''·~ "Power" 
60. Pal;e 37, line 40,-
a ft ex- ''Ban k" in ser t "a 9 " 
61. page:J3,- lin~ 3) ,-
62. 
!Q.r. ''member "- ~ ''members'' 
Pa ge 3), line14,-
!Ql: '1House" ~ ''Houses'' 
h."',. P~ ge ,3), lin e 18,-
!al: "m an y" .I:.e9:.d "m the" 
64. Page 41, line 16 ,-
l'ei'ore "Industrial" ;Lnsert "the" 
65. Page 41., line 43,-
" 
.., 
.fQr. "sub-clause (c) l' ~ "sub-clause(1i) of 
clause (c)" 
66. Page 42, line 28;-
(i) '.fQI. "Id-" read "In" 
(ii) ~ II( lause" ~ ,"clause" 
67. Page 42,. line 37,-
.!o..r. "wor-cds" ~ "words fI 
68. Page 48, lines 16 and 17,-
om1..t "colla teral" 
69 • Page 48, lines 20 and 21,-
ru!11..:t. " co 119. te ra 1 " 
70. Page 50, line B,-
!cu: "tra tit l:.!illi..d ntha t n ~ _________ _ 

_ 6 _ 
71. Page 50, line 24,-
after "unit" insert "vilich" 
72. Pago 50, line 33,-
ru "i ts" <r~ "an" 
73. page 51, line 3,-
.fQ.r. "on d" ~ "an d " 
74. page 51, line .3frombottom,-
m. "corpora tinons" ~ "corpo~t:lons" 
75. 'Pa~e 55, line 4 from bottom,':' 
.!Q1: "occurence" ~ ''occurrenoe tt 
. o. '. 
NEW DElliI; 
lYh 30 ... ___ -.19.8..4~.---;-~_ 
f;ravana 8, 1909' (Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
Bill No. 55 of 1984 
THE INDUSTRIr\.L RECONSTRUCTION BANK OF INDIA BILL, 1984 
I 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPrER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPrER II 
EsTABLISHMENT OF THE INDUSTRIAL RmcoNS1'RUCTION BANK OI~' INDIA 
3. Establishment of the Reconstruction Bank. 
4. Authorised capital. 
CHAPTER III 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE INDUSTRIAL 
REcONS'tRUCTION CORPORAT.lON OF INDIA l...IMrrJ:D 
5. Undertaking of the Corporation to be transferred to the 
Reconstruction Bank. 
6. Power of Central Government to authorise a person to take 
over. the management of the Corporation. 
7. Transfer of the. services of 'the officers and other employees of 
the Corporation to the Reconstruction Bank. 
8. Dissolution of the Corporation. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGE1!vfENT OF THE REcONSTRUCTION BANK 
9. Management 
10. Board of Directors. 
] 1. Disqualifications of membership of the Board. 
12. Term of office, salaries and allowances of Chairman. 
13. Disclosure of interest. 
14. Meetings of the Board. 
15. Executive Committee and other committees. 
16. Existence of vacancy in or defect In the constitution of the 
Board Or defect or disqualification of a meinber not io invali-
date the proceedings of the Board. 
17. Fees and allowances of directors and members of committees. 
(i) 

(ii) 
CHAPrER V 
OBJECTS OF, AND BUSINESS TO BE TRANSACTED BY, THE RECONSTRUCTION 
BANK 
CLAUSES 
18. Objects ;nd business of the Reconstruction Bank. 
19. PrOlifbited business. 
tl. Loans by Central qovernment. 
21. Borrowing and acceptance of deposits by the Recollstruction 
Bank. 
22. Power to transfer rights. 
23. Loans in foreign currency. 
24. Grants, donations, etc., to the :Reconstruction Bank. 
CHAPTER VI 
RD:!ONSTRUCTIoN AssIsTANCE FUIm 
25. Reconstruction Assistance Fund. 
26. Credits to the Reconstruction Assistance Fund. 
27. Utilisation (1f Reconstruction Assistance Fund. 
28. Debits to Reconstruction Assistance Fund. 
29. Accounts 'and audit of Reconstruction Assistance Fund. 
30. Liquidation of Reconstruction Assistance Fund 
CHAPTER VII 
GENBRAL FUND ACCOUNTS AND AtJ'DIT 
31. General Fund. 
32. Corporation of accounts and balance-sheet. 
33. Disposal of profits accruing to General Fund. 
34. Audit. 
35. Saving. 
CHAPTER VIII 
SPECIAL POWERS OF THE RECONSTRUCTION BANK 
36. Power to impose conditions for assistance. 
37. Assistance to industrial concern when to operate as a charge I)n 
the property offered as security. 
38. Power to call for repayment before agreea period. 
39. Rights of Reconstruction Bank in case of default. 
40. Enforcement of claims by the Reconstruction Bank. 
41. Power of Reconstruction Bank relating to property offered as 
transfer . collateral security. 
42. Power of Reconstruction Bank to appoint directors or adminis-
trators of an industrial concern when management thereof 
is taken over. 
43. Effect 01 notified order under section 42. 

(iii) 
CLAUSES 
44. Powers and· duties of directors and administrators. 
45. No right to compensation fOr termination of contract of manag-
ing director, etc . 
. ... 'Application of Act 1 of 1956 . 
• 7. Restriction on filing of suits for dissolution, ~tc., of ~ industrial 
concern not being a company wben its management is taken 
over. 
~8. OOidal assignee or receiver not to be appointed without the 
consent of the Reconstruction Bank. 
49. Power of Central Government to grant relief in the case of 
certain assisted industrial concerns. 
50. Power of High Court to authorise Reconstruction Bank to pre-
pare scheme for reconstruction, etc., of industrial concern. 
5!. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and District Magistrate to assist 
Reconstruction Bank in taking charge of property. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
52. Effect of the Act on other laws. 
53. Act 43 of 1961, Act 7 of 1964 and Act 45 of 1974 not to apply to 
Reconstruction Bank. 
54. Law relating to winding up not to apply to the Reconstruction 
Bank. 
55. Act 18 of 1891 to apply to the books of the Reconstruction Bank. 
56. Certain provisions of Act 10 of 1949 not to apply to Reconstruc-
tion Bank. . 
57. Act 54 of 1969 not to apply to the expansion or amalgamation 
of certain undertakings. 
58. Returns. 
59. Delegation of powers. 
60. Staff of the Reconstruction Bank. 
61. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy. 
62. Provident fund. 
63. Indemnity of directors. 
64. Protection of action taken in good faith under this Act. 
65. Chairman, director, etc., to be public servants. 
66. Penalty for making false statement in applications lor loans 
and advances. 
67. Oftences by companies. 
68. Power to make rules. 

(iv) 
CLAUSES 
69. Power of Reconstruction Bank to make regulations. 
70. Power to remove difficulties. 
71. Amendmt'"ot of certain enactments. 
72. Substitutio:c. in Acts, rules or regulations of the Reconstruction 
Bank in place of the Corporation. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. 5$ of 11M 
THE INDUSTRIAL RECONSTRUCTION BANK OF INOlA BILL. 1~ 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the estabZishment of the Indust.ria.l Reconstruction Bank 
of India., and for the transfer to, and vesting in, the IGid Recons-
truction Ban1e, of the uncfertaking of the Corporation 1mo1Dn C&3 the 
Industrial ReconRtntction Corporation of India. Limited, with a view 
to enAbling the said Reconstruction Bank to function AS the principa..l 
credit and reconstruction agency for industTia.l reviwl and to co-
ordi?tG.te similar 'work of the other institutions engaged therein and 
to assist and promote industrial development, a..nd to rehabilit4te 
industrial COtlcerns. and for ma.tter, connected therewith or inciden-
tal thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ftfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PREuMINUY 
r. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Reconstruction Bank ,J 
of India Act, 1984. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Oft1clal Gazette, appoint, and dift'erent dates 
may be appointed for dift'erent provisions of this Act. 
Short 
title and 
commen-
cement. 

l)eftni· 
tiona. 
2 
2. In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day", in relation to any provision of this Act, 
means the date on which such provision comes into force and any 
reference to the appointed day in any provision of this Act shall be 
construed. as a reference to the commeneement o~ that provision; 5 
(b) "assistance" means any direct or indirect financial, manage-
rial or technical assistance granted by the Reconstruction Bank in 
pursuance of any business referred to in section 18; 
(c) "asSISted industrial concern" means any industrial concern 
to which any assistance has been given by the Reconstruction Bank; 10 
(d) "Board" means the Board of Directors ot the Reconstruction 
Bank; 
(e) "charge" includes a charge referred to in section 37; 
<I) "Corporation" means the Industrial Reconstruction Corpora-
tion of India Limited, a company formed and registered under the '5 
Companies Act, 1956, and having its registered office in the State of 1 of 1956. 
West Bengal; 
(g) "Development Bank" means the Industrial Development 
,';·Bank of u.lia, established under section 3 of the Industrial Develop-
ment Bank of India Act, 1964; 20 18 of 1964. 
(h) "dues" means any dues payable by any person to the Re-
construction Bank in relation to any assistance given by, or any 
bond or debenture issued to, the Reconstruction Bank, and includes 
interest, rent, costs, charges and cOinmission payable in relation 
thereto· , ',. , 25 
(i) -"industrial concel'll"-
. (1) . means any, concern en.&apd, or to be ~ged,in.-
(i) ih~ ~an':liactUre, preservation or process~g of Joods; 
(ii) shiPlllI\g;· 
(iii)" mi~g; 
(it,) the hotel industry; 
.. (v) tl;le trans~rt of ~engers or goods ~y toad or hy 
water or by air or by ropeway or by lift; 
(vi) the generation or distribution of electricity Or any 
other form of power; . . 35 
(vii) the maintenance,· re~ir, testing or servicing of 
machinery of any description or vehicles or vessels or motor 
boats' or trailers or tractorS; . 
. (viii) assembling, repairing or packing any· article with 
~e aid of ~acbineIy or power;.. . . 4D 
(ix)the develoPment of any contigUous -area of land BI 
an industrial estate; . . 
(x) fishing or prov\ding shore facilities for fishing or 
maintenanee thereof; . 
~ I 

5 of 1970. 
40 of 1980. 
1 of 1956. 
~, 
'1 
2 of 1934. 
2011984. 
23 of 1955. 
I( 
4~ of 19"l.. 
5 
3 
(xi) providing special or technical knowledge or other 
services for the promotion of industrial growth; or 
(Xii) the research and development of any process or 
product in relation to any of the matters aforesaid, 
(2) and includes-
(i) an undertaking owned, controlled or managed by a 
company, finn or other body corporate, which is, or is to 
be, so engaged, 
(ii) such other concern as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Oftlcial Gaiette, specify in this behalf. 
Explrmation.-The expression "processing of goods" includes 
any art or process for producing, preparing or making an article 
by subjecting any material to a manual, mechanical, chemical, 
electrical or any other like operation; 
15 (j) ~nationalised bank" means a corresponding new bank as 
20 
30 
35 
45 
defined in section 2 of the-
(i) Banking Companies (Acquisition and TranRfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970; 
(ii) Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1980; 
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(l) "public financial institution" means a public financial institu-
tion specified in, or under, section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956; 
(m) ccReconstruction Bank" means the Industrial Reconstruction 
Bank of India, established under section 3; 
(n) ccregulations" means a regulation made un4er this Act; 
(0) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constituted 
under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(p) "share" means a share in the capital of the Corporation; 
(q) "shareholder" means a person registered l:ry' the Corporation 
as the holder of a share; 
(r) "scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being included 
in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(8) "State Bank" means the State Bank of India constituted 
under section 3 of the Statl:" Bank of India Act, 19&&; 
(t) "State co-operatiVe bank" means the principal co-operative 
society in a State, the primary object· of which is the financing of 
other co-operative societies in the State; 
(u) "State Financial Corporation" means a financial corporation 
established under section 3 or section SA or an institution noUfted 
under section 46, of the State Financial Corpor~tions Act, 1961; 
(v) "State level agency" means such institution or agency, 
operating in any State or Union territory, as may be specifted as Its 
agency by the Reconstruction Bank. 

Estab-
liab-
ment of 
theRe_ 
~onstruc­
tion 
Bank. 
Authoris-
ed. capi-
hit. 
Under. 
takinlof 
the Cnrpo-
ration to 
be trans-
ferred to 
the Re-
construe-
t:on 
HPIlk. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OJ' THE IND.USTRIAL RECONSTRUCTION BANK OF INDIA 
3. (1) With effect. from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established, for 
the purposes of this Act, a corporation, to be known as the Industrial 
Reconstruction Bank of India. . .') 
(2) The Reconstruction Bank shall be a body corporate with the 
name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal with 
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold .:J.nd dispose 
of property, and to contract, and may, by that name, sue and be sued. 10 
(3) The head office of the Reconstruction Bank shall be at Calcu.tta, 
and the Reconstruction Bank may establish offices, branches Or agencies 
at any other place, whether in. or outside, India. 
4. (1) The authoriled (".al.ltal or the R~on!itrudioB Ba.k shall he ru-
pees two hUlldred crores. 15 
(2) 1be initial paid-up capital of the Reconstruction Bank shall be ru-
pees fifty crores which shall be obaained,-
(0) by the appropriation, oat of die usets of· tb~ Corporation 
which staad transferred to tile Reeomauetioas Bak by virtue of die 
pro.wons of sectioa 5, a sam of rupees twenty crores, heiDg an 20 
dIIIODDt equal to the amount paid-lip on the shares of tb~ Corporation: 
(b) by the COIIversioa, to the eu.t Of rupees twenty c:rores, of 
the 108115 gnated by the Central GoftrDment to tbf! Corporation. 
mto the capital of die Rec:oDStnlc:tion Baak: and 
(c) by the subsc:ripdoD, by the Central GoverDmeat, to die paid- 2:) 
up capitas of tile Rec:oastruction 8aDk, of a sum of rupees ~a nores. 
(3) The Rec:oastmdioa Bak may '-crease its paid-up capital b~' 
-killa furdler isIue of ....... of sach IIBlOUIlt as it may tlaink expedieat. 
bu. in doing 80, die Rec:cmstruction 8aDk IbaII ensure that its total c:apltftl 
does not, in any c:a.,e. exceed its authorised capitaL 3() 
(4) The eatire paid-up capital of the Rec:oDStruCtioD Bank shall be 
wholly subscribed by and allotted to, the Central GovemmeRt. 
CHAPTER liT 
Acquisition and transfer of the undertaking of the Industria': Reconstruct;on 
Corporation of India Limited. 35 
5. (1) On :'ll~h date as the Central Government may, by notit1cation 
in the Official Gal,ctte, "ppoint, the undertaking of the Corporation shan 
itand tran'.ferred 10. and ~hall vest in. the Reconstruction Bank. 
(2) F:or the transfer to, and vestina in, the Reconstruction Bank uf 40 
tbe und~rfaldng of the Corporation, the Corporation shall be' given, ill· 
Cash, by the C~tral Government aD amount equal to the amount of the 
lotal ~id-up capital of tbe Corporation. 
(3) The lIndc!laking of the Corporation shaH be deemed to inclulie 
. at; assets, husine:.s, right". powers, authorities and priviJeges and all r>ro- " 

perty. movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments, 
book-debts and all other rights and interest<; in, or ",Irising out of, such 
property as were, immediately before the appointed day, in the ownership, 
possession, power or control of the Corporation whether within or outside 
5 India, and all books (If account, registers, records, and all other docu-
ments of whatever nature relating thereto, and shaH also be deemed to 
include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then 
subsisting of the Corpof,ation in relation to its undertaking. 
(4) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this . Act, all contracts, 
10 deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representa-
tion and other instruments of whatever nature' subsisting or having effect 
immediately before the appointed day and to which the Corporation is . a 
party or which are in favour of the Corporation, shall be of as full force 
and effect againsf or in favour of the Reconstruction Bank, imd may be 
15 enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if, in theptace of the 
Corporation, the Recoru.truction Bank had been a party thereto or as if 
they had been issued in favour of the Reconstruction Bank. 
(5) If, on the appointed day, any suit,. appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature in relation to the business of the undertaking which has 
~o been transferred under this section, is pen:ding by, or against, the Corpora-
tion, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudi-
cially deete<! by reason of the transfer of the undertaking of the Corpora-
tion or of anything contained in this Act, and the suit,' appeal or other pr()oo 
ceeding may be c~ntinued, prosecuted apd enforced by, or against, the Re-
25 construction Bank. 
to (1) The Central Government may appoint, on or·after the appoint-
. eel day. a suitable person to take over the management of the Corporation 
b''t11! pui'pose of winding up of the Corporation, and, where any penon 
is 80' 'appomted, it shall be the duty of such person to bring the operations 
30 of the ~ation to a close, realise the amounts payable to the Corpora-
nOR uncIDr sub-section (2) of section 5. and distribute the said amount -to 
the sharbholdcrs in accordance with their rights and interests, and after 
such realisation and distribution, to obtain the order of the Central GiYV-
ernment for the dissolution of the Corporation. 
35 (2) For the purposes of sub-section. (1), the person appointed under 
that sub-sectionshaU have such powers and duties of the Official Liquida-
tor under the Compallies Act, 1956, as are necessary to give effect to the 
provisions of sub-section (1) as if the Corporation were being wound up 
by the Court. and,. for this purpose the provisions of the Companies Act, 
fO 1956 shall apply, subject to the modification that for the word "Court", 
wherever it occurs, the words "Central Government" shall be substituted. 
'. 
(3) When any person is appointed by the Central Government under 
sub-section (1), to take over the maJUlgement of the Corporation,-
(a)' die provisions of ~he Companies Act, 1956, or of any other 
law for the time being in force, or any instrument having effect by 
virtue of any Act, or other law, shall, in so far as. they are inconsis-
tent with the provisions of this Act, cenSe to apply to,· or in relation 
to, the Corporation; 
(b) all per.sons holdillg office as Chairman and Managing 
50 Director and other dir~ctors, of the Corporation, immediately befolW 
Pow. of 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
authorl .. 
• pel'IOn. 
to take 
over the 
manaae-
meat 
of the 
Corpo-
rdiOD. 

.,.. ' . .... .. ' . 
eftlle 
.... ...... 
~­.,. a. ...... .... ...... 
011 9 & 
.. 
JIMII, 
6 
tho appointment of the person under sub-section (1), shall be q.eemcd. 
to have vacated their offices as such. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other Jaw 
for 1he1ime being in force or . in any agreement or contract, any perIOD. 
Iablding, immediately before the appointed day, office as the Chairmlb. 5 
fIt'director of the Corporation, who vacates his office as such on the ap-
pointed day by reason or the provisions of sub-section (3). shall not be 
_titled to any compensation from the Reconstruction Bank for the loss 
or. oIDee or for the premature termination of any ~greement or contract 
retating to his employment, except such compensation or other .benC8t 10 
~ch the Reconstruction Bank may grant to him, baviDa regaRI to wbi ' 
that penon would have 1'eceived as an officer of the Corporation if tbl,a 
A"tt had Dot been pa~sed and if he had retired from" his employment in 
the oramary Course. 
7. (1)' Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3) of seotion 6. 15 
every officer or other employee of the Corporation shall beco~ on and 
from the appointed day, an officer or other employee, as the case may be, 
of the Reeonstruetton Bank and shall hold his offtoe or servi'ce in that 
bIilk on the same tenns and conditions and with the lame rights to gratuitY 
aiI'4' dtbtt matters as would have been admissible to bim, if the ~takiD& !Zo 
of.'the·.Corporation had not been transferred to. and vested'in the Recona. 
trUet:hm Bank, and continue to do 80 unless ann until his employment 1n 
the lteconstruction. Bank . is duly tenninated or until 9 his . remuneration, 
terms and conditions are duly alt'!ted by the Reconstruction Bank: 
Pnmded'thBt an officer or other emtJlovee who dMA not intend to 25 
COIiIaue as an emolovee of the'ReconstrUction Bank mav,widrin 1liMty 
"';'from the IIbJX>inted day, serve a notice. of hi.i intention.· to the ... 
~etlOD·'Bank. and, on the expjry of the period of thirty da,.'fIout,the 
dMe of service of the notice, he shall cease to be an emplovee of die 
Reeonstruction. Bank . and on such cesser, . superannuadon . and· • __ !so 
benefits due to him under the terms of his emolovment Ihall be PSidto him 
forthwith by the Reconstruction Bank. as if he had retiNd ,from . ..-viae. 
(2) Any person who. on the aonointed day. is entitled to, or is in 
recemt of. any superannuation or comoassionate allowance or benefit from 
the Corporation or anv urovident OT' other fund or anv IIIUt110rltv adm"\il- 35 
terine: such fund shall he entitled to be "aid bv. and to receive from. the 
Reconstruction Ranle or anv provident or other func:! or anv authority a4:' 
minist!lrin2 such fund. the same allowanCe or bf!nefit so lonQ' a~ be OVllerYeS 
the conditions on which the allowance or benefit was QT,ulted. and. if anv 
qoeRtion arises whether he has so observed such conditions. the Question 40 
shan be determined bv the (",cntral Government and the decision of the 
Central Government thereon shall be final. 
(3) Where, under the terms of any contract :Qf service or otherwise. 
any ~ whose service becomes transferred to the Reconstruction Bank 
bv reasOn of the nrovi~ions of this Act is entitled to anv oavment bv WRV ·"5 
of 2ratuitv OT' retirement benefit or compensation for Pl1V 1e'lve I10t availed 
of~ or any other ~neftts. su~h rerqon m'ly enfol'('~ hi~ ~laim against (,,,\ 
Reconstruction Bank. 
(4) Notwjthstandin~ anything contained in suJ>..section {l J or sub-
"~"'ction ('2). no ap1'1icatio!'" made or rrnmotjo~ increment in s 1\1 ary. 311ow- 50 

anee or any other benefit granted to any person, before the awpinted day, 
which would not ordinarily have been made Or granted or which would 
not ordinarily have been admissible under the rules or authorisation pf 
the Corporation, or of any provident other fund in force prior to the 
appointed day, &hall have effect or be payable or claimable from the 
5 Reconstruction Bank or from any provident, or other fund or from an 
authority administering such fund, unless the Central Government has, by 
general or special order, confirmed the appointment, promotion or incre-
mealt or has directed the continued grant of such allowance or other ben~ 
10 fit, as tite case may be. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial DisPutes Act, 
IM'l, Or iri any other law for the time being in force, the transfer or, the 
services ,of any officer or other employee of the Corporation to thes Re· 
15 COIaItmCtion Bank shall not entitle such officer or other employee to ~ 
compensation under that Act or other law, and no such claim shall 'be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
(6) ,·Where any person, Chairman, 0r other director, by whate.ver 
. name called, or other employee of the Corporation has, before the appoint-
ed day, been pfrld a sum by way of compensation or gratuity, the R,&. 
20 construction Bank shall be entitled to claim refund of any sum so paid, 
jf'the ,payriient is not confirmed by the Central Government by general or 
speeialorder. 
(7)Wh,ere one or more provident funds have been established ,9r 
maintained, by the Corporatioh or any other authority, for the benefit ,of 
25 its officers and other employees, the money debitable to the oftloera 
and other employees whose services have become transferred, 
by, or under thlsAct, to the Reconstruction Bank, shall, out of' the 
mpnies standing on the appointed day to the credit of such provident 
f'tuid, atand transferred to, and vested in, the provident fund established, 
b7 the" J:teconstruction Bank, under section 62. 
(8) Where a superannuation, welfare and other funds have been 
30 established by the Corporation for the benefit of its officers or other 
employeeS' whose services stand transferred to the Reconstruction Bank, 
the amount standing to the credit of such fund shall stand transferred. 
on· the appointed day, to the Reconstruction Bank for distribution to the 
concerned officers or other employees in accordance with their righf6 and 
£~ obUgations. 
8.(1) As soon as. realisation and distribution of the amount have 
, been made under section 6, the person appointed under sub-sect1on (1) of 
, that section shall submit ,his duly audited account to the Central Govern. 
-to ment and shall apply to that Government for orders as to the dissolution 
of the Corporation. . 
(2) The Celltral Government shall, after hearing such person as it 
xgay think fit, and Jlpon perusing. the accounts so audited, if satisfied that 
:~t ha~ been realised and distributed in accQrdance with the provi. 
45 atOllS of .thIS Act, make an order that the Corporation is dissolvt".d from 
the elate of the order and the Corp~ration shall stand dissolved accordingly. 
(3) A copy ,of the order made by the Central Government for the 
dissolution of the Corporation sball be filed by the Reconstruction Bank 
50 with the. Registrar of Companies within thirty days from the date of ~uch 
order, and the Registrar of Companies shall give effect to the said order. u 
if it were an order made by the Court for the dissolution of the Corpora-
tion. . 
-,-

8 
( 4) The provlSlons of this section shall' have effect, notwithstanding 
anything to ·the contrary contained in the Companies Aot, 1956, or in any 
other law for the time being in force. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT OF THE REcONSTRUCTION BANK 
9. (1) The general . superintendence, direction and management of 
the affairs and business of the Reconstruction Bank shall vest in. a Board of. 
Directors which may exercise all powers and do all acts and thin .. whjch 
may be exercised or" done by the Reconstruction Bank. 
5 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in the regulations made under this 10 
Act, the Chairman shall also have powers of general superinteadence, 
direction and management of the affairs and business of the Reccm.strw> 
tion Bank and may also exercise all" powers and do all acts and thin" 
which may be exercised or done by the Reconstruction Bank. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board, in discbarzinl 15 
its functions, shall act on business princip1es with due regard to' public 
interest. 
(4) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the RccoDstruc-
tion Bank sha11 be guided by such directions in matters of policy mvomq 
public interest as the Central Government may give to it in writing, and $I 
if 'any dispute arises as to wheth~ a ques~9n is or is not a questi9ll ot 0 
such policy, the dispute shall be decided by the Central Government whose 
decision thereon shall be final. . 
18. (1) The Board shall consist. of ihe following, namely:-
(a) a Chairman, to be appointed by ,the central Goven1meDt, 
who shall\ function both as the Chait'll181i alftl as the" manaJin. !2,5 
director; .' ,. 
(b) a DePuty, Governor of the Reserve Bank, to be nomiaAied 
by that Bank ; 
(c) a director, to be nominated by the J:)cWlopment Bank; 30 
(d) not more than fifteen directors to be ~lOd by the 
Central Government, of whom--
(i) three shall be officials of the Central GOVCl'DIDIIIlt, 
(ii) not more than three shall be from the public finBllcia! 
institutions, 35 
(iii) not more than five shall be from the State Bank, 
nationalised banks and the State Financial Corporations, 
(iv) not more than four shall be from among persons who 
have, in the opinion of the Central Government, special lmow-
ledge of, and professional experience in, science, technology, eco.:. 
nomics, industry, industrial co-operatives, law, industrial finllDCe',4O 
investment, accountancy, marketing 01' any other matter, the 
special.knowledge of, or professional eXperience in, which would., 
in the opinion of the Central Govemment~ be useful to. the 
loflHt. 
Reconstruction Bank. 45 
(2) A director nominated under sub-section (1) shaH hold office 
tluring the pleasure of the authority nommatiOI him. 

9 
.11. No person shall be qualified to be a member of the Board if-
.(a) he has been removed or dismissed from service of-
(i) Government, or 
(ii) Reserve Bank, State Bank Or any other bank, or 
5 (iii) any public financial institution or State financial cor-
10 
poration, or 
(iv) any other corporation owned or controlled by Govern-
ment, 
on a charge cf corruption Or bribery; or 
(b) he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated an insolvent or 
b«S suspended payment of his debts or has compoWlded with his 
creditors; or 
(c) he is a lunatic and stands so declared by a competent court; 
or 
15 (d) he is or has been convicted of any offence, which. in the 
20 
:25 
30 
opinio~ of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude. 
12. (1) The Choirman shall, hold. offtce for such term not exceedJDe 
ft.ve yean as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and aDy 
person so appointed shall be eligible for re-appointment ler a like term. 
(2) Notwithstantiing anything contained in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) the Central Govemment !ihaD Iaav~ the right to termiaate 
the term of of6c=e of the Chairmau at .y time before the apIry of 
the term specified UDder sub-sectioD (1) by giving bbn D~ of DOt 
leal dum three moatbs .. writlag or three montbs salary and. allow-
ances in lieu Of such notice: and the CJudnaaD shaD also have tile 
right to relinquish his ofIlce at aDy ... before the expiry. of the term 
specified ~ sub-aection (1) by giving, to the Central Govemmeat, 
notic.:e of not less than. three mOlltbs Ia writing; 
(b) the Central Government may, at any time, remove the 
Chainnan from office: 
Pro\< ided that, no person shall be removed from his office under this 
clause, unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against his removal.'i. 
(3) Where any vacancy occurs in the oftlce of the Chairman, the 
35 Central Government shall appoint a suitable person to discharge the 
functions of the Chairman. . ,",' . 
(4) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his function •. owing to 
absence, illness or any other cause, the Central Government may appoint 
a suitable person to function as the Chairman until the day on which the 
Chairman resumes the charge of his functions. 
40 (5) The Chairman shall be a whole-time officer of the Reconstruction 
Bank and shall receive such salaries, allowances and other benefits, and 
shall be subject to such other terms and conditions, B!'1 may be determined 
hy the Central Government: 
Provided that the Board may, if it is of opinion, that it is necessllry in 
45 the public interest so to do, permit the Chairman to undertake, at the 
request of the Central Government or the Reserve Bank, such par-time 
honorary work as is not likely to interfere with his duties as Chairman. 
\ 

Dildo-
sure Of 
interest. 
Meettn, 
of the 
Boards. 
'10 
13. Norn~mber of the Board shall have an int.ere3t, direct Or iAdtitd 
in any buainess,industry' or concern to which any assistance bas been 
given or is to be given by the Reconstruction Bank under this Act and if 
any such mf:!mber acquires such interest at any time during the continu-
ance of's~h 'QSSi'Stance,he shall Immediately disclose it to the Board and 5 
sh.aIe'ither· resign his me1nbership of the Board or dispose of his interest 
in such manner and within such tjme as the Board may direct. 
if. (1) The Board shall meet· at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the tranl>8.ction of busineas at 
its meetings as may be provided for in the regulations. 
'! I (2) If, for any reason, the Chairman is· unable to atteD.d. aJly, .~ 
of the Board, any uther director nominated by the Chairman intbtabebA1f, 
and in the absence ~f such nomination, any director. elected by ,the -cUr-
ectors, present from amongst themselves, shall preside at the meetJD&:. 
1& 
(3) All questions which <-'orne up before any meetiftg of the oBard '5 
shall bede<!ldedbya' majority of vtJtes of the directors pre8ent' AI14 
voting, and in the e';ent of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or, in btl 
ableftce, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. 
(4) $ave as otherwise provided under ~ub-section (), every director' 
of the Board shall have one vote. 
~f 15. (1) The Board may constitute an Executive Committee,eonsistinC 
=- of s\1ch number of directors as may be~ provid(!d for in the reguJatiou. 
other 
eommit-
tees. 
Existence 
olvac-
ancyin 
or detect 
!nthe 
constitu-
tion of, 
the Board 
ordeted 
ordtl.. 
qlllUftca 
tionofa 
member 
not toin-
vaUdale 
the pro-
ceedinls 
oUbe 
Do.rd. 
(:~) The Executive Committee shall discharge such fUDCt.i.ons as.may 
be provided for in the regulations, or, as may be delegated to it, };)y the 
BOard. . . 
(3) The Board may constitute such other committees, ~hether, coDsist-
ing only of direckrs or only of other persons or partly of direefors"aDd 
partly d other persons, for such purpose or purpose~, as it may think fit. 
(4) I The Executive Committee ar any other committee coDItittlted 
under this sectton shull meet at such times and places and shall. ~bsetve ,. 
sucih .ru1esof procedure in ~Jard to the transactio~ of business at its 
mee.ti~g'l as may be provi~ed for in the regulations. 
16. (1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of any Executive or ..... 
committee constituted by it shall pe invalid merely on the ground oftlae 
existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution ot, such 
&ard. or cOnunittee, as the case m~ be. 35 
-(Z) All acts done by a person acting in good faith as a member of 
the Board or of any committee constftuted by it shull be vaUd,riOtWftb .. 
standing that it may aferwardsbe -discovered that hisappoiutment 'WlS 
invalid by reason. of any defeCt or disqualification or had 18nnlnated . by;fO 
~rtaeof any provision of this act or any -other law tor tbe time·betaft in 
force: 
Prvvidedthat nothing in this'section shall be . deemed to' give ,v~tfdJty 
to any act of a member of thEf Board or of any committee after his a~t.. 
ment has been shown to the ReConstruction Bank to be invaHd orto'hrie 
~~~~~ 6 

11 
If. Tho dire.:tors and members of the committee shall be paid such 
ftII aad allowances as may be provided for in the regulations for attending 
the mcdings of the Board or of any committee constituted in pursuance of 
thi$ Ac;t or for atte.qd4ti to any other work of the Reconstruction Bank: 
5 Provided that no fees shall be payaMe to the Chairman or to any other 
director or member who is an official of the Government, or. to a Deputy 
OoYernor of the Reserve Bank or to an~cial of the Development Bank 
or Reconstruction Bank:. 
CHAPTER V 
1. OiIJECTS OF, AND BUSINESS To BE TRANSACTED BY, THE REcONSTRuctION 
BA..WK 
1&. (1) The Reconstruction Bank shall function as the principal credit 
aqd. reconstruction agency for industrial revival by undertaking modemisa-
don c:P.:p8DSion, re-organisation, diversification or rationalisation of indus-
'5 ~;. ID¢ by co-ordinating similar work of other institution:- engaged 
tI'lenmt. and sh,8.ll assist promote induStrial development, reconstruction 
and revival, and undertake rehabilitation of industrial concerns, by provid-
ing or procuring assistance and opc:rating schemes for the same, and may, 
for. ,at4Uning the said objects, carry on and trSn.llact all or any of the follow-
:lQ in, business, namely:-
(a): granting loans and advances (including working capital) 
to any industrial concern or subscribing to or purchasing ,or under-
wrltini the issue of stocks, shares. bond~ or debentures of. any indus~ 
trial concern. or converting the dues in respect of such loans or de~ 
;; bento-res into the shares cYf any industrial concern; 
(b) guaranteeing.' counter-guaranteeing or providing indemnity, 
as the caSe may be, in respect of-
(i) loans raised by an industrial concern from any schedul-
ed bank or State co-operative bank or any public financial in-
l- stitution or any other prescribed institution or agency in. or 
outside, India; 
(ii)' deferred payments due 'from an industrial concern;. 
(iii) the performance obligations of any contract under-
taken by an industrial concern, including repayment of any 
a4vance obtained hy such tndustriul concern in connection with 
such contract; 
(c) subscribing to or purchasing or imderwriting the issue of 
stocb, shares,. bonds or debenques of any institution which may be 
notified by the Central Govemm~Jlt in this behalf; 
(d) providing credit to any State level agency or other prescrib-
ed institution or agency for grant of loans and advances to industrial 
concerns; 
(e) providing or obtaining credit from other public financial 
institutions. scheduled banles and State co-operative banks, for grant 
of loans and advances to or to furnish guarantees on hehalf of the 
industrial concern: 
(f)' providing infra-structural facilities and raw materials: 
(g) providing machinery and other equipment on lease or hire-
purchase basis; 
Fee. .atd 
~., 
directorw 
and mem-
bel-. of coJq 
mlUees. 
Objects 
and 
buaineas 
of the He-
COlllKruc_ 
Bank. 
. \ 

\, •. ; 12 
I au":) ~vi=:~rec'!~:;C::t =;:;:'::"'oin := i industrial concern or indbstry ill general: 
~ (;) accepting or discounting of bills of exchange and promissory 
i notes, made, drawn, accepted or endorsed by any industrial concern 5 
l' or by any person selling capital goods mapufactured by one indus-
1: trial concern to another industrial concern; , 
(j) promoting, owning, taking over, managing and acting u 
authorised person, where so appointed by thcCeatr.al Government, to 
manage an industrial concern, including .ancillaries; 10 
(k) transferring or acquiring for consideration any instrument 
relating to loans and advances; 
(I) providing. technical, legal. adminjstrative and marketing 
assistance, promoting, assisting and financing mergers, amalpmation 
or reconstruction of an industrial or business concern or undertBkiD&; 15 
(m) providing managerial assistance to in4ustrial concerns in-
cluding nationalised undertakings by deputing oMCcrs -from its own 
cadre or a separate management pool constituted for. the purpose; 
(II) undertUing r~ch and surveys for eNaluatiag or deal"" 
with marketing or investments, carrying on tecbno-cconomic studies 10 
in connection with reconstruction ~ development of industry and 
establishment of institutes for such purpose including training of 
pet'IOIlDd ; 
(0) granting. opening, issuing. confirming or cndoraing «etten 
of credit and negotiating or collecting biDs and otber documents draWR Sl5 
thereunder; 
(p) forming, or contr~ of subsidiaries for carryiDa out ally 
of ita functions or to carry on such other activities comJucift to its 
businc:ss; 
( q) acting as an agent of-
(i) Centra! Government or State Government; 
(il), Reserve Bank, State Bank, scheduled bank, State co-
opera.tive bank. public financial institutions, ~ate Financial 
Corporations; 
30 
(iii) such other Government or person as the Central 35 
Government may authorl$e; 
and to appoint one or more of those institutions or ,agencies, or any 
other pr-ccribed person, as its agent; 
(r) performing functions entrusted to or required of it by Cen-
I 
tral Government ullder this Act or any other .law; .0 
(s): doing any kind of business or assignment in or out5i~ the 
country which the Central Government may authorise; 
(I) conceting information from all concerned agencies relating 
to industt"ial sickness and industria] development; 

1 of 1956. 
13 
(ul) preparing guidelines to assist the Central Government in 
formulating policy framework to reconstruct, revive or rehabilitate 
industrial concerns or any industry; 
(v) granting loans for housing and· other purposes to the om-
5 cers and other employees (including persons employed on contract) 
of the Reconstruction Bank; • 
(w) generally doing such other acts and things as may be inci-
dental to or consequential upon the exercise of its powers or of its 
duties under this Act or any other law, including sale or transfer of 
10 any o(its assets. 
(2) The Reconl)truction Bank may receive in consideration of any of 
the services mentioned in sub-section (1), such comnussJOn, brokerage, 
interest. rent, remuneration or fees, as may be agreed upon. 
(3) The Reconstruction Bank shall not grant any :(oan or advance 
15 or other assistance on the security of its own bonds or debentures. 
20 
19. (1) The Reconstruction Bank shall not enter into any kind of 
business with any indu.~trial concern, of which any of the directors of the 
Reconstruction Bank is a proprietor, partner, director, manager, agent, 
employee or guarantor, or in which one or more directors of the Recons-
truction Bank together bolds substantial interest: 
Provided that this sub-section shalI not apply to any induSitrial concern 
if any director of the Reconstruction Bank-
(i) is nominated as a director of the Board of such concern by 
Government, or a Government company, or by the Reconstruction 
Bank or by a corporation established by any other law, or 
(ii) is elected as a director on the Board of such industrial con-
cern by virtue of shares held in that industrial concern by Govern-
ment, or a1 Government company, or by the Reconstruction Bank or 
by a corporation established by any other law, 
by reason only of su~h nomination or election, as the case may be. 30 
Explanation '.-"Government company" has the meaning assigned to 
it in section 617 of the Companies Act, ) 9 5 6. 
Explanation 1I.-"Substantial interest" in relation to any industrial 
concern, means the beneficial interest held by one or more of the directors 
of the Reconstruction Bank Or hy any relative as defined in clause· (4tt ~ 
35 of section 2 of the Companies Aer, 1956] of such director whether singly 
or taken together, in the shares of the industrial concern, the aggregate am-
ount paid-up on which either exceeds five lakhs of rupees or five per cent. 
0{ the paid-up share capital of the industrial concern, whichever is the 
. lesser. 
40 
45 
(2) TIle provisions of sub-secti9n (1)-
(i) shall not apply to any industrial concern as spe~ified there~n 
if the Reconstruction Bank is satisfied that it is necessary In t~e p~bhc 
inferest to enter into business wirth that concern, and ent~nng mto 
any kind of business with such industrial concern shall be 10 accord-. . d l' . t' as may be ,ance with and subject to such condItIOns Idl1 Iffilta Ions 
provided for in the regulations; 
Prohi-
bited 
business. 

Loans 
by 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Borrow_ 
ingand 
accept-
anceof 
deposits 
by the 
Recons-
truction 
Bank. 
Power 
to 
lran~ 
fer 
rights. 
14 
(ii) shall apply only so long as the conditions precedent to such 
disability as set out in the said sub-section continue. 
20. 'Ike Central Govemment may, after due appropriatioa made by 
ParIi .... t by law in thk behalf, advaace to the Reconstruction Bank In-
teftSi free loans or lonns with int,~rest on such terms and conditions, as 5 
may be aweed upon. 
21. (1) The Reconstruction Bank may. for the purpose or carrying 
out its functions under this Act-
(a.) issue nnd sell bonds and debentures with or without guaran-
tee of the Central Government; JO 
(b) borrow money fwm the Reserve Bank-
(I) repayable on demand or on the expiry .of fixed period~, 
not exceeding ninety days 'from tfte date on WhICh the mone.y. ]s 
so borrowect ug:ainst the security of stocks, funds a~ secUl'~ties 
(other than immm'abh property) in which a trust~e IS. authons~d 15 
to invest trust money by any law for the: time hemg 10 force m 
India: 
(i;) against bills of exchange or promissory notes arising 
out of bona. fide commercial or trade transactions, bearing-two or 
more good signatures and maturing within five years from the 20 
date of borrowing; . 
(iii) for any other purpose approved by the Central Gov-
ernment in accordance with the provis~ons of the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934; 2 of 1984. 
(c) borrow money from !;uch other authority, "Org~njsation, insti- 25 
tution or truSt in India as may be generally or specially approved by 
the Central Government; 
(d) accept deposits repayable after the expiry of a period which 
shall not be less than twelve months from the date of making of the 
deposit on such terms as may be generally or specially . approved go 
by the Re.cwerve Bank. 
(2) The Central Government may, on a request being made to it by 
the Reconstruction Hank, guarantee the bonds and debentures issued by 
that Bank as. to the repayment of principal and the payment of interest Ht 
such rate as may be fix'ed by that Government. . 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, the bonds and debentures issued or sold bv the Recons-
truction Bank shan be approved securities for the purposes ·of the Indian 
35 
Tr\lsts Act, 1882. the lmurance Act, 1938 and the Banking Regulation Act, 4! of 1938. 
1949. : .;. I , ~ 40 10 of 1949. 
22. The rights 'and interests of the Reconstruction Bank (including 
any other r!ght~ incidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advance 
grar:tted. or any amount recoverable, by it may be transferred hy the Recons-
truction Bank, either in whole or in part, by the execution or issue of 
any instrument. or by the transfer of any instrument by endorsement, or 45 
in any other manner in which the rights and interests in· relation to such 
loan or advance may be lawfully transferred, and the Re:::onstruction Rank 
may notwithstanding such transfer. act as the trustee of the transferee. 

10 
15 
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1973, or in any other enactment for the time being in force 
relating to foreign exchange, Ute Reconstruction Bank may, tor the pur-
pose' 01 grantmg Joans ana advances under this Act, borrow, With the pre-
vious consent 01 the Central Government, foreign currency from any bank 
,or lInanC131 instltutlon ill any foreign country or as otherwIse prescnoed. 
(2) The Central Government may, where necessary, guar,antee auy loan, 
taken by the Reconstruction Bank under sub-section ~1), or ani part 
thereuf, as to the repayment of principal and payment of interest an..! other 
lllcidcntal charges. ' 
(3) All loans and advances granted by the Reconstruction)3ank out 
of foreign currency borrowed unaer .sub-section (1), shall be expressed in 
terms 01 (oreign currency ~ equivalent of Indian currency, calculated in 
accordance wIth the rate of exchange pr,evailing i!f India at the time of 
grant thereof, and the ~UUllt due thereunder shall be repayable in equiva-
15 lent Indian currency, calculated in accordance with the rale of ex.::hange 
prevailing in lndia at the time of repayment of such loan or advance. 
( 4) Any loss or profit in connection with any borrowing of foreign 
currency under sub-section (1), for the purpose of granting loans and 
20 ,advances wlder this Act, or' with its repayment to the concerned foreign 
lending agency, on account of any fluctuations in the rate of exchange 
accruing-
(a) during the period within which the loan or advance is repay-
able by the industrial concern or the period of actual repayment thereof 
by the concern, whichever is longer, shaH be reimbursed by, or paid to, 
, as the c,ase may ,be, the recipients 01 such loans ami advances. 
(b) after the expiry of the period specified in clause (a),-
(i) shall be borne by the Reconstruction Bank in respect 
of normal market fluctuations in foreign exc~; 
(ii) shall be reimbursed by, or paid to as the case may 
be, the Central Government in respect of fluctuations other than 
the normal market fluctuations in foreign exchange. 
Explanation.-If any ques~on arises as to whether any fluctuation as 
aforesaid is a norlual fluctuation or not, the same ,shall be decided by the 
35 Central Govcmment whose decision thereon shall be fin,al. 
Loans 
in 
foreign 
currency. 
24. The Reconstruction Bank may receive gifts grants, donations or Grants, 
benefactions from Government 01' any other source. donations, 
C~ERVl 
RECONSTRUCTION ASSISTANCE FU!liD 
etc., to 
the Re-
construc-
tion Bank. 
40 25, With effect from the appointed day, the Reconstruction Bank shall,· Recon-
establish a special fund to be called the Reconstruction Assistance Fund. struction Assistance 
Fund. 

Credits to 
theRecon-
struction 
Assistance 
Fund. 
Utilisa-
tion 
of Recon-
atr..u:tion 
Aasistance 
Fund. 
16 
28. To the Reconstruction Assistance Fund shall be credited-
(a) all amounts ~ived for the purposes of that Fund by way 
of loans, gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from Government or 
any other source; . 
(b) repayments or recoveries in respect of loans, advances or 5 
other facilities granted from the Fund; 
(c) income or profits from investments made from the Fund; and 
(d) income accruing or arising to the Fund by way of interest or 
othe.rwise., on account of the application of the Fund in accordance 
with the provisions of sect~on 27. 10 
.. 
27. (l) Where the Reconstruction Bank considers it necessary or 
desirable so to do, it may, subject to the prov:sions of iub-\iections (3) and 
(4), disourse or spend from the Reconstruction Assistance Fund any 
amount on account, or in consequence, of the grant of any loan o.r advance 
or on account, or in consequence, of entering into any arrangement, 15 
under section 18: • a.: 
Provided that before granting any such loan or advance to an indus-
trial concern o.r entering into any '8uch arrangement with or in relation 
to an industrial concern, the Reconstruction Bank shall obtain the prior 
approval of the Central Government. 20 
(2) Where the Reconstruction Bank considers it necessary or desi-
rable so to do, it may, subject to the provisions of 'iub-section$ (3) and 
.(4). disburse or spend from the Reconstruction Assistance Fund any 
amount for one or more of the purposes s~fied in section 18. 
(3) Before seeking, the appr~val of the Central Government under 25 
sub-section (1), the Reconstruction Bank shall satisfy itself that the 
banking or othe.r financial institutions or other agencies are not likely 
to grant such loan or advance to the indUstrial concern or to enter into 
any such arrangement with Or in relation to the industrial concern in 
the o.rdinary course of business. 30 
(4) .The Central Government shall, before giving its approval, satisfy. 
itself that such loan, advance or arrangement is necessary as a matter 
of priority in the interests of industrial reconstruction, revival, rehabili-
tation or development. t.. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing 35 
contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude the ~onstruction 
Bank from granting any loan or advance or· from entering into any 
arrangement under clause (a) or under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 18, without the approval of the Central Government, if DO 
amount in respect thereof is to be disbursed o.r spent from the Recon- 40 
atruction Assistance Fund. 

.. 
28. (1) To the Reconstruction Assistance Fund shall be debi-ted.-
(a) such amounts as may from time to tinle be disbursed or 
spent under section 27; 
(b) such amounts as may be required for discharging the 
5 liabilities in respect of loans received for the purposes . of that 
Fund; 
(c) any loss arising on account of investment made out of 
that Fund; and 
(d) such expenditure arising out of or in connection with 
IO the administration and application of the Fund as may be deter-
mined by the Board. 
(2) No amount shall be debited to the Reconstruction Assist~ce 
Fund except as provided for in sub-section (1). 
29. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Reconstruction Assis-
15 tance Fund shall be pl"E!pared in such fo.rm and manner ;4 may be 
provided for in the regulations. 
(2) The Board shall cause the hooks and accounts of the Fund to 
be closed and balanced as on the 30th day of June each y~r. 
(3) The Reconstruction Assistance Fund shall be audited by one or 
20 more auditors appointed by the Central Government under section 34, 
who shaH make a separate report thereon. 
(4) The provisions of sulrsections (2), (3), (4) and (6) of section 
34 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the audit of the Recon-
struction Assistance Fund, as they apply to the audit of the accounts of 
25 the Reconstruction Bank. 
(5) The Reconstruction Bank -shall furnish to the Central Govern-
ment, within four months from the date on which the accounts of the 
Fund are closed and balanced, a copy of the balance-sheet and accounts 
together with a copy of the auditors' report and a copy of the report 
30 on the operation of the Fund during the relevant year and the Central 
Government shall, as soon as may be after they are received by it, 
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
30. T!te Rm:onstruction Assistance Fund l:>hall not be closed or 
wound up save by the order of the Central Government and in such 
35 manner as that GOV'ernment may direct. 
CHAPTER VII 
GENERAl. FUND ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
31. All receipts of the Reconstruction Bank other than those which 
are to bc credited to the Reconstruction Assistance Fund under this 
40 Act shall be credited to a Fund to be called the General Fund and 
all payments by the Recon'Struction Bank, other than those which are 
to be debited to the Reconstruction Assistance Fund, shall be made 
out of the General Fund . 
32. (1) The balance-sheet and account of the Reconstruction Bank 
45 shaU be prepared in such form and manner as may be provided for in 
the regulations. 
Debits t() 
R-ecoastruc-
tion Assis-
taace Fuad. 
Accounts 
and audit 
of Recons-
truction 
Assistance 
Fund. 
Liquida-
tion of 
Recons-
truction 
Assistance 
Fund. 
Genual 
Fund. 
Prepara-
tion of 
accounts 
and 
balance-
Ibeet. 

Disposal 
of profits 
accruing 
to General 
Fund. 
Audit. 
18 
; . 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accoulltli of the Reconstruc-
tion .tiank to be closed and balanced as on the ~Oth (jay of June eaen 
year. 
J:J. ~1) The Reconstruction Bank may establish a reserve fund 
WluCl"l may be translerrec.t such sums as mat .Bank may deem tit oUt of 5 
the annual prohL::; accrumg to the lZenel'al ~'und. 
(2) After making proVision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation 
of assets and lor au other matters tor whiCh pl'ovlsion is necessary or 
expedIent or wnich is usually provIded lor by bankers and ior the 
l·e~e.rve lund reletrec.t to ill sub-sectIon· V), the Reconstruction Bank. 10 
ShaJ.l tl'ansler the balance of the net profits to ,the Central Government. 
~ (1) The accounts of the Reconstr~ction Bank shall be audited , 
by aUI.1HOl'S dUly qUalil1ed to act as auditors under iiuo-sectlon (1) 01 
I)ectloll ~:::b 01 tne ~ompanies Act, 19;'0 who shall be appointed by the 1 of 1956. 
~entral Uovernment lor such ,term and on such ,remuneration as the 15 
l,;entral Uovernment may fix.. I. 
'(Z) The audItors snall be supplied with a copy of tlu~ annual 
balance-sheet of the ..Reconstruction Bank and it shall be their duty 1.0 
examme It together WIth the accounts and vouchers relating thereto 
and tney shaH have a !iiit delivered to' them of all books kept by the 20 
lteconstructlon .tiank and shall at all reasonable' times have ac(."ess to 
the books, accounts, vouchers and other documents of the Reconstruction 
l:Wlk. 
(3) The auditors may, in relation to such accounts, examine any 
director or any otlicer or other emplo~e 01 -the ReconstructIon Bank: 25 
and IJhal1 be entitled to require trom ,the Board or officers Or other 
employees of the }{econstruct.lon Bank such information and explana-
won as they may thmk necessary for the performance of their. duties. 
(4) The audItors shall make a report to the Reconstruction Bank. 
upon the annual balance-sheet and accounts examined by them and in 30 
every such report they shall state whethe,r in their opinion the 
balance-sheet is a full and fair balance-sheet containing all necessary 
particulars and prope.rly drawn up 80 as to exhibit a true and fair view 
of the state of attaas of the Reconstruction Bank and in case they' had 
called tor any explanation or information from the Board Or any officer 35 
or other employee of the Reconstruction Bank whether it has been 
given and whether it is satinactory. 
(5) The Reconstruction Bank shall furnish to the Ceniral Government 
Within four months from ,the date on which itt> accounts are closed and 
balanced, a copy of its balance-sheet and accounts together with a copy 40 
of the auditors' report and a report of the working of the Reconstruction 
Bank during the relevant year, and the Central Government 'Shall, as 
soon as may be after they are ;received by it, cause the same to be laid 
before each Hou~ of Parliament. 
(6). Without prejudice to anything contained in the preceding sub- 45 
sections, the Cent.ral Government may at any time appoint the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India to examine and report upon the 
accounts of the Reconstruction Bank and any expenditure incurred by 
him in connection with such examination and report shall be payable by 
the Reconst,ruction Bank to the Comptroller and Auditor..Qe.eral of 50 
India. 

19 
35. Save as otherwise provided in s.ub-section (4) of section 29; no- Savin,. 
thing contained in this Chapter shall apply to the Reconstruction Assist-
ance Fund. 
CHAPTER VIll 
s SPEC'IAL POWERS OF THE REcONSTRUCTION BANK 
36. (1) In entering into any arrangement under section 18 with an Power to 
industrial concern, the Reconstruction Bank may impose such conditions impose conditions as it may think necessary or expedient for protecting the interests of the for assis-
Reconstruction Bank, and securing that the assistance granted by it is' tanco. 
10 put to the best use by the industrial concern. 
(2) Where any arrangement en,tered into by the Reconstruction Bank 
with an industrial concem-p,rovides for the appointment by the Recon-
struction Bank of one or more directors of such industrial concern, such 
provision and any appointment of directors made in pur~uance thereof 
IS shall be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the cont.rary 
1 of 1956, contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law for the time 
being in force or in the memorandum, articles of association or any other 
instrument relating to the industrial concern" and any provision ;regard .. 
ing share qualification, age limit, number of directorships, removal from 
20 office· of directors and such like conditions contained in any such law 
or inst,rument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by the 
Reconstruction Bank in pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid. 
(3) Any director appointed in pursuance of sub-section (2) sha11-
(a) hold '. officeduring the pleasure of the Reconstruction Bank 
and may be removed or substituted by any person by order in writ-
ing by the Reconstruction Bank; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his 
being a director or for anything done or omitted to. be done in good 
faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in rela-
tion thereto; 
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be 
taken into account for computing 'the number of directors liable to 
such retirement. 
37. (1) Where any person o,r industrial concern 'Seeks any assist8.nce 
35 from the Reconstruction Bank on· the Sf!curity of any immovable propel"ty 
belonging to him or to the industrial concern or on the security of the 
property of some other person whose property is offered as a collateral 
security for such assistance" such person or indUlStrial concern or, as the 
case may be, such other person may execute a written declaration in the 
40 form specified in the Fi,rst Schedule stating therein the particulars of the 
immovable property which is proposed to be offered as security or, a'S 
the case may be, collateral security, for such assistance and agreeing that 
the dues relating to the assistance, if granted, shall be a charge on such 
p.roperty;, and, if, on receipt of such declaration, the Reconstruction Bank 
45 grants any assistance to the person or the industrial concern aforesaid, 
the due!; relating to such assistance shall, without prejudice to the 
rights of any other creditOr holding any prior charge or mortgage in 
.Au.ist-
ance to 
industrial 
concern 
when to 
operate as 
a charge 
on the 
property 
oft'ered 
Js lIeoU-
dty.. 

Power to 
call for 
repayment 
before 
agreed 
period. 
Rights of 
Recons_ 
truction 
Bank tn 
case of 
default. 
20 
respect of the property so specified, be, by virtue .of the provisions of this 
section, a charge on the property specified in the declaration aforesaid. 
(2) Where any further immovable property is offered as 'Security for 
the assistance referred to in sub-section (1), a fresh declaration shall be 
executed, as far as may be, in the form specified in the First Schedule. 5 
(3) Every declaration referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) 
shall be deemed to be a document registrable as an agreement under the 
Provisions of the Registration Act, 1908, and no such declaration shall 16 Of 1908. 
, have effect unless it is so registered. 
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in any agreement to the fO 
contrary, the Reconstruction Bank may, by notice in writing, require any 
industrial concern to which it· has granted any assistance to discharge 
forthwith in full its entire dues and also discharge other liabilities to 
the Reconstruction Bank- -
. 
(4) if it appears to the Board that false or misleading inform~tion 1-5 
in any material particular was given in the application for the assis-
tance; or 
·(b) if the industrial concEU'n has faUed to comply with the terms 
of its agreement with the Reconstruction Bank in the mRtter of 
assistance; or 20 
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the industrial 
conce.rn is unable to pay its debts or that proceedings for liquida-
tiOn has been, or may be, commend!d in respect thereof; or 
(d) i11.he property assigned, charged, hypothecated, mortgaged 
or pledged to the Reconstruction Bank as a security for assbtance is 25 
not insured and kept insured by the industrial concern to the satis-
faction of the Rec::onstruction Barlk or if such property depreciates 
in value to such an extent that 'rn the opinion of the Board, further 
security to the satisfaction of the Board should be given and such 
security is not given; or 30 
(e) if, without the permission of the Board, any machinery, plant 
or other equipment, whether 'forming part of the security or other-
wise, is removed from the premises of the undcl'taking or the indus-
trial concern, as the case may be, without being· replaced; or 
(1) if for any other reason, it is necessary so to do to· protect the 35 
interests of the Reconstruction Bank. 
31. (1) Where an assisted industrial concern, which is' under a lia-
bility to the Reconstru.ctiQn Bank under any agreement with the Bank, 
makes any ,default in the payment of any duef\, or in. meeting its obligation 
in relation to any other assistance given by the Reconstruction Bank or 40 
otherwise fails to comply with the terms of the agreement with that Bank, 
the Reconstruction Bank shall have the right ~ take over the manage-
ment, or possession, or both, of the industrial concern as the case matr be , ,7 , 
as well as the right .to transfer by way! of lease or sale of the· property 
assigned, charged, hypotheca'ted, mo.rtgaged or pledged to the' Reconstruc- 45 
tion Bank for the purpose of realising its dues or for the revival of the . 
industrial concern. 

/ 
.{ of 1882. 
(2) Any. transfer of property made by the Reconstruction Bank in 
ae.rcise of the powers conferred on it by sub-section (1) shall vest in 
the transferee the rights in or in relation to the »roperty transferred u 
~ the,transfer had been made by the owner of such property. 
5 (3)' The Reconstruction Bank shall have the 'Same rights and powel'l 
with, respect to goods manufactured or produced wholl.y or partly frODl 
goods fwming part of the securitty held by it as it had with respect to 
the original goods. '_ 
(4) Where any action has been taken against an industrial 
/0 concern nnder the provisions of sub-section (1) , all costs, charges 
and expenses which, in the opinion of the Reconstruction Bank, 
have been properly incurred by it as incidental thereto, shall be re-
coverable from the industrial concern and the money which is reCeived 
by the Reconstruction Bank shall, in the absence of any contract to the 
15 contrary, be held by it in trust, to be applied, firstly, in payment of such 
costs, charges and expemes, and, secondly, in discharge of the d1,1es of 
the Reconstruction Bank and the residue of the money so leceived shall 
be paid to the person entitled thereto in accordance with his rights and 
interests. . 
20 (5) . Where the Reconstruction Bank takes over the management ot 
possession of any industrial cone ern under sub-section (1), such indus-
trial ,concern may sue, and be sued, in its name. 
40. (l) (a) Where an aSSisted industrial concern makes any default 
in the payment of any dues to, or in meeting its obligation in relation to 
25 any other assistance given by the Reconstruction Bank or otherwise 
fails to comply with the terms of agreement with that Bank, or 
(b) Where the Reconstruction Bank makes an order under section 
38 requiring the assisted industrial concern to make immediate repay .. 
ment of any assistance granted to it and the industrial concern fails to 
30 make such repayment," 
then, without prejudice to the provisions of section 3i1 of this Act and 
of section 69 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, any officer of the 
Reconstruction Bank generally or specially authorised by the Board in 
this behalf, may apply to the concerned High Court for one or more of 
35 the following reliefs, namely:-
40 
45 
(i) for an order for the sale or lease of the property ~igned, 
charged, hypothecated, mortgaged or pledged to the Reconstruc-
tion Bank. as security for the assistance granted to it, Or for the 
sale or lease oE any other property, of the industrial concern; or 
(i,i) for transferring the management of the industrial concern 
to the Reconstruction B8.nk Or to its nominee; or 
(iii) f.er an ad interim injunction restraining the industrial 
concern. ,from transferring or removing its machinery, plant or 
.. equipment from the premises of the industrial concern without the 
previous perIl1ission of the Boaru, where lluch transfer ot removal 
is apprehended; or 
Enforce-
ment of 
claims 
by the 
Recon-
struction 
Bank. 

· .., ..... --,..... -.. 
(i'V) for an order for the appointment 9f a receiver where there 
is apprehension of the machinery, equipment or any other property 
ot substantial value which has been assigned, charged, hypothecated, 
mortgaged or pledged to the Reconstruation Bank, being removed 
from the premises of the industrial concern or of being transferred , 
without the previous permission of the Reconstruction Bank. 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall state the nature and 
extent of the liability of the industrial concern to the Reconstruction 
Bank, the ground on which it is made and such other particulars as may 
be necessary for obtaining the relief prayed for. . 10 
(3) Where an application is for any relief mentioned in sub-clause 
(i) of sulJ..section (1), the High Court may,-
(4) by an order, authorise the Reconstruction Bank to grant 
lease of such property to such person and on such terms and condi. 
tions as may be specified in the said order; or IS 
(b) pass an order calling upon the person whose property bat 
been assigned, charged, hypothecated, mortgaged or pledged to the 
Reconstruction Bank to show cause, on a date to be specified in the 
notice, as to why an order for the sale of such property or so muehi 
of such property as would, on being sold, realise in its estimation, \lO 
an amount equivalent in value to the outstanding dues of the ind~­
trial concern to the Reconstruction Bank, together with costs of the 
proceedings taken under this section, shall not be made; or 
(c) pass an ad interim order attaching any property of the 
industrial concern which has not been assigned, charged, hypoth~ 25 
cated, mortgaged or pledged to the ~construction Bank, or so mucb 
of such property, as would, on being sold, realise in its estimation. 
an amount eqUivalent in value to the outstanding dues of the 
industrial ~oncern to the Reconstruction Bank, together with costa 
of the proceedings taken under this section, and pass an order So 
calling upon the industrial concern to show cause on a date to be 
specified in the notice as to wby such order of ad in.terim attach· 
ment shall not be made absolute. 
(4) Where an applicatioJ) is for the relief mentioned in sub-clause 
(ii) of sub-section (1), the High Court shall issue a notice calling upon 3S 
the industrial concern to show cause, on a date to be specified in the 
notice, as to why the management of the industrial concern shall not 
be transferred t.o the RI'construction Bank or to its nominee. 
(5) Where an application is for the relief mentioned in sub-clause 
(iii) of sub-section (1), the High Court shall grant an ad interim 40 
injunction restraining the industrial concern from transferring or 
removing its machinery Or other equipment and issue a notice calling 
Upon the industrial concern to show cause, on a date to be speclfted in 
the notice, as to why such ad interim injunction shall not be made 
abaolute. 

(6) Where an application is for the: relief mentioned in sub-claUM 
(iv) of clause (b) of sub-section (1), the High. Court shall put an 
ad interim order appointing a receiver in respect of the property autgll. 
ed, charged, hypothecated, mortgaged or pledged and shall issue a notice 
5 calling upon the industrial concern to show cause, on a date to be 
specifted in the notice, as to why the ad interim order appointing the 
receiver shall not be made absolute. 
(7) If no cause is shown, on or before the date speciIled in the notice 
iuued by the High Court, the Court shall forthwith-
10 (a) make an order for the sale of the property which haa been 
assigned, cLarged, hypothecated, mortgaged or· pledge to the 
Reconstruction Bank or so much of such property, as would, on 
being sold, realise in its estimation, an amount equivalent in value 
to the outstanding dues of the industrial coneern to the Reconstruc-
t5 tion Bank, together with costs of the proCeedings taken under thiI 
! ' 
sectiO~ 
(b) direct the lale of the attaehed property or the trantfer of the 
management of the industrial concern to the Reconatructfon Bani 
or to its nominee; 
and shally the proceeds of such sale for the discharge of the dues 
to the Reconstruction Bank and the residue of such proceed., if any, 
shall be made over to the person entitled thereto in accorc:laDce with 
his rights and interests; 
(c) make the ad interim injunction made under sub-section 
(5), and the ad interim order of appointment of the receiver made 
under sub-section (6), as the case may be, absolute. 
(8) If cause is shown, the High Court shall proceed to investigate the 
'of 1908. claim of the Reconstruction Bank and the provisions· of the Code ot 
-- Civil ~rocedure, 1908, shall, as far as practicable, apply to .uch pr.o-
30 ceedings. ' .. 
~.. (9) On an investigation made under sub-8ection (8), the High Court 
may pass an order,-
. (a) for t~ sale of the property wHich has been assigned, 
charged, hypothecated. mortgaged or pledged to the Reconstruction 
35 Bank or so much of such property, as WOUld, on being !Old, real1se, 
in its estimation, an amount equivalent in value to the outstanding 
dues of the assisted industrial concern to the R.econstructfon Bank, 
together with costs of the proceedings taken under this section; or 
(b) con1\rming the order of attachment. and directing the sale 
40 of the attached property, or the transfer of the management of the 
asslsted industrial eoncem to the Reconstruction Bank or to its 
nominee; or 

or 
(c) varying the order of attachment so .s to release ... a ~ortion 
of the property from attachment . and direct.ing the sale - of the 
remainder of the attach,d propertYi 
and shall the proceeds of such sale for the discharge of the dues 
to the Reconstruction Bank and the .residue of such proceeds, ·if any t 5~ 
shall be made over to the person entitled ·thereto, in accordance with 
his rights and interests; 
(d) releasing the property fro~ attachment, if it is satlifted, that 
it is not necessaty in the interests· of the Reconstruction BaM;-or 
(e) confirming or vacating the injunction or the order for the 10 
appointment of the receiver: 
Provided that when making any order under clause '(d), the High 
Court may maIre such further orders as it thinks nec;eesary to protect the 
Interest of the &!construction Bank, and may apportion the costs of the 
proceedings in such manner a'S it thinks fit: ./j 15 
Provided further that unless the Reconstruction Bank intimates to the 
High Court that it will not prefer an appeal against any order releasing 
any property from any attachment, such order shall not be given effect 
to until the expiry of the period fixed under sub-section· (12) within 
which an appeal may ~ preferred, or if an appeal is preferred, unless the ao 
court empowered to hear appeals from the decisions of the said' High 
Court otheTWi~e directs. untn the appeal is dIsposed of. 
: 
(10) An or~er of Attarhment or !lllle of property under this section 
shall be carrip.d into effect as far as l>racticable in the manner pro-
vided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. for the attachment or sale of 25 
prope.t"tv in 'the eX~Ht;on of a der.ree a~ 'f the Reconstruction Bank 
werp. the de~holder. 
ill' An order undf'l' thio.:; )';ection tran~e",fn~ th~ manal!e~ent of any 
~ndu~trial COTl(~m tl') thp. 'Reron!:l+rtlction Bank n1' to ;ts nominee shall be 
earried into effe~t. ~!! fA.1' It';; may be '01"aeticable. in the mannerprovtded 30 
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. fnl.' thl'! "ossession of immovable 
pl'~rtv or the deliverv of movable l>l'onertv in the execution of a 
decree, as if the Reconstruction Bank or its nominee were the decree-holder. '., ..... ,-,._, r , ! 
(U) Anv party ae~rie~ by an order un~er sub-section (3). sub- 35 
seetlon (7) 01' sub-section (9) mav. within thl1'tv davs from the date of 
the order. prefer an appeal to the court empowered to hear appeals from 
the decisfonc:; of the 'HicYh Court which tlafl<lt'!d the o1"der and the appeUate 
Court may, after hearinrt the parties. pass such orders as it thtnksproper. 
(13) Nothin~ in this section shall be cOnstrned where proceedings for.4O 
Uquidatfon in respe.ct of an industrial eonce,"" hHve commenced before an 
application is made uniter sub-seetion (1). a~ \7,lvin9.' to the Reconstruction 
Bank any preference over the other creditors of ,tbe. fndustr:liil ~C8m 
not conferred on it by Mly other law. . ., 

1 of 1956. 
1 of 1956. 
~5 
41. (1) Where a person has offered any property as 'Security, 
'\Yhether primary or collateral, for any assistance given by the 
Reconstruction Bank to any industrial concern, or to such person, 
and a default has been committed by the industrial concern 
5 or by such person in the payment of any dues of the Recon-
struction Bank or in meeting any obligation in relation to the assistance 
given by the Reconstruction Bank to the industrial concern aforesaid, 
the Reconstruction Bank shall have the right to take over the manage-
ment, or possession, or both, of the property so offered as security, and 
10 shall have the right to transfer by lease Or sale the property aforesaid 
for the purpose of realising its dues. 
(2) Any transfer of property made by the Reconstruction Bank, in 
exercise of the powers conferred on it by sub-section (1), shall vest in 
the transferee, the rights in or in relation to the property transferred 
IS as if the 'transfer had heen made by the owner of such property. 
(3) Where any action has been taken t1',der the provisions of sub-
section (1), costs, charp,es and expense!! which. in the opinion of the 
Reconstruction Bank, h!lve been properly incurr",d hy it alS incidental 
lZO theM!to. shall be recoverable out of the money received by the Recon-
struction Bank by the sale or lease of the property refer.red to in sub-
section (1), and· shall. in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be 
held by it in trust, to be applied, firstly, in paymept of· such com, 
charges and expenses and. secondly.. in the discharge of the dues 
85 of the Reconstruction Bank and the residue· of the money so received 
shall' be paid to the '''person entitled thereto in accordance with the 
rights. and interests. . . ._' 
(4) The Reconstruction Bank mav. fnstead of exercisin~ the powers 
conferred on it bv sub-section (1). ap-olv for the sale or lease of the 
-or'OPertv"referred to in sub-section (1). or for anv other relief. to the 
So Hieh Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property 
aforesaid is situated. snd, thereupon. the provisions of section 4{) shan. 
without preiudice to the p:r:ovisfons of section 69 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882. apply thereto as if the property aforesaid were the 
35 properly referred to fn section. 40, and powers shall be exercisable by 
the Hi~h Court accordingly. 
42. (n When the manallement of an industrial concern fs taken 
over by the ReconstT1lction Bank, that Bank mav. bv orde.r, notified In 
the Official Gazette. appoint as many persons as it thinks ftt.-
(a) in anv case in which the industrial concern is a company, 
as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, to be the directors of that. 
industrial concern; or 
(b) in any other case, to be the admini!ftrator of thsat indmrtrial 
concEn'n. 
45 . (2) The power to apooint . directors or adminf':'!trators under thfs 
section inC!ludes the power to apnoint any fndividwll. finn or body 
r.or.pora~ to be the man8~r of tlle Industrial conrP.m on such terms 
and cOTlditionsa~ the Re"onstruction Bank may think fit. 
. (3) For the removnl of doubts. it is hereby declared that tht! power' 
to mmoint directors. administrators or manager~ includes the power to 
SO remove or' replace the person 9(", Br'pofnted. 
Power 
at Be-
constrw:-
·tion 
Bank 
rela-
tin, to 
property 
offered 
as 
primary or 
collacteral 
security. 
POORei' of 
Recon. 
b!ud.ion 
Baot to 
~t 
ciirectOn 
or ad-
mlDJatra-
torso( 
an in-
dustrial 
concen 
when 
~ 
meat 
thereo:I 
:fa taken 
over. 

Meet of 
notified 
order 
under 
section 42. 
Powers 
and dutiee 
of direc-
tors .tnd 
adminis-
trators. 
(4) Nothing in the Companies Act, 1956 or in any other law for 1 of 1956. 
the time being in force. or in any inst.rument relating to the 0 indlJBtrial 
concern shall, in so far as it makes, in relation to a direct~r, any pro-
vision for the holding of any share qualification, age limit, restriction 
on tht" number (If directorships, retirement by rotation or removal 5 
from office, apply to any director appointed by the Reconstruction Bank 
under this section. 
43. On the issue of a notified order under section 42-
(a) if the industrial concern is a company as defined in the 
Companies Act, 1956, all persons holding office 88 directors of the 10 1 of 1918. 
industrial concern, anod in any othEU' case, all persons holding any 
office having the powers of superintendence, direction and control 
of the industrial concern, immediately before the issue of, the 
notified order, shall be deemed to have vacated their oftlces as such; 
(b) any contract of management between the industrial concern 15 
and any director or manager thereof holding office as such imme-
diately bt"fore the issue of the notified order shall be deemed to 
have terminated: 
(e) the directors or administrators, appointed under section 42, 
shall take 'Such steps as may be necessary to take into their custody 20 
or under their control, the property, effects and actionable claims 
to which the industrial concern is, or appears to be, entitled, and 
all the property and effects of the industrial concern shall be 
deemed to be in the custody of the directors or administrators, as 
the case may be. as from the date ot' the notified order; 25 
(d) the directo.rs appointed under section 42 shall, for all 
purposes, be the directors of the industrial concern, duly constituted 
und~r the Companies Act. 1956, and such directors, or, as the case 1 of 1956. 
may be, the adminIstrators, appointed under section 42, shall 
alone be entitled to exercise -all the powers of the directors, or, as go 
the ca9P. mlly be. of the persons exercising powers of superinten-
dence direction and control of the industrial concern, whether such 
powers are derived from the said Act or from the memorandum 
or articles of association of the industrial concern or from, anY 
other source whatsoever. 
44. '(1) Subject to the control of the Reconstruction Bank. the direc-
tors. or. as the case may be, the administrators appointed under section 
42, shall take such steps as may be necessary for the pu.rpose of 
efticientlv managing the busfne'ss of the indUstrial concern and shall 
exercise such power" an~ have such duties as may be prescribed. 
35 
(2) Without preiudice to the generality of the powers vested in 
th'?m under sub-section (1). the directors, or. as the case may be, the 
administrators appointed under section 42, may, with the previous 
approval of the Reconstruction Bank, make an app1ication to a court far 
the purpose of cancelling or varying any con4:ract or agreement entered 4, 
into, at any time before the issue of the notifierl order under lIection 42, 
between the industrial concern and any other penon, and the court 
may, if satisfied after due inquiry that such contract or agreement had 
been entered into in bad faith and is detrimental to the interests ot' the 
~ indust:rlal concern, make an order cancelling or varying (either uncan- 50 
0-

., 
ditionally or subject to such conditions as it may think ftt to impose) 
tbatcontract oraareement and the contract or agreement shall have 
eftect accordingly. 
45. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
5 contract or in any law for the time being in force, no . managing or 
whole~time director or any other director or a manager or any person in 
charge of management of an industrial concern shall be entitled to any 
compensation for the loss of office or for the premature termination, 
under this Act, of any contract of management entered into by him 
10 with such concern. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub~section (1) shall affect the right of 
any such managing or whole-time director, or any-other director Or 
manager or any such person in charge of management to recover from 
the industrial concern, moneys recoverable otherwise than by way of 
15 such compensation. 
U. (l) Where the managem~nt of an industrial concern, beini a 
company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, is taken over by the 
Reconstruction Bank, then, notwithstanding anything . contained in the 
said Act or in the memorandum or articles of association of such con-. 
ao cern,-
(0) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of such concern 
or any other person to nominate or appoint any person to be a 
director of the concern; 
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of 
such concern shall be given effect to unless approved by the Recon~ 
struction Bank; 
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of such concern or for 
the appointment of a receiver in respect thereof shall lie ill any 
CClurt, except with the consent of the Reconstruction Bank. 
30 (2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1) and to the 
other provisions contained in this Act and subject to such other excep-
tions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, the 
of 1916. Companies Act, 1956, shall continu~ to -apply to such concern in the 
S5 same manner as it applied thereto before the issue of the notified 
order under section 42. 
41. Where the management of an industrial concern not being a 
of 196fl. company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, is taken over by the 
Reconstruction Bank, no suit or proceedings for dissolution or for 
40 partitIon shall, in so far as it relates to that industrial concern, lie in 
any court or before any tribunal or other authority except with the 
consent of the Reconstruction Bank. 
)lu 
right to 
compen~ 
sation 
[or 
tel1niu-
tion of 
contract 
ot 
managing 
director, 
etc. 
Applica .. 
tion of 
Act 1 of 
1956. 
Restric-
tion on 
filing of 
suits 
for 
dis-
solution, 
etc., of 
an in-
dustrial 
cooccrn 
notbeinc 
a com.. 
pany 
when ita 
mana, ... 
ment is 
taken 
.... 
t 

Ofttcial 
assi&IJOI 
orr&-
ceiverncn 
to be 
appoint-
ed 
without 
the 
COIl88Jlt 
oUbe 
~ 
struction 
Bank. 
Power 
olCen-
tral 
Govern-
mentto 
II'8llt 
relief 
in the 
cue of 
certain 
uslated 
indUl_ 
trial 
COncenD. 
128 " 
48. No proceeding for the appointment of any official 'uai&Dee ' or 
receiver in relation to any industrial concern the management of whiCh 
has been taken over by the Reconstruction Bank shall lie in 'any coun 
except with the consent of' the Reconsu-uction Bank. 
49. (1) The Central Government may, 1f it is satisfied on 'an application 5 
made to it by the Reconstruction Bank. thllt it is necessary so to do for the 
purpose of reconstructing, reviving or rehabilitating any assistediadustrial coa .. 
cern, declare by notitication in the Official Gazette, that the operation of an 
or any of the contracts, assurances of property, agreements,' settlemcots, 
awards, standing orders or other instruments in force (to which such assisted 10 
industrial concern is a party, or which may be applicable to such assisted in-
dustrial concern) immediately before the issue of such notified order, shall 
remain suspended or any rights, privileges, obligatiOn and liabilities accruina 
or arising thereunder before the said date, shall remain suspended or shall be 
enforceable with such adaptations and in such maJ:lIlCr as may be specified in 15 
the notified order. 
(2) The notified order made under sub-section (1) shall remain intoCce, 
in the first instance, for a period of two years, but. the duration of such order 
may be ,e~tended from, time to time by a· further notified order by a period, 
not exceeding two years at a time: ~o 
Provided that no such order shall in any case remain in force for more 
than eight years in the aggregate from the date of issue of the first notified 
order. 
(3) Any notified order made under sub-section (1) shall have effect, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, BJCee- 25 
mentor instrument or any decree or order of a CO\lIt, tribunal, officer or 
other aut40rity or of any submission, settlement or standing order. 
(4) Any remedy for the enforcement of any right, privilege, obligation 
or liability referred to in ~tion (1) and suspended or modified by noti-
fied order made under that sub-section shall, in accordance with the terms So 
of that notified order, remain suspended, or modified, and all proceedinp 
relating thereto pending before any court, tribunal, officer or other authotity 
sh811 accordingly remain stayed or be continuedsubject to such adapations, 
so, however, that on the notified orders ceasing to' b,ave effect-
')' . . 
(a) any right, privilege, obligation or liability so remaining sus· 35 
pended or modified shall become revived and enforeeable as if the notified 
order had never been made; 
(b) any proceeding so remaining stayed shall be proceeded with, sub-
ject to the prOVisions of any law which may then be in force, from the 
stage which had been reached when the proceeding became stayed. 
(5) In computing the period of limitation for the enforcement of any 
right, privilege, obligation or liability referred .to in sub~ection (1), the 
periOd during which it or the remedy for the enforcement thereof, remained 
IUI~nded ahall be excluded. 

(6) Durias me pcrioG ot operation of the notified order maoe UDdor :$ubo-
action (l ), . the Central Government may, if satisfied that it isneceasuy 80 
to do in the public interest,- - -
(a) lor the r~onstructioD,revivalor rehabilitation of an assisted 
5 industrial concern; or 
(b) for the proper management of the assisted industrial concern; 
or 
(e) for sealing down the liabilities oj the assisted industrial concern, 
..-0 the financial condition and other circumstances of. the assisted in-
10 dutriaJ concern are such that such scaling down is neceSsary, 
authorise the Reconstruction Bank to prepare a 9cheme- .' 
(;) for, the reconstruction, revival or rehabilitation of the a~sisted 
industrial concern; or 
(ii) for scaling down the liabilities of the assisted industrial concern; 
I 5 or Z dition tft 
(iii) for the amalgamation of the assisted industrial concern with 
any other industrial concern (refetted to in this section as the 4'tr~eree' in-
dustrial concern"), i: 
(7) The scheme referred to in sub-section (6) may contain, provisioDJ for 
20 all or any of the following matters, namcly:-
30 
35 
45 
(a) the constitution, name and registered office, the capital, assets, 
powers, rights, interests, authorities and privileges, the liabilities, duties 
and oblig~tions of the assisted industrial concern on its r~onstruction, or, 
as the case may be, of the transferee industrial concern; 
(b) in the case of amalgamation of the assisted industrial concern, 
the transfer to the tran9f~ree indusfrial concern of the busineSS, proper-
ties, assets and liabilities of the assisted industrial concern on such terms 
and conditions as mny be specified in the scheme; 
(e) any change in the Board .of Director9, or the appointment of 
a new Board of Directors, of the assisted industrial concern on its re-
construction, or, as the case may be, of the transferee industrial con-
cern and the authority by whom, the manner in which, and the other 
terms and conditions on which, . such change or appoihtment shall be 
made and in the case of appointment of a new Board of DireCtors or' of 
any di~tor, the period for which such appointment shall be made; 
(d) .the alteration elf the memorandum und articles of association of 
the assisted industrial concernOD its reconstruction, or, as the case 
may Qe, of the transferee . industrial concern for the purpo$e of altering 
the c;apitaI thereof or for such other purposes as may be necessary 
to give e1fect to the reconstruction or amalgamation; . 
(e) subject to the provisions of the scheme, the continuation by. 
or against, ·the· assisted industrial concern on its reconstruction or, as the 
case may be, the ttansferee industrial concern of any actions or proceed-
ings pending ag~inst the assisted industrial concern immediately before the 
date of the notified order made under sub-section (1); 
(f) the reduction of the interest or rights which the members and 
otber creditors have, in, or against,' the assisted industrial concern be-
fore its reconstruction or amalgamation to such extent as the Reconstruc-

30 
tioo Babk considers rlecestary in the interest of the recoliatruction, ~ •• 
viva! or rehabilitation' of the assisted iDd.ustrial concern or for themalD~ 
tenance of the business of the assisted industrial conccrn; 
, (g) the payment in cash or otherwise to the members and other 
creditors in full satisfaction of their claims- .5 
(i) in respect of their interests or rights, in, or against, the 
assisted industrial ~oncern before the reconstruction or amalgama-
tion; or 
(ii) where their interests or rights aforesaid, in, or against, 
the assisted industrial concern has or have been reduced under 10 
clause (f) , in respect of such interests or rights as so reduced; 
(h) the vesting of controlling interest, in the reconstructed indus-
trial concern, in the Central Government or its nominee either by the 
appointment of additional director or by the allotment of additional shares; 
(i) the allotment to the members of the assisted industrial concern, 15 
for any share or shares held by them therein before its reconstruction or 
amalgamation [whether their interest on such shares has been reduced 
undcrclause (I) or not], of shares in the assisted industrial concern art 
its reconstruction, or, as the caSe may be, in the transferee industrial 
concern and where any member claims payment in cfth and not aUotment IZO 
of shares, or where it is not possJble to allot shares to any member, the 
payment in cash to those members in, full satisfaction of their claims,-
(i) in respect of their interest in shares in the assisted in-
dustrial concern before its reconstruction or amalgamation; or 
(ii) where such interest has bcen reduced under clause (j), in 25 
respect of their interest in shares as so -reduced; 
(j) the continuance of the services of such of the employees of the 
assisted industrial co_ncern as may, be specified in the scheme, in the 
assisted industrial concern itself on its reconstruction, or in the trans-
feree iudustrial concern on such terms and conditions as may be speci- 30 
fled in the scheme; 
(k) notwithstandinJ anything contained in clause (j), where any 
employees of theassisfed industrial concern wl10se services are proposed 
in the draft scheme referred to in sub-section (2), have, by notice in 
writing given to the Reconstruction Bark at any time before the expiry of 35 
one month next following the date on which the draft scheme is sent to 
the assisted industrial concern, intimated their intention of not becoming 
employees of the assisted industrial concern on its reconstruction or' in the 
trallSferee industrial concern, the payment, to such employees, . and to 
?ther ~mployees whos~ services h!1~e not been continued in the assisted 40 
IDdustrtal concern on liS reconstructton Or in the transferee industrial con-
cern, of compensation, if any, to which they are entitled under the 
IndustriaJDisputes Act. 1947, and such pension, gratuity, provident 
fund and other retirement benefits ordinarily admissible to them under the 
rules or authorisations of the assisted industrial concern as in force imme- 45 
diately before the date of its reconstruction or amalgamation; 
(l) any other terans and conditions for the reconstruc"tion or amalga-
mation of the assisted industrialconcerp; 
14 Of 1947. 

(m) such incidental, consequential and supplemental mattera II ... 
necessary to secure that the reconstruction or amalgamation shall be 
fully and effectively carried out. 
( 8) (a) A copy of the scheme prepared by the Reconstruction Bank 
5 shall be sent, in draft, ,to the assisted industrial concern and also to the trans-
feree industrial concern and any other industrial concern concerned in the amal-
gamation for suggestions and objections, if any. within such period as the Re-
construction Bank may specify for this purpose; 
(b) The Reconstruction Bank may make such modifications, if any, in 
10 tho draft scheme as it may consider necessary in the light of the suggestions 
and objections received from the assisted industrial concern and as also from 
the transferee industrial concern, and any' other industrial concern' concerned 
in the amalgamation and from any members or other creditors of such of those 
industrial concerns and the transferee industrial concern: 
15 Provided that where the transferee industrial concern is a company, the 
scheme aforesaid shall be laid before such company in the general meeting for 
the approval of the scheme by its members and no such scheme shall be pro-
ceeded with unless it has been approved, with or without modification, by a 
special resolution passed by the members of such company. 
20 (9) The scheme shall thereafter be placad before the Central Govern-
ment for its sanction and the Central Government may sanction the scheme 
without any modifications or with such modifications as it may consider neces-
sary, and the scheme as sanctioned by the Central Government shall come into 
force on sucb date as the Central Government may specify in this behalf: 
25 Provided that different dates may be specified for different provisions of 
the scheme. 
(10) For the purpose of assisting it to exercise the powers conferred on it 
by sub-section (9), the Central Government may constitute an advisory com-
mittee consisting of such officers of ,the Central Government, Reserve Bank, 
go State Bank, public financial institutions and n,ationaIised banks, having know-
35 
ledge of, or experience in, one or more of the following matters,namely:-
(a) .-industry and industrial sickness; 
(b) finance and banking; 
(c) industrial relations; 
(d) law, .. ' 
as it may think fit. 
(11) The sanction accorded by the Central Government under $ub-section 
(9) shall be conclusive evidence that all the requirements of this scheme relating 
to the reconstruction, or, as the case may be, amalgamation, have been complied 
40 with and a copy of the sanctioned scheme certified in writing by an officer ot 
the Central Government to be a true copy thereof, shall, in all legal proceedings 
(whether in appeal' or otherwise) be admitted as evidence to the same extent 
as the original scheme. 
(12) On and from such date of tbe coming into operation of the scheme or 
45 any provision thereof, the scheme or such provision shaJI be binding on the 
assisted industrial concern or as the case may be, on the transferee induatrial 
concern, and any other i~du;trial concern concerned in the amalpmation and 

Power 
of High 
\I Court to 
nu~ho­
rise Re-
COn8trll~_ 
lion 
Bank to 
prepare 
s-:heme 
for recons-
truction, 
etc., of 
:'1dU~1-
trial 
concern.· 
32 
,also on Illl the, members and oilier creditors and employees of each of those 
assisted industrial concerns and of the transferee industrial concern, and on any 
other person having any right or liability in rciution to any of the assisted indus-
trial c()Dcerns or the transferee industrial concern including the trustees or· ether 
persons managing, or connected in any other manner with, any provident fund 5 
or other fund maintained by any of those industrial concerns or the transfcre~ 
industrial concern. 
(13) On and from such date as may be specified by the Central Government 
in tbis behalf, the properties, and the assets of the assisted industrial concern 
shall, by virtue of, and to the extcnt provided in the scheme, stand transferred 10 
to, and vest in, and the liabilities of the assisted indu~trial concern shall, by 
virtue of, and to the extent provided in, the scheme stand transferred to. and 
become the liabilities of, the transferee industrial concern. 
(14) If any difficulty arises in giving effc:t [0 the provisions of the scheme, 
Jhe Central Government may, by order, do anything. not inconsistent with such 15 ,,-
provisions, which appears to it to be ncces9ary or expedient for the purpose 
or reriloving the difficulty. 
(15) Copies of the scheme or of any order nlade under sub-section (14) 
shalJ be laid before each House of Parliament, as SOon as may be, after the 
. scheme has been sanctioned hy the Central Government. or, as the case maybe. :lO 
the order has been ,made, 
(16) Where the scheme is a scheme for amalgamation of the assisted indus-
trial concern, any ~usiness acquired by the transferee industrial concern under 
the Rcheme Or under any previsions thereof shall, .after the coming into opera-
tion of the scheme or such provision, be carried on by the transferee industrial ~5 
concern, in accordance with the law governing the transferee industrial concern, 
subject to such modifications in that law or such exemptions of the 'transferee 
industrial concern from the operation of any provisions th~reof as the Central 
, Government, on the recommendation of the Reconstruction Bank, may, by notifi-
cation iw'the Official Gazettc. make for the purposes of giving full effect to the 30 
scheme: 
PrOVided . that no such modification or exemption shall be made so as to 
have effect for a period d more than seven years from the date of the acquisition 
of such business. , 
(17) Nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to prevent the amalgama~ 35 
tion with an assisted industrial concern by a single scheme of several industrial 
concerns in respect of each of which an order has been made under sub-section 
(1) of thi!l section. 
SO. (1) Where any company, being an industrial concern, is being wound 
up by the High Court, and the High Court is of opinion that a scheme should be 40 
'made for the reconstruction, revival or rehabilitation Of such industrial concern, it 
may, by order, authorise the Reconstruction Bank to prepare, and submit to h, 
a scheme for such reconstruction,' reviva1 or rehabilitation of the industrial con-
cern. 
(2) The Reconstruction Bank may, in pursuance of the order made by the 45 
court under sub--section (1), prepare a scheme for the reconstruction, revival 
or rehabilitation of the industrial concern referred to in sub-section (1), and 
'the s~heme so made may cOOtain all or any of the matters specified In sub--' 
Rettion (7) of section 49: 

Provided that no such scheme shall provide for the amalgamation or merger 
of the company in liquidation or of any undertaking owned by it with any other 
company. or any other undertltking owned by such other company, except o'n 
the authority ofa special resolution passed by the members of that other com-
5 pany. 
(3) The· High Court may. if it is satisfied. after considering the scheme 
prepared under sub-section (2), that the scheme ensures the reconstruction. 
revival or rehabilitation of till? industrial concern which is a company 
being wound· up by ~e court; and such reconstruction, revival or rehabilitation 
10 would ensure an increase in the production of goods needed by the community, 
approve the scheme with or without any modification and the scheme so approv ... 
cd shall have effect, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
other provisions of this Act or any other law, or any agreement, award ,or other 
instrument for the time being in force. 
15 51. (1) Where any pro~rty. effects or actionable claims have been sold or 
leue4 in pursuance of any power conferred by section 39, section 40. or section 
41 or where the management of an industrial concern is taken ovel by the Re-
construction Bank or its nominee or an undertaking or an industrial concern 
is amalgamated under section 49, the Reconstruction Bank or the administrator 
20 or any director, or any other person authorised by the Re~onstruction Bank 
may, fOf the purpose of taking into custody or control any such property, effects 
or actionable claims, may, request in writing the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 
or the District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction any property or books of 
account or other documents relating to such property Of effects or actionable 
25 claims may be situated, or found, to take posseSSion thereof, and the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate,. as the case may be, shall, on 
such request being made to him,~ 
(a) take possession of such property. effects or actionable claims and 
books of account and other documents relating thereto, and 
30 (b) forward them to the Reconstruction Bank, administrator, director 
or other person, 8S the case may be. 
(2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of sub-
section (1), the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate may 
take Or cause to be taken such steps and use, or cause to be used, 9uch' f~rce as 
35 may. in his opinion, be necessary. 
(3) No act of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate 
don~ in pursuance of this section shall be called in question in any court or 
bef~re any authority. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
52. The provisions of this Act and of any rules or schemes made 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained ~ any other law for the time being in fOfce or in the memorandum or 
artlC1es of assoellrtfoa of In Indu8trial eonc:elioor in any other instrumeDt having 
54 effect by virtue of any law other 'than this Act. 
Chief 
Metro-
politan 
Magis-
trate 
and 
District 
Magis-
trats 
to'Bssist 
Recon-
struction 
Bank 
in 
taking 
charge 
of 
pro-
perty. 
Effect 
otthe 
Acton 
other 
laws. 

Act 43 
of 1961, 
Act 7 of 
19i14: 
and 
Act 45 
of 1974 
not to 
apply to 
Recon-
struction 
Bank. 
Law 
relating 
to 
winding 
up not 
to apply 
to the , 
Recon-
struction 
Bank. 
Act 
180f 
1891 to 
apply 
to the 
books 
. of the 
Recon-
struction 
Bank. 
Certain 
pro-
visions 
of Act 
lOof 
1949 
not to 
apply to 
Recon-
struction 
Bank. 
Act 54 
of 1969. 
not to 
apply' 
to the 
ex-
pansionor 
amal-
gamation 
of certain 
under-
takings. 
Returns 
34 
53, Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961, or the 
Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964 or the Interest-tax Act, 1974, or any 
other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on income, profits or 
gains, the Reconstruction Bank shan not be liable to pay income-tax, surtax, 
interest-tax, or any other tax in respect of-
(a) any income, profits or gains accruing to the Reconstruction 
Assistance Fund or any amount received to the credit of that Fund; 
(b) aily inc~e, profits or gains derived, or any amount received, by 
the Reconstruction Bank; and ., 
5 
(c) any interest collected by, or payable to, the Reconstruction Bank 10 
in accordance with the provisions of the Interest-tax Act, 1974. 
54. No provision of law relating to winding up of corporations shall apply 
to the Reconstruction Bank and the Reconstruction Bank shall not be placed in 
liquidation, save by order of the Central Government and in such manner as it 15 
may direct. 
55. The Reconstruction Bank shall be deemed to be It bank for the pur-
poses of .the Bankers' /Books Evidence Act, 1981. 
56. Nothing contained in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, except the 
_prpvi9ions of section 34A and section 36AD, shall apply to the Reconstruction 
Bank. 20 
57. No provision of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 
1969, in relation to the amalgamation, merger, modernisation or expansion of 
any undertaking to which Part III of that Act applies, shall apply when such 
amalgamation, merger, modernisation or expansion of such undertaking takes 
place as a result of any sale, lease, purchase, amalgamation or merger in Ilccord- 25 
ance with the provisions of this Act. 
58. The Reconstruction Bank shall ,furnish, from time to time, to the Cen-
tral Government and the Reserve Bank such returns as the Central Government, 
or as the case may ~. Reserve Bank, may require. 
/ 

3& 
39. Thl Board may, by general or special order, delegate, subject to such 
.mditiollS and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the said order, to the 
Executive Committee or any other committee constituted under this Act or 
to any director, officer or other employee of the Reconstruction Bank or to the 
5 directors, administrators, officers, or other perftons authorised by the Recons-
truction Bank to manage any assisted industrial concern or any undertaking 
owned by such assisted industrial concern, such of its powers and duties under 
this Act as it may deem necessary. 
00, (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 7, the Reconstruc-
lotion Bank may appoint such number of officers and other employees as it 
considers necessary or desirable for the efficient performanCe of its functions 
and determine their terms and conditions of appointment and service. 
(2} The Reconstruction Bank may, notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force or in any contract, depute any of its 
15 officers or other members of its staff to, or receive on deputation from, pres-
cribed institutions on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed, and may 
also depute any of its officers or other members of its staff to any assisted indus-
trial concern: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as em-
30 powering the Reconstruction Bank to depute to any prescribed institution or 
assisted industlial concern any officer or other member of its staff on any 
salary, emoluments or other terms and conditions of service which are less 
favourable to him than those to which he was entitled immediately before such 
deputation. 
25 61. (1) The Reconstruction Bank shall observe, except as otherwise required 
by law, the practices and usages customary among bankers and, in particular, 
it shall not, except as otherwise provided in sub-section (3), divulge any infor-
mation relating to, or to the affairs of, the assisted industrial concern, except in 
circumstances in which it is, in accordance with law or practices and usages, 
30 customary among bankers, necessary or appropriate for the Reconstruction Bank 
to divulge such information. 
..... (2) Every director, auditor, adviser, officer or any other employee of the 
Reconstruction Bank shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration 
of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Second Schedule. 
3801 
1939. 
35 (3) The Reconstruction Bank may, for the purpose of efficient discharge of 
its fUDctions under this Act, collect from, or furnish to,-
(a) the Centra) Government, 
(b) the Reserve Bank. 
(c) the Stute Bank, or any subsidiary bank within the meaning of 
40 the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, or any nationalised 
bank, or any other scheduled bank, or any State co.operative bank or the 
Development Bank or other public financial institutions, or State level 
agencies or prescribed institutions or State Financial Corporations, 
such credit information or other information as it may consider useful for the 
45 purpose, in such manner and at such times, as it· may think fit. 
Explanat;on.-For the purposes of this sub-section. the expression 
"credit information" shall have the same meaning as in clause (c) of 
section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, subject to the modi-
fication that the banking company referred to therein shaH menn an 
50 assisted industrial concern. . . .<. 
Delegation 
ot powers. 
Staff 
of the 
Recon-
struction 
Bank. 
Obliga-
tions as to 
fidelity 
and 
secrEjcy. 

Provident 
fund. 
Indemi-
nity of 
'direc-
tors. 
Protec-
tion of 
actior. 
taken in 
good faith 
under 
this Act. 
Chair-
man direc-
tor, etc., 
to !be 
public 
servants. 
Penalty 
for making 
falSe state-
ment in 
applica-
tions for 
loans abel 
advances. 
Offence. 
by com-
panies. 
61.(1) The Reconstruction Bank shall constitute, for thebeneftt ot 
the omcers and other employees appointed under section 50 (as also for 
the officers and other employees whose services have been transferred to it 
under section 7) in such manner and subjeCt to such conditions as may be ' . 
prescribed, such insurance and provident fUhd as it may deem fit. 5 
(2) Where any such insurance or provident fund·QQSbeen soconstitv.t-
ed, the Central Government may declare that the proviSions of' the PlDvident 
Funds Act, 1925, shall apply to such fund as if it were a Governm(f~t 
Provident Fund. 
63. (1) Every director shall be indemnified by the Reconstruction 10 
n.ank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in or in relation, to 
the discharge of his duties, except such as are caused by his oW:!l wilful act or 
default. 
(2) A director shall not be responsible for any other director or for 
any officer or other employee of the Reconstruction Bank or for any. loss 15 
or expenses resulting to the Reconstruction Bank from the insufficiency or 
deficiency of the value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or 
taken on behalf of the Reconstruction Bank or the insolvency or wrongful 
act of any debtor or any person under obligation to the ReQonstructioo 
Bank or any' thing done in good faith in execution of the duties of his 20 
office or in relation thereto. 
64. No suit or other Jegal proceeding shall lie against the Recons~on 
Bank, or any director, or officer, or oth.er employee of the Reconstructl(m 
Bank. or any other person authorised by the Reconstruction Bank, to dis-
charge any functions under this Act, for any loss or damage oaused or is 25 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done. in pursuance of this Act or any other law or provision having 
the force of law. 
65. Chairmad, director, adviser and auditor and every other employee 
of the Reconstruction Bank shall be deemed to be public servants for the 30 
19 Of 1926: 
purposes of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code. 45 l'f 1860 
66. If in any application, return or statement or othet document made, 
submitted, furnished or produced for the purpose of obtaining any loan or 
advance or any other assistance from the Reconstrucq9n ,Bank any person 
makes a statement- 35 
(0) which is false in any material particular., knbwing It to !be 
false; or 
(b) which omits to &tate any ma.terial fact, knowing it to be 
materi~l; , . , 
be shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 40 
to two years, and shan also be liab'le to fine. 
67. (1) Where any offence, punishab~e under section 66, has been 
ccmmltled by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company' for 
the conduct of the business of the company, as well astbe company, sbaD 

';" , ST' 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against 'aDd punished accordingly: I ' 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render' any/ 
sueb person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence: was 
, committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the coDlIDission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), when any 
offence punishable under section 66 has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
10 or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on tbepart ot, any 
director, manager, secretary or othet officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deem.ed to be 
guilty of that oifEmce and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. , 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and inc.udes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm. means a partner in he firm. 
68. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official PoW'e1'll 
~o Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions' of· this Act. ' ~ate .i 
lZ5 
35 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any ot the following matters, Di.!1lely:-
(a) institutions and agencies in, and outside, India, payment of 
whose loans may be guaranteed, counter-guaranteed or indemnified by tho 
Reconstruction Bank as may be specjfied under sub-section (1) of section 18; 
• (b) institutions and agencies which may, be provided with the 
line 01 credit by the Reconstruction Bank for grant of loans and advances 
by them to industrial concerns as may be specified under clause (d) of 
sub-section (1) of section 18; 
(c) persons who may be appointed to act as the agents of the 
Reconstruction Bank as required by clause (q) of sub-section (1) of Section 
181 .,:;:. i 
(d) borrowing of foreign currency from any sotp'ce, other than 
the source specified in sub-section (1) of section 23; 
(e) the powers which may be exercised and duties which may 
'be Performed by any director or· administrator appointed' under 
, .ub-section (1) of IeCtion 44; 
(f) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which an in-
surance or provident fund may be constituted by the R.econstruction 
Bank required by sub-lection (1) of section 62; 
(g) any other matter which is required to be. or may be. pres-
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of ParHament. while it is in session, for 
45 a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one sesSion or in 

Power of 
Recon-
atruction 
Bank to 
make re-
p1aUOD.S. 
two or morc; successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session im-
mediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have dlcet only 
in luch modified form or be Of no effect, as the case may be; 10, however, 5 
that any luch modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of .anything prev~ously done under that rule. 
". (1) The Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for aU matters for which 10 
regulations are necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to 
the provisions of this Act and of the rules made thereunder. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such regulations may provide for all or- any of the foHowing 
,matters, nllJ!lCly:- 15 
l 
(0) restrictions relating to the powers which may be exercised 
by the Chairman in pursuance of the provisions of sub-section (2) of 
section 9; 
(b) the time and place at which the Board shall meet and the 
rUles of procedure (including quorum) which shall be observed by 20 
the Board in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings 
8S required by Bub-section (1) of section 14; . . 
(c) (i) the constitution of the Executive Committee or other comuiittees 
and the functions thereof; 
(ii) the time and place at which such committees shall meet; and 25 
(iii) the rules of procedure (including quorum) which shall be 
observed by each Committee in relation to the transaction of business 
at ita meetings ~ required by section IS; 
(d) fees and allowances which may be paid to the directors and 
member of 111e commi~ a~ required by sec1ion 17; So 
(e) conditions and limitations, subject to \Yhich an industrial 
eoncern may enter into 1lDy kind of business as required by clause (f)of 
IU~on (,%) of section 19: 
(1) the form and manner in which the OOlance sheet and ac-
counts of the Reconstruction Assistance Fund shall be prepared as required 35 
by sub:section (1) of section 29; 
(g) the form and the manner in which the balance sheet and 
accoun~ Of 1he Reconstruction Bank shall be preplred as required by su~ 
section (1~ of section 32; 

" 
(h) the duties, conduct, ~alaries, allowances and conditions of 
service of officerE and other employees (whether employed on re~ 
basis or on contract) of the Reconstruction Bank and all those who 
are appointed for the management of any undertaking, the mana .. 
5 ment of which has been taken over; and 
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pro-
vided for by regulations. " 
(9) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this 
Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, befl)fe each HOUle of ParHa-
10 ment, while it is in Session, for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one seSsion or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the SUC<:e8Sive sei-
sions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation, 
or both House agree that the regulation should not be made, O.e regulation shall 
15 thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation. 
70. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provisions of this 
Act, the Central Gov.ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette. 
80 remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such notification shall be made after the' expiry of • 
period of two years from the appointed day. 
71. The enactments specified in Parts I to III. of the Third Schedule to 
this Act shall be am~ded in the manner directed in the first column thereof 
a5 and such amendments shall take effect on the dates specified in the second 
column of that Schedule. 
71. In every Act,rule or regulation in fdrce on the appointed day, for the 
words "Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited", wherever 
they· occur, the words "Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India" shall .,. 
So substituted. . .' . <"-'T~ 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 37)· 
D!x:LARATION RIll"ERRED TO IN SEC'1'ION 'n or THIJ IMtnrS'I'RIAL RIDOOmlTRtTCl'IOIf 
BANK 01' INDIA ACt, 19M 
85 I/We .............. hereby declare that in coMlderatt.· of the 
8B~taDce given to me/us or at my/our request, by the Industrial Reconstruction 
Amead. 
ment of 
certahl 
enaet-
menta. 
Su.betitu· 
tionm 
.Acta, 
ru1ea or 
ftIUla· 
tlOIII of 
dIo RecoIl-
ItI'UctIoD 
Bantta 
plaae of 
die Cor. 
pcnUcIIL 

Bank of India, as specified in the Annexure hereto. I/We agr~ that the immov-
able properties specified in the said Annexure shall form a security for 
'the said assistance and IIWe agree that ·the dues arising out of such 
assistance . shall, on and from the date of execution of' these presents, 
be a cbarge on the said properties for the recovery of the dues of, the 5 
IBid Reconstruction Bank. 
Execution by the parties. 
« 
\ 
1. Signed and delivered by ..............• ~ • . •. (party recciw.g the 
assistance ) 
2. Signed and delivered by ......•..... (the concerned person fumilh- 10 
ing guarimtee / collateral security ) 
3. Sign~ by the duly authoriSed official of Reconstruction Bank. 
'. , . 
, '(Note:-&rike out whichever is not applicable) 
'THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
, (See section 61) 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY 
I, ........... ~, do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to 
the best of my skill and ability, execute and perform the dutiel required 
of me as the Chairman, Director, member of ................ committee, 
15 
auditor, adviser, officer Or other employee of the Reconstruction Bank ~o 
of India and which properly relate to the office or position held by me in or in ." 
rela~on to the said Reconstruction Bank. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be com-
municated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information 
relating to the affairs of the Industrial' Reconstruction Bank of India:l5 
or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said Racon-
. struction Bank, nor will I allow any such person to inspect or have 
access to any books or documents belonging to or in pOssession of the 
aaid Reconstruction Bank and relating to the business of the said Recon-
IttUction Bank or the busine~ of any person having any dealing with SO 
the said Reconstruction Bank. 
, (Signature) 
Signed before me. 
'--

.' .. ,"j 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 71) 
Amendments of certain enactments 
PART I "~.',. .., 
5 AMENDMENTS ronrE RESBRVE BA.NlC OF INDlA Act; 1934 
Ameudmcmta 
10 (1) 
(2 0., 1934) 
Date on which 
amendme n ts shall 
take effect 
(2) 
f 
1. In section 2, after clause (ellI), insert the following Th. e date of establish-
clause, namely:- ment of !.be Recons-
'(Cll) "Reconstruction Bank" means the Industrial truction Bank. 
Reconstruction Bank of India establbhed under 
15 section 3.0£ Industrial Reconstruction Bank: of India 
Act, 1984'. 
20 
35 
2. In tection 17,-
(0) in clause (40), after the worda ·,the Exim Bank", 
insert the worda "or the Reconstruction Bank'~; 
(b) in clause (4-1), after the words "Exim Bank", 
insert the worda "Of' Reconstruction Bank"; 
(c) after clau~c (41), insert the following clause, 
namely:-
"(410 the making to the Reconstruction Bank of 
loans and advaBccs-
(0) repayable on demand or on the expiry 
of a fixed period not exceeding ninety days, 
from the date of such loan or advance against 
the security of stocks, funds and securities 
(other thaD immovable property) in 
which a trustee is authorised to invest trust 
money by any law for the time being in force in 
India; or . 
(b) against the security of bills of 
exchange or promissory notes, arising out of 
bona flu commercial or trade transactions 
bearing two or more good signatures and ma-
turing within five years from the date of luch 
loan or advance"; 
(d) in clause (I~B), after the words "the Exim 
Bank", insert the word$ "or the RecoDitruc tion Bank"; 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
3. In section 42, in sUb-claUSCI (e) of the Explanotion Do. 
below the proviso to sub-section (r), after th., words "or 
from the Exim Bank", msert the 'Words "or from the Recons-
45 truction Bank". 
--.... --.... ----------.--------------.... ------------

· Amendments 
(1) 
Date on which 
am.endments shall 
t~ke effect 
(2) 
4. In section 46C, in clauses (e) and (d) ofsub-section 
(.II), after the words "&tim. Banku wherever they oa;ur, 
insert the worda "or the Reconstruction Bank, as the case 
may be,". 
The date of 5 
PART II 
establishment of 
the Reconstruc-
tion Bank. 
C., 
AMENDMENT TO nlE INDUSTlUAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 OF 1947) 
Amendment 
Date on Which 
amendment shall 
take effect 
10 
(1) (2) 15 
In section 2. 'ojn clause (bb), after the words "ExpOrt-
Import Bank of India, u. insert the words uThe Industrial 
Reconstruction Bank of India,". 
The date of esta-
blishment of the 
Industrial Recons-
truction Bank of 
India. 20 
PARTm 
.AMJCNDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION N:rl 1949 
(10 or 1949) 
Amendments 
(1) 
I. Id section 5, after [lause (1ft), buert the following clause, 
namely:-
(I,) "Reconatructlon Bank" means the Industrial Recons-
truction Bank of India established under .ectlon S or the Industrial 
RCCODItrUctiOll Bank or India Act, 1984,", 
s. In lectlon 18, in the &pl_,,.,,, in Bub-clause (ia") of clau.,e (II), ' 
af\er tlle words "or from the Exim Bank", insert the worda "ortiom the 
Reconstruction Bank". 
3, In section MA, in lub .. cction (,), after the words "the Exim 
BaDk". insert the worcda "The Reconstruction Bank", 
Date on which 
amendments shall 
take effect 
(2) 
The date of estab-
lishment of the 
Reconstruction 
Bank. 
Do. 
Do. 
4. In section S6AD, in sub .ection (3), after the words "the Eldm Do. 
Bank". iDlert the words ''The Reconstruction Dauk". 
5. In section ,56, in .ub-cl .... e (Ii) of clause (II) of the &,IiIMfiDJI Do. 
under clause U), after the words "the Edm Bank", insert the words "The 
Recomtructlon Bank", 
25 
SO 
S5 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS .. ~, : 
The Bill seeks to convert the Industrial Reconatruction Corporatioa 
of India Limited (which was established. 81 a company under the 
Companies Aot, on 12th AprU, 1971, for tl}e purpose of rehabilitating 
and reconstructing ailing industrial concerns) into a statutory corpora-
tion, to be known as the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of lDdia (here-
after referred to as the Reconstruction Bank). The conversion of the 
said company into a statutory corporation has become necessarx-
(i) in order to overcome the inherent difilcultiea which have 
been faced by the company during the last twelve yeara of ita 
existence, which have tended to inhibit its efforta to rebabilitate 
and reconstruct sick industrial concerna, and. ... 1 
.(ii) to invest the Reconstruction Bank with eftective power. to 
tackle and contain the growing malaise of indust~81 sickness. 
2. The salient features of the Bill at'6-
(i) The establishment of the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of 
India which shall be wholly: owned 1:>y the Central Government, 
and the transfer thereto of the Wldertaking of the company known 
sa ,the Ind.ustrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited; : , 
(ii) The Chairman of the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of 
India . (who shall also fWlction as the managing director thereof) 
shall be appointed by': the Central Government; 
(iii) The Reconstnlction Bank will function 88 the principal 
credit and reconstruction agency' for industrial revival and w1ll co-
ordinate the work of other institutions engaged in industrial revival 
activities. Besides, the Recopstruction Bank will also assist and 
promote industrial development and rehabilitation of ind\J8trial 
concel'IlS ; , . 
(iv) In regard ,to assisted sick industrial units, the J.teconstruc-
tion Bank shall have powers to take over the management; lease 
out or sell the undertaking as a running concern; prepare schemes for 
reconstruction by scaling down the liability and submit such 
schem.es of merger or amalgamation fal' approval of the Central 
Government. and to apply to the Central Government for the SUB-
pension of all or any contracts, agreements, settlements, awards, etc. 
The Reconstruction Bank will also have the power, if directed 80 to 
do by the High Court, to submit schemes for recoDitruction of the 
companies in liquidation or, for their amalgamation with healthy con-
cenu and to submit such schemes to the High Court for approval; 

44 
(v) The Central Oovemmen( ~an have powers to give to 
the Reconstruction Bank such directions in matters of policy invo}y-
ing public interest as it may think fit. 
3. The notes on c~usea appended to the Bill explain. in detail the 
various provisions of the Bill. 
PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
NBW DE.L~; 
The 2"d J1!ly, 19&4. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF . THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.l (13)IF-ll/81, dated 2nd July, 1984 from 
Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherjee, Minister of Finance to the Secretary-
General, Lok' Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India Bill, .1984, recommends . 
under clause (1) of article 117 read with clause (1) of article 274 of 
the Constitution, 'the intro'Cluction of the Bill in Lok Sabha and also 
,ecommends to Lok Sabha under clause (3) of article 117 of the Constl-
i tution the consideration of the Bill. 

Notes on Clauses 
Clause I.-This clause deals with the extent and commencement 01 
the Act. 
t::lause 2:-This clause seeks to define certain expressions in the Bill. 
Speclal mention may be made about the definition of the expression indus-
trial concern. The said expression has been so defined as to ensure that 
almost all types of industries fall within the purview of the Bill. 
Clause 3.-This clause seeks to provide for the establishment of the 
Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India (to be known as the Reconstruc-
tion Bank) with Head Office at Calcutta and also for the establishlllent 
of its office'i and branches in and outside India. 
Claw Ie 4.-' This clause deals with the share capital and the owner-
5hip of the Reconstruction Bank. .Jt provides for an authorbed capital 
of Rs. 200 crores with initial paid up capital of Rs. 50 crores. Further, the 
issued capital shall be wholly subscribed by the Central Government. 
Clauses 5 to 8.-These clauses provide for the trallSfer of business of 
Jndustrial Reconstruction Co~poration of India Limited (IRel) to the 
Reconstruction Bank and other consequential provisions. 
Clauses 9 and 10.-These clauses provide for the management of the 
Reconstruction Bank. 
Clause l1.-This clause deal .. with the disqualification of membership 
of the Board of Directors. 
Clause 12.-This clause deals with the terms of office, salaries and 
allowances of the, Chainnan .. 
Clause l3.-This clause deals with the disclosure of interest. direct 
or indirect, of the Directors 
Clause 14.-This clause deals with the time and place of the meetings 
of the Board of Reconstruction Bank and the rules and procedures in 
regard to transaction of business of the meetings. 
Clause IS.-This clause empowers the Board to constitute Executive 
Committee nr other Committees for such purpose as it may think fit. 
Clame 16.-This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the 
-Board or of any Executive Committee or other Committees shall be invalid 
on the ground of existence of any vacancy or difficulty in the constitution 
of the Board or difficulty or di"qualification of a member of the Board of 
Executive or other Committee. . 
Clause 17.-This clause seeks to provide for the payment of fees and 
allowances to Directors and members of the Executive Committee or other 
. Committees. 
45 

46 
Clause 18.-This clause deals with the object and .business of the 
Reconstruction Bank and gives details of the functions which may be 
undertaken by the Reconstruction Bank. 
Apart from its normal function, 1,iz:, to act as the principal credit and 
reconstruction agency for industrial revival by undertaking modernisation. 
expansion. re-organisation, diversification or rationalisation of industries 
and by coordinating similar work of other institutions, the Reconstruction 
Bank shall a]so assist and promote industrial development and undertake 
rehabilitation of industrial concerns by providing or procuring assistance and 
operating schemes for the same and for attaining the said objectives granting 
loans and advances (including working capita]) to any industrial .concern or 
subscribing to or purchasing or underwriting the issue of stocks, shares, 
bonds or debentures of any industrial concern or converting the dues in 
rc!spect of such loans or debentures into shares of industrial concerns, to 
i~sue guarantee, counter guarantee in respect of: 
(i) loans raised by industrial concerns from banks, public fin-
,incial institutions or any other prescribed institution or agency in or 
outside India; 
(ii) deferred payments due from an industrial concern; 
(iii) the purpose of obligation to any contract undertaken by the 
incJustrial concern. 
A number of other functions are proposed to be entrusted to the 
Reconstruction Bank, such as (a) subscribing to or purchasing or under-
writing the issue of stocks, shares, bonds or debentures to any institution; 
(b) providiBg credit to any state level agency or other institution for grant 
or loans and advances to industrial concerns; (c) providmg or obtaining 
credit from other public institutions or banks; (d) grant of loans to, or 
to furnish guarantees on behalf of industrial concerns: (e) providing in-
frac;tructural facilities and raw-materials; (f) providing machinery or other 
equipments on lease or hire iurchase basis; (g) providing eonsultancy 
and bank services in or outside India related to reconstruction and 
development of any industrial concern; (h) providing technical, 
managerial, legal, administr-ative and marketing assistance; (i) to provide 
schem~ for merger. ama]gamation or reconstruction of industrial or busi-
nes'S concerns or undertakings: (j) undertaking research and survey for 
evaluating or dealing with marketing or investment and, (k) acting as 
an agent to the Central or State Government, Reserve Bank, State Bank •. 
scheduled bank, etc. 
Cla11se 19.-This clause rrohibits Re('onstruction Bank from enter-
ing into any kind of business with any industrial concern of which any 
of the directors of Reconstruction B.ank is a proprietor, partner, director. 
etc. or one or more 'direct.ors (If Reconstruction Bank together hold suba-
tantial interest. However, the restriction is not applicable to a director-
nominated by Government, Government Company, Reconstruction Bank 
or by a Corporation established by any law or is elected by the aforelJaid 
bodies pursuant to shares beld by any of them. 
Clauses 20 and 21.-While clause 20 seeks to provide for loans by' 
the Central Government, clause 21 provides for borrowings and accep-
mnce of deposits by the Reconstruction Bank. Like other financial insti-

47 
tutioDS, Reconstruction Bank would be abl~, to borrow from the open 
market throUB'h the issue of bonds and debentures. Besides it will also 
enjoy the requisite ,accommodation from the Reserve Bank against trustee 
securities and lodgment of bill!! and promissory notes arisins out of bolUl 
fide ~rcial or tr.we transactions. In addition to the above, Recons-
truction Bank may borrow from such other authority,'organisation institu-
tions or trusts in India as approved by the Central Government as also 
may accept deposit repayable after the expiry of not less than one year 
with the approval of Reserve Bank. 
Cliluse 22.-This clause deals with the power of the Reconstructioa 
Bank. to transfer its rights and interest in respect of any loan or advance 
granted or any aDlount recoverable by it. 
Clauses 23 and 24.-Clause 23 enables the Reconstruction Bank to 
borrow foreign currency for the purpose of granting loans and advances 
with the consent of Central Government from bank or financial institutiona 
in any foreign country and clause 24 enables it to raise resources by accep-
tance of gifts, grants, donations, etc. either from Government Qr from any" 
other source. 
Clauses 25 to 30.-These clause,s inter alia deal with the establishment of 
a special fund to be called the Reconstruction Assistance Fund which would 
be utilised mainly for financing of any loan or advance or entering into any 
arrangement under clause 18 which are unlikely to be supported by the 
Reserve Bank, scheduled banks and financial institutions. The account of 
the Reconstruction AsSistance Fund would be maintained separately and· 
would also be audited by the statutory auditors and an annual report on its 
operations would be submitted to the Central Government. These provisions 
are similar to the provisions UDder Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 
1964. 
Clause 31.-This clause seeks to provide for the maintenance aI. peral 
fund to which aU other income earned by the Reconstruction Bank would 
be .aredited. The general fund will be uti1i!led by the Reconstruction Bank 
for its normal operations. 
Clause 32.-This clause seeks to provide for the preparation of Balance 
sheet and Profit & Los'\ Account of the Reconstruction Bank and closure or. 
Books and Accounts as on 30th June each year. 
Clause 33.-This clause provides that the Reconstruction Bank may est .. 
lish a Reserve FUnd to which may be transferred such funds . as it may 
deem fit out of the annual profit acct Jing to the General Fund. It further pro-
vides that Reconstruction Banle: shall after making the provisions for bad and 
doubtful debts, depreciation of assets .a:nd for all other matters which are 
usually provided for by the bankers and for the transfer of the balance of the 
net profits to the Central Government. 
Clause 34.-This clause provideS for the accounts of the Reconstruction Sank 
being audited by the Auditors duly qualified to act u such under the Com-
panies Act, 1956, to be appointed by the Central Government. The Central 
Government may also, at any time. appoint the Comptroller and Auditor ~ 
rat of India to examine and report upon the accounts of the ReconstructiOn 
Bank .. 

C'aI~.ie 3S ... This claU'Se makes a saving provJ.Slon to ensure that the proVi .. 
sions contained in Chapter VII [excePt as otherwise provided in sub-sectioa 
( 4)] of section 29. shall not apply to the Reconstruction Assistance Fund. 
CUuue 36.- This clause deals with the power of the Reconstruction Bank 
to impose conditions on industrial concerns for grantin, assistance for the pur-
pose of protecting the interest of the Reconstruction Bank and for securing 
that the assistance granted is put to the best use by the industrial concem. 
This clause further enables the Reconstruction Bank to appoint one or more 
aominee non-rotational director on the Board of such industrial concern. Any 
provision regarding qualification, age limit, number of directorships\ removal 
from office of directors and such like conditions cOntained in the memor.andum, 
articles of association of the industrial concern or in any <>ther law relating 
to industrial concern, shall not apply to such directors appointed by the Re-
construction Bank. 
Clause 37.-This clause deals with the creation of a charge on the property 
of the industrial concern or'thc person offering immovable properties as colla-
tetal security to secure assistance from the Reconstruction Bank. This clause 
enables the Reconstruction Bank to have a charge both as primary security 
and as collateral security for the assistance sanctioned to the industrial concern. 
The person seeking th~ assistance or offering any immovable property as col-
lateral security for such assistance will be required to make a written declara-
tion which wiJl be registered with the concerned Registrar of Assurances. Such 
lIec1aration shall, inter alia, contain the particulars of the assistance granted 
and the particulars of the properties offered as security or collateral security 
lor such assistance. In case any fresh security Qf immovable property is offered 
for the assistance, fresh decJaration shan be executed by the industrial concern 
or the person offering SUC'l property as collateral security, as the case may be. 
Cl4use 38.-This clause deals with the power of the Reconstruction Bank 
to call for repayment before the agreed period if false or misleading informa-
tion ift any material particular have been given in the application for the assis-
tance or iT the 'industrial concern had failed to comply with the terms of its 
agreement with the Reconstruction Bank or if there is r~asonable apprehen-
sion that the industrial concern is unable to pay its debts or that proceedings 
for liquidation have been or may be commenced against the industrial concern 
or if the property assigned, charged, hypothecated, mortgaged or pledged to 
the Reconstruction Bank as security for the assistance is not insured and kept 
insured to the satisfaction of tlte Reconstruction Bank or if such property MS 
depreciated in value to suchan extent that further security to the satisfaction 
of the Reconstruction Bank should be given and such security has not been 
furnished or any machinery, plant and10ther equipment whether, forming part 
lof the security or otherwise, is removed without the permission of the Recons-
truction Bank from the premises of the industrial concern or for any otber 
reason to protect the interest of the Reconstruction Bank. . 
Clause 39.-This clause deals with the rights of the RecoDstruction Bank 
in case of default. It enables the Reconstruction Bank to take over the manage-
ment, or poSSession, or both, of the industrial concern as well as the right to 
transfer by way Of. lease or sale of the property assigned, charged, hypothecated, 
mortgaged or pledged to Reconstruction Bank for the purpose of realising its 
~ or for the remal. of the industrial concern. Any such transfer of pro-
perty made by ReconstRICtiQJ1 Bank shall vcst in the transferee the rights In 
relation to the property transferred as jf th~ transfer has been made' by the 

49 
owner, of such P!oPCrty~ The same powe'r is 'llso extended to the Reconstmc-
tionBank in regard to goods manufactured or produ:ed atinually or partly 
from the goods forming part of the security held by the Reconstruction Bank 
as it had with the 'receipt or the origin a' !!o<)d<;, The cost incidental to the 
aforesaid shall also be recovered from the industrial concern. 
Clause 40.-This clause deals with the enforcement of claims by the 
Reconstruction Bank w~eTe an assisted industrial concem makes default 
in payment of any of the dues or in meeting its obligations in relaJion to 
any other industrial a<;sistance given by the Reconstruction Bank or other-
wise fails to comply with the term .. of agreement with the Reconstruction 
Bank. through concerned High Court for an order of sale or lease of the 
property a~signed, charged. hypothecated. mortgaged or pledged to Re· 
cuni>truction Bank as primary or coJ1ateraJ security for the assistance 
. granted by it or for transfer of the management of the industrial concern 
to the Reconstructi()1\ Bank or its or its nominee or for ad interim injunc-
tion or f(}t' order for appointment of receiver, by an application stating the 
nature and extont of liability of the industrial concern to . the Reconstruc-
tion Bank and the grounds thereof and the procedure to be ad1pted by the 
High Court in this regard. 
Clause 41.-This clause deals with the powers of'Reconstruction Bank 
to take over the management or possession or both of the property offered 
as collateral security and shall also have the right to transfer by lease or 
sale of the said property for the purpose of realising its dues. The clause 
also enab!es Reconstruction Bank to recover the incidental cost out of the 
money received by way of sale or Jease of the property mentioned afore-
said, Reconstruction Bank shall also have the right to appJy to High 
Court for sale or leac;eof the aforesaid property and the provisions will he 
similar to that of clause 40. 
Clause 42.-This c1ause deals wjth the power of the Reconstruction 
Rank to appoint a director oradministratot of an industrial concern by 
llolitled order when the ~a2ement of the industrial concern is taken over. 
The provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 or any other la~ for timely en-
forccmentretating to industrial .concern in so far as it relates to the holding 
of any share qualification,. age limit, restriction on the number of director-
ship\ .J;'etirement by rotation or removal from office shall not apply to such 
directors as appointed by the Reconstruction Bank under this tltlll..:e. 
Clawe 43.-1'his clause deals with the effect of nOlified order issued 
under clause 42. On the issue of such notified order, all persons holding 
"tnee as directors of the industrW concern and all the persons hoMing any 
office having the power of superintendence, direction Or control of the indus-
trial concern whiclt is not· a company before the issuance of. notified order. 
shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such and any contract or 
management between any other Jndustrial concern and any director or 
manager thereof, 'lihall be deemed, to have terminated. The directors or 
administrators, appointed 'for the purpose, shall take SUC!1 steps as may be 
neeessary to take into their custody or control. all the properties and assetS. 
of the industrial coacem. From the date of notified order the direc-
-rors . or administrators, as the case may be shall alone be entitled to eXercise 
·tbe pOwers of the directors or aU the powers of superintendence, direction 
or control. as the case may be. ' 

50 
Clause 44.-This clause deals with the powers and duties of directors 
and administrators appointed under clause 42 subject to the control of the 
Reconstruction ~ank for the purpose of efficiently managing the business of 
industrial concern and shall also have powers to make an application to 
court for cancellation of any contract or agreement entered into before 
the issue of notified order and the court may make an order cancelling of 
such contracts or agreements. 
CLawe 45-This clause povides trat the managing or whole-time dir-
ector' or any other director or manager or any person in charge of manage-
ment of the industrial concern shall not be entitled to any compensation in 
the loss of office or for premature retirement or for the termination of any 
contract of management by him with the industrial concern. 
Clause 46.-This clause deals with the non-application of certain pro-
visions of the Companies Act where the management of ~ company has 
been taken over by the Reconstruction Bank.. It restricts nomination or 
appointment of a director by the shareholders and passing of any resolu-
tions in the shareholders'meeting and no proceedings for winding up or 
for appointment of receiver of such industrial concern shall lie in any court 
except with the consent of the Reconstruction Bank. Except the above re- . 
strict ions and the exceptions, restrictions and eliminations, if any, at; the 
Central Government by notified order specify, all other provifOions of the 
Companies Act shall apply to the industrial concern. 
Clause 47 .-This clause deals with the restriction on filing of suits for 
disso·lution or for partition of an industrial concer9 (unit is not a company) 
when its management is taken over by the Reconstruction Bank, before any 
court or tribunal or other party except with the consent of Reconstruction 
Bank. 
Clause 48.-This clause seeks to "provide that no proceeding for the 
aRl)ointment of ~y official assignee or receiver shall lie in any court in 
re.tion to any indu'itrial concern the management of which has been taken 
over by the Reconstruction Bank without its consent. 
Clawe 49.-This clause gives power to the Central Government, by 
notified oreier, to grant relief to im assisted industrial concern, on its 
application, to suspend the operation of all or any of the contracts, ,assur-
ances of property, agreem~nts, settlements and awards or standing brders, 
etc., or any rights, privileges, obligations and liabilities arising Or accru-
ing thereunder before the date of notified order. The notified order shall 
not be made for more than two years at a time, so, however, that such 
notified order shall not remain in force for more than eight years in the 
aggregate, The period of limitation .will not run for the period during 
which the notified order will be in force. 
During the period of operation of the notified order, the Central Gov-
ernment, if satisfied, that it is necessary 80 to do in the public interest, 
may authorise the Reconstruction Bank to prepare a scheme for recon-
struction, revival or rehabilitation of the aSsisted industrial concern or 
for scaling down the liabilities of the assisted industrial concern or f9r 
/ the amalgamation of the a'ssisted industrial concern with any other 
indl1strial concern, A copy of the draft of the scheme is to be sent to 
the assls~ed industrial concern concerned in the amalgamation, for 
sl1ggestions and objections and the consent of the . transferee industrial 

51 
concern, if it is a company, has to be obtained by special resolution of 
l:iuch company. The scheme as approved shall be placed before the 
Central Government for si\!lction ond if sanctioned the same shall come 
inLo force on such date as the Central Government may specify in this 
behalf. 
The Central Government may constitute an advisory committee con-
sisting of officers of the Central Government, Reserve Bank, State Bank, 
Nationalised Banks. and public financial institutions for the purpose of 
assisting it in this regard. 
The scheme shall when comes into force, be binding on the assisted 
concern, transferee !Jldustrial concern or any other indU8~al concern 
and also on all the'membel'll and other creditors and employees and on 
any other person having any right or liability thereto including the trps-
tees or other persons managing or connected with provident fund .' or 
other funds maintained by any of those industrial concern or the trans-
feree industrial concerns. The copies of the schemes or any other order 
made under sub-section (14) shall be laid before both the Houses of 
Parliament after the scheme has been sanctioned by the Central Govern-
ment or, as the case may be, the order has been made. 
Cllluse 50-This clause enables the concerned High Court to authorise 
the Reconstruction Bank to prepare scheme for reconstruction, revival 
or rehabilitation of industrial concern which is being wound up by the 
High Court. The High Court may, alter considering the scheme, approve 
the scheme with or without modification and the scheme so approved 
shall become effective. 
Clause 51.-This clause seeks to enable the Chief Metropolitan Magis-
trate or District Magistrate to extend help to the Reconstruction Bank 
or the administrator, any directors or any othe.r person authorised by the 
Re::onstruction Bank in taking charge of or possession of the property of 
the industrial concern or of any other person offered that security which 
has been sold or leased in pursuance of any of the power conferred by 
clause 39, 40 or 41 or where the managementl of any industrial concern 
is taken over or when an und':!rtaking or an industrial concern is amal-
gamated under clause 49. 
Clause 5·2.-This clause deals with the effect of this Act on other laws. 
Clause 53.- This clause provides for the exemption of the Reconstruc-
tion Bank from payment of income-tax or companies (profits) surtax 
and of other taxes on income, profits, or gains and is on the lines ot simi-
lar exemptions given to Industrial Development Bank of India and Ex-
port Import Bank of India This clause further exempts Reconstruction 
Bank from the payment of interest-tax on its income under the Interest-
tax Act, 1974. 
Clause 54.-This clause ensures that no provision of any law relating 
to the Winding Up of companies or corporatinons shall apply to the Recon-
struction Bank which shall not be placed in liquidafion except by 1'\n 
order of the Central Government. 

52 
Clauses 55 and 56.-These two clauses seek to extend the application 
of the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, and to a limited extent, of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 to the Reconstruction Bank. 
Clfl.use 57.-This 'clause provides that Part III of the Monopolies ani 
Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, shall not apply to any amalgama-
tion effected under this Act. 
Clause 58.-This clause makes it obligatory for the Reconstructioa 
Bank to furnish from time to time returns to the Central Gov~rnment. 
OLause 59.-This clause provides for the delegation of powers and 
functions of tilt! Board under the Act. 
Clause 6O.-This clause provides for the. appointment of the staft by 
the Reconstruction Bank for the efficient performance of its functioning. 
It also enables the Reconstruction Bartk to depute or to receive on depu-
tation lrom the prescribed institutions any of its ofticers o.r other memo-
hers of its staff on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed in-
cluding deputation of its officers or other members to any assisted indus-
trial concern. 
Clause 6l.-This clause s~eks to impose on the Reconstruction Bank 
obligation not to divulge any information relating to or to the affairs of 
its constituents except in the circumstanc~ stated in that .clause. It also 
provides ff}r a declaration of fidelity and secrecy by every director, audi-
tor, adviser, officer or other employee of the Reconstruction Bank. 
Clause 62.-This clause deals with the establishment of the Provideat 
Fund for the benefit of its officers and employees. 
Clause 63.-This clause seeks to indemnify the directors of the Re-
construction Bank against all losses and expenses incurred by hUn in or 
in relation to the discharge of his duties other than those caused. by his 
own wilful act or default. 
Clause 6~-This clause is the usual provision rela!ing to protection of 
a-::tion taken in good faith. 
Clause 65.-This clause provides that the Chairman, Adviser and 
Auditor and every other employee of the Reconstruction Bank shall be 
d..:emcd to be a public servant for the purpose of Chapter IX of the 
Indian Penal Code. 
Clauses OS and 67.-These two clauses provide for penalty for making 
hlse statoment in applications for loans or arlvances or any other assist-
ance from. the Reconstruction Bank. 
~ . Clause 68-This clau~e provides for the power of the Central Gov-
ernment to make rules for the purpose of giving et!ect to the provisions 
0( thp. Act and in particular in respect of the matters specified in ·that 
clause. 
Clause. 69.-Th is clause seeks to empower the Board of Directors of 
"Reconstruction Bank, with the approval of the Central GoveJ,'Dment, . to 
make regulations. not inconsistent with the Act and the rules mst-de 
th~reunder, for the purpose of giving etlect to tbeprovtsions of the' Act 
and in p.'1rticular in respect of the matters specified in that clause. 

83 
CZa.v.se 70.-This clause gives power to Central Government to remove 
defects in iiving eft'ect to any of the provisions of this Act. 
CLause 71.-This clause provides for certain amendments of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and 
the Banking Regulation' Act, 1949. . 
The amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 arc mainl)t 
consequential. This will enable the ,Reserve Bank to grant accommoda .. 
tion to the Reconstruction Bank against trustee securities, loans and 
advances and purchase of foreign exchange from the Reserve Bank of 
Indi:l for the purpose of its financing activities. The Reserve Bank of 
India is also being empowered to grant short-term loans to the Recon-. 
struction Bank. 
The amendment to the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is to clarify that 
the appropriate Government in relation to any industrial dispute, involv .. 
ing the Reconstruction Bank, will be the Central Government. 
The amendment to the Banking Regulation Act 1949 is for the purpose 
of extending the Reconstruction Bank the protection against any demand 
by any tribunal or authority under the IndUstrial Disputes Act, 1947 for 
disclosure of information regarding its inner reserves. The other ameD4-
ments prohibits the holding of arty agitation by the staff of the Reeor· 
struction Bank wi£hin the premises. 
Clcr.u8e 72.-This clause deals with substitution in Acts, rules anti * 
gulations of the Reconstruction Bank in place of Industrial Recon.~t1'Uc~ 
tion Corporation of India Limited. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 4(1) provides tbat the IRd~trial 'RecODstructiolil Bank of India shalL 
have an authorised capital of two hundred crores of rupees. Gause 4(2) pro-
vides that the· initial paid up capital of 'the Reconstruction Bank shall be ~ 
crores of rupees obtained by acquiring the present paid up capital of tweDty 
crores of rupees of the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited; 
conversion into equity of Central Government loans to the ReconstrUction Car-
poration to the extent of twenty crores of rupees and direct SU~1l by, the 
Central Government of the remaining ten crores of rupees. aause 4(3) po-
vid~ that the Reconstruction Bank may incrc:8se its paid up capital by makin •• 
furthe~ iss~e of shares of such amount as it may think expedient within the aD-
thorised capital of two hundred crores of rupees. Clause 4(4) provides ~ 
the entire paid up capital of the Reconstruction Bank shall be wholly subscn"b-
ed by and allotted to the Central Government.- Thus, it would be necessary to 
make available a sum of twenty crores of rupees for acquiring the shares of the 
IIKIustrial RecOnstruction Coqx>ration Of India and a sum of tea crores of 
rupees for subscribing to the share capital of tbe Industrial Reconstru'ction 
Bank of India during the year 1984-85. It would also be necessary to COIlvert 
the outstanding Central Government loans to the extent of twenty crorea of 
rupees to the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India into equity of the 
R.econstruction Bank during the year 1984-85. The imp]ica~on of conversion 
of twenty crores of loan into equity df the Reconstruction B'ank will be that 
after slIch conversion the interest payable on the sum of twenty crore!r of' n:rpeei 
shall cease to be paid. Tile loss of interest amount may to lome extent btw 
offset by the dividend payable on this amount by the Reconstruction Baqk. The 
extent of dividend that may be paid by the Recon'truction Bank, each Year, on 
the ~um at twenty crores of rupees and the extent to which such payment of 
dividend "ould offset the loss of interest cannot be envisaged at thi~ stage. Ja 
regard to subscriptions beyond the initial paid up capital of fifty crOfes of rupees. 
th", Central Government may have to provide funds to the extent of one hun· 
dred and fifty crores of rupe~ over a period of time as and when the paid up 
capital of the Reconstruction Bank is proposed to be enhanced untU the paid up 
capital reaches the level of the authorised capital of ~wo hundred crOfes of 
ruptes. 
2. C'Iause 5(2) provides for payment by the Central Government to the In. 
dustrial Reconstruction Corporation of Jndia Ltd.. an amount equal to the 
amount of fhe total paid up capital ()f the Corporation for being disbursed to the 
existing !'hareholder!> of the Corporation in terms of clause 6(1). The amount 
payable to the shilreholders. being twenty crores of rupees, is the same amount 
indicated inc1ause 4(2) for acquiring sharc~ of the Reconstruction Corporation. 
Thus, there is no ildditional expenditure either in terms of clause 5(2) or clause 
6(1) except to the extent of twenty crores Of rupeCfi contemplated to be paid fo, 
acquiring the shares of the Reconstruction Corporation under clause 4(2) . 
.... tr.:.~----
'" .... ,';J" 

55 
3. Clause 12(2)(61) provides that ia the event of the Central Governmeat 
deciding to terminate the lIervices of the Chairman before the expiry of bis term; 
it shall either give him notice of not less than three months or three Q10Jltbs' 
salary and allowance. in .lieu of .. uch notice. The salaries and aUowanc.s of 
the Chairman of the Reconstruction Bank shall be the same lotS presently .n-
joyed by him, as the Chairman of the 'Reconstruction Corporation. The Chair-
man ot the Iildustrial ReconstructioA Corporation is presently drawinj a salary 
of three thousand five hundred rupees in the pay scale of Rs. 35()()..125-
4000. Thus in the event of the Central Government deciding to temlinate the 
services of the Chairman of the Reconstruction B~mk without three months' 
notice the Central Government may have to pay an amount ronging from ten 
thousand five hundred rupees to twelve thousand rupees plus three months' 
allowances a~ admissible to the Chuirman at the time of sllch termination. 
4. Clause 20 provides that the Central Government may, after due appro-
priation made by law, advance to the Reconstruction Bank, interest free loans 
or interest bearing loans, on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon. 
It may be necessary for the Central Government from the year 1984-85 onwardi 
to grant loans ranging from forty crores of rupees to eighty cron's of rupees 
every year depending upon the magnitude of the operations of the Reconstruc-
tion Bank, 011 such terms and conditions llS may be agreed upon. 
5. Clauie 21 provides that the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India may 
iisue and sell bonds and debentures with or withoUt the guarantee of the ('~n­
iral Government. Cause 21(2) provides that the Central Government may on 
a request being made to it by the Reconstruction Bank guarantee the bonds and 
debentures issued by that bank as to the repayment of principal and payment 
of interest at such' rate as may be fixed by that Government. The extent of 
the contingent liability arising out of the Central Government guarantee in respect 
of bonds and debentures issued by the Reconstruction Bank will depend upon 
the Size of the market borrowings of the Reconstruction Bank, the exact quan-
tum of which would be known only at'1er the bank has ~tarled fW'lctioning. 
6. Clause 23 (2), read with clause 23 (1 ), provides that the Centrlll Govern-
Melit may, where necessary,qtJarantce the foreign currency loans taken by the 
Reconstruction Bank with thepreviou~ consent of the Central Government 
from any bank or financial institution or other prescribed sources in any for-
eign country. The extent of the contingent liability arisinl!; out of such guaran-
tee will depend upon the extent of the foreign currency borrowings by the Re-
eonstnu:tion Bank which would be known only after the bank bas started fwte-
tioning. Clause 23(4) provides that any loss or profit arising from ftuctuation~ 
in the rate of exchange relating to borrowings in foreign currency will be borne 
by or accrue to the Central Government as the case may be. if such fluctuation 
is not related to nonnal markeT fluctu:!tion~ in foreign elrchan'!e and occurred 
after the period within which the forci,," currency loan i'l reoavHh1,. Mr the in-
dustrial concern or the period of actunl repavm~nt by tbe concern. whichever is 
longer. The extent of this con!ingent liability will depend not onlv uDOn the 
extent of foreign exchange fluctuations but also the nature and the time of 
occurencc of such fluctuation. Further the los .. on .1C:coun' of depreciation in 
the value of the rupee at any poiDt of ti~e will be offset to some e)[tent by the 
p-roftt accruing from appreciation of the value ~ the rupee at other point~ rl 
time, 

;. t.. 5. 
7. Clause 24 provides· that the RecoDsttuction Bank may I'CCOive gifts, 
Jl'3Iltl, donations or benefactions from the Ceotral Government. It is Dot pr0.-
posed at this stage to make any contributions to the Reconstruction Bank 
under this provision. 
S. Cause 53 provides that the Reconstruction Bank shall not be liable to 
pay income-tax, companies (profits) surtax, i!l.tcrest~ax or any other tax in 
respect of any income, profit or gains accruing to the Reconstruction Asslsteed 
Fund or any amount received to the credit of that Fund as also on any income, 
profit or gains or any amount received by the Reconstruction Bank including 
any interest collected by or payable to the Reconstruction Bank in accordanco 
with the provisions of the Interest-tax Act, 1974. The extent of the contingent 
liability on account of loss of income-tax, companies (profits) sunax, interest 
tax or any other tax in terms of the provision o1f this clause will depend upon. 
the extent of tbe operation of the Reconstruction Bank, the exact quantum ot 
19hich will vary from year to year, and would be known only after the bank has 
become fully functional. 
9. No other provision of tbe Bill, would, if enacted, involve any other ex-
penditure of a recurring or a non-recurring nature from and out of the Coasoli-
dated Fund of India. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (6) of clause 49 empowers the Central Government to 
authorise the Reconstruction Bank to prepare a scheme for the recons-
tluction, revival or rehabilitation of the assisted industrial concern; for 
scaling down liabilities of such a concern or for the amalgamation of such 
a concern with any other industrial concern. If any difficulty arises in 
giving effect to the provisions of the scheme~ the Central Government may 
by order do anything, not inconsistent with such provilsions, which appears 
to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty 
[vide sub-clause (14) J. It is also provided that the scheme or any order 
!ssued for removing the djfficulty shall be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament [vide sub-clause (15)]. 
2. Qause 68 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by noti.fication in 
the Official Gazette, to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the pro-
posed legislation. Sub-clause (2) thereof enumerates in detail the matters in 
respect pf which rules may be made under that clause. These matters relate 
to the institutions and agencies in and outside India, the payment of whose loans 
to industrial concerns may be guaranteed, counter-guaranteed or indemnified by 
the Reconstruction Bank, the institutions and agencie~ which may be provided 
with line of credit by the Reconstruction, Bank for grant by them of loans and 
advances to industrial concerns, the persons who may be appointed to act as 
agents of the Reconstruction Bank and the manner in which and the conditions 
subject to which insurance or provident fund may be constituted by the 
Reconstruction Bank. 
3. Cause 69 of the Bill empowers the Board of Directors of tho 
Reconstruction Bank. with the previous sanction of the Central Government, 
to make. by notification in the Official Gazette, regulations not inconsistent with 
the provisions of the.Bill and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all 
matters for which regulations are necessary or expedient for the purpose of 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill and of the rules made thereunder. The 
matters in respoe't of which such regulations may be made are specified in SQb-
clause (2) of that clause. 'JIhese matters, inter alia, relate to the restrictiODs 
relar;n~ to the "owen; which mav be exr.rci!ied bv the Chairman of the Board of 
Directors, the time Jnd place at which the Board of Directors shall meet aud the 
rules of procedure (inc1udin/.! quorum) which shall be observed by the Board in 
regard to the transaction of hl1sine~s at its meetin2s. the conditions and limita-
tions subject to which an industrial concern may enter into any kind of business 
and the form and manner in which the balance-sheet and acco~ts of the Re-
construction Assistance Fund shall be prepared. 
4. The matters with respect' to which the rules and reguJation~ may be 
made are matters of procedure or detail and as such the delegation or legislative 
power is of a normal character. I 
57 

~8 
s. Cause 70 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, to remove any difficulty which may arise in giving effect 
to any of the provisions ·of the BiU. As all the problems which may arise 
cannot be envisaged, this provision has been included by way of abundant 
caution. It is also made clear in the clause that no such notification shall be 
made after the expiry of a period of two years from the commen~ment of that 
claUBe. 

ANNEXUltt 
ExTMC'l'S FROM THE REsERVE BANK OF INDIA Ar:r, 1934 
(2 OF 1934) 
... ... ... ... • 
17. The Bank shall be authorised- to carry on and transact the BlIIl-
several kinds of business hereinafter specified, namaly:- neM 
wbicb 
the ... ... til ... 
Bank 
(4G) the making of loans and advances to, and the purchasing IDaJ 
of bonds land debentures of, the Development Bank or the Exim transact. 
Bank out of the National Indusirial Credit (Long Term Operations) 
Fund establfshed under section 46C; 
... ... ... ... 
(4-1) the making to scheduled banks, the Development Bank, 
the Exim Bank, the Industrial Finance Corporation and any other 
financial institution as may, on the recommendation of the Bank, be 
approved in this behalf by the Central Government of 10anJ and 
advances repayable on demand or otherwtise and against such 
security and on such other terms and conditions as may be approv-
ed in this behalf by the Central Board for the purpose of enabling 
such banks, or financial institution, as the case may be, to purchase 
foreign exchange from the Bank for the purpoee of financing the 
import of capital goods or for auch other - purpole8 as may be 
approved by the Central Government; 
... ... ... ... • 
(12B) the making of loans and advances in foreign currencies 
to scheduled banks, the Development Bank, the Exim Bank, the 
Industrial Finance Corporation, any State Financial Corporation and 
any other financial institution may, on the recommendation of 
the Bank, be approved by the Central Government and on IUch 
terms and conditions as may be specified by the Central Board in 
this behalf, against prom.iSBOry notes of suc~ bank or financial 
institution, as the case may be: 
Provided that the borrowing bank or financial institUtion, as the 
case may be. furnishes a declaration in writing to the effeet tha~ 
(a) it has made loans and advances in foreign currencies 
for~ini international trade or for the import ()f capital 
goods or for such other purposes as may be approved by the 
Central· Government; and 
(b) that the amount of loans or advances so made and out-
standing at any time will not be less than the outstandmg 
amount of the loans or advanCN obtained by it from the Bank; 
.. • • • 

tab re-
IeI'VWI8 of 
8ChedUl.-
ed banka 
to be "opt 
with the 
a,nk. 
National 
lDcluRdal 
CrecUt 
(l.on, 
Term 
Opera-
tioDl) 
J'und. 
J • ". • 
80 
U. (1) tvery bank included in the Second Schedule shall maintala 
with the Bank an average daily balance the amount of which shall not 
be leu than three per cent. of the total of the demand and time liabili· 
ties in India of such bank as shown in the return referred to in sub--
section (2): 
Provided that the Bank may, by notification in the Gazette of India, 
increue the said rate to such hlgher rate as may be specified in the 
notification so however that the rate shall not be more than fifteen per 
cent. 01 the total of the demand and time liabilities. 
E:cplanation.-For the purposes of this section,~ 
'" '" '" 
(c) "liabilities" shall not include-
'" '" • It; 
'" 
. 
:' 
(ii) the amount of any loan taken from the Bank or from 
the Development Bank Or from the Exim Bank or from the 
National Bank, 
'" '" ... '" . ... 
48C. (1) • • ... ... ... 
(2) The amount in the said fund shall be applied by the "Bank oniy 
to the following objects, namely:-
II< 
'" '" '" • 
(r) tne making to the Exirn Bank of loans and advances for the 
purposes' of any business of the Exim Bank; 
(d) the purchasing of bonds and debentures issued by the 
Exim Bank. 
'" '" '" '" 
BX'l'RA(:T FROM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14: OF 1947) 
'" ... •• 
'" 
• 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
ot conb!xt,-
'" ... ... • 
(bb) "banking company" means a banking' company as defined 
in section 5 of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, having branches 10 of 1940. 
Or other establishments in more than one State, and includes- the 
Export-Import Bank of India, the Industrial Development Bank of " 
IncUa, the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India, a corres-
ponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Com-
. panies (.Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, a 5 of 1970, 
corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, 40 ot 1980. 
and any subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Sub-
sidiary Banks) Act, 1969; 38 of 1081 • 
. . , 
• • • II' 

26 of 1881 
2 of J934. 
IS of 1970. 
21 of 1978. 
40 of 1980. 
5011970. 
21 of 1978. 
40 of 1980. 
61 
EXTRACTS FROM THE BANKING RECULA.TION AJ:r 1949 . , 
(10 OF 1949) 
• • • • • 
18. Every banking company, not being a scheduled bank, shall main-
tain in India, by way of cash reserve with itself or in current account reserve. 
opened. wi~h the Reserve Bank or the State Bank'of India or any other 
bank notified by the Central Government in this behalf or partly in 
cash with itself and partiy in such account or accounts, a sum equivalent 
to at least three per cent. of the total of its time and demand liabili-
ties in India, and shall submit to the Reserve Bank before the tifteentb 
day of every month a return showing the amount so held on Friday 
of each week of the preceding month with particulars of its time BlUi 
demand liabilities in India on each such Friday, or, 1f any such Friday 
is a public holiday under _ the Negotjable Instruments Act, 1881, at the 
close of business on the preceding working day. 
Explanation .. ·-In this section and in section 24, "liabilities in India" 
shall not include-
• • • • 
(b) any advance taken from the Reserve Bank or from the State 
Bank of India or from the Industrial Development Bank of India 
or from the Export-Import Bank of India or from the National Bank 
or from any -bank notified by the Central Government under clause 
(c) of the Explanation to sub-section (1) of section 42 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
• • • • • 
MA. (1) • • • • • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking. company" in<:Judes the 
Export-Import Bank of India, the Industrial Devel09ment Bank of India, 
the National Bank, the Reserve Bank, the State Bank of India a 
corresponding new bank c;onstituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (AcquiSition and Transfer of Undertakings). Act, 1970, a 
Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural 
Banks Act, 1976, a corresponding new bank constituted under section '3 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1980, and any subsidiary bank. 
• • • • . . 
36AD. (1) • • • • • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "banking compan,." includes the 
Export-Import Bank of India, the Reserve Bank, the Industrial Develop-
ment Bank of India, the National Bank, the Stare Bank of India, a 
eorresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, a 
Regional Rural Bank estabUshed under Ff'Ction 3 of the Regionl Rural 
Banks Act, 19'16, a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 
of the BanJPng Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of. Undertakings) 
Act, 1980, and any subsidiary bank. / 
• • • • • 
Produc-
tion of 
document. 
ofconft-
dential 
nature. 
PunIsh-
ments 
for 
certain 
activities 
1D reiatlon 
to bank-
Ine 
compame.. 

Act to 
apply to 
cc-opers_ 
tive 
societies 
subject 
to 
modiftc:a-
tior.s. 
Cash 
reserve. 
62 
56. The provisions of this Aet, as in force for the time being, shall 
apply to, or in relation to, co-operative societies as they apply to, or in 
relation to, banking companies subject to the following modifications, 
namely: - i :.:~ IJ 
• • • • • 
(j) for section 18, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'18. Every co-operative bank, not being a State ~o-operatlve 
bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, shall maintain in India, by 
way of cash reserve with itself or in current account opened 
with the ~serve Bank or the State Bank of India or the state 
co-operative bank of' the State concerned Or with any other 
bank notified by the Central Government in this behalf or, in 
the case of a primary co-operative bank, with· the central ~o­
operative bank of the district concerned or partly in cash with 
itself and partly in such account or accounts, a sum eqUivalent 
to at least three per cent. of the total of its time and demand 
liabilities in India, and shall submit to the Reserve Bank before 
the 15th day of every month a return showing the amount so 
held on Friday of each week of the preceding month with parti-
culars of its time ~d demand liabilities in India on each such 
Friday, or, if any such Friday is a public holiday under the 
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, at the close of business on 
the preceding working day. 
Explanatioo.-In this section and section 24, "liabilities in 
India" shall not Include,-
• • • • • 
(b) any advance taken from a State Government, the 
Reserve Bank, the State Bank of India, the Industrial 
Development Bank of India, the Export-Import Bank of 
India, the National Bank or any b~ notified by the Central 
Government under clause (c) of the Exp14na.tion to sub-
section (1) of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Aet, 
2 of 1934. 
28 of 1881. 
1934:; 2 of 1934 . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of the Industrial Reconstruction Bank 
of India, and for the transfer to, and vesting in, the said Reconstruc-
tion Bank, of the undertaking of the Corporation known as the 
Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited, with a view 
to enabling the said RecOnstruction Bank to function as the 
principal credit and reconstruction agency for industrial revival and to 
co-ordinate similar work of the other institutions engaged therein 
and to assist and promote industrial development, arid to rehabili-
tate industrial concerns, and for matters connected therewith or 
incideBtal thereto. 
(Shri Pranab KUmAr Mukhet'jee, 
MiniBte7' 0/ Finance.) 