8W No. 55 of 19$1 GJ 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX SECONQ 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

74 of 1956. 
BW Mo. 55 of 1958 
THE CENTRAL SALES TAX (SECOND AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK: SABKA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
01 India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Sales Tax (Second Short title 
Amendment) Act, 1958.:!=~. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. ~ section 2 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 
after referred to as the principal Act),-
(herein- Amendment of ,ectioa a. 
(i) in clause (a), the words "one or more" in sub-clause 
10 (ii), and the Explanation shall be omitted; 
(U) in clause (b), for the words "selling goods", the 
words "buying or selling goods" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in clause (d), after the words "does not include", the 
word "newspapers" shall be inserted; 
I~ (iv) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inser-
ted, namely:-
, (tid) "place of business" includes a warehouse 
godown or other place where a dealer storeS his goods and 
any place where he keeps his books of accounts it. 

2 
:r=7. 3. Section 6 of the principal A~t shall be re-numbered 88 8Ub-
laction (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as 80 re-numbered, 
the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Notwithstanding any thine contained in sub-tlection 
(1), where a sale in the course of inter-State trade or com- S 
merce of goods of the description referred to in sub-section 
(3) of section 8-
(a) has occasioned the movement of such goods from 
one State to another; or 
(b) has been effected by a transfer of documents of 10 
title to such goods during their movement from one State 
to another; 
any subsequent sale to a registered dealer during such move-
ment effected by a transfer of documents of title to such goods 
shall not be subject to tax under this Act: IS 
Provided that no such subsequent sale shall be exempt 
from tax under this sub-section unless the dealer effecting the 
sale furnishes to the prescribed authority in the prescribed 
manner a certificate duly filled and signed by the registered 
dealer from whom the goods were purchased, containing the 20 
prescribed particulars.". 
4. In section 7 of the principal Act,-
(0 for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) Any dealer liable to pay tax under the sales tax 25 
law of the appropriate State, or where there is no such 
law in force in the appropriate State or any part thereof, 
any dealer having a place of business in that State or part, 
as the case may be, may, notwithstanding that he is not 
liable to pay tax under this Act, apply for registration 30 
under this Act to the authority referred to In sub-section 
(1), and every such application shall contain such parti-
culars as may be prescribed. . 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, a 
dealer shall be deemed to be liable to pay tax under the 35 
Iales tax law of the appropriate State notwlthstandinl 

3 
that under such law a sale or purchase made by him 
is exempt from tax or a refund or rebate of tax is admis-
sible in respect thereof."; 
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
5 substituted, namely:-
10 
IS 
20 
.. (4) A certificate of registnltion granted under this sec-
tion may-
(a) either on the application of the dealer to whom 
it has been granted, or, where no such application has 
been made, after due notice to the dealer, be amended 
by the authority granting it if he is satisfied that by 
reason of the registered dealer having changed the 
neme, place or nature of his business or the class or 
classes of goods in which he carries on bUsiness or for 
any other reason the certificate of registration granted 
to him requires to be amended; or 
(b) be cancelled by the authority granting it where 
he is satisfied, after due notice to the dealer to whom it 
has been granted, that he hes ceased to carryon busi-
ness or has ceased to exist, or in the case of a dealer 
registered under sub-section (2) has ceased to be liable 
to pay tax under the sales tax law of the appropriate 
State or for any other sufficient reason.". 
5. For s\lb-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4) of section 8 of the prin- Amendment 
25 clpal Act, the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: _ of IeCtiOD 8. 
I (1) Every dealer, who in the course of inter-State trade or 
commerce--
(a) sells to the Government eny goods; or 
(b) sells to a registered deder other than the Govern-
30 ment goods of the description referred to in sub-section (3); 
shall be liable to pay tax under this Act, which shall be one 
per cent. of his turnover. 
(2) The tax payable by any dealer on his turnover in so iQr 
as the turnover or any part thereof relates to the sale of goods 
35 in the course of inter-State trade or commerce not falling within 
sub-section (1) shall be--
(a) in the case of declared goods, calculated at the rate 
applicable to the sale or purchase of such goods inside the 
appropriate State; and 

(b) in the ease of goods other than declared goodI, 
shall be calculated at the rate of leVen per eel or at the 
rate applicable to the sale or purchase of such goods inside 
the appropriate State, whichever is higher; 
and for the purpose of making any such ca1cul11ltion...., IUCA S 
dealer shall be deemed to be a dealer liable to pay tax under the 
sales tax law of the appropriate State, notwithstanding that he, 
in fact, may not be so liable under that law. 
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sectlon 
(1) or sub--section (2), if under the sales tax law of the appro- 10 
priate State the safe or purchase, as the case may be, of any 
goods by a dealer is exeD).pt from tax generally or 11 subject to 
tax generally at a rate which is lower than one per cent. (whe-
ther called a tax or fee or by any other name), the tax payable 
under this Act on his turnover in so far as the turnover or any IS 
part thereof relates to the sale of such goocls shall De nil or, as 
the case may be, shall be calculated at the lower rate 
E~nation.-For the purposes of this BUJi)-eection a sale or 
purchase of goods shall not be deemed to be exempt from tax 
generally under the sales tax law of the appropriate State if 20 
UDder that law it is exempt only in specified circumstances 01' 
under specified aon.ditiOIl$ or in re1atiOD to which the tax t. 
levied at specified stages or otherwise than with reference to the 
turnover of the goods. 
(3), The goods referred to in clause (b) of sub-aecUon 25 
(1)-
(4) in the case of declared goods are goods of the clua 
or classes specified in the certificate of registratioll of the 
registered dealer purchasing the goods as being intended for 
re-sale by him; 30 
(b) in the case of goods other than declared goods are 
goods of the class or classes specified in the certificate of 
registration of the registered dealer purchasing the goods as 
being intended for re-sale by him or for use by him in the 
execution of any confnct or, subjeet to any rules made by 3S 
the Central Government in this behalf, for use by hiM in 
the manufacture or processing of goods for sale fir in mining 
or in the generation or distribution of electricity or an)' 
other form of power; 
(c) ere containers or other materials spectfted in the 40 
certificate of registration of the registered dealer purehRSina .. 

5 ' 
the goods, being containers or materials intended for being 
used for the packing of goods for sale; 
(d) are containers or other materials used for the 
packing of any goods or classes of goods speci1\ed In the 
5 certificate of registretion referred t('l in clause (a) or clause 
(b) or for the packing of any containers or oilier materials 
specified in the certificate of registration referred to in 
clause (c). 
ExpZan4tion.-For the purposes of this sub-seetion, "cont. 
10 ract" means any agreement for carrying out for cash or deferred 
payment or other valuable consideration-
(i) the construction, fitting out, improvement or repair 
of any buildmgi road, bridge or other immovable property; 
or 
15 (ii) the instaliation or repair of any machinet'j aftlxed 
to anY' building or other immovablp. property. 
(4) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not epply to any 
sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce unless the 
dealer selling the goods furnishes to tM prescribed authorIty in 
20 the preseribed m8ft11er-
(0) a declaration duly filled and signed by thl!' registered 
dealer to whom the goods are sold containing the prescribed 
particulars iIi e prescribed form obtained from the pres-
cribed authority; or 
25 (b) if the goods are sold to the Government, not being 
a registered dealer, a certificate in the prescribed form duly 
filled and signed by a duly authori.c;ed officer of the Govern-
ment.'. 
8. Por seetion 9 of the principal Act, the following sections shan SUbstitUti,?D 
b ~ ted - of new teCUCD 
30 e'lIuUIJwtu ; namelr, - for aectioD 9. 
35 
"9. (1) The tax payable by any dealer under this Act on Le1"l1 . ~Dd . co cetlon SIIles of goods effected. by him In the CC"ut'se of intcr..state trade of taluDd 
or commetee [whether such sales fall within claUla (a) or penalties. 
olaUR (b) of section 3] shall be levied and collected by the 
GoTernment of India in the manner provided in sub-8ection (3) 
in the State from which the movement of the goods commenced: 
Provided that, in the case of a sale of goods during their 
movement from one State to another beoina a sale subsequent to 

I 
the first sale in respect of the same goods, the tax sball, where 
such sale does not fall within sub-section (2) of section 6, be 
levied and collected in the StJate from which the registered 
dealer effecting the subsequent sale obtained the form pres- S 
cribed for the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (4) of sec-
tion 8 in connection with the purchase of such goods. 
(2) The penalty imposed upon any dealer under section 
lOA shall be collected by the Government of India in the manner 
provided in sub-section (3)-
(a) in the case of an offence falling under clause (b) 10 
or clause (d). of section 10, in the State in which the person 
purchasing the goods obtained the form prescribed for the 
purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (4) of ~ction 8 in 
connection with the purchase of such goods; 
(b) in the case of an offence falling under clause (c) of IS 
section 10, in the State in which tbe person purchasing the 
goods should have registered himself it the offence had not 
been committed. 
(3) The authorities for the time being empowered to assess, 
collect end enforce payment of any tax under the general sales 20 
tax law of the appropriate State shall, on behalf of the Govern-
ment of India and subject to any rules made under this Act, 
assesS, collect and enforce payment of any tax, including any 
penalty, payable by a dealer under this Act in the same manner 
as the tax on the sale or purchase of goods under the general 2S 
sales tax law of the State is assessed, paid and. collected; and 
for this purpose they may exercise all or any of the powers thE'Y 
have under the general sales tax law of the State; and the pro-
visions of such law, including provisions relating to returns, 
appeals, reviews, revisions, references, penalties and crmpound- 30 
ing of offences, shall apply accordingly: 
Provided that if in any State or part thereof there ,ilno 
general sales tJax law in force, the Central Government may, by 
rules made in this behalf, make necessary provision fer 011 or 
any of the matters specified in this sub-section, and such rules 3S 
may provide that a breach of any rule shall be punJ.sheble with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees; and where the 
offence is a continuing offence, with a daily fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees for every day during which the offence 
continues. 40 
(4) The proceeds in any financial year of any ta'1C, includ-
ing any penalty, levied and collected under. this ~ in any State 

S 
7 
(other than a Union territory) on behalf of the Government of 
India shall be assigned to that State and shall be retained by it; 
and the proceeds attributable to Union territories shall fQrm part 
'of the Consolidated Fund of India. 
9A. No person who is not a registered dealer shall collect in Collection of 
respect of any sale by him of goods in the course of inter-State ~~;ob~e 
trade or commerce any amount by way of tax under this Act, registered 
and no registered dealer shall make any such collection except dealers. 
in accordance with this Act and the rules made thereunder.". 
ro 7. In section 10 of the principal Act, after clause (e), the foJlow- :ren~t 
ing clause shall be inserted, namely: _ acctiOQ 10 • 
.. (f) collects Qny amount by way of tax in contravention of 
the provisions contained in section 9A;". 
8. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion. of 
IS shall be inserted, namely:- ~gA. section 
20 
30 
3S 
"lOA. If any person purchasing goods is guilty of p.n offence Irmpositll'on 
. • 0 pena ty 
under clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) of sectIon 10, the in lieu of 
authority who granted to him or, as the case may be, is com- prosecutIon. 
petent to grant to him a certifioote of registration uncler this 
Act may, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard, by order in writing, impose upon him by way of penalty 
a sum not exceeding one-and-a-half times the tax which would 
have been levied under this· Act in respect of the sale to him of 
the goods if the offence bed not been committed: 
Provided that no prosecution for an offence under section 
10 shall be instituted in respect of the same facts on which a 
penalty has been imposed under this section.". 
9. In section 13 of the principal Act,-
(i) for clause (d) of sub-section (1), 
shall be substituted, namely:-
the following clauses 
"(d) the form in which and the particulars to be 
contained in any declaration or certificate to be given under 
this Act; 
(e) the enumeration of goods or class of goods used in 
the manufacture or processing of goods for sale or in mining 
or in the generation or distribution of electricity or any tither 
form of power; 
Amendment 
of section 
13· 

8 
(I) the matters in respect of which provision may be 
made under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 9; 
(g) the fees payable in respect of applications· for 
registretion under this Act."; 
(ii) in sub-section (4),-
(4) in clause (e), for the words "the authority from 
which", the words "the authority from whom, the conditions 
subject to which and the fees subject to payment of which" 
shall be substituted; 
S 
('b) in clause (g), for the words "the authorities to 10 
which" and "the nature", the words "the authorities to whom" 
and "the name, place or nature" shall respectively be 
substituted. 
Amendment It. In section 14 of the principal Act,-
clleCtioo 140 
(i) for item (iiel), the following items shall be substituted, IS 
namely:-
"(iiel) cotton fabrics as defined in Item No. 12 of the 
First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944; 
(Ub) cotton yarn, but not including cotton yarn waste;"; 
, (il) after item (vi), the following items shall be inserted, 20 
namely:-
"(vii) rayon or artificial silk fabrics as defined in Item 
No. 12A of the First Schedule to the Central Excises and 
Salt Act, 1944; 
1 of 1944. 
1 of 19# 
(viii) sugar, as defined in Item No.8 of the First Sche- 2S f 
• 1 0 1944. dule to the Central EXCises and Salt Act, 1944; 
(ix) tobacco, as defined in Item No. 9 of the First 
Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944; 1 of 1944· 
(x) woollen fabrics, as defined in item No. 12B of the 
First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944.". 30 I of 1944· 
Substitution 11. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
or DeW lee- be substituted, namely:-bon for ICC-
lion I,. 
Restrictions 
and condi-
tlon\ in re-
gard to taJ: 
on aale or 
purchase of 
declared 
aoodl within 
a State. 
"15. Every sales tax law of a State shall, in so far as it 
imposes or authorises the imp6sition of a tax on the sale or pur-
chase of declared goods, be subject to the following restrictions 35 
and conditions, namely:-
(a) the tax payable under that law in respect of any 
sale or purchase of such goods inside the State shall not 

9 
exceed two per cent. of the sale or purchase price thereof, 
and such tax shall not be levied at more than one stage; 
(b) where a tax has been levied under that law in 
respect of the sale or purchase inside the State of any declar-
ed goods and such goods are sold in the course of inter-State 
S trade or commerce, the tax so levied shall be refunded to 
such person in such manner and subject to such conditions 
as may be provided in any law in force in that State.". 
12. Section 7 of the Additioool Duties of Excise (Goods of Special ~ of 
10 [mportance) Act, 1957, is hereby repealed. Act ODS87~f 
19'7· 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The levy of tax on inter-State sales under the Central Sales Tax 
Act, 1956, commenced from the 1st July, 1957. Experience of the 
working of the Act has shown that it requires to be amended in 
certain respects. The Bill seeks to make the following amend-
ments:-
(i) mmmg industries, electricity undertakings, etc., as 
registered dealers, will be enabled to purchase in inter-State trade 
prescribed goods at the concessional rate of tax; 
(ii) the law at present provides for the taxation of all sales 
effected by a transfer of documents of title to the goods during 
a single movement from one State to another and also lays down 
that in respect of such sales the tax shall be collected in the 
States where the sales take place. Administrative difficulties 
have been experienced in fixing the place of a sale and there is 
also the rigour of multiple taxation of such sales of goods in a 
single movement. It is now proposed to avoid this multiple 
taxation and levy the tax only once at the first point during a 
single movement of goods from one State to another and also to 
fix 'the place of sale as being in the State from which the move-
ment of goods commenced. If sales effected by a transfer of 
documents of title to the goods involve sales to an unregistered 
dealer, provision is being made whereby the State in which the 
place of business of the last registered dealer making the sale is 
situate will levy the tax; 
(iii) the provisions relating to registration are being amended 
to make it clear that dealers in exempted goods also are entitled 
to get themselves registered; 
(i1') on the unanimous suggestion of State Governments, ft is 
being provided that all inter-State sales of goods made to Gov-
ernment (either Central or State) would be taxed at the conces-
sional rates laid down in section 8 (1) of the Act; 
(v) the Union territories ~f Himachal Pradesh and Tripura 
have no local sales tax law. The amendments proposed will 
enable the Central Government, by rules, to provide a suitable 
machinery for the collection of Central sales tax; 
lQ 
i •. .., 

11 
(vi) under the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special 
Irr.portance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957) ,-
(a) cotton fabrics. rayon and artificial silk fabrics and 
woollen fabrics, 
(b) sugar, and 
( c) tobacco, 
as defined in Items 12. 12A, 12B, 8 and 9 ~f the First Schedule 
to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 respectively, were 
declared as goods of special importance in inter-State trade or 
commerce. It is proposed to make section 14 of the Act self-
contained, by including those three items also under the list of 
'declared goods' defined in this Act. Section 7 of the Additional 
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, will 
consequently be repealed; 
lvii) one of the conditions laid down in section 15 is that 
tax on declared goods shall be levied at the stage of last sale or 
purchase inside the State. Certain State Governments levy tax 
at the first point of purchase on some of the declared goods under 
their respective laws, and to accommodate their views it is 
proposed to leave with the States the option regarding the point 
of levy of tax on declared goods without in any way disturbing 
the scope of the present restrictions imposed by Parliament. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th April, 1958. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-Sub-clause (i) omits the Explanation to section 2 (a) 
which defines "place of business" for the purpose of determining the 
place of sale. This is no longer necessary in view of the detailed 
provisions now being made in section 9 by clause 6. 
Sub-clause (ii) enlarges the definition of "dealer" by including 
therein persons carrying on the business of purchasing goods in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
Sub-clause (iii) amends the definition of "goods" by removing 
"newspapers" therefrom as no State can levy a tax on the sale of 
newspapers. 
Sub-clause (iv) seeks to insert a new definition of "place of busi-
ness" as including a warehouse, godown. etc. 
Clause 3.-The proposed sub-section seeks to avoid multiple taxa-
tion on sales effected by a transfer of documents of title to goods in 
a single movement thereof from one State to another. In such cases 
the tax will be levied only once at the first point during such move-
ment. This benefit will, however, be confined to sales to registered 
dealers only. 
Clause 4.-Sub-clause (i) seeks to substitute for sub-section (2) 
a new sub-section providing for the registration of a dealer who has 
a place of business in a State where there is no local sales tax law. 
The Expl.anation to that sub-section is also being amended to make 
it clear that dealers in exempted goods also may get themselves regis-
tered under the Act as persons liable to pay tax although exempt for 
the time being. 
Sub-clause (ii) seeks to substitute a new sub-section for sub-
section (4) of section 7, the amendments made being of a procedural 
character. 
Clause 5.-The amendments proposed will-
(a) entitle Government departments to purchase goods at the 
concessional rate of tax; 
(b) ensure that in no circumstances a sale to an unregistered 
dealer or consumer is taxed at a rate lower than that applicable 
in the case of a sale to a registered dealer; 
12 

13 
(c) enable the rate of tax to be determined in cases where 
the State rate is prescribed not with reference to the turnover 
but with respect to the quantity sold, e.g., petrol; 
(d) enable rules being made prescribing the commodities 
used by a manufacturer, miner, etc., in his undertaking which 
would be entitled to the concessional rate of tax. 
Clauge 6.-Section 9 as proposed to be revised provides that the 
State which shall levy and collect the tax shall be the one from 
which the goods have been moved in the course of inter-State trade 
or co~merce. In the case of a_second or subsequent sale by a regis-
tered. dealer to an unregistered dealer which will not be covered by 
sub-section (2) of section 6 as proposed to be amended by clause 3, 
tax will be levied and collected in the State where the registered 
dealer making the sale has his place of business. Power is also 
being taken by the Central Government to make rules for the purpose 
of providing for the assessment, collection and enforcement of pay-
ment of tax under the Act in any territory where there is no local 
sales tax law in force. 
The proposed new section 9A provides that tax under the Act can 
be collected only by registered dealers. 
Clause 7.-This amendment is consequential upon the insertion of 
new section 9A. 
Cla'U.'fe a.-The new section lOA seeks to provide for the imposition 
of a penalty in respect of the offences enumerated in clauses (b), 
(c) and (d) of section 10. Any penalty under this provision will be 
a bar to a prosecution on the same facts. 
Clause 9.-The rule-making section (section 13) is sought to be 
amended suitably in consequence of the amendments proposed in 
the Bill. 
Cla'U.'~e 10.-Section 14 of the Act is sought to be made self-contain-
ed by including within it (a) cotton fabrics, (b) rayon and artificial 
silk fabrics, (c) woollen fabrics, (d) sugar and (e) tobacco as defined 
in the First Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, which 
were declared as goods of special importance in inter-State trade or 
commerce by section 7 of the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of 
Special Importance) Act, 1957. 
Clause ll.-Section 15 is being revised so as to leave the discretion 
of the State Governments unfettered with respect to the levy of 
tax on declared goods at any stage under their local laws, the only 

14 
condition sought to be imposed being that if, under the local sales 
tax law, a tax is collected, provision is made in the law for the 
refund of such tax if the goods are sold in the course of inter-State 
trade or commerce. In such cases Central sales tax alone should 
be leviable. The State Governments are left free to lay down 
their own procedure for the making of such refunds. 
Clause 12.-This amendment is consequential on the amendment 
proposed in clause 10. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The scheme of the existing Act is to utilise the machinery hi 
existence in the States for collecting the Central sales tax. This 
does not in,volve any expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. With respect to Union territories like Delhi, the Financial 
Memorandum attached to the Central Sales Tax Bill has already 
explained tl!e financial implications. In States like Himachal Pradesh 
and Tripura, where there is no local sales tax law in force, a machi-
nery may have to be devised whereby the Central sales tax may be 
collected. For this purpose a small staff may be required. As there 
is no appreciable volume of inter-State trade from these territories, 
the expenditure likely to be involved on this account may not exceed 
Rs. 25,000/- per annum. 
• 
15 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to enlarge the rule-making power of 
the Central Government to provide for-
(a) the form of declaration and certificates under the Act 
and the particulars to be contained therein; 
(b) the goods or class of goods which are likely to be used 
by a manufacturer, miner, etc., in his undertaking in respect of 
which the concessional rate of tax should be leviable; 
(c) the procedure for the levy and collection of tax in 
territories where there is no local sales tax law; 
(d) the fees payable in respect of applications for registra-
tion; and 
(e) the fees payable for obtaining a declaration form under 
sub-section (4) of section 8 and the conditions subject to which 
such declaration forms may be obtained. 
Power has to be assumed by the Central Government for the 
purpose of specifying what goods or classes of goods are likely to be 
used by ·a manufacturer, miner, electricity undertakings, etc., as 
such specifications may have to be made from time to time. 
States like Tripura _ Himachal Pradesh have at present ,no sales 
tax law. Provision has, therefore, to be made enabling the Central 
Government to make rules providing for the collection and enforce-
ment of payment of tax under the Central law in these territories. 
The rule-making power is of a normal character. 
16 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT, 1956 
(No. 74 OF 1956) 
• • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate State" means-
(i) in relation to a dealer who has one or more places 
of business situate in the same State, that State; 
(ii) in relation to a dealer who has one or more places 
of business situate in different States, every such State 
with respect to the place or places of business situate 
within its territory; 
Explanation.-"Place of business" means-
(i) in the case of a sale of goods in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce falling within clause (a) of section 
3, the place from which the goods have been moved by reason 
of such sale; 
(ii) in the case of any such sale falling within clause 
(b) of section 3, the place where the sale is effected; 
(b) "dealer" means any person who carries on the business 
of selling goods, and includes a Government which carries on 
such business; 
(c) "declared goods" means goods declared under section 
14 to be of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce; 
(d) "goods" includes all materials, articles, commodities and 
ell other kinds of movable property, but does not include action-
able claims, stocks, shares and securities; 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER III 
INTER-STATE SALES TAX 
Definitions' 
6. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, every ~~I~:~~t~: 
dealer shall, with effect from such date as the Central Government state s:·les. 
17 

ReaiatnotioD 
of dcalen. 
18 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, not being 
earlier than thirty days from the date of such notifioation, be 
liable to pay tax under this Act on all sales effected by him in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce during any year on and from 
the date so notified. 
7. (1) Every dealer liable to pay tax under this Act shall, within 
such time as may be prescribed for the purpose, make an application 
for registration under this Act to such authority in the appropriate 
State as the Central Government may, by general or special order, 
specify, and eve:ry such application shall contain such particulars as 
may be prescribed. 
(2) Any dealer who is liable to pay tax under the sales tax law 
of the appropriate State may, notwithstanding that he is not liable 
to pay tax under this Act, apply for registration under this Act to 
the authority referred to in sub-section (1), and ~ery such applica-
tion shall contnin such particulars as may be prescribed . 
• • • • • 
(4) A certificate of registration granted under this section may 
be cancelled by the authority granting it, where it is satisfied that 
the dealer to whom it has been granted has ceased to carry on 
business or bas ceased to exist or, in thP. case of a dealer registered 
under sub-section (2), has ceased to be liable to pay tax under the 
sales tax law of the appropriate State or for any other sufficient 
reason . 
• • • • • 
Rates of.tax 8. (1) Every dealer who, in the course of inter-State trade or com-
~~=~ of merce sells to e. registered dealer goods of the description referred 
inter-State to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to pay tax under this Act, which 
~~~~ com- shall be one per cent. of his turnover: 
Provided that, if under the sales tax law of the appropriate State, 
the sale or purchase of any goods by a dealer is exempt from tax 
generally and not in specified cases or in specified circumstances 
or is subject to tax (by whatever DBme called) at a rate or rates 
which is or are lower than the rate specified in sub-section (l), the 
tax payable under this Act on the turnover in relation to the sale of 
such goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall be 
nil or shall be calculated e.t the lower rate, as the case may be. 
(2) The tax payable by any dealer in any case not falling within 
sub-section (1) in respect of the sale by him of any goods in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce shall be oalculated at the 

19 
same rates and in the same manner as would have been done if the 
sale had, in fact, taken place inside the appropriate State, and 
for the purpose of making any such calculation any such dealer shall 
be deemed to be a dealer liable to pay tax under the sales tax law 
of the appropriate State, notwithstanding that he, in fact, may not 
be so liable under that law. 
(3) The goods referred to in sub-section (1)-
(a) in the case of declared goods, are goods of the class or 
classes specified in the certificate of registration of the registered 
dealer purchasing the goods as being intended for resale by 
him; and 
(b) in any other case, are goods of the class or classes 
specified in the certificate of registration of the registered dealer 
purchasing the goods as being intended for resale by him or for 
use by him in the manufacture of goods for sale or for use by 
him in the execution of any contract; 
and in either case include the containers or other materials used 
for the packing of goods of the class or classes of goods so specified. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section "contract" 
means any agreement for carrying out for cash or deferred payment 
or other valuable consideration-
(i) the construction, fitting out, improvement or repair of 
any building, road, bridge or other immovable property; or 
(ii) the installation or repair of any machinery affixed to 
any building or other immovable property. 
(4) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to any sale 
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce unless the dealer 
selling the goods furnishes to the prescribed authority in the pres-
cribed manner a declamtion duly filled and signed by the registered 
dealer to whom the goods are sold, containing the prescribed parti-
culars on a prescribed form obtained from the prescribed authority. 
• • • • • • 
9. (1) The tax payable by any dealer under this Act shall be ~il!~~~ of 
levied and collected in the appropriate State by the Government tllX. 
of India in the manner provided in sub-section (2). 
(2) The authorities for the time being empowered to assess, col-
lect and enforce payment of any tax under the general sales tax 
law of the appropriate State shall. on behalf of the Government of 
India and subject to any rules made under this Act, assess, collect 
and enforce payment of any tax payable by a dealer under this Act 
in the same manner as the tax on the sale or purchase of goods 
under the general sales tax law of the State is assessed, paid and 
collected; and for this purpose they may exercise all or any of the 
powers they have under the general sales tax law of the Statej and 

Penaltitl. 
20 
the provisions of such law. including provisions relating to returns, 
appeals, reviews, revisions. references, penalties and compounding 
of offences, shall apply accordingly. 
(3) The proceeds (reduced by the cost of collection) in any 
financial year of any tax levied and collected under this Act in any 
State on behalf of the Government of India shall, except in so far 
as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to Union terri-
tories, be assigned to that state and shall be retained by it; and the 
proceeds attributable to Union territories shall form part of the Con-
solidated Fund of India. 
10. If any person-
• • • • • • * 
(e) has in his possession any form prescribed for the purpose 
of sub-section (4) of section 8 which has not been obtained by 
him or by his principal or by his agent in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder; 
he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or with fine, or with both; and when the offence is a 
continuing offence, with a daily fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees for every day during which the offence continues. 
* • * * • 
Power to 13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
m3ke rules. OfficPll Gazette, make rules providing for- . 
(a) the manner in which applicktions for registration may 
be made under this Act. the particular to be contained therein, 
the procedure for the grant of such registration, the circumstances 
in which registration may be refused and the form in which the 
certificate of registration may be given; 
(b) the period of turnover, the manner in which the turnover 
in relation to the sale of any goods under this Act shall be deter-
mined, and the deductions which may be made in the process 
of such determination; 
(c) the cases and circumstances in which, and the conditions 
subject to which, any registration granted under this Act may be 
cancelled; 
(d) the particulars to be contained in the declaration to be 
given by any registered dealer purchasing goods and the form of 
such declaration. 
* • .' • • 
(4) In particular and without prejudice to the powers conferred 
by sub"section (1), the State Government may make rules for all or 
any of the following purposes, namely:-
• • * • • 

(e) the authority from which any form of declaration pres-
cribeJ under sub-section (4) of section 8 may be obtained, the 
manner in which the form shall be kept in custody and records 
relating thereto maintained, the manner in which any such 
form may be used and any such declaration may be furnished; 
• • • • • • 
(g) the time within which, the manner in which and the 
authorities to which any change in the ownership of any busi-
ness or in the nature of any business carried on by any dealer 
shall be furnished, 
.. .. .. .. • • 
CHAPTER IV 
GOODS OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE IN INTER-STATE TRADE OR COMMERCE 
14, It is hereby declared that the following goods are of special ;;~~~i~ be 
importance in inter-State trade or commerce: - of special 
( ') I' 1 d' k' 11 't f importan.:e t coa, mc u mg co e mal s orms; in inter-
(ii) cotton, that is to say, all kinds of cotton (indigenous Stste trade 
or imported) in its unmanufactured state, whether ginned or ~e;~~­
unginned, baled, pressed or otherwise, but not including cotton 
waste; 
(Ua) cotton yarn, but not including cotton yarn waste; 
(iii) hides and skins, whether in a raw or dressed state; 
(iv) iron and steel, that is to say,-
(a) pig iron and iron scrap; 
(b) iron plates sold in the same form in which they are 
directly produced by the rolling mill; 
(c) steel scrap" steel inggts. steel "billets, steel bars and 
rods; 
(d) (i) steel plates, 
(ii) steel sheets, 
(iii) sheet bars and tin 
bars, 
(iv) rolled steel sections, 
(v) tool alloy steel; 
lrsold in the same form in 
which they aile direct-
I ly produced by the 
) rolling mill; 
(1.') jute, that is to say, the fibre extracted from plants belong-
ing to the species core horus capsularis and eorehorus oZitorius 
and the fibre known as mesta or bimli extracted from plants 
of the species hibiscus cannapinus l!lnd hibiscus sabdariffavar 
. altissima, whether baled or otherWise; 
(vi) oil-seeds, that is to say, seeds yielding non-volatile 
oils used for human consumption, or in industry. or in the 
manufacture of varnishes, soaps and the like, or in lubrication, 
and volatile oils used chiefly in medicines, perfumes, cosme-
tics and the like. 

Restrictions 
and condi-
tions in 
gard to :ax 
on sale or 
purchase of 
dcc1a.'ed 
goods wi.h-
in a Statc. 
22 
15. Every sales tax law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes or 
authorises the imposition of a tax on the sale or purchase of declared 
goods, be subject to the following restrictions and conditions, 
namely:-
(a) the tax payable under that law in respect of any sale 
or purchase of such goods inside the State shall be levied only 
in respect of the last sale or purchase inside the State and 
shall not exceed two per cent. of the sale or purchase price; 
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a), no 
tax shall be levied in respect of the last sale or purchase in-
side the State if the declared goods purchased are intended for 
sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. 
Explanatwn.-The expression "last sale or purchase inside the 
State" means the transaction in which a dealer registered under 
the sales tax law of the State-
(i) sells to or purchases from another such dealer dec-
lared goods for use by the purchaser in the manufacture of 
goods for sale or for use by the purchaser in the execution of 
any contract; or 
(ii) purchases declared goods from another such dealer 
for sale to a dealer not registered under the sales tax law 
of the State or to a consumer in the State . 
• • • • • • 
EXTRCT FROM THE ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF EXCISE (GOODS or SPECIAL 
IMPORTANCE) ACT. 1957 
(No. 58 or 1957) 
• • • • • 
7. It is hereby declared that the following goods namely, sugar, 
~=t!:~on tobacco, cotton fabrics, rayen or artificial silk fabrics and woollen 
goods to be fabrics are of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce 
~~ and every sales tax law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes 
in inter-Slife or authorises the imposition of a tax on the sale or purchase of 
~m~~ce. the declared goods, be subject as from the 1st day of April, 1958, 
to the restrictions and conditions specified in section 15 of the of 6 
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 1~ 195, 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and ~3) ofarticle 117 
and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, 
recommended to Lok Sabha, the introduction and 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarft Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 