Bill No. 55 of 1954 
THE ANDHRA STATE LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION 
OF POWERS) BILL, 1954 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to confer on the Presid~nt the power of the AnClhra State 
Legislature to make laws. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic 
()f India as follows:-
1. Short tltle.-This Act may be called the Andhra State Legisla-
ture (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1954. 
2. DeftnltioDS.-In this Act,- S 
(a) "article" means an article of the Constitution; 
(b) "Proclamation" means the Proclamation i3sued on the 
15th day of November, 1954, by the President under clause (1) of 
article 356. 
3. CoDIennent on the President of the power of the state Legtsla- 10 
ture.-(l) The power of the Legislature of 9te State of Andhra if, 
make laws, which has been declared by the Proclamation to be exer-
cisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is hereby conferred 
on the President. 
(2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from I, 
time to time, whether Parliament is or is not in session, enact as a 
President's Act a Bill containing such provisions as he considers 
necessary. 
(3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) 
shall, as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before Parliament. 2~ 
(4) Parliament may, by resolution passed within seven days from 
the date on which the Aet has been laid before it under sub-section 
(3), direct any modifications to be made in the Act and such modifica-
tions shall be given effect to by the President by enacting an amend-
ing Act under sub-section (2) : 25 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity 
of the Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended. 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
By virtue of the Proclamation issued by the President on the 15th 
November, 1954, under article 356 of the Constitution the powers 
of the Legislature of the State of Andhra are now exercisable by. 
or under the authority of, Parliament.' Article 357(1) (a> of the 
Constitution provides for Parliament enacting a law conferring on 
the President the powers of the Legislature of the State to make 
laws. 
2. If all legislative measures that it may be necessary to enact 
from time to time for the State of Andhra are to be taken up by 
Parliament, it would require a good deal of time which would not be 
available and which would hold up measures of all-India importance'. 
3. This Bill, therefore, seeks during the period of emergency to 
confer on the President the powers of the Legislature of the State of 
Andhra. 
K. N. KATJU . 
• NEW DELlI!; 
The 18th November, 1954. 

• 
• 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
-
tu confer on the President the power of the Andhra State 
Legislature to make laws . 
/ 
• 
(Dr. Kailas Nalh Kalju, 
Minister for Home Affair $) 