THE WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the  Workmen’s Compensation  (Amendment) Act,
2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the long title to the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), for the word “workmen” the word “employee” shall be substituted.
3. In the principal Act, in the preamble, for the word “workmen”, the word “employee”
shall be substituted.
4. In section 1 of the principal Act,  in sub-section (1), for the word “Workmen’s”,
the word “Employees’” shall be substituted.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
8 of 1923. Amendment
of long title.
Amendment
of preamble.
Amendment
of section 1.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 55 of 2008

2
5. Throughout the principal Act, for the words “workman” and “workmen” wherever
they occur, the words “employee” and “employees” shall respectively be substituted,
and such other consequential amendments as the rules of grammar may require shall also
be made.
6.  In section 2 of the principal Act,  in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(dd) “employee” means any person who is—
(i) a railway servant as defined in clause (34) of section 2 of the
Railways Act, 1989, not permanently employed in any administrative,
district or sub-divisional office of a railway and not employed in any
such capacity as is specified in Schedule II, or
(ii) (a) a master, seaman or other member of the crew of a ship,
(b) a captain or other member of the crew of an aircraft,
(c) recruited as driver, helper, mechanic, cleaner or in any other
capacity in connection with a motor vehicle,
(d) recruited for work abroad by a company,
and who is employed outside India in any such capacity as is specified
in Schedule II and the ship, aircraft or motor vehicle, or company, as the
case may be, is registered in India, or
(iii) employed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II,
whether the contract of employment was made before or after the
passing of this Act and whether such contract is expressed or implied,
oral or in writing; but does not include any person working in the
capacity of a member of the Armed Forces of the Union; and any
reference to an employees who has been injured shall, where the
employee is dead, include a reference to his dependants or any of
them.’;
(ii) clause (n) shall be omitted.
7. In section 4 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), after clause (b), Explanation II  shall be omitted;
(ii) sub-section (1A) shall be re-numbered as sub-section ( 1B) thereof, and
before sub-section ( 1B) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(1A) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such monthly wage in
relation to an employee as it may consider necessary.”;
(iii) in sub-section (4), for the words “two thousand and five hundred rupees”,
the words “not less than three thousand rupees or such sum, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify,” shall be
substituted.
8. In  section 20 of the principal Act,  in sub-section (1), after the words “appoint
any person”, the words “who is or has been a member of a State Judicial Service for a
period of not less than five years or has been for not less than five years an advocate or
a pleader” shall be inserted.
9. In the principal Act, in Schedule II,—
(i) for the word, number, brackets and letter “section 2 (
1) (n)”, wherever they
occur the word, number, brackets and letters “section 2(1) (dd)” shall be substituted;
Substitution of
references to
certain
expressions by
certain other
expressions.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 20.
Amendment
of  Schedule
II.
24 of 1989.

3
(ii) in item (i) for the words “employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity or
on a railway”, the words “employed in railways” shall be substituted;
(iii) in item ( ii), the words “otherwise than in a clerical capacity” shall be
omitted;
(iv) in item (iii), the words “wherein or within the precincts whereof  twenty
or more persons are so employed” shall be omitted;
(v) in item (v), the words  “other than clerical work” shall be omitted;
(vi) in item (vi),—
(a) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(b) in clause (c), the words, brackets and letter “or sub-clause (b)” shall
be omitted;
(vii) in item ( x), the words “otherwise than in a clerical capacity” shall be
omitted;
(viii) in item (xiv), the words “otherwise than in a clerical capacity” shall be
omitted;
(ix) in item (xvi), the words “in which on any one day of the preceding twelve
months more than twenty-five persons have been employed” shall be omitted;
(x) for item (xviii) the following item shall be substituted, namely:—
“(xviii) employed on any estate which is maintained for the purpose of
growing cardamom, cinchona, coffee, rubber or tea; or”;
(xi) in item (xix), the words “otherwise than in a clerical capacity” shall be
omitted;
(xii) in item (xxvi),—
(a) in clause (a), the words “and in which on any one day of the preceding
twelve months ten or more persons have been so employed” shall be omitted;
(b) in clause (b), the words “in which on any one day of the preceding
twelve months fifty or more persons have been so employed” shall be omitted;
(xiii) in item (xxx), the words “otherwise than in a clerical capacity” shall be
omitted;
(xiv) in items ( xl) and ( xli), the words “in which on any one day of the
preceding twelve months more than twenty-five persons have been employed”
occurring at both items shall be omitted;
(xv) the Explanation occurring at the end shall be omitted.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 provides for payment of compensation to
the workmen and their dependants in the case of injury by industrial accidents including
certain occupational diseases arising out of and in the course of employment resulting in
death or disablement. The Act applies to certain railway servants and persons employed
in hazardous employments such as factories, mines, plantations mechanically propelled
vehicles, construction work, etc., specified in Schedule II of the Act. However, the Act is
not applicable to the employees who are covered under the Employees’ State Insurance
Act, 1948.
2. The Second National Commission on Labour set-up in the year 2002 has made
recommendations relating to amendment of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923. The
recommendations have been examined in consultation with the concerned Ministries/
Departments/State Governments/Union Territory Administrations.
3. The salient features of the Bill are as follows:—
(1) It provides for substitution of the work ‘workman’ with the word ‘employee’
so that the Act is applicable to all classes of employees and to make the expression
gender-neutral.
(2) To re-name the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 as the Employees’
Compensation Act, 1923.
(3) To omit restrictive clauses in Schedule II of the Act, so as to make it more
workers friendly.
(4) Keeping in view the changing trend in the wage level of employees, it is
proposed to have an enabling provision to revise the wage ceiling from time to time
by the Central Government.
(5) To enhance the funeral expenses of the deceased workman from Rs. 2500/-
to Rs. 3000/- and also to empower the Central Government to enhance such expenses
from time to time.
(6) Provision is being made so that persons who have a minimum qualification
of not less than five years as a member of a State Judicial Service or not less than
five years of experience as an advocate or a pleader shall be eligible to become the
Commissioner.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; OSCAR FERNANDES.
The 19th September, 2008.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (ii) of clasue 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to revise
the wage ceiling from time to time for calculation of maximum amount of compensation
where death or permanent total disablement or permanent partial disablement results from
the injury. Sub-clause (iii) of the Bill, provides for the enhancement of the funeral expenses
of the deceased workman from an amount of Rs. 2500 to Rs. 3000, and also empowers the
Central Government to enhance such sum as the funeral expenses from time to time.
2. The above-mentioned proposals in their application to the workmen employed
by the Central Government will involve increased expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India by way of payment of compensation. However, as compensation becomes
payable only in the event of employment injury resulting in disablement or death, it is not
possible to estimate in advance the amount of additional expenditure involved.
3. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether recurring or non-recurring
nature.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (ii) of Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to specify such monthly wage in relation
to an employee as the Central Government may, consider necessary for calculation of
maximum amount of compensation. Similarly, sub-clause (iii) of the Bill seeks to increase
the funeral expenses from Rs. 2500 to Rs. 3000 or such sum, as the Central Government
may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette.
2. The matters in respect of which the Central Government is empowered by
notification to specify certain amounts are matters of administrative details or of procedure
and it is not possible to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923
(8 OF 1923)
An Act to provide for the payment by certain classes of employers to their workmen
of compensation for injury by accident.
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the payment by certain classes of employers
to their workmen of compensation for injury by accident;
It is hereby enacted as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923.
* * * * *
2.  (1) In this Act,  unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
* * * * *
(n) “workman” means any person  who is—
(i) a railway servant as defined in clause (34) of section 2 of the Railways
Act, 1989 not permanently employed in any administrative, district or sub-
divisional office of a railway and not employed in any such capacity as is
specified in Schedule II, or
(ia) (a) a master, seaman or other member of the crew of a ship,
(b) a captain or other member of the crew of an aircraft,
(c) a person recruited as driver, helper, mechanic, cleaner or in any
other capacity in connection with a motor vehicle,
(d) a person recruited for work abroad by a company,
and who is employed outside India in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule
II and the ship, aircraft or motor vehicle, or company, as the case may be, is registered
in India, or;
(ii) employed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II, whether
the contract of employment was made before or after the passing of this Act
and whether such contract is expressed or implied, oral or in writing; but does
not include any person working in the capacity of a member of  the Armed
Forces of the Union; and any reference to a workman who has been injured
shall, where the workman is dead, include a reference to his dependants or
any of them.
* * * * *
4.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of compensation shall be as
follows, namely:—
(a) Where death results from the injury an amount equal to fifty per cent.
of the monthly wages of  the
deceased wokman multiplied by
the relevant factor;
or
an amount of eighty thousand
rupees, whichever is more;
(b) where permanent total disablement results an amount equal to sixty per cent.
from the injury of the monthly wages of  the
injured wokman multiplied by the
relevant factor;
or
an amount of ninety thousand
rupees, whichever is more;
7
24 of 1989.
Amount of
compensation.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.

Explanation I.— For the purposes of clause (a) and clause (b) “relevant factor” in
relation to a workman means the factor specified in the second column of Schedule IV
against the entry in the first column of that Schedule specifying the number of years
which are the same as the completed years of the age of the workman on his last birthday
immediately preceding the date on which the compensation fell due.
Explanation II.— Where the monthly wages of a workman exceed four thousand
rupees, his monthly wages for the purposes of clause (a) and clause (b) shall be deemed
to be four thousand rupees only;
* * * * *
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), while fixing the amount
of compensation payable to a workman is respect of an accident occurred outside India,
the Commissioner shall take into account the amount of compensation, if any, awarded to
such workman in accordance with the law of the country in which the accident occurred
and shall reduce the amount fixed by him by the amount of compensation awarded to the
workman in accordance with the law of that country.
* * * * *
(4) If the injury of the workman results in his death, the employer shall, in addition
to the compensation under sub-section (1), deposit with the Commissioner a sum of two
thousand and five hundred rupees for payment of the same to the eldest surviving
dependant of the workman towards the expenditure of the funeral of such workman or
where the workman did not have a dependant or was not living with his dependant at the
time of his death to the person who actually incurred such expenditure.
* * * * *
20. 
 (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
any person to be a Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation for such area as may be
specified in the notification.
* * * * *
SCHEDULE  II
[See section 2(1) (n)]
LIST OF PERSONS WHO, SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 2(1)(n),
ARE INCLUDED IN THE DEFINITION OF WORKMEN
The following persons are workmen within the meaning of section 2( 1)(n) and
subject to the provisions of that section, that is to say, any person who is—
(i) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity or on a railway, in connection
with the operation, repair or maintenance of a lift or a vehicle propelled by steam or
other mechanical power or by electricity or in connection with the loading or
unloading of any such vehicle; or
(ii) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in any premises wherein
or within the precincts whereof a manufacturing process as defined in clause (k) of
section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948, is being carried on, or in any kind of work
whatsoever incidental to or connected with any such manufacturing process or
with the article made, whether or not employment in any such work is within such
premises or precincts and steam, water or other mechanical power or electricial
power is used; or
(iii) employed for the purpose of making, altering, repairing, ornamenting,
finishing or otherwise adapting for use, transport or sale any article or part of an
article in any premises wherein or within the precincts whereof twenty or more
persons are so employed;
8
63 of 1948.
Appointment
of
Commissioners.

9
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, persons employed outside such
premises or precincts  but in any work  incidental to, or connected, with, the work relating
to making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise adapting for use,
transport or sale of any article or part of an article shall be deemed to be employed within
such premises or precincts; or
* * * * *
(v) employed, in any mine as defined in clause (j) of section 2 of the Mines
Act, 1952, in any mining operation or in any kind of work other than clerical work,
incidental to or connected with any mining operation or with the mineral obtained,
or in any kind of work whatsoever below ground; or
(vi) employed as the master or as a seaman of—
* * * * *
(b) any ship not included in sub-clause (a), of twenty-five tons net
tonnage or over; or
(c) any sea-going ship not included in sub-clause ( a) or sub-clause
(b) provided with sufficient area for navigation under sales alone; or
* * * * *
(x) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in the construction,
working, repair or demolition of any aerial ropeway, canal, pipeline or sewer; or
* * * * *
(xiv) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in connection with
operation for winning natural petroleum or natural gas; or
* * * * *
(xvi) employed in the making of any excavation in which on any one day of
the preceding twelve months more than twenty-five persons have been employed
or explosives have been used, or whose depth from its highest to its lowest point
exceeds twelve feet; or
* * * * *
(xviii) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, on any estate which is
maintained for the purpose of growing cardamom, cinchona, coffee, rubber or tea,
and on which on any one day in the preceding twelve months twenty-five or more
persons have been so employed; or
(xix) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in the generating,
transforming transmitting or distribution of electrical energy or in generation or
supply of gas; or
* * * * *
(xxvi) employed in the handling or transport of goods in, or within the precincts
of,—
(a) any warehouse or other place in which goods are stored, and in
which on any one day of the preceding twelve months ten or more persons
have been so employed; or
(b) any market in which on any one day of the preceding twelve months
fifty or more persons have been so employed; or
35 of 1952.

10
* * * * *
(xxx) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in the construction,
working, repair or maintenance of a tube-well; or
* * * * *
(xl) employed in cleaning of jungles or reclaiming land or ponds in which on
any one day of the preceding twelve months more than twenty-five persons have
been employed; or
(xli) employed in cultivation of land or rearing and maintenance of live-stock
or forest operations or fishing in which on any one day of the preceding twelve
months more than twenty-five persons have been employed; or
* * * * *
Explanation.— In this Schedule, “the preceding twelve months” relates in
any particular case to the twelve months ending with the day on which the accident
in such case occurred.
* * * * *

GMGIPMRND—3299LS—14.10.2008.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923.
————
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of State for Labour and Employment)