1
THE MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC CLEANLINESS AND WASTE
MANAGEMENT BILL, 2015
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of household waste by prescribing norms
and fixing duties on citizens with regard to maintenance of public cleanliness
and for matters connected herewith and incidental thereto.
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment held at Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, to take appropriate
steps for the protection and improvement of human environment;
A
ND WHEREAS it is considered necessary further to implement the decisions of aforesaid
in so far as they relate to the protection and improvement of environment and the prevention
of hazards to human beings, other living creatures, plants and property;
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Maintenance of Public Cleanliness and Waste
Management  Act, 2015.
Bill No. 55  of 2015
Short title and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "disposal" means disposal of household waste according to prescribed norms
to prevent contamination of the environment and harmful effect on human health;
(c) "municipal authority" means Municipal Corporation, Municipality, Nagar
Palika, Nagar Nigam, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council including Notified Area
Committee (NAC) or any other local body constituted under the relevant statutes and,
where the management and handling of municipal solid waste is entrusted to such
agency;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(e) "school" means a school run by the Central Government or a State Government
or a local authority or by an authority designated or sponsored by the appropriate
Government and includes Government aided school and recognised aided and unaided
private school; and
(f) "segregate" means to separate household waste into organic, inorganic,
recyclables and hazardous wastes.
3.  No person shall throw or dispose of any household waste in public place or on the
property of any other person, except in the dustbins or waste collection points demarcated
by the municipal authority.
4.  It shall be the duty of every citizen—
(i) to ensure cleanliness in his home and surrounding areas;
(ii) to segregate household waste;
(iii) to participate in the routine community cleanliness drives organised by the
municipal authorities; and
(iv) to undertake such other tasks as may be prescribed.
5.  (1) The appropriate Government shall include a course on waste management as a
compulsory part of the school curriculum.
(2) Every school shall organize cleanliness drives at prescribed intervals to promote
household waste management and public cleanliness among students.
6. The municipal authority shall—
(i) ensure collection of segregated waste from households for further treatment
and disposal;
(ii) notify sites demarcated as collection points;
(iii) conduct educational and informational activities relating to cleanliness at
such interval for the local residents, as may be prescribed; and
(iv) organise cleanliness drives from time to time to promote cleanliness among
citizens.
Definitions.
Prohibition on
littering.
Duties of
citizens.
Schools to
promote
household
waste
management
and public
cleanliness
among
students.
Responsibilities
of the
municipal
authorities.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months and fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite sums to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period  of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to maintenance of
public cleanliness and waste management or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any
law other than this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Penalty.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite sums.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Mahatma Gandhi, the father of our nation had once said, "Cleanliness is next to
Godliness". While the concept of personal hygiene and keeping one's home is greatly
emphasized, cleanliness in the public sphere is often found to be lacking. Recently, the
Swachh Bharat Abhiyan has been launched, with a focus on community participation, in
order to fulfil Mahatma Gandhi's vision of a clean India. The Bill aims to provide a legislative
impetus to the ambitious campaign by clearly outlining the roles and responsibilities of the
Government, municipal authorities and the citizens so that the nation can collectively work
towards achieving the objective of a clean India.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
February 6, 2015
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for introducing a course on waste management as a
compulsory part of the school curriculum. Clause 6 provides for certain steps to be initiated
by municipal authorities for promotion of public cleanliness. Clause 8 provides that the
Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about
rupees five hundred crore will be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees  one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

7
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for proper handling and disposal of household waste by prescribing norms
and fixing duties on citizens with regard to maintenance of public cleanliness
and for matters connected herewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki,  M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4768LS(S3)—03-03-2015.