79 JUL 206

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
SHRI BRAJESH PATHAK, M.P.
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in th

९ Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

1. (/) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005.

2. After article 30 of the C

onstitution, the following heading and article thereunder
ill be inserted, namely:—

“Right to Safe and Adequate Drinking Water

31.(7) Every citizen shall have access to safe and adequate quantity of drinking
_ Water.

ery village,

tehsil and district in order fo ensure availability of safe and adequate quantity

of drinking water for every citizen."

Bill No. 55 of 2005
at

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Short title.

Insertion of
new article
+1.

Provision of
Safe and
adequate
drinking
water.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Water is an essential element for existence of all living beings on the earth. In |
country, there is adequate water in ponds, iakes, rivers and oceans. However, in the absence
of effective water management policy, river waters and other water bodies remain untapped.

Moreover, due to lack of awareness regarding the importance of water among the common ;
man, the condition of ponds and lakes has been deteriorating for the last several years.

There is acute shortage of drinking water everywhere in the‘ country including the
metropolitan cities. In most of the villages, particularly in Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, the villagers collect the rainwater in ponds which is utilized _
by them mainly for drinking purpose. Due to lack of any other alternative, they are forced to
utilize this water which is unhygienic and unfit for human consumption.

' In a welfare State like ours, it is the duty of the State to fulfil the basic needs of its
citizens. Therefore, the State is required to provide drinking water to every citizen.

If the right to get drinking water is made a fundamental right, the State shall have to
provide potable water to the citizens. Otherwise, the rural and urban people will come together
and take recourse to the court collectively or individually with the purpose of compelling the
Government to provide safe and adequate quantity of drinking water to them. Such a step
shall give a new direction to the Government to tackle this serious problem. The Bill accordingly
seeks to amend the Constitution.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; BRAJESH PATHAK
March 14, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for giving the citizens the right to potable water and the
State shall provide facility of wells, tubewells, water taps, handpumps, water tanks in each
village, tehsil and district. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees fifteen thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

An amount of about rupees seventy crore will also be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India towards non-recurring expenditure. |


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Brajesh Pathak, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—96LS—14.04.2005.