1
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF SANITATION AND
CLEANLINESS IN SCHOOLS BILL, 2016
By
SHRI OM BIRLA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory teaching of sanitation and cleanliness in all
schools as part of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Sanitation and Cleanliness
in Schools Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  55  of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Definitions.
Compulsory
teaching of
sanitation and
cleanliness in
schools.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "elementary education" means the school education from first standard to
eighth standard;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "sanitation and cleanliness" means maintenance of hygienic conditions and
includes safe disposal of human urine and faeces;
(e) "school" means—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate
Government or a local authority; or
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of its
expenses from the appropriate Government or the local authority;
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; or
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to meet its
expenditure; or
(v) an educational institution managed by a private entity, society or a
trust,
which imparts elementary education.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette specify, sanitation and cleanliness shall be taught as a compulsory subject in all
schools.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, immediately after issuance of the notification
under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of sanitation and cleanliness in all
schools within its jurisdiction.
(2) While issuing directions to include a subject on 'Sanitation and Cleanliness' as part
of the school curriculum, the appropriate Government shall ensure that—
(i) lessons on personal hygiene and community cleanliness are made part of the
teaching on the subject; and
(ii) the values enshrined in the Constitution and all round development of the
child's knowledge on health and sanitation have been taken into consideration.
5. Every school shall, at least twice in every year, conduct exhibitions aimed at promoting
sanitation and cleanliness at community level and once in every year conduct cleanliness
drive to promote importance of sanitation and cleanliness.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with Central Government,
publish a teacher training manual which shall prescribe the best practices and methods to
be applied while teaching about sanitation and cleanliness.
(2) It shall be compulsory for every school to conduct a teacher training programme
on sanitation and cleanliness every year to ensure effective implementation of the provisions
of this Act.
7. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall apply to
minority schools only if the management of such schools convey to the appropriate
Government their willingness to include sanitation and cleanliness in its school curriculum.
Appropriate
Government
to issue
directions for
compulsory
teaching of
sanitation and
cleanliness in
schools.
Promotion of
sanitation and
cleanliness.
Teacher
Training
Manual.
Act to apply
to minority
schools in
certain
situation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
8. The appropriate Government shall monitor the implementation of the provisions of
this Act.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
10. The appropriate Government shall derecognise a school which does not comply
with the provisions of section 4 or 5 and may impose a fine of rupees one lakh after giving
such school a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
11. The Central Government shall issue such directions to the State Government or, as
the case may be, the local authority, as it may deem fit for the purposes of implementation of
the provisions of this Act.
12. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act:
Provided that no such order shall be issued after expiry of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Implementation
of the Act.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Punishment.
Power to issue
directions.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
One of the commonly recalled statements about hygiene is one that by Mahatma
Gandhi: "Sanitation is of more importance than political independence". However, even after
sixty-nine years of independence, we are yet to realise the goal of a clean India. Keeping this
in mind, the Bill proposes to make young minds in India realise the value of health and
sanitation. As future leaders of the country, it is essential for students to be nurtured with
importance of sanitation.
The Bill proposes inclusion of a subject on sanitation and cleanliness in elementary
school curriculum. By virtue of this move, the Bill ensures that children grow up knowing the
importance of cleanliness which will help to achieve Mahatma Gandhi's vision of a clean
India. Apart from achieving cleanliness, such curriculum will play a vital role in understanding
the concept of germs and reduce the spread of several communicable diseases that can be
controlled through clean habits. Education is an investment in unearthing the country's
potential in the longer run. Similarly, inclusion of subject on cleanliness will help to achieve
clean India by raising citizens with cleanliness as part of their core values.
Moreover, by virtue of having a teacher training manual and training programme, the
concept of sanitation will be dynamic keeping in touch with reality rather than sticking with
one laid down curriculum.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above mentioned objectives.
N
EW DELHI; OM BIRLA
February 9, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for publication of a teacher training manual that prescribes
best practices and methods to be applied while teaching about sanitation and cleanliness.
Clause 9 provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State
Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The expenditure relating to State
Governments shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of States concerned. The
expenditure in relation to Union Territories shall be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees three hundred crore per
annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory teaching of sanitation and cleanliness in all
schools as part of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Om Birla, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4375LS(S3)—01.03.2016.