Bill No. 55-F of 2002

ee

THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS

(AMENDMENT AND MISCELLAN
PROVISIONS) BILL, 2002

(As PASSED BY THE Houses oF PARLIAMENT—

Lok SABHA ON 21st NOVEMBER, 2002
RasyA SABHA ps 26rH NoveMBER, 2002)

1

TASSENTED TO
on 17-12-02
Act No. 55 oF 2002

EOUS



Bill No. 55-F of 2002

THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS (AMENDMENT AND
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 2002

(AS PASSED BY THE Houses OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL

further to amend the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, the Bankers' Books Evidence
Act, 1891 and the Information Technology Act, 2000.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. (J) This Act may be called the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment and
Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2002.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions

of this: Act.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881
26 of 1881 2. For section 6 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (hereinafter in this Chapter

referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:—

“6. A“cheque” is a bill of exchange drawn ona specified banker and not expressed
to be payable otherwise than on demand and it includes the electronic image of a
truncated cheque and a cheque in the electronic form.

Short title and
commencement,

Substitution of
new section
for section 6.

“Cheque”.



Amendment

2

Explanation |.—For the purposes of this section, the expressions—

(a) “a cheque in the electronic form” means a cheque which contains the
exact mirror image of a paper cheque, and is generated, written and signed ina
secure system ensuring the minimum safety standards with the use of digital
signature (with or without biometrics signature) and asymmetric crypto system;

(6) “a truncated cheque” means a cheque which is truncated during the
course of a clearing cycle, either by the clearing house or by the bank whether
paying or receiving payment, immediately on generation of an electronic image
for transmission, substituting the further physical movement of the cheque in
writing. 2

Explanation \|—For the purposes of this section, the expression “clearing
house” means the clearing house managed by the Reserve Bank of India or a clearing
house recognised as such by the Reserve Bank of India.”.

3. Section 64 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section (7) thereof, and

of section 64. after sub-section (/) as so te-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-—

Amendment

of section 81.

Amendment
of section 89.

Amendment

of section 131.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, where an electronic image
of a truncated cheque is presented for payment, the drawee bank is entitled to demand
any further information regarding the truncated cheque from the bank holding the
truncated cheque in case of any reasonable suspicion about the genuineness of the
apparent tenor of instrument, and if the suspicion is that of any fraud, forgery, tampering
or destruction of the instrument, it is entitled to further demand the presentment of the
truncated cheque itself for verification:

Provided that the truncated cheque so demanded by the drawee bank shall be
retained by it, ifthe payment is made accordingly.”. .

4. Section 81 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section (J) thereof, and

after sub-section (/) as so re-numbered, the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2) Where the cheque is an electronic image of a truncated cheque, even after
the payment the banker who received the payment shall be entitled to retain the
truncated cheque.

(3) A certificate issued on the foot of the printout of the electronic image ofa
truncated cheque by the banker who paid the instrument, shall be prima facie proof of
such payment.”.

5. Section 89 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (/) thereof, and

after sub-section (/) as so re-numbered, the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—

“(2) Where the cheque is an electronic image of a truncated cheque, any
difference in apparent tenor of such electronic image and the truncated cheque shall
bea material alteration and it shall be the duty of the bank or the clearing house, as the
case may be, to ensure the exactness of the apparent tendr of electronic image of the
truncated cheque while truncating and transmitting the image.

(3) Any bank ora clearing house which receives a transmitted electronic image
of a truncated cheque, shall verify from the party who transmitted the image to it, that
the image so transmitted to it and received by it, is exactly the same.”.

6. In section 131 of the principal Act, Explanation shall be re-numbered as Explanation 1

thereof, and after Explanation 1 as so re-numbered, the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:— -

“Explanation \I.—It shall be the duty of the banker who receives payment
based on an electronic image of a truncated cheque held with him, to verify the prima
Jacie genuineness of the cheque to be truncated and any fraud, forgery or tampering



= on the face of the instrument that can be verified with due diligence and
ordinary care.”.

7.1n section 138 of the principal Act,— Amendment

+ of section 138.
(a) for the words “a term which may be extended to one year”, the words “a term

which may be extended to two years” shall be substituted;

(4) in the proviso, in clause (6), for the words “within fifteen days”, the words
“within thirty days” shall be substituted.

8. In section 141 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the proviso, the following Amendment
proviso shall be inserted, namely:— of section 141.

“Provided further that where a person is nominated as a Director of a company
by virtue of his holding any office or employment in the Central Government or State
Government or a financial corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be, he shall not be liable for prosecution
under this Chapter.”.

9. In section 142 of the principal Act, after clause (6), the following proviso shall be Amendment
inserted, namely: — + of section 142.

“Provided that the cognizance of a complaint may be taken by the Court after the
prescribed period, if the complainant satisfies the Court that he had sufficient cause
for not making a complaint within such period.”.

10. After section 142 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, Insertion of
namely:— new sections
after section

142

“143. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, Power of
2 of 1974 1973, all offences under this Chapter shall be tried by a Judicial Magistrate of the first Court to try
class or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both जगत
inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trials: :

Provided that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section,
it shall be lawful for the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year and an amount of fine exceeding five thousand rupees:

Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a
summary trial under this section, it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the
case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may have
to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the case summarily,
the Magistrate shall after hearing the parties, record an order to that effect and thereafter
recall any witness who may have been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case
in the manner provided by the said Code.

(2) The trial ofa case under this section shall, so far as practicable, consistently
with the interests of justice, be continued from day to day until its conclusion, unless
the Court finds the adjournment of the trial beyond the following day to be necessary
for reasons to be recorded in writing.

(3) Every trial under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously as possible
and an endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six months from the date
of filing of the complaint.

144. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, Mode of
2 of 1974. 1973, and for the purposes of this Chapter, a Magistrate. issuing a summons to an service of
accused or a witness may direct a copy of summons to be served at the place where “"™™0"S

such accused or witness ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works



Evidence on
affidavit.

Bank’s slip
prima facie
evidence of
certain facts.

Offences to
be

compoundable.

Amendment
of section 2.

Amendment
of section 1.

for gain; by speed post or by such courier services as are approved by a Court of
Session.

(2) Where an acknowledgment Purporting to be signed by the accused or the
witness or an endorsement Purported to be made by any person authorised by the
postal department or the courier services that the accused or the witness refused to
take delivery of summons has been received, the Court issuing the summons may
declare that the summons has been duly served.

145. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the evidence of the complainant may be given by him on affidavit and may,
subject to all just exceptions be read in evidence in any enquiry, trial or other proceeding
under the said Code,

(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution
or the accused, summon and examine any person giving evidence on affidavit as to the
facts contained therein. 5

146..The Court shall, in Tespect of every proceeding under this Chapter, on
production of bank’s slip or memo. having thereon the official mark denoting that the
cheque has been dishonoured, presume the fact of dishonour of such cheque, unless
and until such fact is. disproved.

147. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, every offence punishable under this Act shall be compoundable.”.

CHAPTER III
AMENDMENT TO THE BANKERS’ Booxs EVIDENCE Act, 1891
11. In section 2 of the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891,—
(a) for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

“(3) “bankers” books” include ledgers, day-books, cash-books, account-
books and all other records used in the ordinary business of the bank, whether
these records are kept in written form or stored in amicro film, magnetic tape or
in any other form of mechanical or electronic data retrieval mechanism, either
onsite or at any offsite location including a back-up or disaster recovery site of
both;’;

(6) in clause (8), after sub-clause (6), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:— z

“(©)a printout of any entry in the books of a bank stored in a micro film,
magnetic tape or in any other form of mechanical or electronic data retrieval
mechanism obtained by a mechanical or other Process which jn itself ensures
the accuracy of such printout as a copy of such entry and such printout contains
the certificate in accordance with the provisions of section 2A.”

CHAPTER IV
AMENDMENTS TO THE INFORMATION TecHNOLOGy Act, 2000

12. In the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as ५
the principal Act), in section 1, in sub-section (4), for clause (a), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—

“(@) anegotiable instrument (other than acheque) as defined in section 13 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 as

2 of 1974.

2 of 1974.

18 of 1891.

21 of 2000.

26 of 1881.



26 =} 1881.

26 of 1881.

5

13. After section 81 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,

namely:—

*81A.(/) The provisions of this Act, for the time being in force, shall apply to, or
in relation to, electronic cheques and the truncated cheques subject to such
modifications and amendments as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 by the Central Government, in consultation with
the Reserve Bank of India, by notification in the Official Gazette.

(2) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub-section (/)
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification
should not be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall.be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that notification.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this Act, the expressions “electronic cheque”
and “truncated cheque” shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in section 6
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.’.

Insertion of
new section
BIA

Application
of the Act to
electronic
cheque and
truncated
cheque.



A
BILL
further to amend the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, the Bankers’ Books Evidence
Act, 1891 and the Information Technology Act, 2000.

(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)

MGIPMAND—6908RS—30.12.2002..