जब AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

' ~2 JUN 1999 |

Bill No. 9 of 1998
THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 1998
By
Dr. 1. SuaBarami Reppy, M.P.
IN
PILL

‘10 provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

1. (7) This Act may be called the Compulsory Voting Act, 1998.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shal! come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
cation in the Official Gazene, appoint.
2. (2) It shail be compulsory for every voter, who is eligible to vote at an election, to
ercise his right to vote when called for by the Election Commission:
Provided that 6 voter may be exempted from exercising his vote when he is
ically incapseituied from an illness of'a serious nature and produces a medical certifi-
¢ from a reo:stered medical practitioner testifying for such incapacity.
(2) The Election Commission shall arrange for mobile ballot box vans in each

Euency for casting of votes by those persons who are not in a position to cast
ir votes at polling booths.

Shorttinle,

conmmence-

Compulsory
voting.


2

Penishment 3. Any person, who fails to cast his vote shall be liable to —

(7) a fine of rupee one hundred; or

(ii) one day imprisonment; or

(di) both in case of deliberate avoidance;
(iv) forfeiture of his ration card: and

(vy) be ineligible for contestin,

(8 any election for a period of six years from the date
of his conviction:

Provided that if such person is an था
sector undertaking owned or controlled by
punished with —

ployee of the Union Government or any public
Union Government, such person shall also be

16
(a) forfeiture of four days salary;

(b) delay in promotion for a period of one year.

Reward for 4. Any person who inspite of his illness or physical incapacity has exercised his
vpbAE. right to vote at an election or any person who has exercised his right to vote at all elections

held during a period of twenty years preceding the commencement of this Act without any 15
break shall be —

(7 provided with a certificate of reward of value of rupees one thousand;
(it) given preference in jobs in services under the Central Government; and

(aii) given preference in admission to the institutions of higher technical education.

Power to make

5. The Central Government may. by notification in the Official G.
rules,

azette, make rules 20
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Misa very sad feature that the number of voters who cast their votes is far less than
Se who are eligible. The average number of votes polled is around 50 per cent. It is a

commentary on the responsibility of citizens that the fate of the country’s demo-
itutions has been left to be decided by about 50 per cent. of the electorate. Since
of voting from tme to time does not show any appreciable increase in the number
९ who exercise their franchise, time has come to ensure that all the citizens exercise
"sovereign right to choose their representatives, so that the elections may reflect the
of the whole clectorate and not merely that of a part of it. In 11th Lok Sabha, in
of States, the voting was less than 40 per cent, and in number of cases people had
cotted elections and thus did not vote deliberately.

With a view to increasing the voting percentage, the present Bill purports to make it
mpulsory for every eligible voter to vote and to provide for exemption only in cases
2 the voter is physically incapacitated duc to illness of serious nature. In these cases
Election Commission shall arrange for mobile booths for those who are unable to cast
Votes at polling booths.

Since the provision is being made compulsory, punishment is also sought to be
110 those who do not vote at elections. However, reward is also proposed to be given
persons who vote at elections inspite of their illness or without any break.

Hence this Bill.

T. SUBBARAMI REDDY


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Election Commission shall make arrange-
ments for mobile vans for the purpose of casting of votes by those persons who are not ina
Position to cast their votes at polling booths in each constituency. Clause 4 of the Bill
provides for certificate of reward of value of rupees one thousand to those persons who
inspite of their illness or physical incapacity exercise their right to vote at an election or to
those who exercise their right at all elections held during a period of twenty years without
any break.

This Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum.

A non-recurring of about rupees one lakh is also likely to be involved.


oo

Be hs

हे हु 27 7 “ :
Bubs eine atid या scaotoala आंत oe “ely hing Gt
seb i कहता ee legis ee)



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

10 provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.

(Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy, iM.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—82.S—21.04,1998,