Bill No. 55-C of 2010
THE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS BILL, 2010
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
STATE EDUCA TIONAL TRIBUNALS
4. Establishment of State Educational Tribunal.
5. Composition of State Educational Tribunal.
6. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson or Member of State Educational Tribunal.
7. Selection Committee.
8. Term of office, salaries and allowances of Chairperson and Members of State Educational
Tribunal.
9. Resignation.
10. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and Members of State Educational Tribunal.
11. Vacancies.
12. Member of State Educational Tribunal to act as its Chairperson in certain cases.
13. Prohibitions as to holding of offices by Chairperson or Member on ceasing to be such
Chairperson or Member of State Educational Tribunal.
14. Staff of State Educational Tribunal and their salaries and allowances.
15. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of State Educational Tribunal.
16. Manner of making application before State Educational Tribunal.
17. Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted.
18. Limitation.
19. Filing of appeal to National Educational Tribunal.
CHAPTER III
N
A TIONAL EDUCA TIONAL TRIBUNAL
20. Establishment of National Educational Tribunal.
21. Composition of National Educational Tribunal.
22. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson or Member of National Educational
Tribunal.
23. Selection Committee.
24. Term of office, salaries and allowances of Chairperson and Members of National
Educational Tribunal.
25. Resignation.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 26TH AUGUST, 2010

20
26. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and Members of National Educational Tribunal.
27. Vacancies.
28. Member of National Educational Tribunal to act as its Chairperson in certain cases.
29. Prohibition as to holding of offices by Chairperson or Member on ceasing to be such
Chairperson or Member of National Educational Tribunal.
30. Staff of National Educational Tribunal and their salaries and allowances.
31. Powers and authority of National Educational Tribunal.
32. Filing of application for adjudication of dispute by National Educational Tribunal.
33. Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted.
34. Limitation.
35. Appeal against order passed under this Chapter.
CHAPTER IV
P
ENALTIES
36. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Tribunal.
37. Execution of award or order of Tribunal.
38. Cognizance of offences.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
39. Procedure of State Educational Tribunals and National Educational Tribunal.
40. Interim orders.
41. Proceedings before Tribunal to be judicial proceedings.
42. Vacancy in State Educational Tribunals or National Educational Tribunal not to invalidate
acts or proceedings.
43. Members and staff of Tribunals to be public servants.
44. Administrative control.
45. Dismissal of frivolous or vexatious complaints.
46. Finality of orders.
47. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts.
48. Protection of action taken in good faith.
49. Act to have overriding effect.
50. Application of other laws not barred.
51. Non-applicability of this Act to minority institutions in certain cases.
52. Power of Central Government to make rules.
53. Power of State Government to make rules.
54. Rules to be laid before Parliament and State Legislature.
55. Power to remove difficulties.
(ii)
CLAUSES

1
THE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Educational Tribunals for effective and expeditious
adjudication of disputes involving  teachers and other employees of higher
educational institutions and other stake holders (including students, universities,
institutions and statutory regulatory authorities) and to adjudicate penalties for
indulging in unfair practices in  higher education and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Educational Tribunals Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date or dates as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different States and any
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
ON 26TH AUGUST, 2010
Bill No. 55-C of 2010

2
reference in any provision of this Act to the commencement of this Act shall be construed
in relation to any State or part thereof as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision in that State or part thereof.
2. This Act shall apply to all higher educational institutions other than the higher
educational institutions engaged mainly in agricultural education and research.
3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Academic Member" means a Member  appointed as such under
sub-section (2) of section 22;
(b) "Administrative Member" means a Member  appointed as such under sub-
section (3) of section 22;
(c) "affiliation" together with its grammatical variations, includes, in relation to
a college or institution,—
(i) recognition of such college or institution by a university; or
(ii) association of such college or institution with a university; or
(iii) admission of such college or institution to the privileges of a
university;
(d) "appropriate Government",—
(i) in relation to a Union territory, means the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a State, means the Government of the State in which the
State Educational Tribunal is established under this Act;
(e) "appropriate State Legislature" means such Legislature of the State as has
jurisdiction over the matter;
(f) "appropriate statutory regulatory authority" means any authority established
under any law for the time being in force for co-ordinating or determining or maintaining
the standards of higher education and research;
(g) "Central Educational Institution" means—
(i) a university established or incorporated by or under a Central Act; or
 (ii) an institution of national importance set up by an Act of Parliament;
or
(iii) an institution, declared as an institution deemed to be University
under section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, and maintained
by or receiving aid from the Central Government; or
(iv) an institution maintained by, or receiving aid from,—
(A) the Central Government, whether directly or indirectly;
(B) affiliated to university referred to in sub-clause ( i) or to an
institution referred to in sub-clause ( ii), or a constituent unit of an
institution referred to in sub-clause ( iii);
(v) an higher educational institution set up by the Central Government
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860;
(h) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of a State Educational Tribunal or the
National Educational Tribunal, as the case may be;
(i) "college" means any institution, whether known as such or by any other
name which provides for a course of study for obtaining any qualification from a
university and which, in accordance with the rules and regulations of such university,
is recognised as competent to provide for such course of study and present students
undergoing such course of study for examination for the award of such qualification;
(j) "contractual provisions" in relation to a teacher or an employee engaged on
Application
of Act.
Definitions.
21 of 1860.
3 of 1956.

3
contract by an higher educational institution means the provisions of the terms and
conditions of the contract governing the service of such teacher or employee to such
institution;
(k) "degree" means any such degree, as may, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, be specified in this behalf by the University Grants Commission,
by notification in the Official Gazette, under section 22 of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956;
(l) "diploma" means such award, not being a degree, granted by a higher
educational institution certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a
course of study of not less than nine months duration;
(m) "distance education systems" means the distance education systems as
defined in clause (e) of section (2) of the Indira Gandhi National Open University Act,
1985;
(n) "High Court" means the High Court of the State within whose jurisdiction
the State Educational Tribunal is situated;
(o) "higher educational institution" means an institution of learning including
an university, an institution deemed to be university, a college, an institute, an
institution of national importance declared as such by an Act of Parliament or a
constituent unit of such institution, which is imparting (whether through conduct of
regular classes or distance education system) higher education beyond twelve years
of schooling leading to the award of a degree or diploma;
(p) "institution deemed to be University" means an institution declared by the
Central Government, as deemed to be a university under section 3 of the University
Grants Commission Act, 1956;
(q) "Judicial Member" means a  Member appointed as such under sub-section
(1) of section 22 and includes the Chairperson;
(r) "Member" includes the Chairperson and a Member of the National
Educational Tribunal or a State Educational Tribunal, as the case may be;
(s) "National Educational Tribunal" means the National Educational Tribunal
established under section 20;
(t) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression "notify" with its cognate meanings and grammetical variations shall be
construed accordingly;
(u) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government
or the Central Government, as the case may be, under this Act;
(v) "service" means service with an higher educational institution;
(w) "service matters", in relation to a teacher or an employee of a higher
educational institution means all matters relating to the conditions of their service as
respects,—
(w) remuneration including pay, allowances, pension and other retirement
benefits permissible in accordance with the terms and conditions of service of,
such teacher or employee;
(ii) tenure including appointment, probation, confirmation, seniority,
promotion, reversion, premature retirement or superannuation;
(iii) leave of any kind;
(iv) disciplinary matters; or
(v) any other matter whatsoever;
(x) "service rules" means the rules or regulations or statutes or bye-laws or
ordinances or contractual provisions, as the case may be, of the higher educational
institution, governing service matters, of any teacher or any employee (whether
appointed on permanent or temporary or visiting or contract basis) of such institution;
3 of 1956.
50 of 1985.
3 of 1956.

4
(y) "society" means a society registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 or under any corresponding law for the time being in force in a State;
(z) "State Educational Tribunal" means a State Educational Tribunal  established
in a State under section 4;
(za) "Vice Chancellor" means—
(i)  Chief executive of a university; or
(ii) head of a Central Educational Institution, not being a college.
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and not inconsistent with this Act shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.
CHAPTER II
S
TATE EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNALS
4. The appropriate Government shall, by notification, establish a Tribunal to be known
as the "State Educational Tribunal" to exercise the powers conferred upon it under this Act:
Provided that an appropriate Government may notify any Educational Tribunal existing
before the commencement of this Act as the "State Educational Tribunal" for the purposes
of this Act and thereafter the provisions of this Act shall apply to such Tribunal.
5. Each State Educational Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and two other
Members, of which not less than one shall be a woman, to be appointed by the appropriate
Government.
6. ( 1) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the Chairperson of a State
Educational Tribunal, if such person is, or has been, a Judge of the High Court:
Provided that no appointment under this section shall be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Member of the State Educational
Tribunal, if such person,—
(a) is not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge and
experience of at least twenty years in dealing with matters relating to higher education,
public affairs or administration in educational matters;
(c) is, or has been, a Vice Chancellor  or a person who is, or has been, of the rank
and equivalence of a Chief Secretary of the State Government.
 (3) Out of the two Members referred to in sub-section (1) of section 5, one Member
shall be chosen from amongst persons who is, or, has been, the Vice Chancellor  and the
other Member shall be chosen from amongst persons who is, or has been, the Chief Secretary
of the State Government or equivalent rank.
7. ( 1) The Chairperson and Members of the State Educational Tribunal shall be
appointed by the appropriate Government from a panel of names recommended by a Selection
Committee, consisting of—
(a) the Chief Justice of the High Court or his nominee ..........Chairperson;
(b) the Chief Secretary of the State Government.........Member;
(c) an officer of the State Government of the rank and equivalence of a Secretary
to the Government of India with experience in dealing with educational
matters..........Member.
21 of 1860.
3 of 1956.
Establishment
of State
Educational
Tribunal.
Composition
of State
Educational
Tribunal.
Qualifications
for
appointment
as
Chairperson
or Member of
State
Educational
Tribunal.
Selection
Committee.

5
(2) The Secretary in charge of higher education in the Department of Education or
Department dealing with educational matters of the State Government shall be the convenor
of the meetings of the Selection Committee.
 (3) The term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names shall be such as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government:
Provided that in the case of the Selection Committee in respect of an Educational
Tribunal to be established in a Union territory, the provisions of this section shall have the
effect as if for the words "State Government", the words "Central Government" has been
substituted.
(4) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the State Educational Tribunal
shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) to (4), the Selection Committee may
regulate its own procedure.
8. (1) The Chairperson and every Member of the State Educational Tribunal shall hold
office as such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office and
shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that the Chairperson or other Members of the State Educational Tribunal
shall not hold office as such after he has attained the age of seventy years.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and other Members of a State Educational Tribunal shall be
such as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other Member shall be varied to their disadvantage after
their appointment.
9. The Chairperson or a Member of the State Educational Tribunal may, by notice in
writing under his hand addressed to the appropriate Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member of the State Educational Tribunal shall,
unless he is permitted by the appropriate Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue
to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until
a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.
10. (1) The appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the
High Court, remove from office the Chairperson or any other Member of the State Educational
Tribunal, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any paid employment;
or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson
or other Member; or
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
the exercise of his functions as such Chairperson or other Member; or
(g) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(h) has been guilty of proved misbehavior; or
(i) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government.
Term of
office,
salaries and
allowances of
Chairperson
and Members
of State
Educational
Tribunal.
Resignation.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson
and Members
of State
Educational
Tribunal.

6
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), no Chairperson or a
Member of the State Educational Tribunal shall be removed from his office on the grounds
specified in clause (f) or clause (g) or clause (h) of sub-section (1), except by an order made
by the appropriate Government after an inquiry made in this behalf by a Judge of the High
Court in which such Chairperson or such Member has been informed of the charges against
him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
(3) The appropriate Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the inquiry
referred to in sub-section (2).
11. If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office
of the Chairperson or a Member of the State Educational Tribunal, the appropriate
Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to
fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the State Educational Tribunal
from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.
12. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
of the State Educational Tribunal by reason of his death or resignation, the senior-most
Member of the State Educational Tribunal shall act as the Chairperson of the Tribunal until
the date on which a new Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this
Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairperson of the State Educational Tribunal is unable to discharge his
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member shall
discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes
his duties.
13. On ceasing to hold office,—
(a) the Chairperson or Member of the State Educational Tribunal, as the case
may be, shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be ineligible, for a period of five
years from the date on which they cease to hold office, for further employment
(including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in any higher educational institution
within such State, whether under the Central Government or the Government of any
State or any private educational institution or in any institution whose matters had
been before such Chairperson or Member;
(b) the Chairperson or Member shall not appear, act or plead before the State
Educational Tribunal in which he had been the Chairperson or Member.
14. (1) The appropriate Government shall, after consultations with the Chairperson of
the State Educational Tribunal, determine the nature and categories of the officers and
other employees required to assist the State Educational Tribunal in the discharge of its
functions and provide such Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think
fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the State Educational Tribunal shall discharge
their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson of such Tribunal.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of a State Educational Tribunal shall be such as
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
15. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the State Educational Tribunal
shall exercise powers and authority in relation to,—
(a) service matters of any teacher or any other employee of a higher educational
institution;
(b) matters relating to affiliation of any higher educational institution (not being
a University) with the affiliating University;
Vacancies.
Member of
State
Educational
Tribunal to
act as its
Chairperson
in certain
cases.
Prohibitions
as to holding
of offices by
Chairperson
or Member
on ceasing to
be such
Chairperson
or Member of
State
Educational
Tribunal.
Staff of State
Educational
Tribunal and
their salaries
and
allowances.
Jurisdiction,
powers and
authority of
State
Educational
Tribunal.

7
(c) matters relating to use of unfair practices, by any higher educational
institution, which has been specifically prohibited under  any  law for the time being
in force;
(d) matters as may be assigned to it by any other law for the time being in force.
16. Every application, for redressal of grievance or settlement of disputes relating to
any of the matters specified under clauses (a) to (d) of section 15, shall be made to the State
Educational Tribunal in such form and accompanied by such documents and on payment of
such fee and the manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
17. (1) The State Educational Tribunal shall, not admit any applications in respect of
a matter under clause (a) of section 15 unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of
all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules for redressal of grievances
or settlement of disputes.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of
all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules or contractual provisions
as to redressal of grievances or settlement of disputes,—
(a) if a final order has been made by the higher educational institution or other
authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order under such rules,
rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by such person in connection
with the grievance or disputes; or
 (b) where no final order has been made by the higher educational institution or
other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order with regard to
the application or representation made or appeal preferred by such person, if a period
of three months from the date on which such application or representation was made
or appeal was preferred has expired; or
(c) where no service rules exist on the service matter in dispute.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the words "final order" means an
order passed by such final appellate authority of the higher educational institution as
provided in the service rules but does not include an order passed in any arbitration or any
conciliation proceedings under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
18. (1) A State Educational Tribunal shall not admit an application,—
(a) in a case where a final order referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section (2) of
section 17 has been made, unless the application is made, within a period of six
months from the date on which such final order has been made;
(b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is mentioned in clause
(b) of sub-section (2) of section 17 has been made and a period of three months had
expired thereafter without such final order having been made, within a period of six
months from the date of expiry of the said period of three months;
(c) in any other matter, within a period of six months from the date the cause of
action arose.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an application may be admitted
after the period of six months specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this
section, if the applicant satisfies the State Educational Tribunal that he had sufficient cause
for not making the application within such period.
19. Any person aggrieved by an order made by a State Educational Tribunal in
respect of any matter specified under clauses (b) to (d) of section 15, may prefer an appeal
against such order to the National Educational Tribunal within a period of sixty days from
the date of the order, in such form and manner and accompanied with such documents and
such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Manner of
making
application
before State
Educational
Tribunal.
Applications
not  to  be
admitted
unless  other
remedies
exhausted.
26 of 1996.
Limitation.
Filing of
appeal to
National
Educational
Tribunal.

8
Provided that the National Educational Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause
for not preferring the appeal within the said period.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL EDUCATIONAL TRIBUNAL
20. The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Tribunal to be known
as the "National Educational Tribunal" to exercise the powers conferred upon it under
this Act.
21. (1) The National Educational Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and such
number of Members not exceeding eight to be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) Out of  the eight Members to be appointed under sub-section ( 1) —
(a)  two shall be Judicial Members;
(b) three shall be Academic Members;
(c) three shall be Administrative Members.
 (3) Not less than one-third of the total number of Members appointed under sub-
section (1) shall be women.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act,—
(a) the jurisdiction of the National Educational Tribunal may be exercised by
Benches thereof;
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson consisting of three Members
of which one Member shall be a Judicial Member, one Member shall be an Academic
Member and one Member shall be an Administrative Member.
 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 4), the Chairperson may
transfer a Member from one Bench to another Bench.
(6) The National Educational Tribunal shall sit in New Delhi.
22. (1) A person shall be qualified, to be appointed as the Chairperson or Judicial
Member of the National Educational Tribunal, if such person is, or has been, a Judge of the
Supreme Court:
Provided that no appointment under this sub-section shall be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as an Academic Member of the National
Educational Tribunal if such person,—
(a) is not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge and
experience of at least twenty-five years in dealing with matters relating to higher
education  or administration in educational matters;
(c) is, or has been, a Vice Chancellor of any University, or a Director of an
institution of national importance.
(3) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as an Administrative Member of the
National Educational Tribunal if such person,—
(a) is not less than fifty-five years of age;
(b) is of ability, integrity and standing, and has adequate knowledge and
experience of at least twenty-five years in dealing with matters relating to higher
education, public affairs or administration in educational matters;
(c) is, or has been, a Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent rank.
Establishment
of National
Educational
Tribunal.
Composition
of National
Educational
Tribunal.
Qualifications
for
appointment
as
Chairperson
or Member of
National
Educational
Tribunal.

9
23. (1) The Chairperson and Members of the National Educational Tribunal shall be
appointed by the Central Government from a panel of names recommended by a Selection
Committee consisting of—
(a) the Chief Justice of India or his nominee..........Chairperson;
(b) the Secretary in charge of higher education in the Ministry of Human Resource
Development of the Government of India........Member;
(c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice of the Government of India
........Member;
(d) the Secretary in charge of medical education in the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare of the Government of India..........Member;
(e) the Secretary in charge of the Department of Personnel and Training of the
Government of India..........Member.
(2) The Secretary in charge of higher education in the Ministry of Human Resource
Development of the Government of India shall be the convenor of the meetings of the
Selection Committee.
 (3) The term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the National Educational Tribunal
shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) to (4), the Selection Committee may
regulate its own procedure.
24. (1) The Chairperson and every other Member of the National Educational Tribunal
shall, hold office as such for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his
office and shall be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that the Chairperson or other Member of the National Educational Tribunal
shall not hold office as such after he has attained the age of seventy years.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the National Educational Tribunal shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other Member shall be varied to their disadvantage after
their appointment.
25. The Chairperson or a Member of the National Educational Tribunal may, by notice
in writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member of the National Educational Tribunal
shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such
notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon office or until the
expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
 26. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India,
remove from office, the Chairperson or any other Member of the National Educational
Tribunal, who—
(a) has been  adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has engaged any time, during his term of office, in any paid employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson
or other Member; or
Selection
Committee.
Term of
office,
salaries and
allowances of
Chairperson
and Members
of National
Educational
Tribunal.
Resignation.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson
and Members
of National
Educational
Tribunal.

10
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
the exercise of his functions as such Chairperson or other Member; or
(g) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(h) has been guilty of proved misbehavior; or
(i) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), no Chairperson or a Member of the
National Educational Tribunal shall be removed from his office on the grounds specified in
clause (f) or clause ( g) or clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1), except by an order made by the
Central Government after an inquiry made in this behalf by a Judge of the Supreme Court in
which such Chairperson or such Member has been informed of the charges against him and
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the inquiry
referred to in sub-section (2).
27. If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office
of the Chairperson or a Member of the National Educational Tribunal, the Central Government
shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy
and the proceedings may be continued before the National Educational Tribunal from the
stage at which the vacancy is filled.
28. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson
of the National Educational Tribunal by reason of his death or resignation, the senior-most
Member of the National Educational Tribunal shall act as the Chairperson of the Tribunal
until the date on which a new Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of
this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.
(2) When the Chairperson of the National Educational Tribunal is unable to discharge
his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member of the
National Educational Tribunal, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the
date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.
29. On ceasing to hold office,—
(a) the Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, of the National Educational
Tribunal shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be ineligible, for a period of five
years from the date they cease to hold office, for further employment (including as
consultant or expert or otherwise) in any higher educational institution, whether
under the Central Government or the Government of any State or any private
educational institution or in any institution whose matters had been before such
Chairperson or Member; and
(b) the Chairperson or Member shall not appear, act or plead before the National
Educational Tribunal or the State Educational Tribunal.
30. (1) The Central Government shall, after consultation with the Chairperson of the
National Educational Tribunal, determine the nature and categories of the officers and other
employees required to assist the National Educational Tribunal in the discharge of its
functions and provide such Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think
fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the National Educational Tribunal shall
discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson of such
Tribunal.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of, the officers and other employees of the National Educational Tribunal shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Vacancies.
Member of
National
Educational
Tribunal to
act as its
Chairperson in
certain cases.
Prohibition
as to holding
of offices by
Chairperson
or Member
on ceasing to
be such
Chairperson
or Member of
National
Educational
Tribunal.
Staff of
National
Educational
Tribunal and
their salaries
and
allowances.

11
31. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the National Educational
Tribunal shall exercise powers and authority in relation to—
(a) any dispute between any higher educational institution and any appropriate
statutory regulatory authority;
(b) any reference made to it by any appropriate statutory regulatory authority
amongst statutory regulatory authorities;
(c) any  matter of affiliation between any higher educational institution (other
than a University) and the affiliating University, where such University is a Central
Educational Institution having powers of affiliation in two or more States;
(d) any constituent unit of an institution deemed to be University or a Central
Educational Institution  located in a State other than the State in which such institution
deemed to be university or a Central Educational Institution is located;
(e) on the matters as may be assigned to it by any other law for the time being
in force.
(2) The National Educational Tribunal shall exercise appellate jurisdiction, as provided
in section 19, over a matter under clauses ( b) to ( d) of section 15 decided by any State
Educational Tribunal.
(3) The National Educational Tribunal shall have the power to call for the records and
pass appropriate orders in any matter which is pending before or has been decided by any
State Educational Tribunal, where it appears to the National Educational Tribunal that such
State Educational Tribunal has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed
to exercise a jurisdiction so vested or has acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with
material irregularity.
(4) Where cases involving the same or substantially the same issues, to the
satisfaction of the National Educational Tribunal, either on its own motion or on an application
made by a party to any such case, are pending before the National Educational Tribunal and
one or more State Educational Tribunals or before two or more State Educational Tribunals,
the National Educational Tribunal may withdraw the case or cases pending before the State
Educational Tribunal or the State Educational Tribunals and dispose of all the cases itself:
Provided that the National Educational Tribunal may, after determining the said issues,
return any case so withdrawn together with a copy of its order on such questions to the
State Educational Tribunal from which the case has been withdrawn, and the State Educational
Tribunal shall on receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such
order.
32. Any person, for settlement of any dispute arising out of matters referred to in
clause (a) or in clause (b) or in clause (c) or in clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-section (1) of
section 31 may make an application, in such form and accompanied by such documents and
on payment of such fee and the manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government,
within a period of six months from the date when such dispute first arose:
Provided that the National Educational Tribunal may entertain an appeal or application
after the expiry of the said period of six months, if it is satisfied that the appellant had
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the said period.
33. (1) The National Educational Tribunal shall, not admit an application in respct of
a  service matter of any teacher or any other employee of the Constituent Unit of any
Institution deemed to be a University or Central Educational Institution referred to in  clause
(d) of section 31 unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies
available to him under the relevant service rules for redressal of grievances.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of
all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of
grievances,—
(a) if a final order has been made by the higher educational institution or other
authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order under such rules,
Powers and
authority of
National
Educational
Tribunal.
Filing of
application
for
adjudication
of dispute by
National
Educational
Tribunal.
Applications
not  to  be
admitted
unless  other
remedies
exhausted.

12
rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made by such person in connection
with the grievance; or
 (b) where no final order has been made by the higher educational institution or
other authority or officer or other person competent to pass such order with regard to
the application or representation made or appeal preferred by such person, if a period
of three months from the date on which such application or representation was made
or appeal was preferred was made has expired; or
(c) where no service rules exist on the service matters raised.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the words "final order" means an
order passed by such final appellate authority of the higher educational institution as
provided in the service rules but does not include an order passed in any arbitration or any
conciliation proceedings under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
34. (1) A National Educational Tribunal shall not admit an application,—
(a) in a case where a final order referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section (2) of
section 33 has been made, unless the application is made, within a period of six
months from the date on which such final order has been made;
(b) in a case where an appeal or representation such as is mentioned in clause
(b) of sub-section (2) of section 33 has been made and a period of three months had
expired thereafter without such final order having been made, within a period of six
months from the date of expiry of the said period of three months;
(c) in any other matter within a period of six months from the date the cause of
action arose.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an application may be admitted
after the period of six months specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this
section, if the applicant satisfies the National Educational Tribunal that he had sufficient
cause for not making the application within such period.
35. Any person aggrieved by an order made by the National Educational Tribunal
may prefer an appeal against such order to the Supreme Court within a period of sixty days
from the date of the order:
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring
the appeal within the period of sixty days.
CHAPTER IV
P
ENALTIES
36. Whoever fails to comply with any order made by any State Educational Tribunal
or the National Educational Tribunal, as the case may be, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to
ten lakh rupees, or with both.
37. (1) An order made by every State Educational Tribunal and the National Educational
Tribunal, under this Act shall be executable as a decree of a civil court, and for this purpose,
the State Educational Tribunal and the National Educational Tribunal shall have all the
powers of a civil court.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Tribunal may transmit
to the Collector having jurisdiction over the concerned higher educational institution or
against the person against whom an order had been made, and the Collector shall execute
the order.
(3) Where the higher educational institution or any person, against whom the order is
made by the State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal, as the case
26 of 1996.
Limitation.
Appeal
against order
passed under
this Chapter.
Penalty for
failure to
comply with
orders of
Tribunal.
Execution of
award or
order of
Tribunal.

13
may be, fails to make the payment or deposit the amount as directed by such Tribunal within
the period specified in the order, such amount shall be recoverable from such institution or
person as arrears of land revenue.
38. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Chapter,
save on a complaint made by the officer authorised by the National Educational Tribunal or
a State Educational Tribunal, as the case may be.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial
Magistrate of first class shall try any offence punishable under this Chapter.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
39. (1) For the purpose of inquiring into an application, every State Educational
Tribunal and the National Educational Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in
a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or
document from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) reviewing its decisions;
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte;
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any
order passed by it ex parte; and
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed by the appropriate Government or
by the Central Government, as the case may be.
(2) A person making an application under this Act may appear either in person or
authorise one or more legal practitioners to present his case before the State Educational
Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal.
(3) Any institution may authorise one or more legal practitioners or any of its officers
to present its case before the State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal.
(4) The State Educational Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and
subject to other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the appropriate Government.
(5) The National Educational Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice
and subject to other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the Central Government.
(6) The State Educational Tribunal and the National Educational Tribunal shall conduct
such proceedings as may be required for it to arrive at a conclusion provided that an
opportunity of being heard and produce such evidence as may be necessary, shall be
adequately offered to all the parties at issue.
(7) Every proceeding referred to in sub-section (6) shall be conducted, in the case of
the State Educational Tribunal, by its Chairperson and at least one Member thereof sitting
together:
Provided that where a Member of the State Educational Tribunal, for any reason, is
unable to conduct a proceeding till it is completed, the Chairperson and the other Member
Cognizance of
offences.
Procedure of
State
Educational
Tribunals and
National
Educational
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
1 of 1872.

14
of such Tribunal shall continue the proceeding from the stage at which it was last heard by
the previous Member.
(8) Every proceeding referred to in sub-section (6) shall be conducted, in the case of
the National Educational Tribunal, by a bench constituted by the Chairperson of the National
Educational Tribunal under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 21.
(9) On the conclusion of proceedings, the State Educational Tribunal or the National
Educational Tribunal, as the case may be, shall pass such orders as it deems fit and provide
such relief as may be desirable, including the award of such punitive damages, as it deems
fit, to the affected party at issue:
Provided that where the proceeding is conducted by the Chairperson and one Member
of the State Educational Tribunal and they differ on any point or points, they shall state the
point or points on which they differ and refer the same to the other Member of such
Tribunal for hearing on such point or points and the opinion of the majority shall be the
order of the State Educational Tribunal:
Provided further that the order of the State Educational Tribunal on the matters
covered under clause (a)  of section 15 shall be final.
(10) Every order made by the State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational
Tribunal, as the case may be, under sub-section ( 9) shall be signed by the Chairperson or
Member or Members who heard the case and passed the order.
40. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act or in any
other law for the time being in force, no interim order, whether by way of injunction or stay
in any other manner, shall be made by a State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational
Tribunal, as the case may be, on, or in any proceedings relating to, an application unless,—
(a) copies of such application and of all documents in support of the plea for
such interim order are furnished to the party against whom such application is made
or proposed to be made; and
(b) opportunity to be heard is given to such party in the matter.
41. All proceedings before any State Educational Tribunal and the National
Educational Tribunal, shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of
sections 193, 219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
42. No act or proceeding of any State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational
Tribunal shall be questioned or be invalid merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy
or defect in the establishment of the State Educational Tribunal and the National Educational
Tribunal.
43. The Chairperson and other Members of the State Educational Tribunals and the
National Educational Tribunal and the officers and other employees of the State Educational
Tribunals and the National Educational Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
44. The National Educational Tribunal shall have administrative control over all the
State Educational Tribunals in the following matters, namely:—
(a) calling for periodical returns regarding the institution, disposal and pendency
of cases;
(b) issuance of instructions regarding adoption of uniform procedure in the
hearing of matters, prior service of copies of documents produced by one party to the
Interim orders.
Proceedings
before
Tribunal to be
judicial
proceedings.
45 of 1860.
V acancy  in
State
Educational
Tribunals or
National
Educational
Tribunal not
to invalidate
acts or
proceedings.
Members and
staff of
Tribunals to
be public
servants.
Administrative
Control.
45 of 1860.

15
opposite parties, furnishing of English translation of orders written in any language,
speedy grant of copies of documents;
(c) generally overseeing the functioning of the State Educational Tribunals to
ensure that the objects and purposes of the Act are best served without in any way
interfering with their quasi-judicial freedom.
45. Where a matter instituted before any State Educational Tribunal or the National
Educational Tribunal, as the case may be, is found to be frivolous or vexatious, it shall, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, dismiss the application and make an order that the
applicant shall pay to the opposite party such cost, not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, as
may be specified in the order.
46. Every order of a State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal,
as the case may be, shall, if no appeal has been preferred against such order under the
provisions of this Act, be final.
47. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect
of any matter which the State Educational Tribunal or the National Educational Tribunal  is
empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by or under this Act.
48. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or any State Government or against the Chairperson or any other Member or
any other person authorised by the Chairperson of any State Educational Tribunal or the
National Educational Tribunal, as the case may be, for anything which is done in good faith
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder in the
discharge of official duties.
49. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained, in any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
50. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
51. Nothing contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder shall apply to any
minority institution to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the functions and
powers vested upon the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions
established under the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act,  2004
or provisions contained in that Act.
52. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which an appeal may be preferred, the documents
which shall be accompanied with it and the fee payable in respect of filing of such
appeal or for the service of execution of processes under section 19;
(b) the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names under sub-section (3) of section 23;
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson and other Members of the National Educational Tribunal
under sub-section (2) of section 24;
(d) the other disqualifications for removal of the Chairperson or other Member
of the National Educational Tribunal under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 26
and the procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub-section ( 3) of that section;
(e) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of,
service of,  the officers and other employees of the National Educational Tribunal
under sub-section (3) of section 30;
Dismissal of
frivolous or
vexatious
complaints.
Finality of
orders.
Exclusion of
jurisdiction of
civil courts.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Application
of other laws
not barred.
Non-
applicability
of this Act to
minority
institutions in
certain cases.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
2 of  2005.

16
(f) the form in which an application may be made, the documents and other
evidence by which such application shall be accompanied and the fee payable in
respect of the filing of such application or for the service of execution of processes
under section 32;
(g) the other matters under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 39 in respect
of which the National Educational Tribunal shall have the powers under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit;
(h) the procedure for conduct of proceedings of the National Educational
Tribunal under sub-section (5) of section 39;
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in
respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
53. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely:—
(a) the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of
names under sub-section ( 3) of section 7;
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the State Educational Tribunal
under sub-section (2) of section 8;
(c)  the other disqualifications for removal of the Chairperson or other Member
of the State Educational Tribunal under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 10 and
the procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub-section ( 3) of  that section;
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the officers and other employees of, the State Educational Tribunal under
sub-section (3) of section 14;
(e) the form in which an application may be made, the documents and other
evidence by which such application shall be accompanied and the fee payable in
respect of the filing of such application or for the service of execution of processes
under section 16;
(f) the other matters under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 39 in respect
of which the State Educational Tribunal shall have the powers under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit;
(g) the procedure for conduct of proceedings of the State Educational Tribunal
under sub-section (4) of section 39;
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in
respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
54. (1) Every rule made by the Central  Government, under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Power of
State
Government
to make rules.
Rules to be
laid before
Parliament
and State
Legislature.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

17
55. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of Educational Tribunals for effective and expeditious
adjudication of disputes involving  teachers and other employees of higher educational
institutions and other stake holders (including students, universities, institutions
and statutory regulatory authorities)  and to adjudicate penalties for indulging in
unfair  practices in  higher education and for matters  connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha )
GMGIPMRND—4291LS(S3)—26-08-2010.