AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
 Bill No. 55 of  2022
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHAVAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
         B E it  enact ed by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic
of India  as fo llow s:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2022.
    (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  After article 21A  of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“21B. The State shall secur e to all its citizens the right to health including
mental and envir onmental health in such manner  as the State may by law ,
determine.”.
Short title and
commencement.
5
10
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to Health.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Constitution of India does not expressly recognize right to health as a fundamental
right. However, through judicial interpretation, this  has  been  read  into the  fundamental
right to  life and  personal  liberty (under article  21) and  is now considered an inseparable
part of the right to life . Article 23 of the Constitution also indirectly contributes to protecting
the Right to Health as it prohibits human trafficking and child labour.
Various judicial pronouncements have laid stress on Right to Health being an integral
part of Constitution . Various High Courts and the Supreme Court has held that Right to
life has a very broad scope which includes right to livelihood, better standa rd of life,
hygienic conditions in the workplace and right to leisure.  Right to Health is, therefore, an
inherent and inescapable part of a dignifie d life. Article 21 should also be read in tandem
with the directive principles of state policy, to truly understand  the  nature  of  the
obligations  of  the State  in  this respect.
Constitutional  ‘Right  to Health’  will  not only guarantee the health and well-being of
our people but  will  also act  as a  leap  for  the economic  and  developmental  progress  of
the  nation. Vision for Ayushman Bharat will be further  strengthened  with a Constitutional
‘Right to Health’.
Immediate financial security  that  will  come  with  the constitutional ‘Right to Health’
will  be seen as a measurable impact on family savings , greater  investment  and  jobs
creation on  the one hand, and in the long-term emotional, psychological and social security
of people . Thus, right to health can provide simple, transparent and quality  healthcare  to
those  who  are  most  in  need  of  such care. Provision of right to health under PART-III will
ensure mandatory compliance by State, else writ petitions can be filed under article 32 for
its enforcement. This will remove disparities in health indicators across the States and
would eventually lead to universal health equality being a reality.
The Bill, therefore seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to confer right to health
including mental and environmental health as a fundamental right to every citizen.
      NEW DELHI;         M.K. RAGHAVAN
January 20, 2022.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for making the right to health including mental and
environmental health as a fundamental right. The Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an expenditure of
about rupees one hundred crore would be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund
of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
———
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P.)