As INTRODUCED In Lok SABHA

28 yn 28 '

Bill No. 55 of 2006

THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE (ADMINISTRATION) BILL, 2006
By

Suri Mouan Sincu, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the appointment of a Commission to oversee the administration of the
secretarial staff of the House of the People and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the House of the People (Administration) Act, 2006. Shoit title.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

5 (०) “Commission” means the House of the People Commission constituted
under section 3 of this Act;

(6) “House” means the House of the People;

(० “Leader of the House” means the Prime Minister or a member of the
Council of Ministers, who, being a member of the House, may be nominated by the
10 Prime Minister for the purposes of this Act;


Constitution
and
composition
of the
Commission.

‘

Time up to
which Speaker
and Leader of
the House
continue as
Members of
Commission.

Cessation of
membership
of the
Commission.

Chairman
of the
Commission.

Appointment
of Secretary-
General.

Vacation and
resignation of,
and removal
from, the
office of
Secretary-
General.

2

(d) “Leader of the Opposition” means a member of the House who is
recognized by the Speaker as such or his nominee, who shall be a member of the
House, and if there is no such leader, then the leader of the party in the Opposition
having the largest number in the house;

(०) “Secretarial Staff” means the staff of the House of the People;
(/ “Secretariat” means the Secretariat of the House of the people; and
(g) “Speaker” means Speaker of the House of the People.

3. (1) There shall be constituted a Commission to be known as the House of the
People Commission to perform the functions conferred on it by this Act.

(2) The Commission shall be appointed by the House on a motion to be moved by
the Leader of the House and adopted by the House.

(3) Commission shall consist of the following:-—
(a) the Speaker;
(6) the Deputy Speaker of, the House;
(c) the Leader of the House;
(d) the Leader of the Opposition; and

(e) three members of the House to be elected by the system of proportional,
representation by means of a single transferable vote.

4. The Speaker and the Leader of the House shall continue to be the members of
the Commission until immediately before the assumption of the office by their respective
successors.

5. A member of the Commission other than the Speaker and the Leader of the House
shall cease to be a member of the Commission if he ceases to be a member of the House.

6. (7) The Speaker shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the Commission,

(2) While the office of the Speaker is vacant, the Deputy Speaker of the House shall
function as the Chairman of the Commission and, if for any reason, the Speaker is unable
to act as the Chairman of the Commission, the Deputy Speaker shall act as the Chairman
of the Commission.

7. (1) There shall be a Secretary-General of the House who shall be appointed by
the President of India on the recommendation of the Commission.

(2) The Secretary-General shall be appointed from amongst those who have
distinguished themselves and made their mark in the service of the House in various
capacities in the Secretariat for not less than twenty years.

(3) The Secretary-General shall be the head of the Secretariat.
8. The office of the Secretary-General shall become vacant:—
(a) on his attaining the age of superannuation, as may be fixed by the
Commission;
(6) on his resignation in writing addressed to the President of India; and
(©) on his removal from office by the President of India in the same manner

as is provided for the removal of a judge of the Supreme Court under clause (4) of
article 124 of the Constitution.

20 *

25

30

35

40



20

25

30

35

40

45

3

9. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the functions of the Commission shall
include the following:—

(a) to frame rules regulating the recruitment, appointment, promotion and
other service conditions of the Secretary-General and officers and staff of the
Secretariat;

(6) to adopt such service rules of the Government of India as it may deem
fit;

(c) to appoint officers and staff of the Secretariat;

(4) to appoint officers and staff on deputation to posts in the Secretariat from
other services such as Judicial services or from office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General or from State Legislatures;

(e) to determine the strength of the secretarial staff at various levels and their
pay scales and other allowances;

(/) to ensure that the classification, grading, salaries, allowances and other
conditions of service, including pension and other benefits, of the personnel in the
Secretariat are kept generally in conformity with those of the personnel in other
comparable services in the Government of India and also consistent with the service
requirements of the House; *

(g) to consider and decide appeals against the orders of the Speaker or
Secretary-General, as the case may be, submitted by the officers and staff of the
Secretariat;

(A) to prepare an estimate for each financial year of the expenses of the
services of the House and of any other expenses incurred for the service of the
House and jay them before the House:

(0) ४७ appoint a member of the secretarial staff as “Finance Officer” who will
be responsible for accounting for the sums paid out of money provided by Parliament
for the ser ice of the House; and

(/) ४० exercise all powers necessary to implement the provisions of clause (J)
of article 98 of the Constitution of India towards the constitution of a separate,
independent and autonomous Secretariat of the House.

10. (7) The Commission may delegate to the Speaker or Secretary-General any of
its functions’ under this Act. मु

(2) Anything done by or in relation to a person, to whom functions are delegated
under this section, in the discharge of functions of the Commission, shall have the same
effect as if it were done by or in relation to the Commission.

(3) Any delegation of functions made by the Commission under this section or any
amendment or revocation of such delegation shall be mentioned in the annual report of
the Commission made under section 12.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Commission shall retain
the ultimate responsibility for considering any representation made, in relation to matters
affecting the interests, in connection with the employment of the secretarial staff, by staff
associations who are recognised by the Commission in respect of such staff, and for the
conduct of consultations and negotiations, about such matters with those staff associations.

11. The validity of any proceedings of the Commission shall not be affected by any
vacancy among the members of the Commission, or by any defect in the appointment or
nomination of any member of the Commission. है

12. The Commission shall, as soon as possible, after the end of every financial year
present to the House a report on its functions in that year.

Functions
of the
Commission,

Delegation of
Functions of
Commission.

Validity of the
proceedings
of the
Commission.

Annual
Report of the
Commission.


Power to make
rules.

Transitional
provisions.

Saving.

4

13. (4) The Commission may make rules to regulate its procedure and conduct of
its business.

(2) The Commission may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to
regulate recruitment and conditions of service of the secretarial staff.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before the House, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
the House agrees in making any modification in the tule, or the House agrees that the
tule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be.

(4) Any notice of amendment to such rules given by a member shall stand referred
to the Commission which shall consider it and make such changes jn the rules as the
Commission may consider fit.

(5) The final rule made by the Commission after taking into consideration the
amendments suggested by the members shall be laid before the House and, thereafter, on
the House agreeing to the final rule on a motion made by a member of the Commission,
the rule or amendment to a rule, as the case may be, shall be promulgated by the
Commission by notification in the Official Gazette.

14. All persons employed in the secretarial staff immediately before the coming into
force of this'Act, shall be treated, for all purposes, as if their appointment had been made
by the Commission.

15. All rules, regulations and orders made and in force immediately before the
coming into force of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made by the Commission
and shall continue to be valid and operative unless modified or revoked by the Commission;
so, however, anything contained therein being inconsistent with any provisions of this
Act, shall be of no effect and be void to the extent of such inconsistency.

20

25


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The concept of an independent Secretariat of Parliament is an essential adjunct of
Parliamentary democracy. The significance of this conceptualization of a Secretariat
independent of the Executive was fully realized in the 1920s when the then Central Legislative
Assembly passed unanimously a resolution moved by Pandit Motilal Nehru and seconded
by Lala Lajpat Rai. Later, Vithalbhai Patel ceaselessly endeavoured in this direction.

The independent position of the Secretariats of the Houses of Parliament was recognized
by the makers of our Constitution when they considered it necessary to incorporate a separate
and exclusive article (article 98) in the Constitution. This article envisages enactment by
Parliament ofa law to regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed
to the secretariat staff of the House. The enactment of such a legislation is long overdue.

The unique position of the Lok Sabha Secretariat demands, as it does, a special sense
of dedication and impartiality from the secretarial staff in the discharge of their duties and
requires a broad-based institutional arrangement representing the House to be statutorily
made available to assist the Speaker in watching and safeguarding the interests of the
secretarial staff in the service of the House and its members. This institutional arrangement
is sought to be made by providing a House of the People Commission.

New Deu; MOHAN SINGH
May 19,2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of a House of the People
Commission. Its members are the members of the House of the People who would be
discharging their duties in relation to the Commission as its members. The expenditure
towards the payment of their TA/DA, ifany, would be a part of the normal expenditure of the
House. The increase in the expenditure, if any, as a result of constituting the commission
wouid be a marginal one and that would not be possible to be quantified in specific terms at
this stage.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to confer on the Commission the power to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act. The matters in respect of which such rules may be

. Made are matters of procedure and administrative details, The delegation of legislative power
is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

to provide for the appointment of a Commission to oversee the administration of the
secretarial staff of the House of the People and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1083LS(S4)—30-06-2006.