f 1974.

AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

22 AUS 2003

Bill No. 55 of 2003

THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
| By |
SHRI P. H. PANDIAN, M.P.

| A
BILL
further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act,
2003. | |

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint

2. After section 389 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the following section

shall be inserted, namely:—

"(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or the Rules framed by the
Supreme Court of India under article 145 of the Constitution of India or any other
law for the time being in force, the Supreme Court or High Court may entertain an
appeal by a convicted person by means of Special Leave or otherwise without insisting
on the production of the surrender certificate of the sentence and conviction of
which is the subject matter of the appeal:

Short title and

_commence-

ment:

'nsertion of
new section
389A.

Provision for

entertaining

appeal or
Special Leave
Petition.


™~

2

Provided that the person is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years or where the offence of which such person had been convicted is a bailable one
and he is on bail.

(2) If an appeal filed by the convicted person has been admitted by the Supreme 5

Court or the High Court and the same is not being disposed of for more than a year from —

the date of posting of the matter before the Court for hearing not due to the reason
attributable to the Appellant, he shall be entitled to be released on bail or on his own bond
on any of the conditions which the Court may think reasonable till the hearing of the
appeal by the Supreme Court or High Court: 7

Provided that it shall not be applicable to persons sentenced to death.

|



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It is a well known fact that in many High Courts and Supreme Court Criminal Appeals
are pending for years together. Persons punished for long period of sentence or life
imprisonment are languishing in jails without any bail on the presumption that their appeals
would be heard and disposed of. In number of cases if the convicted person's appeal ends in
success, irreparable damage is caused to the person since he had already undergone the
imprisonment. There is no provision to claim damages for the jail sentence undergone by
him during the pendency of the appeals. Similarly, if a convicted person wants to file a
Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court of India even if the sentence is for a short
period of three months or fifteen days, he has to produce a surrender certificate that he had
surrendered and undergone imprisonment. By the time, the Supreme Court disposes of the
appeals, the convicted person might have already undergone the sentence and the appeal
becomes infructuous. The same principle applies irrespective of the length of sentence.
Therefore, the jail sentence undergone during the pendencey of an appeal is in violation of
human rights. Even if the person ultimately succeeds in his appeal the sentence already
undergone by him cannot be repaired or compensated. Therefore, it is highly necessary to
bring this amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure by introducing section 389-A. .
Article 145 of the Constitution of India enables Supreme Court to make provisions for
regulating general practice and procedure of the Court. However, the above power is subject

_ to the provisions of any law made by the Parliament. Hence, the proposed amendment to

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 are well within the competence of the Parliament.

New DELHI; | ? H. PANDIAN.
July 22, 2003.


_ ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973

ok Ok मं: * के *
389.(1) Pending any appeal by a corivicted person, the Appellate Court may, for
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the sentence or

order appealed against be suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be
released on bail, or on his own bond

(2) The power conferred by this section on an Appellate Court may be exercised

also by the High Court in the case of an appeal by convicted person to a Court

subordinate thereto

(3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he is convicted that he
intends to present an appeal, the Court shall,—_

(i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not
xceeding three years, or ;

(ii) where the offence of which such person has been convicted is a bailable one,
and he is on bail

order that the convicted person be released on bail, unless there are special reasons for
refusing bail, for such period as will afford sufficient time to present the appeal and
obtain the orders of the Appellate Court under sub-section (1); and the sentence of
imprisonment shall, so long as he is so released on bail, be deemed to be suspended

(4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to imprisonment for a term or to

imprisonment for life, the time during which he is so released shall be excluded in
computing the term for which he is so sentenced

2 * | ** * *

Suspension of —

sentence
pending the —
appeal; release
of appellant —
on bail.


LOK SABHA

A
| BILL -

(Shri P. H. Pandian, MP.)

MGIPMRND—2141LS—1-8-2003.