As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

2 JUN 3999

Bill No. 17 of 1998

THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 1998
By
‘Suri Bacut SincH Rawat, M.P.

A
BILL

ide for measures to control population in the country and for matters connected
rerewith.

| 1«

38 it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

pt

4, (1) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 1998. Short title,

r d
2) Iextends to the whole of India. व दर
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by =
otification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

iho
2 In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.
(a) “child” includes an illegitimate child but does not include an adopted
child;


‘Smal! Family
norm.

Insertion of
new section 88
in Act No 43
of 1951
Disqualifica-
tion on ground
ofnot
following
small family
norm

Punishment to
Government
employees.
Punishment to

individuals,

Incentive for
small family.

2

(b) “custom” means any usage which has been continuously and uniformly
being observed for a long time by the people and which has now acquired the force
of law amongst any community in any area, tribe, group or family;

Pe ey ‘
* _« (c) “financial institution” means any banking or finance lending company,
corporation, firm or society in which the Central Government holds not less than
fifty-one per cent. of shares;

(4) “Government company” means any company, corporation or society in
which the Central Government holds not less than fifty-one per cent. of shares; and

(e) “Government service” means any public service in connection with the
affairs of the Central Government and includes service in any civil, defence or all
India service of the Union or service in any Government company or local bodies in
Union territories.

3. Any person—
(a) who has two or more than two living children shall not procreate any more
child after a period of one year from the date of commencement of this Act; and
(6) who has less than two living children on the date of commencement of this

Act, shall not procreate more than two living children.

4. After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—

“8B. (1) A person shall be disqualified if he procreates more than two living children:

Provided that the person shall not be disqualified if he, within a period of one year
from the date of commencement of the Population Control Act, 1998, procreates another
living child and thereby the number of living children of that person increases to more
than two.

(2) The disqualification referred to in sub-section (1) shall not apply in case of
persons having more than two living children on the date of commencement of the
Population Control Act, 1998.".

5. Any person who is in Government service, if violates the provisions of section 3,
shall not be given any further increment or promotion during his service,

6 Any person who is running his own company, firm society or corporation, if
violates the provisions of section 3,—

(a) shall not be allowed to avail of any loan or facility of any kind trom any
Government company or financial institution;

(6) shall not be entitled to undertake any contract with any financial institution,
Government company or the Central Government; and

12) shail not be entitled to have facilities of drawing ration from public
distribution system and cooking gas from a Government company.
7. (1) Any person who procreates only one child and gives an undertaking that
he shall not procreate another child, he shall be—
(a) given preference in Government services;
(b) provided with a house by the Central Government at subsidised cost;

and

(c) given ration items from fair price shops at a reduced price.


(2) Any person, who has been given benefit under sub-section (1) , if procreates
| child, the benefits given to him shall be withdrawn immediately.

8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.

9, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Acttéhave
over riding
effect.

Power to make


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Exploding population of the country is one of the major hurdles in the progress of
the country. If we can check the increase in population then we can expect to give reasonable
standard of living to the people of the country.

Some strong measures are required to check this menace. Some benefits should also
be given to the people to encourage them to adopt small family norm.

‘The Bill provides for some harsh measures for those who do not come forward to
help in achieving the goal of population control. Alongside, some benefits are provided to
those who adopt the small family norm.

Hence this Bill.

New Deva; BACHI SINGH RAWAT.
March 23, 1998


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

¢ 7 of the Bill provides that any person who procreates only one child and gives
taking that he shall not procreate another child shall be provided with

dation at subsidised cost and ration items from fair price shops at reduced price
‘Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Cluase 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

10 provide for measures to control population in the coun

try and for matters
connected therewith,

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, M.P)