5

AS INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

+ 9 AUG2001

Bill No. 55 of 2001
THE WOMEN (RESERVATION IN SERVICE) BILL, 2001
By
‘Surat RENUKA CHowpiury, M.P.
j A
BILL

to provide for reservation in posts and appointments for women under the State and for
matters connected therewith.

Bi

follows:

it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

1. (7) This Act may be called the Women (Reservation in Service) Act, 2001.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State
Government concerned, and in all other cases the Central Government;

(6) “service” means the service in connection with the affairs of the Central or
any State Government and includes the service in any public sector undertaking or
enterprise or any authority under the appropriate Government;

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


Reservation for
women in

Appropriate
Government to
consider claims
of women
afflicted with
typical family
obligations and
constraints.

Power to make
rales,

a

(@ “public sector undertakings and enterprises” means and includes all public
sector undertakings, enterprises, banks and financial institutions wholly owned or
managed by the Central Government or a State Government or in which fifty-one
percent shares are held by the appropriate Government.

3. There shall be reserved thirty-three percent of all appointments and posts in services
under the State for women.

4, The appropriate Government shall make provision for relaxation of eligibility
conditions, qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the standard of evaluation
consistently with the maintenance of administrative efficiency, as may be prescribed in
case of appointment of women in services under State:

Provided that women afflicted with typical family obligations and constraints or who
do not have means of livelihood on their own shall be given preference in employment
subject to eligibility as per provisions laid down in the Act.

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

10

15


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Women in India often find themselves so deeply engrossed in family affairs and
burdened with such heavy domestic responsibilities that despite their capabilities, educa-
tion and aptitude, they are unable to enter into Government services in due time.

‘Women have only marginal representation in services connected with the affairs of
the State. Even though they are capable of carrying out the responsibilities of the various
assignments efficiently, they sometimes fall short of requisite qualifications, experience
and other conditions of eligibility.

It would, therefore, only be proper to reserve thirty-three percent of posts for women
in all appointments in services under the State, including public sector undertakings and
enterprises and to provide for relaxation in the matter of age-limit, requisite educational
qualifications, experience and other conditions of eligibility to ensure their due
representation in Government services,

Hence this Bill.

New ऐप मा; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
June 25, 2001.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of A
legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for reservation in posts and appointments for women under the State and for
matters connected therewith.

(Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—956LS—16-07-2001.