AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SaBHA

BAC AAR

Bill No. 55 of 2004

THE FISHERMEN (INSURANCE) BILL, 2004
By

‘Suri A.P. ABDULLAKUTTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for comprehensive and compulsory insurance of fishermen and boats against
any mishap and for matters connected therewith.
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1 (J) This Act may be called the Fishermen Insurance Act, 2004.
(2) In extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Fishermen Insurance Authority constituted under
section 5.
(b) “boat” means a conventional boat, motorboat, catamaran whether small or
big or any such vehicle used for transporting or fishing in sea;

Short title,
extent and
‘commencement.

Definitions.


Framing of
Fishermen
Insurance
Scheme,

Establishment
of the
Fishermen
Insurance
Fund,

Constitution
of Fishermen

Insurance
Authority.

2
(c) “fisherman” means any person who engages himself in fishing and ears
livelihood out of it;

(4) “mishap” means an accident resulting in loss of life or any physical
disability, handicap, whether temporary or permanent, caused to a fisherman or loss or
damage to a boat while engaging in fishing due to any natural calamities or due to
unforeseen circumstances.

(० “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “scheme” means the fishermen insurance scheme framed under section 3.

3. (7) The Centra! Government shall frame 2 Scheme to be known as the Fishermen
Insurance Scheme, for comprehensive and compulsory insurance of fishermen and boats
against any mishap.

(2) The scheme shall be applicable to all fishermen irrespective of their income, sizeof
boat and quantity of catch of fish.

(3) The scheme shall provide for—

(a) the principles and conditions governing the insurance of fishermen and
boats under the scheme;

(b) part of insurance amount to be paid immediately to the fishermen in different
mishaps caused to them due to hazards involved in their work or natural calamities;

(©) nominal rate of premium to be paid by the fishermen;

(d) the extent of insurance cover;

(¢) the manner of making claims by fishermen or their family members; and
(0 any other matter which the Central Government may deem necessary.

4 (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
4 fund to be known as the Fishermen Insurance Fund which shall consist of —

(2) premium amount received from fishermen for insurance under the Scheme;
(b) any amount received as contribution or donation from any individual or
organisation in India or abroad; and
2) The initial capital of the Fishermen Insurance Fund shalll be rupees five hundred
crore which shall be contributed by the Central Government.

(3) The Fishermen Insurance Fund shall be utilised for the payment of insurance 15
the following cases:—

(@ loss of life or injury to fishermen while engaged in fishing;
Gi) loss or damage to boat or other equipments; and
(iii) loss or damage to fish caught by a fisherman.

5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
an Authority to be known as the Fishermen Insurance Authority.

(2) ‘The Authority shall administer the scheme framed under section 3.

3) The Authority shall have a Chairman and such number of members as may be
appointed by the Central Government.

(The Authority shall have such number of officers and staff'as may be prescribed,

(5) The terms and conditions as to the qualifications, salary and allowances of the
Chairman and members and officers/staff of the Authority shall be such as may
be prescribed.


3
(6) The Authority shall have its head office located at Cochin.

(7) The Authority shall establish at least one or more offices in every costal State
according to the population of fishermen in the State concerned and at such other places as
itmay deem fit.

6.(1) A fisherman, who is affected, may make an application in the prescribed form to
the Authority for compensation.
Q) Incase of loss of life of fisherman, the next of kin of the victim may make an
application in the prescribed form to the Authority for compensation.
7. On receipt of an application, the Authority shall make an enquiry and on receipt of
the report, if any, the Authority shall eithet approve of the claim, or reject the application if it
has been found that a false claim has been made, within one month from the date of receipt
of such application.
8. Ifa fisherman, who has not paid premium, claims compensation, he shall be paid the
compensation, if due, after deducting the amount of premium due towards him.

9. It shall be the responsibility of the Authority to pay the insurance amount or such
part of insurance amount to a fisherman for any mishap he may be involved in during the
course of his work, out of the Fishermen Insurance Fund.

10. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Provision of
‘compensation.

Insurance
amount to be
paid within
one month.

Claim of
compensation
in cases of
non-payment
of premium
Payment of
insurance
amount

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Fishermen go to sea at great risk. Some times they even lose their lives, Their | a
damaged or lost in the sea. Their equipments are damaged. Since, there is no exclusi
insurance scheme for them, they suffer as they only know the traditional profession
fishing by which they earn very meager income. In order to provide protection to
traditional fishermen community living in coastal areas of the country it is necessary
Provide insurance cover to them when they suffer loss of life or physical injury or damage
their equipments in the course of fishing or during natural calamities. Such a step will allevi
the sufferings of fishermen to some extent. Therefore, it is proposed that a comprehensi
insurance scheme for fishermen should be formulated.

Hence, this Bill.

New Detui; 4-7 ABDULLAKI
July, 27,2004



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for framing of the Fishermen Insurance Scheme by the
Central Government. Clause 4 provides for establishment of Fishermen Insurance Fund with
initial capital of rupees five hundred crore to be contributed by the Central Government.
Clause 5 provides for constitution of the Fishermen Insurance Authority who administer the
scheme framed under the Act.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. Itis estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees three thousand
crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure
of rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for comprehensive and compulsory insurance of fishermen and boats
against any mishap and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri AP, Abdullakutty, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1646LS—12.08.2004.