Mof 1953. 
As INTRODuaD IN LoK SABHA ON 
nm No. 56011984 
.' , 'f, 
THE ESTATE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1984 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Estate Duty Act, 1953. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Estate Duty (Amendment) Act, 1984. Short 
title. 
Z. In section 5A of the Estate Duty Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to 
5 as the principal Act), after sub-section (2B) , the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
10 
15 
"(ZC) The amendments made to this Act by sections 3 to 5 of 
the Estate Duty (Amendment) Act, 1964. shall apply to estate duty 
in respect of agricultural lands situate in the territories comprised 
in-
(a) the States of Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Hima-
chal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Meghalaya, Orissa and Tamil Nadu and all the Union territories, 
on the expiration of. two months from the date on which the 
said Act received the assent of the President; and 
(b) any other States in respect whereof resolutions have 
~ passed by the Legislatures of those States adopting the' 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
5A. 

Inser-
tion of 
new 
section 
5B. 
Act to 
cease to 
apply to 
estate 
duty in 
respect 
of agricul-
turalland. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
34. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
85 
2 
proposals with respect to such amendments or the said amend-
ments, as the case may be, under clause (1) of article 252 of the 
Constitution, on the expiration of four months from the date of 
such adoption.". 
3. After section SA of the principal Act, the following section shall 5 
be inserted; namely:-
"5B. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5, this 
Act shall cease to apply to the levy of estate duty in respect of agri-
cultural land .... 
4. In section 34 of t~ principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) in clause (a), the word "and" shall be inserted at the 
end; 
(ii) clause (b) shall be omitted; 
10 
(b) in the Explanation below su~section (2), clause (ii) shall 15 
be omitted. 
i, In section 85 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3)" the follow-
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 20 
is in session, for a total periop of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two a! more successive sessions; and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or tpe su~c~sive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree ~t the rule 25 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified fQrm or be no effect, as the case may be; so, how-
ever, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
rrejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule.". 30 

"' .... 
LOK SABRA 
~ 
CORd.IGEl't""DA , 
t·::, 
'mE Es·rATE DUTY (A .. ,IENDdi;;(TT) BILL, 1984.-
(fo be/Aa intro~uced in Lok sabha ) 
1. page 2, line 27,~ 
afte.r "or be" illoert " of" 
2. Page 3, lines 5 and 6 .from bottom,-
for. "proposal" ~ "proposals" 
3. Page 4, line 6 from bottom,-
for -"Marumakkttayam" 
IffiW DELHI; 
July 21 1984 
lsadha ~, 1"906 (Sib) "'-.---'r-
read 
-
"Marumakkattay~ " 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks fo amend the Estate Puty Act, 1953, mainly with • 
view to excluding agricultural lands from the levy of estate duty. 
2. One of the amendments proposed aecordingly seeks to provide that 
the Act shall cease to apply to the levy of estate duty in respect of 
agricultural land. 
3. Another amendment seeks to omit clause (b) of sub-secUpn (1) 
of section 34 of the J\,ct, which provides for aggregation, for the purpose 
of determining the rate of estate duty, of agricultural land, situate in 
any State in respect of which estate duty under the Act is not 'leviable. 
4. Under another amendment, the rule-laying formula contained in 
section 85 of the Act is being revised 1;1) conform to the model formula 
recQlnmended by the Committees on Subordinate Legislation of both 
the Houses of Parliament. 
5. By another amendment, it is proposed to provide that all the plt)-
posed amendments will come into force in the States of Ass4m, Bihar, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maha-
rashtra, lfeghalaya, Orissa and Tamil Nadu and in all the Union terri-
tories on the expiration of two months from the date on which the Bill 
receives the assent of the President; and in respect of the other st.tes, 
on the expidtion of four months from the date of adoption of the prQ-
posal for s~ch amendm~nts Qf the aqlendments, as the case may be, by 
those States under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th July, 1984, 
3 
PRANAB MUKH~RJEE 

Aggrega. 
tion. 
Rule-
making 
powers of 
the Board. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ESTATE DUTY ACT, 1953 
(34 OF 1953) 
• • • • 
34. (1) For the purpose of determining the rate of the estate 'duty to 
be paid on any property passing on the death of the deceased ,-
(a) all property so passing other than property exempted from 
estate duty under clauses (e), (d), (e), (i) (j), (1) (m), (mm), 
(n), (0) and (p) of sub-section (1) of section 33; 
(b) agricultural land so passing, if any, situate in any State not 
specified in the First Schedule; and 
• • • • • 
shall be aggregated so as to form one estate and estate duty shall be 
levied thereon at the rate or rates applicable in respect of the principal 
value thereof. 
(2) Where any such estate as is referred to in sub-section (1) in-
clu'des any property exempt from estate duty, the estate duty leviable 
on the property not so exempt shall be an amount bearing to the total 
amount of duty which would have been payable on the whole estate 
had no part of it been so exempt, 'the same proportion as the value of 
the prop1!rty not so exempt bears to the value of the whole estate. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "p~operty exempt 
from estate duty" means-
(i) any property which is exempt from estate duty under sec-
tion 33; 
(ii) any agricultural land situate in any State not specified in 
the First Schedule; 
(iii) the interests of all coparceners other than the deceased in 
the joint famfly property of a Hindu family governed by the 
Mito.kshara, MarumakJattayam or Atiyasantana law 
• • • • • 
85. (1). • • • • 
(3)All rules made under this Act shall be laid before both Houses 
of Parliament as soon as may be after they are made. 
• • • • • 

... , I 
r 
'f.t._ 
A 
BILL 
; ,.<It ", ," , , 
.. " ..... 
, 11' '::: 
, ·1 ..... 
futtlrer te IIIIt!b'ti the Jlltate Duty Act, 1_ 
., i .. . 
" ' ,.' ...... . 
• 
(Shri Pranllb K1'fn&r Mukherjee, 
Minister of FmcR08) 