As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
1 9 AUGt966' 
Bill No. S6 of 1966 
THE PUNJAB STATE LEGISLATURE (DELEGATION 
OF POWERS) BILL, 1966 
A 
• BILL 
to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the Sta.te 
of Punjab to make taws. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. ··This Act may be called the Punjab State Legislature (Delega- Short 
: tion of Powers) Act, 1966. ti.t1e. 
1;.' 
>--
.. 
.; Z. In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on Df'fini-
kthe 5th day of July, 1966, under clause (1) of article 356 of the Cons- tion. 
titution, by' the President of India. and published with the notification· 
~':.()f the Government of India, in the Ministry of Home Aftairs, 
I: No. G.S.R. 1069 of the said date. 

Confer-
ment on 
the Presl· 
dent of 
the paWL'!' 
of thl' 
State 
Legisla-
ture to 
make 
!'aws. 
• 
2 
3, (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of Punjab to 
make law~', which has been declared by the Proclamation to be exer-
cisable by or under the authority.of Parliament, 18 hereby conferred 
on the President. 
(2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from 5 
time to time, whether Parliament is or is not in session, enact as a 
President's Act a Bill containing such provisions as he considers 
necessary: 
Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, 
whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a committee IO 
constituted for the purpose, consisting of-
(a) thirty members of the House of the People nominated 
by the Speaker among whom shall be included all members who 
for the time being fill the seats allotted to the State of Punjab 
in that House; and 15 
(b) fifteen members of the Council of States nominated by 
the Chairman among whom shall be included all members who 
for the time being fill the seats allotted to the State of Punjab 
in that House. 
(3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) 20 
shall, as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
(4) Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within 
seven days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it 
,ilnder sub-section (3), direct any m~ations to be made in the 25 
Act and if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of 
Parliament during the session in which the Act has been so laid 
before it or the session succeeding, such modifications shall be given 
effect to by the President by enacting an amending Act under sub-
section (2): 30 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity 
of the Act or of any action taken thereunder before It is so amended, 

" 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Proclamation of the President, dated the 5th July, 
1966. the powers of the Legislature of the State of Punjab are now 
exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament. Such legisla-
tive measures as may be ..necessary for the State can be taken up by 
Parliament only by postponing its business; and even then, it is likely 
that Parliament may not have time to deal with all legislative mea-
sures for the State. It is, therefore, proposed that Parliament should, 
~. in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of 
article 357 of the Constitution, confer by law on the President the 
~;.' .. ":' powers of the Legislature of the State of Punjab to make laws for the 
~ State. The present Bill is intended to give effect to this proposal. 
GULZARILAL NANDA. 
NEW DELw; 
The 17th August, 1~ 
. :/ 
~ .. 
3 

LOK SABHA 
• 
A 
.. 
BILL 
t9 confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the 
State of Punjab to make laws. . 
(Shri GuIzarilal Nanda, 
Minister (If Home Affairs) 