Bill No. S' of 19S' 
THE PUBLIC DEBT (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1956 
.A It P""",.iI h",' fTt ~ 1'A!J It 8l'tMtf 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

BHl No. sa cd 1," 
TIlE PUBLIC DEBT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL , prtgnerf 'b!! ,,,~ rn~. ~~tiI 
further to amend the Pubzl'Debt Act, 1944. 
WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitu-
tion, resolutions have been passed by the Legislatures of all Part B 
States other than the State of Jammu and Kashmir to the effect 
that eertain matters relating to the public debt of those States, that 
S is to say, the matters for which provision is made in the Public Debt 
IS of 19440 Act, 1944, should be reiUlated in those States by Parliament by law; 
IS of IM40 
AND WHEREAS in consequence thereof it is necessary further to 
amend the Public Debt Act, 1944, for the purposes hereinafter 
appearing. 
10 BB it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Debt (Amendment) Short tide 
Act, 1956. aDd comm-
ClICOIDCnt. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
IS ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In the Public Debt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as the AmcMmC'Dt 
principal Act), in the long title and the preamble, for the words ~o::~~ 
and letter "the Union and the Part A States", the words, "the Gov- hie. 
ernment" shall be substituted. 
20 3. In section 1 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) .hall be AmeDdlDellt 
omitted. of leetion J. 

2 
1naertiOll of 4. After section 1 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
DCW section be inserted, namely:-
IA. 
Securitiet to 
which fbill 
Act applies. 
AmeMmem 
of aec:tioD 2. 
Amendment 
of IeCtioD 8. 
"1A. This Act applies to Government securi-
ties created and issued whether before or after 
the commencement of this Act by the Central Government, 
or a State Government other than the Government ot Jammu 
and Kashmir!' . 
.. In section 2 of the principal Act, in clause (2),-
(a) in sub-clause (a), for the words "whether before or 
after the commencement of this Act, by the Central Government 10 
or a State Government", the words "by the Government" shall 
be tubatituted; 
(b) ia sub-clause (b), far the words "the, Central Govern-
ment or a State Government", the words "the Government" 
shall be substituted. IS 
I. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
words and figures "and in the caBle of a security issued by a State 
Government, is made after the 31st day of March, 1949", the words, 
figures and letters "and in the case of a security issued by the Gov-
ernment of a Part A State, is made after the 31st day of March, 1949, 20 
and in the case of a security issued by the Government of a Part B 
State to which this Act applies, is made after the commencement of 
the PubUc ,Debt (Amendment) Act, 1936" shall be substituted. 
1. In .section 8 of the principal Act, in the E~Zmtaiion, for the 
words and figures "a body incorporated under the Indian Companies 2S 
Act, 1913", the words and figures "a body incorpora1.ed or deemed to 7 of 1913. 
be incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956" shall be substituted. I of 19S6. 
8. In section 13 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words and letters "Part A States and Part C 
States", the word "India" shall be substituted; 30 
(Ib) for the words "those States", the word "India" shall be 
substituted. 
Amendment 9. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words 
of section 1+ and letters "01' in a Part B State the Political AgenJ;" shall be 
. o~itted. 
3S 
Amendment 10. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words and letters 
of aection 20. "a Part A State or a Part C State", the word "India" shan be 
. 8ubstitu~. 
/I 

11. In section 23 of the principal Act, for the words "the States", Amendment 
the word "India" shall be substituted. of lCCtion 33· 
12. In section 28 of the principal Act,- ~~. 
(a) in clause (c) of sub-section (2), for the words and letter 
S "rulers of Part B States", the words "Rulers of former Indian 
States" shall be substituted. 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the word "Parliament", the words 
"both Houses of Parliament" shall be substituted . 
• 
13. For section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall !f:::n:: 
10 be substituted namely: _ ~OD for sec-, ~. 
10 of J9l0. "29. The Indian Securities Act, 1920 and any law correspond- ~;tt~: a~;i;. 
ing to that law in force in any Part B State immediately before to Govern-
the commencement of the Public Debt (Amendment) Act, 1956, ri::.secu-
shall cease to apply to Government securities to which this Act 
3 of 19S1. 
IS applies and to all matters for which provision is made by this 
Act: 
zo 
Provided that any such corresponding law shall continue 
to apply to or in relation to any securities created and issued by 
the Government of Hyderabad, Saurashtra or Travancore-
Cochin on or before the 31st day of March, 1953, for such period 
/ 
not exceeding one year from the commencement of the Public 
Debt (Amendment) Act. 1956. as the Central Government may. 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.". 
14. After section 29 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion. of DeW IeCtiOD 
~ shall be inserted, namely:- 30. 
30 
35 
"30. Any reference in this Act to any law which did not ~':r=': 
extend to any Part B State or any part of such State bdore the to laws not 
commencement of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, shall ~ror:~ 
wherever necessary, be construed as including a reference to ApriI,19S1 
the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State, or, as the ~~ B 
case may be, any part thereof, before the said date." 
15. (1) The following enactments are hereby repealed, namely: - ReJ?eal and lavmg. 
1. The Madhya Bharat Public Debt, Act, 1953. 
2. The Mysore Public Debt Act, 1953. 
3. The Saurashtra Public Debt Act, 1953. 
4. The Travancore-COchin Public Debt Act, 1954. 

4 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken in the exercise of any power conferred by or under any such 
enactment shall be deemed to have been done or taken in the 
exercise of the powers conferred by or under the principal Act as 
amended by this Act as if the principal Act as amended by this Act S 
were in force on the day on which such thing was done or action 
was taken. 

5 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The public debt and securities of the Union and Part A States 
are at present administered by the Reserve Bank of India in accord-
ance with the Public Debt Act, 1944, and the rules made thereunder. 
The Act, at present, does not extend to securities created and issued 
by the Governments of Part B States. Some of these States have 
their own Public Debt laws while others have acquired public debt 
only recently and have no regular law on the subject. Securities 
issued by the Governments of Part B States are circulating in all 
parts of the country and the public debt of Part B States is also 
being administered by the Reserve Bank of India. It is, therefore, 
desirable that there should be uniformity of procedure in respect 
of the public debt of the Union and all Part A and Part B States 
and that the Public Debt Act, 1944, should apply to securities issued 
by the Government of Part B States as it applies to securities issued 
by the Central Government or a Part A State. The Legislatures 
of Part B Sta~ other than that of the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
have passed resolutions in pursuance of article 252 of the Constitu-
tion empowering Parliament to pass the necessary legislation on the 
subject. The Bill, accordingly amends the Public Debt Act, 1944, 
so as to make it applicable to securities issued by the Governments 
of Part B States other than the Government of Jammu and Kashmir 
and makes certain other minor and incidental amendments in that 
Act. 
MANILAL C. SHAH. 
NEW DELIU, 
The 10th August, 1956. 

Short dtle 
edeDtaDd 
commtDCe-
malt. 
6 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE PUBLIC DDT ACT, 1944 
(No. 18 OF 1944) 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Government 
securities and to the management by the Reserve Bank of India 
of the public debt of the Union and the Part A States. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating 
to Government securities and to the management by the Reserve 
Bank of India of the public debt of the Union and Part A States; 
... ... ... ... • 
.. ; ......... j-~ 
\ "', 
1. (1) 
... ... • .. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except Part B States. 
... ... . . . 
DefiDitiona. 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
iii ... ... ... • 
(2) "Government security" means-
(a) a security, created and issued, whether before or 
after the commencement of this Act, by the Central 
Government or a State Government for the purpose of 
raising a public loan, and having one of the following forms, 
namely:-
... ... ... • • 
(b) any other security created and issued by the 
Central Government or a State Government in such form 
and for s\lch of the purposes of this Act as may be 
prescribed; 
... ... ... • ... 

, 
3. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 5, a transfer of a <lov- Transferor 
ernment security shall be made only in the manner prescribed for ~:=~:rlt 
the making of transfers of securities of the class to which it belongs, 
and no transfer of a Government security which, in the case of a 
security issued by the Central Government is made after the 30th 
day of April, 1946, and in the case of a security issued by a State 
Government, is made after the 31st day of March, 1949 shall be 
valid if-
(a) it does not purport to convey the full title to the 
security, or 
. (b) it is of such a nature as to affect the manner in which 
the security was expressed by the Government to be held. ~ 
,* * * * * 
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 of the Indian Right of 
Contract Act, 1872.- ~~id:! 
• * * * * 
E:rplqnation.-For the purposes of this section a body incorporat-
VII of 1913· ed under the Indian Companies Act, 1913, or the Co-operative 
II of 1912. Societies Act, 1912, or any other enactment for the time being in 
force whether within or without India relating to the incorporation 
of associations of individuals, shall be deemed to die when it is 
dissolved. 
• • • * * 
or Several 
PIIycc •• 
13. Notwithstanding that as a matter of convenience the Govern- Law appli-
ment may have arranged for payments on a Government security :~!~d~o 
to be made elsewhere than in Part A Stares and Part C States, the GoVcIDDlCDt 
rights of all persons in relation to Government securities shall be securities. 
determined in connection with all such questions as are dealt with 
by this Act by the law and in the Courts of those States. 
It. (1) For the purpose of making any order which it is em- Recording 
powered to make under this Act, the Bank may request a District of evidence. 
Magistrate or in a Part B State the Political Agent to record or 
to have recorded the whole or any part of such evidence as any 
person whose evidence the Bank requires may produce. A 
District Magistrate so requested may himself record, or 
may direct any Magistrate of the first class subordinate to him or 
any Magistrate of the second class subordinate to him and empower-
ed in this behalf by general or special order of the State Govern-
ment to record the evidence, and shall forward a copy thereof to 
the Bank. 
• • • * • 

Sta; of 
proceedinp 
on order of 
Court. 
8 
20. Where the Bank contemplates making with referenee to· a21)t 
Government security any order which it is empowered to make 
under this Act, and before the order is made the Bank receives from 
a Court in a Part A State or a Part C State- an order to stay the 
making of such order, the Bank shall either-
(a) hold the security together with any interest unpaid or 
accruing thereon until the further orders of the Court are re-
ceived, or 
(b) apply to the Court to have the security transferred to 
the Official Trustees appointed for the State in which such Court 
is situated, pending the disposal of the proceedings before the 
Court. 
• • • • • 
DiIcharge In 23 .. The Government shall be discharged from all liability on a 
~ ~ bearer bond or on any interest coupon of such a bond on payment 
to the holder of such bond or coupon on presentation on or after 
the date when it becomes due of the amount expressed therein, 
unless before such payment an order of a Court in the States has 
been served on the Government restraining it from making payment. 
Power to 
make ruels. 
• • • • • 
28. (1) 
• • • • • 
. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(c) the conditions subject to which Government securities 
may be issued to the rulers of Part B States; 
• • • • • 
(3) A copy of all rules under this section shall be laid on the 
table of Parliament as soon as may be after they are made. 
• • • • • 
.. 
Act Xof 1920 29. The Indian Securities Act, 1920 shall cease to apply to Govern- X .r 1920• 
:~ .. ::.,t" ment secur~t~es ~o which this, .Act applies, and to all matters for 
ment teCUJl- which provIsion 18 made by thiS Act. 
tiel. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Public Debt Act, 1944. 
(Shri M. C. Shah, . 
Minister of Revenue and 
Civil Expenditure.) 