5 
43 of 1961. 
10 
,., of 19'72 I ~ 
As INTRODUCED Dr LoK: SABKA OB 
am No. 56 of 1986 
-
THE INCOME-TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1988 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the I'Rcome-taz Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic 
(,f India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Income-tax 
11186. • 
(Amendment) Act, Short 
title and 
(2) It shall come mto force on the 1st day of April, 1987. 
I. In section 36 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to 
as the principal Act). in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) after clau.se (ia). the following clause shall be inserted" 
namely:-
"(ib) the amount of any premium paid by cheque by the 
assessee .as an employer to effect or to keep in· fOMe I.D insurance 
on the .health of his employees under a scheme framed in this 
behalf by the General Insuranee Corporation ot India formed 
under section 9 of the General Insurance Business (Natlonali-
satton) Act, 1972 .nd approved ~ the CeIltraJ Govemmel1t;"; 
com-
mence-
menl 
Amend-
mentot 
section 
38. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
80 D. 
Deduction 
in respect 
ofmedi-
cal insur-
ance 
premia. 
~-.. ~.~-
.. " - . 2 - ~ . 
(b) in clause (viia) , for the portion beginning with the words "in 
respect of any provision" and ending with the words Ilwhichever is 
higher", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
lein respect of any provi'Sion for bad and doubtful debts made 
by- 5 
(m) a scheduled. bank [not being a bank apprqved by the 
Central Government for the purposes of clause (."ma) or a 
bank incorporated by or under the laws of a country outside 
India] or a non-scheduled bank an amount not exceeding 
ftve per cent. of the total income (computed before making 10 
any deduction under this clause and Chapter XIA) and an 
amount not exceeding two per cent. of the ag~gate average 
advances made by the rural branches of such bank computed 
in the prescribed manner; 
(b) a bank, bein~ a bank incorporated by or under the 15 
laws of a country out!l:de India, an amount not exceeding flv. 
per cent. of the' total income (computed before making any 
deduction under this clause and Chapter VIA) .". 
3. After section 80CC of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely: - 20 
elROD. (1) In computing the total income of an assessee, there 
shall be deducted, at the following rates, such sum as is specifted in 
sub-section (2) and paid by him by cheque in the previous year 
out of his income chargeable to tax, namely:-:-
(i) in a case where such sum does not exceed in the aggregate :.!;, 
three thotmand rupees, the whole of such sum; and 
(ii) in B'ny other case, three tbousand rupees. 
(2) The sum referred 1x> in sub-section (1) shall be the following. 
namely:- I , 
(al where the assessep is an individual, any mIm paid to effect 30 
or to keep in force an Insurance on the health of the assessee or 
on the health of the wife or husband dependent parents or 
dependent children of thp assessee; 
(b) where the BflBeSSee is a rondu undivided family, any RUm 
paid to effect or to keep m force an insurance on the' health of 35 
any member of the family; , 
(e) where the assessee is an as~iatton of pel"8ons or a body 
of individuals consfstf~g. in either ease., only of husband and wife 
govemedby the system of community of property in force In the 
Ul'lion territories of Dadra and Nagar'Havelf and Goa, Daman and 40 
Diu. any lum paid to effect OT to keep m force aD inwranee <Ill 

57 of 1972. 
5 
the health of any member of such association or body or ·on the 
health of the depeRdent children of the members of such an 
association or body: 
Provided that such insurance shall be in accordance with a 
scheme framed in this behalf by the General Insurance Corporation 
of India formed under section 9 of the General Insurance Business 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972, and approved by the Central Govern-
ment in this behalf.". 
4. In section 80HHB of the principal Act, for the words "twenty-five 
10 per cent.", wherever they occur, the words "fifty per cent." shall be 
substituted. 
Amend· 
mentol 
section 
80HHB. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the following 
purposes, namely:-
(a) to allow a deduction to an employer in respect of premia 
paid by him by cheque for insurance on the health of his employees 
in accordance with a scheme framed by the General Insurance 
Corporation of India and approved by the Central Gove~entj 
(b) to provide a deduction to an assessee up to Rs. 3,000 a year 
in respect of premia paid by him by cheque for insurance,-
(i) on his health or on the health of his spouse or dependent 
parents and children; and 
(ii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family or association 
of persons or b~dy of individuals consisting of (in either case) 
only of husband and wife governed by the system of com-
munity of property in force in the Union territories of Dadrn 
and Nagar Haveli and Goa. Daman and Diu, on the health of 
any member of such family; 
(e) to provide a deduction on provisions fC?r bad debts made by 
all banks up to 5 per cent. of their total income and an additional 
2 per cent. of the aggregate average advances made by rural 
branches of banks; and 
(d) to increase the admissible deduction to 50 per cent. (as 
against 25 per cent. at present) of the profits and gains of an Indian 
company or a person (other than a company) who is resident in 
India and earns income from projects outside India. 
VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
NEW DI:r.m; 
The 3rd May, 1986. 
.'. , .... ··r-. 4 

4.ef 19!73. 
• 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INCOME-T,.X Iu:.T, 1961 
(43 01' 1961) 
• • • • 
3 ••. (1) 'The deductions provided for in the following clauses shall be Other 
allowed in respect of the matters dealt with therein, in computing the deduc_ 
income referred to in section 28- lions. 
• • • • · ' 
(viia) in respect of any provision for bad and doubtful debts 
made by a scheduled bank (not being a bank approved by the Central 
Government for the purposes of clause (vUUI) or a bank incorporated 
by or under the laws of a country outside Indiit) or a non-scheduled 
bank, an amount not exceeding ten per cent. of the total income 
(computed before making any deduction under this claU'Se and Chapter 
VIA) or an amount not ,exceeding two per cent. of the aggregate 
average advances made by the rural branches of such bank, computed 
in the prescribed manner, whicheftr is higher. 
• • • • 
8OHRB. (1) Where the gross total 'income of an assessee being an 
Indian company or a person (other than a company) who is reside'l1t in 
India includes any profits and gains derived from the' business 01-
(a) the execution of a foreign project U'ndertaken by the assessee 
in pursuance of a contract entered into by him, or 
(b) the execution of any work undertaken by hiro and forming 
part of a foreign project undel'taken by any other person in pursuance 
o~ 11 contract entered into by such other person, 
with the Govemme~t of a foreign State or any statutory or other public 
authority or agency in a foreign State, or a foreign enterprise, there shall, 
Inaccotdance with and subject to the provisions of this ,.ection, be alloW«!, 
In -computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction from s.uch 
proftts and gains of an amount equal to twenty-five per cent. thereof: 
Provided that the consideration for the execution of such proj~ or, al 
tbe case may be, of such work is ~yable in ccmvertible foreign exebange. 
--
(2) For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "convertible foreign 'exchange" means foreign exchange which 
18 for the time being treated by the Reserve Bank of India as converti-
ble foreign exchange for the purposes of the Foreign Wxchange Regu-
lati~n Act, 1973, and any rules made thereunder; , , 
(b) "foreign project" means a proj~ tor-
(i) the construction of any building,. road, dam, bridge or 
other structure o""tlfde India; 
Deduction 
in respect 
of profits 
and gains 
from 
projects 
outside 
India. 

(ii) the assembly or installation of any machinery or plallt 
outside India; 
(ii'i) the execution of such other WQI'k (of whatever nature) 
as may be prescribed. 
(3) The deduction under this section shall be allowed only if' the follow-
ing conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(i) the assessee maintains separate accounts in respect of the 
profits and gains derived from the business of the executian of tile 
toreign proj,ect, or, as the case may be, of the work forming part of 
the fQreign project undertaken by him and, where the assessee is a 
person other Ulan an Indian company or a 'co-operative society, such 
accounts have been audited by an accountant as defined in the 
Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 288 and the assessee 
furnishes, along with his return of income, the reaort of such audit in 
the prescribed form duly signed and verified by such accountant; 
(ii) an amount equal. t.o twenty-five per cent. of the profit1l and· 
gains relerred to in sub-section (1) is debited to the profit and loss 
account of the previous year in respect of which the deduction under 
this section is to be allowed and credited to a reserve account (to be 
called the "l"oreign Projects Reserve Account") to be utilised by the 
assessee during a period of five years next following for the purposes 
of his business othe.r than for distribution by way of dividends or 
profiti; 
(iii) an amount equal to twenty-five per cent. of the proits and 
gains referred to in sub-sectiO'll (1) is brought by the assessee in 
convertible foreign exchange into India, in accordance with the 
provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 and any rules 46 of 1973 
made thereunder, within a peri~ of six months from the end of the 
previous year referred to in clawe (ii) or, where the Commissioner 1. 
satisfied (for reasons to be recorded in writing) that the assessee is, 
fol' reasans beyond his control, unable to do So within the said pel'iod 
of 'six months, within such fUrther period as the Commissioner may' 
allow in this behalf: 
Provided that where the amount credited by the assessee to the 
Foreign Projects Reserve Account in pursuance of clause (iij or the 
amount brougJ:1t into India by the BlSeBSee in pursuance of clause tiii) 
. or each of the said amoltnt'S is less than twenty-Ave per cent. of the 
p.rofits and gains referred to in sub-section (l), the deduction under 
that sub-section shall be limited to the amount so credited ill pursuance 
of clauae (ii) or the amount 10 broUlht into India in purlUaDce of clause 
(iii), whichever is less. 
(4) U at any time before the expiry.of five years ¥,om the end of the 
previous year in which the deduction under sub-lection (1) is allowed, the 
assessee utilis~s the amount credited to . the Foreign Projects Reserve 
Account for distribution by w,.y of dividends or .proAts or "for any other 
purpose which is not a purpose of the business of the assessee, the 
deduction originally allowed under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to 
'have been wrongly allowed. and the Income-tax OJBcel' may, notwith-
standing anything contained in this Act, re-compute the total i11come of 
the assessee for the relevant previous year and make the n8Clllar), 
amendment; and the proviliont of ItCtion 1M lba11, 10 far II IN,. be, 

7 
apply thereto.. the period of four years specified in. sub-section (7) . of 
that section being reCkoned from the end of the previous year in which 
the money was so utilised. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this 
Chapter under the heading "C-Deductions in respect of certain incomes" 
no part of the consideratiO'll or of the income comprised in the consideration 
payable to the assessee for the execution of a foreign project referred· to 
in clause (") of sub-section (1) or of any work referred to in claUtle (b) 
of that sub-section shall qualify for deduction for any assessment year 
under any such other provision . 
• • • • • 

LOX SABRA 
¥ 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
(Sh7'i ViahtosMth p,.ctc'P Singh. Minister of Fift4'RCe) 