Bill_o. 58 of 1918. 
THE DELIVERY OF BOOKS (PUBLIC LIBRARIES) 
BILL, 1953 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for delivery of books to the National LibraT'U and other 
public libraries. ~ 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title aDd edent.-(l) This Act may be called the Deli-
very of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1953. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 5 
2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,-
(a) "book" includes every volume, part or division of a 
volume, and pamphlet, in any language, and every sheet of 
music, map, chart or plan separately printed or lithographed, but 10 
does not include a newspaper published in conformity with· the 
provisions of section 5 of the Press and Registration of Books 
Act, 1867 (XXV of 1867); 
(b) "public libraries" means the National Library at Calcutta 
and any three other libraries which may be specified by the 15 
Central Government in this behalf by notification in the Official 
Gazette. 
3. Delivery of books to public Iibraries.-(l) Subject to any rules 
that may be made under this Act, but without prejudice to the pro-
visions contained in section 9 of the Press and Registration of Books 20 
Act, 1867 (XXV of 1867), the publisher of every book published in 
the territories to which this Act extends after the commencement of 
this Act' shall, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, deli-
ver at his own expense a copy.of.the book to the National Lib'rary 

2 
at Calcutta and one such copy to each of the other three public 
libraries within thirty days from the date of its publication. 
(2) The copy delivered to the National Library shall be a copy of 
the whole book with all maps and illustrations belonging thereto, 
5 finished and coloured in the same manner as the best copies of the 
same, and shall be bound, sewed or stitched together, and on the best 
paper on which any copy of the book is printed. 
(3) The copy delivered td any other public library shall be on the 
paper on which the largest number of copies of the book is printed 
10 for sale, and shall be in the like condition as the books prepared for 
sale. 
(4) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any second 
or subsequent edition of a book in which edition no additions or 
alterations either in the letter-press or in the maps, book prints or 
15 other engravings belonging to the book have been made, and a copy 
of the first or some preceding edition of which book has. been delivered 
under this Act. 
to Receipt for books de11vered.-The person in charge of a public 
library (whether called a librarian or by any other name) or any 
20 other person authorised by him in this behalf to whom a copy of a 
book is delivered under section 3 shall give to the publisher a receipt 
in writing therefor. 
5. Penalty.-Any publisher who contravenes any provision of 
this Act or of any rule made thereunder shall be punishable with fine 
25 which may extend to fifty rupees and the value of the book, and. the 
court trying the offence may direct that the whole or any part of 
the fine realised from him shall be paid, by way of compensation, to 
the public library to which the book ought to have been delivered. 
6. Cognizance of otfences.-(l) No court shall take cognizance of 
30 any offence punishable under this Act save on complaint made by an 
officer empowered in this ·behJlf by the Central Government by " 
general or special order. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a 
magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under 
86 this Act. 
7. Power to make rales.-The Central Government may, by notifi-
cation in the Oftlchtl Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes 
of this Act. 

3 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In order to promote public libraries in India and to encourage 
scholarship, it is considered necessafY to .build up good libraries, and 
for this purpose it is desired to acquire not more than four copies of 
books and publications in India. One set of books so acquired will 
be deposited in the National Library, Calcutta, and the remaining 
three sets will be utilised fot' other important libraries. 
A. K. AZAD. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 2nd November, 1953. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to provide for delivery of books to the National Library and 
other public libraries. 
(Maulana Abul Kalam A.ad, 
Minister for Education) 