THE INDIAN STAMP (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bill No. S6 of I,sa 
TIlE INDIAN STAMP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As Df'mODl7CED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the IMian Stamp Act, 1889. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
ef lnQia as fol'lows:-
2. In clause (a) of section 11 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (here- Short title 
Act, 1958. and com-
mencement. 
S (2) lt shall come into force Oll such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by netification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
t. In eilluse (4) of. section 11 of tfte Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (aere- Amcndmen: 
of 1899. inafter referred to as the principal Act), fer u.e words "with the of section II. 
daty of ORe anna or bali an amul", the words "with a duty not 
10 exceeQing teD Wiye paise" shall be substit\lted. 
3. In sub-section (.1) of seation 31 of the principal Act, for the Amendment 
words "eight annas", the words "fifty naye paise" shall be substi- of section 31. 
tuted. 
4. In lIuB--sedion ~3) of section 32 of the principal Act, in clause Amendment 
IS ~c) of the proviso, for the words "with the duty of one anna or half of section 32" 
an amla", the words "with e duty not e~eeding ten naye paise" 
shall be substituted. 
5. In section 34 of the principal Act, for the words "with a duty Amendment 
of one anna", the words "with a duty net exceeding ten naye paise" of Aection 34· 
20 shall be substituted. 

"'2 
Amendment 6, In clause (a) of the proviso to section 35, sub-section (1) of 
of sections section 40 and section 41 of the principal Act, for the words "with 
35,40 and 41. a duty of one anna or half an anna" wherever they occur, the words 
"with a duty not exceeding ten naye paise" shall be substituted. 
o~)s~~~~~~~~ 7. In section 47 of the principal Act, for the words "with the 5 
duty of one anna", the words "with a duty not exceeding ten naye 
paise" shall be substituted. 
:r~:~~":t:~t3 8. In clause (c) of section 53 and section 54 of the principal Act, 
and 54. for the words "one anna" wherever they occur, the words "ten 
Insertion uf 
new section 
s4A. 
Allowances 
for stamps 
in denomi-
nations of 
annlS. 
Am~ndment 
of sections 
69 and 74. 
naye paise" shall be substituted. 10 
9. After section 54 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
section 
"54A. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 54, 
when any person is possessed of a stamp or stamps in any 
denominations, other than in denominations of annas four or 15 
multiples thereof and such stamp or stamps has or have not 
been spoiled, the Collector shall repay to such person the value 
of such stamp or stamps in money calculated in accordance with 
the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 14 of the Indian 
Coinage Act, 1906, upon such person delivering up, within six 20 3 of 1906. 
months from the commencement of the Indian Stamp 
(Amendment) Act, 1958, such stamp or stamps to the 
Collector.". 
10. In clause (b) of section 69 and the provillo to section 74, for 
the words "one anna or half an anna" wherever they occur, the 25 
words "ten naye paise or five naye paise" shall be substituted. 
Insertion of 11. After section 77 of the principal Act, the following section 
new, section shall be inserted namely'-~A ,. 
S'lving as 
to certain 
stamps. 
"77A. All stamps in denominations of ann as four or multi-
ples thereof shall be deemed to be stamps of the value of twenty- 30 
five naye paise or, as the case may be, multiples thereof and 
shall, accordingly, be valid for all the purposes of this Act.". 
Amendment 12. In section 78 of the principal Act, for the words "four annas", 
of section 78. the words "twenty-five naye paise" shall be substituted. 
Amendment 13. In Schedule I to the principal Act, in entries 13, 14, 27, 37, 47, 3S 
of Schedule 49, 52, 53 and 62, for the words, letters and figures "half an anna", 
t. "one anna", "two annas", "three annas", "four annas", "six annas", 
"eight annas", "twelve annas" and "lis. 2-8-0", wherever they occur, 
the words, letters and figures "five naye paise", "ten naye paise", 
"fifteen naye paise", "twenty naye paise", "twenty-five naye paise", 40 
"forty naye paise", "fifty naye paise", "seventy-five naye paise" and 
"Rs. 2.50", respectively, shall be substituted. 

Usc of ad-
hesive 
stamps. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EJI'l'aACTS noM 'JHE IRDlJoN STAMP ACT, 1880 
(No. 2 OF 1899) 
• • • • • 
11. The following instruments may be stamped with adhesive 
stamps, namely:-
(5) iMtAlmeMs chargeable with the duty of one anna or half 
an anna, extept parts of bills of exehamge payable otherwise 
than on demand and drawn in sets; 
• • • • • • 
CHAPTER III 
ADJUDICATION AS TO STAMPS 
Adiudication 31. (1) When any instrument whether executed or not and 
::a~p:roper" whether previously stamped or not, is brought to the Collector, and 
the person bringing it applies to have the opinion of that officer as 
to the duty (if any) with which it is chargeable, and pays a fee of 
such amop.nt (not exceeding five rupees and not less than eight 
annas) as the Collector may in each case direct, the Collector shall 
determine the duty (if any) with which, in his judgment the instru-
ment is chargeable. 
• • • • • • 
Certificate: 32. 
'by Collector. 
• • • • • • 
(3) Any instrument upon which an endorsement has been made 
under this section, shall be deemed to be duly stamped or not charge-
able with duty, as the case may be; and, if chargeable with duty, 
shall be receivable in evidence or otherwise, and may be acted upon 
and registered as if it had been originally duly stamped: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall authorize the Collector 
to endorse-
(a) any instrument executed or first executed in India and 
brought to him after the expiration of one month from the date 
of its execution or first execution, as the case may bej 
4 

{b) any i,wtrumoot executed Qr fil'st exew:uted Gut of India 
and brought to him after the expiration of tbl'ee J:D()nthi after it 
has been first r~iwd in Ind.i.a; or 
(c) any instrument chargeable with the duty of one anna or 
balf an anna, 01' any bill of exchange 01' prDl11iS8Ol'Y note, when 
brought tic him., after the drawing or execution thelleof, on paper 
not d\lly stamped.. 
* * * • * * 
34. Where any receipt chargeable with a duty of one anna is S'p~cial pro-. VISion as to 
tendered to or produced before nny officer unstamped m the course Ullstamped 
of the audit of any public account, such officer may in his discretion, recrip:s.. 
instead of impounding the instrument, require a duly stamped receipt 
to be substituted therefor. 
35. No instrument chargeable with duty shall be admitted in 
eridence f{}r any purpose by any person having by law or consent 
of parties authority to receive evidence, or shall be acted upon, 
ntgistered or authenticated by any such person or by any public 
officer, unless such instrument ii duly stamped: 
Provided that-
(4) any such instrument not being an instrument charge-
able with a duty of one anna or half an anna only, or a bill of 
exchange or promissory note, ahall, wbject to all just ~cep­
tions, be admitted in evidence on payment of the duty with 
which the &ame is chargeable, or, in the case of an instru-
ment insufficiently stamped, of the amount required to make 
up such duty, together with a penalty of five rupees, or, when 
ten till".lleB the amount of the proper duty or deficient portion 
thereof exeeeds five rupees, of a sum equal to ten times such 
duty or portion; 
(b) where any person from whom a stamped receipt could 
have been demanded, has given an unstamped receipt and 
such receipt, if stamped, would be admissible in evidence 
against him, then such receipt shall be admitted in evidence 
against him on payment of a penalty of one rupee by the person 
tendering it; 
(c) where a contract or agreement of any kmd is effected 
by correspondence consisting of two or more lettel"s and any 
one of the letters bears the proper stamp, the contract or agree-
ment shall be deemed to be duly stamped; 
Instruments 
not duly 
stamped in-
admissible 
in evidence, 
etc. 

·6 
(d) nothing herein contained shall prevent the admission 
of any instrument in evidence in any proceeding in a Criminal 
Court, other than a proceeding under Chapter XII or Chapter 
XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898); 
(e) nothing herein contained shall prevent the admission 
of any instrument in any Court when such instrument has been 
executed by or on behalf of the Government, or where it bears 
the certificate of the Collector as provided by section 32 or any 
other provision of this Act. 
• • • • • • 
40. (1) When the Collector impounds any instrument under Collector's power to section 33, or receives any instrument sent to him under section 38, 
st Imp ins- sub-section (2), not being an instrument chargeable with a duty of 
truments half 1 bill f h . impounded. one anna or an anna on y or a 0 exc ange or pronussory 
note, he shall adopt the following procedure:-
(a) if he is of opinion that such instrument is duly 
stamped, or is not chargeable wlth duty, he shall certify by 
endorsement thereon that it is duly stamped, or that it is not 
so chargeable, as the case may be; 
(b) if he is of opinion that such instrument is chargeable 
with duty and is not duly stamped, he shall require the pay-
ment of the proper duty or the amount required to make up 
the same, together with a penalty of five rupees; or, if he 
thinks fit, an amount not exceeding ten times the amount of 
the proper duty or of the deficient portion thereof, whether 
such amount exceeds or falls short of five rupees: 
Provided that, when such instrument has been impounded only 
because it has been written in contravention of section 13 or sec-
tion 14, the Collector may, if he thinks fit, remit the whole penalty 
prescribed by this section . 
• • • • • • 
In'truments U. If any instrument chargeable with duty and not duly 
Up'ed,ldulbY .ta"?- stamped, not being an instrument chargeable with a duty of one yacCl- • 
dent. anna or hall an anna only or a bill of exchange or promissory 
note, is produced by any person of his own motion before the 
Collector within one year from the date of its execution or first 
execution, and such person brings to the notice of the Collector 
the fact that such instrument is not duly stamped and offers to 
pay to the Collector the amount of the proper duty, or the amount 
required to make up the same, and the Collector is satisfied that 

., 
the omislion to duly stamp such instrument has been occasioned 
by accident, mistake or urgent necessity, he may, instead of pro-
ceeding under sections 33 and 40, receive such amount and proceed 
as next hereinafter prescribed. 
• • • • • 
ft. When any bill of exchange or promissory note chargeable 
with the duty of one anna is presented for payment unstamped, 
th~ person to whom it is so presented may affix thereto the neces-
sary adhesive stamp, and, upon cancelling the same in manner 
hereinbefore provided, may pay the sum payable upon such bUl 
or note, and may charge the duty against the person who ought 
to have paid the same, or deduct it from the sum payable as afore-
said, and such bill or note shall, so far as respects the duty, be 
deemed good and valid: 
Provided that nothing herein contained shall relieve any person 
from any penalty or proceeding to which he may be liable in re-
lation to such bill or note. 
• • • • • 
53. In any case in which allowance is made for spoiled or misused 
stamps, the Collector may give in lieu thereof-
• • • • • • 
(c) at his discretion, the same value in Q'loney, deducting one 
anna for each rupee or fraction of a rupee. ' 
54. When any person is possessed of a stamp or stamps which have 
not been spoiled or rendered unfit or useless for the purpose intended, 
but for which he has no immediate use, the Collector shall repay to 
such person the value of such stamp or stamps in money, deducting 
one anna for each rupee or portion of a rupee, upon such person 
delivering up the same to be cancelled, and proving to the Collector's 
satisfaction-
(4) that such stamp or stamps were purchased by such 
person with a bona fide intention to use them; and 
(b) that he has paid the full price thereof; and 
(c) that they were so purchased within the period of six 
months next preceding the date on which they were so delivered: 
Power of 
p:lyer to 
slimp biDs 
and pro-
missory 
notes rece-
ived by him 
unst.mped. 
Allowance 
for spoiled 
or misused 
atamps how 
to be made. 
Allowance 
for It mp. 
not requ(rc4 
for Dk. 

Pendty for 
brelcb of 
nlle relltins 
to sale of 
stamps and 
for unauth-
orized sale. 
Powers to 
make rule. 
rel~ting to 
lale of 
stampa. 
Act to be 
traD!uted, 
and sold 
cheaply. 
8 
Provided that, where the person is a licensed vendor of .tampa, 
the Collector may, if he thinks fit, make the repayment of the sum 
actually paid by the vendor without any such deduction as aforesaid. 
• • • • • 
e8. 
(b) any person not so appointed who sells or offers for sale 
any stamp (other than a one-anna or half an anna adhesive 
stamp); 
shan be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, 
or with both . 
• • • • • • 
74. The State Government may make rules for regulating-
(4) the supply and sale of stamps and stamped papers, 
(b) the persons by whom alone such sale is to be conducted, 
and 
(c) the duties and remuneration of such persons: 
Provided that such rules shall not restrict the sale of one-anna or 
half an anna adhesive stamps . 
• • • • • 
78. Bvery State Government shall make provision for the sale of 
translations of this Act in the principal vernacular languages of the 
territories administered by it at a price not exceeding four annes per 
copy. 
• 
SCHEDULE I 
STAMP-DUTY ON INSTRUMENTS 
(See section 3) 
DeacriptiOD of Imttument 
• • • 
I,. BILL OP EXCHANGE u ddIned by •• 2(2) not beinla BOND 
bInk-note or currency note:-
• 
. . .' . . 
(6) where payable otherwiae than on demand-
(.,) where payable not more than three months after date or lilht 
• 
if the amount of the "ill or note doea.DOt exceed RI. SOO One rupee four ansa 

10 of 1889-
DesCl iption of Inltrwnent Proper Stamp duty 
-----_. 
IJ. BILL OF EXCHANGE-contd. 
if it eueeda R •. SOO but does not exceed RI. 1000 • Two rupeea ciaht 1UlDIlI. 
and for every additional RI. 1,000 or part thereof in excess of Two rupees daht 
RI.I,ooo. annu. 
(iI) where payable more than three montba but not more than 
Iix months'after date or aiaht-
if the amount of the bill or note does not exceed RI. 500 
if it aceeda RI. 500 but does not exceed RI. 1,000 
and for every Iddidonal RI. 1,000 or part thereof in aceIs 
of RI. 1,000. 
Two rupees daht 
annas. 
Five rupees. 
Five rupees. 
iii) where payable more than six months but not more than nine.J 
montba after date or sigllt-
if the amount of the bill or note does not eXceed Rs. 500 
if it aceeda RI. 500 but does not exceed RI. 1,000 
and for every additional RI. 1,000 or part thereof in excess of 
Ra. 1,000. 
(ill) where payable more than nine months but not more than 
one year after date or sight-
if the amount of the bill or note does not exceed Rs. soo. 
if it aceeds RI. 500 but does not exceed RI. 1,000 
and for every additional RI. 1,000 or part thereof in excess 
of RI. 1,000. 
(c:) where payable at more than one year after date or sight-
if the amount of the bill or note does not exceed RI. 500 
if it exceed. RI. 500 but does not exceed RI. 1,000 
and for every additional RI. 1,000 or part thereof in excess 
ofRl.l,OOO. 
1+ BILL OF LADING (in<:ludina a throUih bill of ladiDa). 
E"",.,tirms 
(4) Bill of Iacling when the goods therein described are received 
at a place within the limits of any port as defined under the 
Indian Portl Act, 1889, and are to be delivered at another 
place within the limits of the lame port. 
(6) Bill of lading when exc:cutcd out of India and rel.atiog to 
property to be delivered in India. 
• • • • 
31. DEBENTtJRB (whether a mortpge debenture or not), being 
a marketable security transferable-
(a) by ednoraement or by a separate instrument of trans fer-
where the amount or value does not exceed RI. 10 
where it exceed. RI. 10 and does Dot exceed RI. SO 
Ditto so ditto. 100 
Ditto 100 dino. 200 
Three rupee. twdve 
annya. 
SevCD rupees eight 
1DDaI. 
SevCD rupees cilht 
annas. 
Five rupees. 
Ten rupees. 
Ten rupees. J 
TCD rupees~) 
Twenty rupees. 
Twenty rupees. 
Fourannas. 
N.B.-If a bill of Jad-
ing is drawn in parts, 
the proper stamp 
therefor DWlt be 
bome by each ODe of 
the act.. 
• 
Threeannu. 
Sixannu. 
Twelve annu. 
• 
ODa rupee daht annu. 
---- .. -----------

10 
Delcription of Instrument 
*7. DEBENTURE-concld. 
where it eEeCds RI. 200 and does not acecd RI. 300 
Ditto 300 ditto 400 
Ditto 400 ditto sao 
Ditto 500 ditto 600 
Ditto 600 ditto 700 
Ditto 100 ditto 800 
Ditto 800 ditto 900 
Ditto 900 ditto 1,000 
"3 
Proper Stamp-duty 
Two rupeea four anna •• 
Three rupees. 
Three rupeeI twelve anna. 
Four rupees cilht annal 
Five rupees four anna. 
Slzrupees. 
Six rupees twelve anna. 
SCftIl rupees eight anna. 
and for every Ra. 500 or part thereof in excess of RI. 1,000 Three rupees twelve IDDU. 
(6) by cklivery-
where the amount or nlue of the conaidendon for such Twelve anna. 
debenture .. act forth therein does not exceed RI. So; 
where it cxceeda Rs. So but docs not exceed RI. 100 
Dino 100 ditto 200 
Ditto 200 ditto 300 
Ditto 300 ditto 400 
I)ino 400 ditto 500 
Ditto 500 ditto 600 
Ditto 600 ditto 700 
Ditto 7«J ditto 800 
Ditto 800 dino 900 
Ditto 900 ditto 1,000 
One rupee eight annas. 
Three rupees. 
Four rupees eight annas. 
Sixrupcel. 
Seven rupees ciIht anna. 
Nincrupca. 
Ten rupea dabt IIUW. 
Twelve rupees. 
Thirteen rupees eiaht annu. 
Fifteen rupcea. 
IUd for every Ra. SOO or part thereof in cxceu of Rs. 1,000 Seven rupees daht IDDU. 
B~-The term "Debenture" iDcludcaany interest 
coupons attached thereto but the amount of such coupona 
,hall not be included in estimatina the duty. 
Ex"",titm 
A debenture illued by an incorporated company or other 
body corporate in terms of a registered mortgage-deed, 
duly stamped in respect of the full atnount of debentures 
to be issued thereunder, whereby the company or body 
borrowing makes ov·:r, in whole or in part; their property 
to tr\JItceI for the benefit of the debenture holden : 
Provided that the debentureS so issued are expressed to be 
illued in tenDI of the said mortpge-dced • 
• • '. • • • 
, . 

11 
Detc:riptiOD of Inltrumcnt Proper Stamp-duty 
37. LE1TER OF ~IT, that is to saYI ~y Twoannas. 
instrument by which one person autnonsea 
another to give credit to the penon in whose favour 
iti,drawn. 
• • • 
47. POUCY OF INSURNACE-
A.-SBA-lNSURANCB (Su Section 7)-
(I) for or upon any voyage-
• • 
if drawn singly 
(.) where the premium or consideration does One anna. 
not exceed the rate of two annas or one-
eighth per centum of the amount insured 
by the policy; 
(it) in any other case, in respect of every full One anna. 
sum of one t.'lousand five hundred rupees 
and also any fractional part of one thowand' 
five hundred rupees insured by the policy; 
(.I) for time-
(m) in respect of every full sum of one thousand 
rupees and also any fractional part of one 
thousand rupees insured by the policy-
wh~ the insurance shall be made for any time Two annas. 
not exceeding lix months; 
where the insurance ahall be made for any time Four annas. 
exceeding six months and not exceeding 
twelve months. 
B.- FIRE-INSURANCE AND OTHllJl CLASSI!S OP IN-
su RANCE, NOT BLSEWHBRE INCLUDJ!D IN THIS 
ARTICLB • OOVERlNQ GOODS, MERCHANDISE, PER-
SONAL BPPIICTS, CROPS, AND OTHER PROPERTY· 
AGAINST LOSS OR DAMAGB-
(1) in respect of an origiDal. policy-
(I) when the sum insured does not exceed lu. 
5,000; 
(ii) in any other case . 
and 
Onerupec. 
• • 
if drawn in 
duplicate, for 
each part 
Half an anna. 
Half an 1UlDA. 
One anna •. 
Twoanoas. 
(.I) in respect of each receipt for any payment 
of a premium on any renewal of an original 
policy. 
One-half of the dUty . payable 
in respect of the original policy 
in addition to the amount, if 
any, charseabIc under No. 
53· 
C • ...,...ACCIDBNT AND SICltNBSS INSUItANCB-
(a) apinst railway accldent, vlllli.d for a sinile One anna. journey only. 

8011923. 
it 
Description of IDatrument 
.1. POUCY OR ~VRANCB--cDnui. 
C.-ACClDBNT AND SICitNESS INSUItAN~cmdd. 
E:u.,tio_ 
When islued to a pu'enser travellinl br the 
intermediate or the third da .. in any railway. 
f.P) in any other case-for the mllflmum amount 
wbicb may become payable in the case of any 
,inale accident or sictne .. where IUch amount 
does not exceed Ill. 1,000, and also where such 
amOUDt exceeds RI. 1,000, for every RI. 1,000 
or part thereof. 
CC.-IHStJltANCl! BY WAY 0' INDEMNITY &P,iDlt 
liability to pay dama,es on account of ac:adents 
to workmen employed by or under the insure r 
or a,ainst liability to pay compensation under 
the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, for 
every RI. 100 or part thereof payable as prem-
ium. 
Porpcr Stamp-duty 
Two annas: 
Provided that, in case of a 
policy of insurance apinst death 
bJ accident when the annual 
premium payable does not 
exceed Ill. :1-8-0 In RI. 1,000, 
the duty on such instrument 
Ihall be one anua for CYerJ 
Ill. 1,000 or part thereof of the 
nwdmum amount which may 
become paJable under it, 
One anna. 
D.-uft INsUJlANCE 0. GaOUP INSURANCE OJ! I-------~----­
If drawn in 
duplic:ate, for 
each part 
OTHEil INSURANCE NOT SPECIfICALLY PItOVlDID 
1'0., exc:cpt such a RB-INStJltANCB as is described If drawn ainsly 
in Divi.ion E of this artide-
<_1 for every sum insured not ezcecdiDa Ill. Two annas. 
:I!l0; 
One anna. 
(ia) for every lum inlured e:xcecdlDl RI. :I!lo Pour annas. 
but not exc:ecdinl RI. !l00; 
Two annas. 
(iii) For every sum iDsured exeedinllll.!loo Six annas. 
but not cxcecdlna RI. 1,000 and also for 
every RI. 1,000 or part thereof in exec .. 
Three aDoa .. 
ofRs. 1,000. 
EUfNpriDn 
Policiel onife-insurance panted by the Director 
General ofPott O1fic:es in accordance with rule. 
for Postal Life-Insurance issued under the au-
tborit, of the Central Government. 
N.D.-If a policy of ,rou.p 
insurance is renewed or other-
wise modified whercbJ the 
swn iDsured exceeds the aum 
previously insured on which 
stamp-duty has beeD paid, 
the proper stamp must be-
borne on the ezc:ess s urn 80 in-
sured. 

13 
Daerlption of Inttrumcnt 
4'1. POUCY OF INSURANCB-amdd. 
B.-RB-IN.tJIlANaI BY AN INlUltANa.() O,""ANF. 
which haa granted a POLlCY of the Dature 
specified in Division A or Division B of thia 
Article, with pnother company by way of 
indemnity or guarantee aplnat the payment on 
thc original insurance ofa certain part ofthc 
tum insured thereby. 
Gnlnal E~tiott 
Letter of cover or enpgement to issue a policy 
of insurance. 
Provided that, unle .. such letter or eng.gement 
bears thc stamp prescribcd by this Act for 
such policy, nothing ,hall be clUnable 
tbcreunder,norahaUit be available for an, 
purpose, ezc,ept to compel the dclJvel)' 
Of the policy thcrein mcntioned. 
• • • • ..,. PROMl8SORY NOTE (u defined by eectiaD 
a~~)J-
(.) when the 8D\OUDt or nlue dOlI DOt aceed 
Ra. 250; 
(ia) when the amount or value exceeda Ra. 250 
but doa DOt aceed RI. 1,000 ; 
(iii) in any other cue 
(6) when payablc othcrwise than:on:dcmandJ 
• • • • 
Proper Stamp-dur, 
Oae-quarter of the duty paJablc 
in respect of the oriJinal 
illlurancc but Dot leas than ODe 
aDDa or more thaD one rupec. 
• • 
ODe IUUIL 
Two aDDU. 
Pour 8IUID. 
Thc HIlle dut'J • a Bm of Bs-
chmae (No. 13) for the IlUDC 
amount payable othcnriae than 
on demand. 
• • 
Po PROn empowering any person to.ole at 
any onc dection of the memben of a district or 
local board or of a body of municipal commis-
aioncra, or at any one meeting of (a) members 
of an incorporated company or othcr body cor-
poratc whoac stock, or funds is or are divided into 
,hares and traIlIferable, (6) a local authority, or 
Two anou. 
~lDS:OPrieton, memben or contributors to the of any inatitutioD. 
"" RECEIPT [u defined by section 2(33)] for 
any money or other property the amount or v.1uc 
of wbic:h aceeda twenty rupees. 
Reccipt- l B""",dIms 
(eI) endoned OIl or contained in any inaw-
IIImt duly .tamped, lor any inatrumeDt ex-
empted] under the prOviso to section 3 (iIl-
mumenta executed on bebalf of the Go-
vcmment, or any cheque or biD of ezchagc 
payablc on demand ac:knowledPnl the receipt 
of the conaidcradon-moaey therein cxpreued, 
ODe IDDL 

14 
----,---------"-----------------------
Description of Instrument 
Exmtptioru-concld. 
or the receipt of any principal-money, interat 
or annuity or other periodical payment thereby 
secured; 
(b) for any payment of money without considera-
tion; 
(c) for any payment of rent by • cultivator OD 
account of land assessed to Government 
revenue, or (in the States of Madra, Bombay 
and Andhra as they existed immediately be-
fore the lit November, I9S6) of loam lands ; 
(tl) for payor allowance by noo-commi. .. i0ne4 
or petty officers, soldien, aailon or airmen 
of the Indian military, naval or air forces 
when serving in ,uch capacity, or by mounted 
poUce-cotlltablea j 
(.) given by holden of family-certific.t~ in 
cases where the penon from whOlle payor 
allowances the sum compriaed in the receipt 
has been assigned is a non-commissioned or 
petty officer, soldier, sailor or airman of any 
of the said forces, and aerviDa in such capacity ; 
.(1) for,pcnaiona or alloWaDCea by persons rcceivinl 
IUd penaiona or allowanc.ea in respect of their 
service as such non-commissiOded or petty 
office s, soldiers, sailors or ai'men, and not 
serving the Government in any other capacity ; 
(z) given by a headman or lambardar for lAnd-
revenue or taxes collected by him ; 
<It) given for money or secunues for mont}' I deposited in the hand, of any banker, to be 
accounted for : 
Provided that the same i, not expressed to 
be received of, or by the banda of, any 
other than the person to whom the aame is 
to be accounted for: 
Pro-,'ided also that this exemption shall not 
extend to a receipt or acknowledgment 
for any Bum paid or deposited for or upon 
a letter of allotment of a share, or in respect 
of a call upon any scrip or share of, or in, 
any incorporated company or other body 
corporate or such proposed or intende4 com-
pany or body or in respect of a debenture 
being a marketable ,ecurity. 
• • • • 
Proper Stamp-duty 
• • 

2 ef 1874 
Description of Instrument Proper Stamp-duty 
h. TRANSFER (whether with or without consi-
deration)-
(a) of ahares in an incorporated company or other 
body corporate ; 
(b) of debentures, beina marketable securities, 
whether the debenture is liable to duty or not, 
except debentures provic1ed for by section 8 ; 
(c) of any interest secured by a bond, mortgage-
deed or policy of inlurance,-
(i) if the duty on such bond, mortgage-deed 
or policy does not exceed five rupees j 
(ii) in any other case 
Twelve IlDDIIB for every hundred 
rupees or part the' eof of the value 
of the ahare. 
ODe-balf of the duty payable 
on a Conveyance (No. 23) tor a 
CODIideradon equal to the fac.: 
amount of the debenture. .' 
The duty with which such bond 
mortgage deed or policy of 
insurance is chargeable. 
Five rupees. 
(d) of any property under the Administrator Ten rupees. 
~cnl'B ~, 1874, section 31; 
(,) of any trust-property without consideration 
from one trustee to another trustee or from a 
trustee to a beneficiary. 
Exmtptions 
Tranafera by endonement-
(a) of a bill of exchange, cheque or promi8sory 
note; 
(b) of a bill of lading, delivery order, warrant 
for goods, or other mercantile document of 
title to goods ; 
(c) of a policy of insurance; 
(d) of securities of the Central Government. 
Five rupees or such smaller amount 
u may be chargeable under 
clauaea (a) to (c) of this Arti-
cle. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Stamp Act, 1899. 
(Shri Morarji Desat, 
Minister of Finance.) 