DiU NO.5' of 1962 
THE CUSTOMS BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 15'm JUNE, 1962) 
.(' 
¥. il-< 
~\ 
.' ... 

CLAUSES 
1. 
2. 
THE CUSTOMS BILL, 1962 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
Plu!:r..IMINARY 
Short title, extent and commencement. 
Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
OrnCERS 01' CUSTOMS 
3. Classes ot of!icers of customs. 
4. Appointment of officers of customs. 
5. Powers of officers of customs. 
6. Entrustment of functions of Board and customs officers QD 
certain other officers. 
CHAPTER III 
APPoINTMENT 01' CUSTOMS PORTS, AIRPORTS, WAREHOUSING STATIONS, J:'l'C. 
7. Appointment of customs ports, airports, etc. 
8. Power to approve landing places and specify limits of 
customs area. 
9. Power to declare places to be warehousing stations. 
10. Appointment of boarding stations. 
CHAptER IV 
PRomBmoNS ON IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION 01' GOODS 
11. Power to prohibit importation or exportation of goods. 
CHAPTER V 
LEVY OF, AND EXEMPTION FROM, CUSTOMS DUTIES 
12. Dutiable goods. 
13. Importer to pay duty on pilferred goods. 
14. Valuation of goods for purposes of assessment. 
15. Date for determination of rate of duty and tariff valuation of 
imported goods. 
16. Date for determination of rate of duty and tariff valuation of 
export goods. 

.... r.t .. !' .! ... .". .•. :r~" •• " ••.• l.CZiJiNI#.!."J~'i. ... ~, .. _.,,,_, , ..•• ":"."" ... ~.~.= ... ii!ill""_i _______ ... '.5.., •• ' __ ,..IiIio'r"'5""rt,.." •• iiii'.i,';ii,,"oft;;;;;;;;:ZS __ _ 
{iO 
CLAUSBS .. ~.d 
17. Assessment of duty. 
18. Provisional assessment of duty. 
19. Determination of duty where goods consist of articles lia~ 
to cillferent rates of duty. 
20. Re-importation of goods produced or manufactured in India. 
21. Goods derelict, wreck, etc. 
22. Abatement of duty on damaged. or deteriorated goods. 
23. Remission of duty on lost, destroyed or abandoned goods. 
24. Power to make rules for denaturing or mutilation of 'loads. 
25. Power to grant exemption from duty. 
26. Refund of export duty in certain cases. 
27. Claim for refund of duty. 
28. Notice for payment of duties not levied, short-levied or 
erroneously refunded. 
CHAPTER VI 
PRoVISIONS RELATING TO CONVEYANCBS CARR'YING IIoIPORTr.D OR EXPORT 
GOODS 
29. Arrival of vessels and aircrafts in India. 
30. Delivery of import manifest or import report. 
31. Imported ,goods not to be unloaded from vessel until entry 
inwards granted. 
32. Imported goods not to be unloaded unless mentioned in 
import manifest or import report. 
33. Unloading and loading of goods at approved places only. 
34. Goods not to be unloaded or loaded except under supervision 
of customs officer. 
35. Restrictions on goods being water-borne. 
36. Restrictions on unloading and loading of goods on holidays, 
etc. 
37. Power to board conveyances. 
38. Power to require production of documents and ask questions. 
39. Export goods not to be loaded on vessel until entry-outwards 
granted. 
~. Export goods not to be loaded unless duly passed by proper 
officer . 
.n. Delivery of export manifest or export report. 
42. NI) conveyance to leave without written order. 
43. Exemption of certain classes of conveyances from certain 
provisions of this Chapter. 
CHAPTER VII 
CI...EARANCE OF IMPORTED GOODS AND. EXPORT GOODS 
4ot:. Chapter not to apply ~o J:?aggage and postal articles. 
• 1 

( iii ) 
Clearance of imported goods 
45. Restrictions on custody and removal of imported goods. 
46. Entry of goods on importation. 
4'1. Clearance of goods for home consumption. 
48. Procedure in caSe of goods not cleared, warehoused, or 
transhipped within two months after unloading. 
49. Storage of imported goods in warehouse pending clearance. 
Clearance of export good~ 
50. Entry of goods for exportation. 
51. Clearance of goods for exportation. 
CHAPl'ER VIII 
GOODS IN TRANSIT 
52. Chapter not to apply to baggage, postal articles and stores. 
53. Transit of goods in same vessel or aircraft. 
54. Transhipment of goods without payment of duty. 
55. Entry, etc., of transitted or transhipped goods on arrival at 
customs port or customs airport. 
56. Transport of certain classes of goods subject to prescrihM 
conditions. 
57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
M. 
fI~. 
'1~. 
71'. 
72. 
'13. 
CHAPTER IX 
WAREHOUSING 
Appointing of public warehouses. 
Licensing of private warehouses. 
Warehousing bon,,9. 
Permission for de'flosit of goods in a warehouse. 
Period for whiclt goods may remain warehoused. 
Control over 1Itlirehoused goods. 
Payment of rent and warehouse chnrges. 
Owner's right to deal with warehoused goods. 
Manufacture and other operations in relation to goods in a 
warehouse. 
Power to exempt imported materials used in the manufaetUft 
of goods in warehouse. 
Removal of goods from one warehouse to another. 
Clearance of warehoused goods for home consumption. 
Clearance of warehoused goods for eX!'Qrtation. 
Allowance in case of volatile goods. 
Goods not to be taken out of warehouse ~cept as provided 
by this Ad. . , 
Goods improperly removed from warehouse, ete. 
Cancellation and return of warehousing bond. 

CLAuSES 
74. 
75. 
71. 
(iv) 
CHAPTER X 
DRAWBACK 
Drawback allowable on re-export of duty-paid goods. 
Drawback on imported materials used in the manufacture of 
goods which are exported. 
Prohibition and regulation of drawback in certain Casel. 
CHAPl'ER XI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING BAGGAGE, GOODS IMPORTED OR EXPORTED BY 
POST, AND STORES 
Baggage 
77. Declaration by owner of baggage. 
78. Determination of rate of duty and tariff valuation in respect 
of baggage. 
79. Bona fide baggage exempted from duty. 
80. Temporary detention of baggage. 
81. Regulations in respect of baggage. 
Goods imported or e:cported by post 
82. Label or declaration accompanying goods to be treated 81 
entry. 
83. Rate of duty and tariff valuation in respect of goods imported 
or exported by post. 
84. Regulations regarding goods imported or to be exported by 
post. 
Stores 
85. Stores may be allowed to be warehoused without assessment 
to duty. 
86. Transit and transhipment of stores. 
87. Imported stores may be consumed on board a foreign going 
vessel or aircraft. 
88. Application of section 69 and Chapter X to stores. 
89. Stores to be free of export duty. 
90. Concessions in respect of imported stores for the Navy. 
CHAPl'ER XII 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO COASTAL GOODS AND VESSELS CARRYING COASTAL 
GOODS 
91. Chapter not to apply to baggage and stores. 
92. Entry of coastal goods. 
98. Coastal goods not to be loaded until bill relating thereto II 
passed, etc. 
H. Clearance of coastal goodp a~ destin41tioD. 
J 

Iv) 
CLAusES 
95. Master of a coasting vessel to carry an advice book. 
96. Loading and unloading of coastal goods at customs port or 
coastal port only. 
97. No coasting vessel to leave without written order. 
98. Application of certain provisions of this Act to coastal goods, 
etc. 
99. Power to make rules in respect of coastal goods and coasting 
vessels. 
CHAPTER XIII 
SEARCHES, SEIZURE AND ARREST 
100. Power to search suspected persons entering or leaving India, 
etc. 
101. Power to search suspected persons in certain other eases. 
102. Persons to be searched may require to be taken before 
Gazetted Officer of Customs or Magistrate. 
103. Power to screen or X-ray bodies of suspected persons for 
detecting secreted goods. 
1M. Power to arrest. 
105. Power to search premises. 
106. Power to stop and search conveyances. 
107. Power to examine persons. 
108. Power to summon persons to give evidence and produce 
documents. 
109. Power to require production of order permitting clearance of 
goods imported by land. 
118. Seizure of goods, documents and things. 
CHAPTER XIV 
CONFISCATION OF GOODS AND CONVEYANCES AND IMPOSmON or PENALTIES 
111. Confiscation of improperly imported goods, etc. 
112. Penalty for improper importation of goods, etc. 
113. Confiscation of goods attempted to be improperly exported, 
etc. 
114. Penalty for attempt to export goods improperly, etc. 
115. Confiscation of conveyances. 
116. Penalty for not accounting for goods. 
117. Penalties for contravention, etc. not expressly mentioned. 
118. Confiscation of packages and their contents. 
119. Confiscation of goods used for concealing smuggled goods. 
120. Confiscation of smuggled goods notwithstanding any change 
in form, etc. 
121. Confiscation of sale-proceeds of smuggled goods. 
122. Adjudication of confiscations and penalties. 
123. Burden of proof in certain cases. 
124. Issue of show-cause notice before confiscation of goods, etc. 

(vi ) 
CLAUSES 
125. Option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation. 
126. On confiscation, property to vest in Central Government. 
127. Award of confiscation or penalty by customs officers not to 
interfere with other punishments. 
CHAPI'ER XV 
ApPEALS AND REVISION 
128. Appeals. 
129. Deposit, pending appeal, of duty demanded or penalty levied. 
130. Powers of revision of Board and Collector of Customs. 
131. Revision by Central Government. 
CHAPTER XVI 
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTIONS 
132. False declaration, false documents, etc. 
133. Obstruction of officer of customs. 
134. Refusal to be X-rayed. 
135. Evasion of duty or prohibitions. 
136. Offences by officers of customs. 
137. Cognizance of offences. 
138. Offences to be tried summarily. 
139. Presumption as to documents in certain cases. 
140. Offences by companies. 
CHAPrER xvn 
MISCELLANEOUS 
141. Conveyances and goods in a customs area subject to control 
. of officers of customs. 
142. Recovery of sums due to Government. 
143. Power to allow import or export on execution of bonds in 
certain cases. 
144. Power to take samples. 
145. Owner to perform operations incidental to compliance ,with 
customs law. 
146. Custom house agents to be licensed. 
14'1. Liability of principal and agent. 
148. Liability of agent appointed by the person-in-charge of a 
conveyance. 
149. Amendme~t of documents. 
150. Procedure for sale of goods and application of sale--proceeds .. 
151. Certain officers required to assist oftlcers of customs. 
152. Delegation of powers. 
153. Service of order. decision. etc. 
154. Correction of clerical errorB,etc. 

CUUII8 
155. 
158. 
157. 
158. 
159. 
160. 
161. 
(vlU 
Protection of action taken under the Act. 
General power to make rules. 
General power to make regulations. 
Provisions with respect to rules and regulations. 
Rules and certain notifications to be laid before Parliament. 
Repeal and savings. 
Removal of difficulties. 
'tHE SCHEDULE. 

u of 19340 
<4 of 19~ 
5 
10 
am NO.5' el I," 
THE CUSTOMS BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
&0 cofUolidate and amend the law rel4ting to customl. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAP'.CER I 
PREl..IMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Customs Act, 1962. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short tilk. 
extent In.1 
commence· 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- meat. 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definition •• 
(1) "aircraft" has the same meaning as in the Aireraft Act, 
1934; 
(2) "assessment" includes provisional assessment, re-assess-
ment and any order of assessment in which the duty assessed is 
nil; 
15 (3) "baggage" includes unaccompanied baggage but does not 
include motor vehicles; 
(4) "bill of entry" means a bill of E'ntry referred to in section 
46; 
(5) "bill of export" means a bill of export referred to in 
section 50; 
(6) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue constituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; 
(7) "coastal goods" means goods, other than imported goods, 
transported in a vessel from one port in India to another; 
(8) "Collector of Customs" includes an AdditioDl81 Collector 
of Customs; 
(9) "conveyance" includes a vessel, an aircraft and a veJucIe; 
937 (F' T C 1 

(10) "customs airport" means any airport appointed under 
e1auae (a) of section 7 to be a customs airport; 
(11) "customs area" means the area of a customs station and 
includes any area in which imported goods or export gOMs are 
ordinarily kept before clearance by Customs Authorities; S 
(12) "custc "ns port" means any port appointed under clauae 
(a) of section 'i to be a customs port; 
(13) "custo:ns station" means any customs port, custOml 
airport or land customs station; 
(Jf) "f~uttable goods" means any goods which are chargeable 10 
to duty and 011 which du.ty 1m not been paid; 
(15) "duty" means a duty of customs leviable under this Act; 
(16) "entry" in relation to goods means an entry made in a 
bill of entry. shipping bill or bill of export and includes in the 
case of goods imported or to be exported by post, the entry IS 
refened toiJlsecUon 82 or the entry made under the regulations 
znacie under section 84; 
(17) "examination", in relation to any goods, includes mea-
surement and weighment thereof; 
(18) "export", with ita grammatical variations and cognate 20 
expressions, meana ~ out of India to a place outside India; 
(19) "export goods" means any goods which are to be taken 
out ~ India to a place outside India; 
(20) "~porter", inre\ation to any goods at any time between 
their entry for export and the time when they are exported, In- 2S 
cludesany owner or any person holding himself out to be the 
9~": 
(21) "foreign-going vessel or aircraft" means any vessel or 
air-oreft for the time beblg engaged. in the carriage of goods or 
,*,,1QIer& between any port or airport in India and any port or 30 
airport outside India. whether touching any intermediate POrt or 
aiQort in India or not, and includes-
(i) any naval vessel of a foreign Government taking 
part in any nayal exercises; 
(ii) any vessel engaged in fishing or any other operations 3S 
0Iltstde the territorial waters of India; 
(iii) any vessel or aircraft proceeding to a place outside 
India for any purpose whatsoever; 
(22) "goods" includes-
~" vessels, aircrafts and vehicles: 
(,b) ~; 
(c) ~ge~ 
(d) currency and negotiable instruments; ad 
(e) any other kind of moveable pro~y; 

• (23) "import", with its grammatical variations and cognati 
expressions, means bringing into India from a plaee outside India; 
(24) "import manifest" or "import report" m,ans the 
manifest or report required to be delivered under section 30; 
S (25) "imported goods" means any goods bl'Ought into lDdiIl 
from a place outside India but does not include goods which have 
been cleared for home consumption; 
(26) "importer", in relation to any goods at an~ time bet~ 
ween th~r importation 8Jld the time when they are eloared for 
10 ,home copsumption, includes any owner or any person holtting 
himself out to be the importer; 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
40 
(27) "India" includes the territorial waters of Indiaj 
(28) "Indian customs waters" means the waters e:JC:tencqn, 
into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured trom 
the appropriate base line on the coast of India and includes ,ny 
bay, gulf, harbour, creek or tidal river; 
(29) "land customs station" means any place appomted 
under clause (b) of section 7 to be a land custoIP.$ statio~; 
(30) "marl~et lJrice", in relation to any goods. meMBa the 
wholesa~ price of such g()()ds in t~ ordinary OQllnH' of. tfade in 
India; 
(31) "person-in-cbBrge" means,-
(a) in relation to a vessel, the master of the vessel; 
(b) in relation to an aircraft, the commander or piJ.ot-lD. 
charge of. the aircraft; 
(c) in relation to a railway train, the conductor, gua,d« 
other person having the chief direction of the train; 
(d) in relation to any other cpnveyance, th~ driver or 
other person-in-charge of the conveyance; 
(32) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made 
under this Act; 
(33) "prohibited goods" means any goods the import or 
export of which is subject to any prohibition under this Act. or 
any other law for the time being in force but does not Include' 
any such goods in respect of which the oonc:liUona 1R'b~*. to 
which the goods are permitted to 'be imported or expo~ h.ve 
been complied with; 
(34) "proper officer" in relation to any functions to be per-
formed under this Act, means the officer of customs who is assign-
ed those functions by the Board or the Collector of Customs; 
(35) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Board· 
under any provision of this Act; 
(16) "rules" meaDI tile rules mad. by> the· Ceatnl Gev",,· 
ment. under aDy· provision, of tWa· Act; 

ClMsclof 
ofllccn of 
cu.toml. 
Appomt-
ment of 
olleen tIL 
cuatoml. 
powers of 
oacers of 
cUlltOms. 
(37) "shipping bill" means a shipping bill referred to in 
section 50; 
(38) "stores" means goods for use in a vessel or aircraft and 
includes fuel and spare parts and other articles of equipment, 
whether or not for immediate fitting; S 
(39) "smuggling", in relation to any goods, means any act or 
omission which will render such goods liable to confiscation under 
section 111 or section 113; 
(40) "tarift value", in relation to any goods, means the tariff 
valued fixed in respect thereof under sub-section (2) of section 10 
14; 
. (41) "value", in rellation to any goods, means the value 
thereof determineCl in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (1) of section 14; 
(42) "vehicle" means conveyance of any kind used on land S 
and includes a railway vehicle; I 
,(0) "warehouse" means a pUblic warehouse appointed under 
section 57 or a private warehouse licensed under section 58; 
(44) ««warehoused gooda" means goods deposited. in a 
warehouse; 
(fS) "warehousing station" mean. 
warehousing station under section 9. 
20 
a place declared as a 
CHAPTER II 
OFFICERS OF CUSTOMS 
3. There shall be the following classes of. omcers of customs. 2S 
namely:-
(a) Collectors of Customs; 
(b) Deputy Collectors of Customs; 
(c) Assistant Collectors of Customs; and 
(d) such other class of officers of customs as may be appoint. 30 
ed for the purposes of this Act. 
'.(1) The Central Government may appoint such persons as it 
thinks fit to be officers of customs. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
Central Government may authorise the Board, a Collector of Customs 35 
or a Deputy or Assistant Collector of Customs to appoint officers of 
customs below the rank of Assistant Collector of Customs., 
5. (1) Subject to such· conditions and limitations as the .Board may 
impose, an officer of customs may exercise the powers and discharge 
the duties conferred or imposed on him under this Act. 40 
(2) An oftieer: ()fcustom,)'may eeerciwe the pmvers 'and discharge 
the duties conferred or imposed under thi.Acl on any other oftlcer of 
eUltoms who is subordinate to him. . 

5 
10 
IS 
• S. The Central Government may, by notification in the Officiai Bntru.~ent 
Gazette, entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to any officer ~~ ~JOI1I 
of the Central or the State Government or a local authority any and customs 
functions of the Board or any officer of customs under this Act. ~~J: o~~er 
officcn, 
CHAPrER III 
APPoINTMENT OF CUSTOMS PORTS, AIRPORTS, W ARBHOUSIHG STATIONS, ETC, 
7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Appoint-
Gazette appoint- ment of , customs 
pom, air-
(a) the ports and airports which alone shall be customs ports pom, etc. 
or customs airports for the unloading of imported goods and the 
loading of export goods or any class of such goods; 
(b) the places which alone shall be land customs stations for 
the clearance of goods imported or to be exported By land or 
inland water or any class of such goods; 
(c) the routes by which alone goods or any class of goods 
specified in the notification may pass by land or inland water into 
or out of India, or to or from any land customs station from or 
to any land frontier; 
(d) the ports which alone shall be coastal ports for the 
carrying on of trade in coastal goods or any class of such goods 
with all or any specified ports in India, . 
I. The Collector of. Customs may- Power to 
(a) approve proper places in any customs port or customs approve 
airport or coastal port for the unloading and loading of goods or ~=8and 
25 b~~~~; ~ limIt. of 
(b) specify the limits of any customs area. custom. 
area, 
t. The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare Power to 
Places to be warehousing stations at which alone public warehouses delacJarct b , pccsoe 
may be appointed and private warehouses may be hcensed. ~housinl 
staUons, 
10. The Collector of Customs may, by notification in the Official Appoint-
30 Gazette, appoint, in or near an~ customs ~ort, a boarding station for ::'~~::g 
the purpose of boarding of, or dIsembarkation from, vessels by oftlcers stations, 
of customs, 
CHAPrER IV 
PROHIBITIONS ON IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION OF GOODS 
35 11. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary Po~r to 
10 to do for any of the purposes specified in sub-section (2), it may, prohirtabjtt' 
h'b' 'th b I I ImPO Jon by notification in the Official Gazette, pro I It el er a so ute y or o,r exports-
subject to such conditions (to be fulfilled before or after clearance) ;:d:.f 

as may be specified in the notification, the impGrt or expol't of guoda 
of any specifted description. 
(2) The purposes merred. to in sub.osection (1) are the follow-
ing:-
(a) the maintenance of the security of India; S 
(b) the maintenance of public order a~d standards of decency 
or morality; 
(c) the prevention of smuggling; 
(d) the prevention of shortage of goods of any description; 
(e) the conservation of foreign exchange and the safeguard- 10 
ing of balance of payments; 
(I) the prevention of injury to the economy of the country 
by the uncontrolled import or export of gold or silver; 
(g) the prevention of surplus of any agricultural product or 
the product ot fisheries; IS 
(h) the maiIitenance of standards for the classification, 
grading or marketing of goods in international trade; 
(i) the establishment of any industry; 
(j) the prevention of serious injury to domestic production 
of goods of any description; 20 
(k) the protection of human, animal or plant life or health; 
(1)' the protection of' national treasures of artistic, historic or 
arclueological value; 
{m) the conservation of exhaustible natural resources; 
(n) the protection of patents, tmde marks and copyrights; 2S 
(0) the prevention of deceptive practicesj 
(p) the carrying on of foreign trade in any goods by the 
State, or by a Corporation owned Or controlled by the State to 
the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens of India; 
(q) the fulfilment of obligations under the Charter ot the 30 
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and 
security; 
(r) the compliance of imported goods with any laws which 
are applicable to similar goods produced or manufactured in 
I.ndia; 
(8) the prevention of dissemination of documents contaIn-
ing any matter whichprejuaijeially affeets .friendly relations with 
any foreign State or is derogatory to national prestiae; 
35 

5 
, 
(t) the pr.evention of the contravention of any law for the 
time being In forte; and 
(u) any other purpose conducive to the interesta of the 
teaeral public. 
CHAP1'ER V 
LJwy OF, AIm EXniPTION FROM, Cl1ST01\.IS Dt1TIIIIS 
lZ. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, or any other law Dutiable 
for the time being in force, duties of customs shall be levied at such roodl. 
rates as may be specified under the Indian Tarift Act, 1934, or any 
10 other law for the time being in force, on goods imported into, or 
exported from, India. 
(2) The pr.ovisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of-
(4) all goods belonging to the Central Government; and 
(b) all goods belonging to the Government of a State and 
15 used for. the purposes cf a trade or business of any kind carried 
on by, or on behalf of, that Government, or of any operations 
connected with such trede or business; 
as they apply in respect of goods not belonging to any Government. 
13. If any imported goods are pilferred after the unloading thereof Impod:ter to 
20 and before clearance for home consumption Dr deposit in a warehouse, ~lretrJ on 
the importer shall be liable to pay the duty leviable on such goods. loods. 
14. (1) For the purposes of the Indian Tariff Act, 1934, or any Valuatir of 
other law for the time being in force whereunder a duty of customs ~r of 
is chargeable on any goods by reference to their value, the value of IIICalmeDt. 
25 such goods shall be deemed to be--
(4) the normal price at which such or like goods are sold, 
or offered for sale, for delivery at the time and place of importa-
tion or exportation, as the case may be, in the ordinary course of 
iIlternational trade, where the seller and the buyer have no 
interest in the business of each other and the price is the sole 
consideration for the sale or offer for sale: 
(b) where the normal price is not ascertainable, the nearest 
ascertainable equivalent of such price determined in accordance 
witll the rules made in this behalf. 
3S (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if 
the Central Govemment is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient 
so to do it may, by. notification in the Official Gazett~, fix tariff values 
for any class of imported goods or export goods, havmg regard to t~e 
trend of value of such or like goods, and where any such tarIff 
40 values are fix:ed, the duty shall be cbarpable with reference to 
such tariff value. 

• 
~:"'I;"'" 15 • .(1) The rate of duty and tarift valuation, if any, applicable to 
of rate of any imported goods, shall be the rate and valuation in force,-
duty and 
tari1f valua- (a) in the case of goods entered for home consumption under 
tiOD of im-ported goods, section 46, on the date on which a bill of entry in respect of such 
Daile for 
determina-
tion of rate 
of duty and 
tariff valua-
tion of ex-
port goodl. 
Aaaeument 
ef duty. 
aoods is presented under that sectiOll; 5 
(b) in the case of goods cleared from a warehouse under 
section 68, on the date on which the goods are actually removed 
from the warehouse; 
(e) in the case of any other goods, on the date of payment of 
duty: 10 
Provided that if a bill of entry has been presented before the date 
of entry inwards of the vessel by which the goods are imported, the 
bill of entry shall be deemed to have been presented on the date of 
such entry inwards. 
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to baggace and IS 
goods imported by post. 
16. (1) The rate of duty and tariff valuation, if any, applicable 
to any export goods, shall be the rate and valuation in force,-
(a) in the case of goods entered for export under section 50, 
on the date on which a shipping bill or a bill of export in resped 20 
of such goods is presented under that section; 
(b) in the case of any other goods, on the date of payment 
of duty: 
Provided that if the shipping bill has been presented before the 
date of entry outwards of the vessel by which the goods are to be 25 
exported, the shipping bill shall be deemed to have been presented 
on the date of such entry outwards. 
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to baggage and 
goods exported by post. 
17. (1) After an importer has entered any imported goods under 30 
section 46 or an exporter has entered any export goods under section 
50 the imported goods or the export goods, as the case may be, or 
such part thereof as may be necessary may, without undue delay, be 
(>xamined and tested by the proper offlcer. 
(2) Mter such examination and testing, the duty, if any, leviablt" 35 
on such goods shall, save as otherwise provided in section 85, be 
assessed. 
(3) For the purpose of assessing duty under sub-section (2), the 
proper otftcer may require the importer, exporter or any other person 
to produce any contract, broker's note, policy of insurance, catalogue 40 

" 
or other document whereby the duty leviable on the imported .ood8 
or export goods, as the case may be, can be ascertained, and to lurnilb 
any information required for such ascertainment which it is in bis 
power to produce or furnish, and thereupon the importer, exporter 
S or such other person shall produce such dooument and furnish luch 
information. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contaIned in this section, imported 
goods or export goods may, prior to the examination or (estillg thereof, 
be permitted by the proper officer to be assesser~, to duty on the besis 
10 of the statements made in the entry relat;',~ thereto and the 
documents produced and the information furnished under sub-section 
(3); but if it is found subsequently on examina:ion or testing of the 
goods or otherwise that any statement in such entry or document or 
any information so furnished is not true in respect of any matter 
IS relevant to the assessment, the goods may, without prejudice to any 
other action which may be taken under this Act, be re-aaaeued to 
duty. 
20 
30 
18. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act but with- = 
out prejudice to the provisions contained in section 46- of dUl,. 
'(a) where the proper officer is satisfied that an importer 01 
exporter is unable to produce any document or furnish any 
information necessary for the assessment of duty on the imported 
goods or the export goods, as the case may be; or 
(b) where the proper officer deems it necessary to subject 
any imported goods or export goods to any chemical or other test 
for the purpose of assessment of duty thereon; or 
(c) where the importer or the exporter has produced all the 
necessary documents and furnished full information for the 
assessment of duty but the proper officer deems it necessary to 
make further enquiry for assessing the duty; 
the proper officer may direct that the duty leviable on such goods 
may, pending the production of such documents ?r furnishing of such 
tnformation or completion of such test or enquIry, be assessed pro-
visionally if the importer or the exporter, as the case may be, 
3S furnishes such security as the proper officer deems fit for the pay· 
ment of the deficiency, if any, between the duty finally assessed and 
the duty provisionally assessed. 
(2) When the duty leviable on such goods is assessed ftnaUy in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, then-
(a) in the case of goods cleared for home consumption or 
portation the amount paid shall be adjusted against the duty 
~x ally asse~sed and if. the amount so paid falls short of, or is in 
e:cess of, the duty finally assessed, the importer or the exporter 
37 (B)LS-3 

.. 
"JOt the 'goods shan pay the deficieneyor be entitled to a refund, 
as the' ease may be; 
(b) ·in the case of wareho1lSed goods, the proper officer may, 
where the duty finally assessed, is in excess of the duty provi-
sionallyassessed, require the importer to execute a bond, binding S 
himself in a sum equal to twice the amount of the excess duty. 
~:e~;, 1ft. ~t· as otherwite }Srovitied in any law for the time belng 
where goodaift . foree, where goods eonSHt of a set Gf artteles, duty f'hall be 
= U!ble ~lculated as 'foDoW'S:-
:ta.u:;=. (4) articles liable to duty with reference to quantity shall 10 
be chugeableto that duty; 
'(11) article's liable to lil.lty Witb refewnce to value shall, if 
they ;are Uableto 'duty at the , .. me rate, -be chargeable to duty 
at :that Tate, and if they ·are liable to duty at dilferent rates,· be 
ehargeable to duty at the highest of such rates; IS 
.(e) articles not liable to duty ~hal1 be chargeable to duty at 
the rate at which articles liable to duty with reference to value 
are liable under clause (b): 
ProYided tbat,-
'(tI) aeeessorles of, and .pare parts or maintenance and 20 
repairing implements for, any article whiehsatisfy the conditions 
.specified in the rules made in· this behalf shall be chargeable at 
theaame rate of duty as that article; 
(b) if 'the tmperter produees evidence to the satisfaction of 
the proper oftlcer regarding the value of any of the articles liable 24 
to different rates ofdu~, such article shall be chargeable to duty 
aparately at the rate applicable to it. 
R.c~na- ZO. (1) If goods produced or manufactured in India be imported 
~: into"lntlia after exportation· therefrom, such goods shall be liable to 
IDIUfIIctu~ duty and be subjeet to all the conditions and restrictions, 30 
cd ill IDdiI. if any, to which goods of the Uke kind and value not 80 produeed nr 
ftUlntifacttn'ed are liable or '·subJect, on the Importation thereof: 
PreviGed that if -sueh importation takes place within three yearR 
after the exportation of such goods and it is ~hOl\lVll to the satisfaction 
of the Assistant Collector of Custom$ that the goods are the same 3S 
which were exported, the goods may be admitted-
(al in any case where at the time.of exportation of the goods, 
drawback of -any customs ,or excise duty levied by the Union or 
both wal ,allowed. on payment of custom!! duty equal to the 
-amount of such drawback; 40 

10 
a 
~b). in any;C8Ie where at the time of.·uportatit)hof.the ~ 
ckawback of any exeile duty levied.by & State .... ~aU ..... 
on payment of customs duty equal ~suchexcile.·da.tyJ.eviab~&t 
the ~ime andj>lace of importatipn ot the goods; 
(c) in any case where the goods were ~. in, hcmd, 
without payment of-
,(i) the custom& duty leviable OIl the iulported. materials, 
if any, used in the manufacture of the aooc:ll,.or 
,(ii) the excise duty leviable on the indii~nou,s materials, 
if any, used in the manufacture of the iODds, or 
(iii) the exciae duty, if any, leviable on the. good8,., 
on payment of customs duty equal to the aaregate amount of 
all such duties calculated at the rates prevailin8 at the time 81Id 
place of importation of the loods; 
15 (d) in any other case, without payment of duty. 
(2) For the purposes of this section ioads shallbe deemed to have 
been produced or manufactured in Illdia, if at least twenty-five per 
cent. of the total cost of production. or ·maDufacture of the ~ has 
been incurred. in India .. 
20 21:. All ioods, derelict, jetsam, flotsam and wreck brought· or ~ 
coming into India, shall be dealt with as if they were imported into ~, 
India, unless it be shown.to thEl satWaction olthElPJ'OP,er~· that etc. • 
they are entitled to be admitteci' d.uty~free UDQer this.~t. 
22. (1) Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the AssWant Abatement 
25 Collector ot Customs- of ItUty·OIt 
. ==-
30 
(a) that any ilnpor~ goods: had. ,*0. dwPapd: or wet· 
deteriorated at any time before or during the u.nlQadina· ot- the aoods·· 
goods in India; or 
(b) that any imported goods, other than warehoused . ..,acB, 
had been damaged at any time after the unlDading thereof ill 
India but before their examination under section 17, on a~ount 
of any accident not due to any wilful act, negligence or default 
of the importer, his enu>loyee or agent; or 
(c) that any warehoused goods had been damaged· at an, 
time before clearance for home consumption on account' of: .... )' 
accident not due to any wilful act, negligence or defauh of the 
owner, his employee or agent, 
allc:h soods shall be chargeable to duty iQ accordance with U.e 
provisions of sub-section (2). 
40 (2) The duty to be charged. on the goods referrecl to in ,u~UGn 
(I) shall bear the same proportion to the duty c:harieablft, 01)- tJw 

aooda bef4re the damage or deterioration which the value ot tht 
dim_led. or deterioratec:l goods bears to the value of the goods before 
the damage or deterioration. 
(3). For the purposes of this section, the value of damaged or 
d.eterioratec:l goods may be ascertained by either of the followma j 
methods at the option of ~e owner:-
.«(1) the value of such goods may be ascertained by ~e 
proper officer, or 
(b) such goods may be sold by the proper officer by public 
auction or by tender, or with the consent of the owner in any 10 
other manner, and the gross sale proceeds shalJ be deemed to 
be .the value of such aoods . 
., , 'Ill II. (1) Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Assistant 
f4 duty OIl Collector of Customs that any imported goods have been lost other-
=---:::: wise than by pilferage or have been destroyed, at any time before IS 
..... IDOdL clearance for home consumption, the Assistant Collector of Customs 
shall remit the duty on such goods. 
(2) The owner of any imported goods may at any time before 
clearance of the goods for home consumption, relinquish his title to 
the goods if they have not been pilierred and thereupon the Assistant 20 
Collector of Customs shan remit the duty thereon and sell the goods: 
Provided that if the goods are not saleable, the Assistant Collec-
tor may require the owner to destroy them. 
Power 10 It. The Central Government may make rules for permitting at 
... ruIea the request of the owner the denaturing or mutilation of imported 25 
:. ~ goods which are ordinarily used for more than one purpose so as 
lDIIdIadoo of to render them unfit for one or more of such purposes; and where 
..... any goods are sc denatured or mutilated they shall be chargeable 
to duty at such rate as would be applicable if the goods had been 
imported in the denatured or mutilated form. 30 
II. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary 
in the public interest so to do, it Play, by notification in the OfDcial 
Gazette, exempt generally either absolutely or subject to mch 
c:onditions (to be fulfUled before or after clearance) as may be 
tpeCifled in the notification goods of any specified description from 35 
the whole or any p:u1; of duty of customs leviable thereon. . 
(2) H the Cent:al Government is satisfied that it is necessary in 
the public interest so to do, it may, by special order in each case, 
exempt from tne payment of duty, under circumstance~ of alf'excep-
Uonal nature to be atated in such ordet, any goods on which duty 40 
II leviable. , .It ,:,.,. 

11 
U. Where on the exportation of any goods any duty has beeli RefUDd of 
paid, such duty shall be refunded to the person by whom Dr on whose iexport !1m, 
behalf it was paid, if- :.:~ 
(a) the goods are returned to such person otherwise than by 
way of re-sale; 
(b) the goods are re-imported within one year trom the date 
of exportation; and 
(c) an application for refund of such duty is made before the 
expiry of six months from the date on which the proper officer 
10 makes an order for the clearance of the goods. 
27. (1) Any person claiming refund of any duty paid by him in c.a for 
pursuance of an order of assessment made by an oftlcer of customs :;:::'d of 
lower in rank than an Assistant Collector of Customs may make an 
application for refund of such duty to the Assistant Collector of 
15 Customs before the expiry of six months from the date of payment 
of duty: 
Provided that the limitation of six months shall not apply where 
any duty has been paid under protest. 
ExpZanation.-Where any duty is paid provisionally under section 
20 18, the period of six months shall be computed from the date of 
adjustment of duty after the final assessment thereof. 
(2) If on receipt of any such application the Assistant Collector 
of Customs is satisfied that the whole or any part of the duty paid 
by the applicant should be refunded to him, he may make an order 
'25 accordingly. 
,(3) Where, as a result of any order passed in appeal or revision 
under this Act, refund of any duty becomes due to any person, the 
proper officer may refund the amount to such person without his 
having to make any claim in that behalf. 
o (4) Save as provided in section 26, no claim for refund of any 
3 duty shall be entertained except in accordance with the provisions of 
this section. 
28. (1) When any duty has not been levied or has been short- Notice for 
levied or erroneously refunded, the proper officer may, within six pa~ of 
35 months from the relevant date, issue notice to the person chargeable~~ Dot 
with the duty which has not been levied or which has been so short- abort-levied 
levied or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, requiring :J:~­
him to show cause why he should not pay the amount specified in the cd. 
notice: 
40 Provided that where any duty has not been levied or has been 
short-levied or has been erroneously refundec:l by reason of collusion 

Mlany,wiltul miMtatement or Buppression of fact&-by the importer Of 
the exporter or the agent or employee of; the importer or exporter, the 
provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as if· the words "within 
six months from the relevant date" were omitted. 
(2) The Assistant Collector of Customs, after couidering the re-· S 
presentation, if any, made by the person to whom notice is issued 
under sub-section (1) shall determine the amount of duty due from 
, such person (not being in excess of the amount specified in the notice) 
and thereupGln suck person shall pay the amGunt so· determined. 
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the expression "relevant 10 
date" means-
(a.) in a case where duty is not· levied, the date on which the 
proper officer makes an order for the clearance of the goods; 
(b) in a case where duty is provisionally assessed under sec-
tion 18, the date of adjustment of duty after the final assessment IS 
thereof; 
(c) in a case where duty has been erroneously refunded, the 
date of refund; 
(d) in any other case, the date of payment of duty. 
CHAPl'ER VI 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO CONVEYANCES CARRYING IMPORTED OR EXPORT 
GOODS 
20 
Arrival of 29. The person-in-charge of a vessel or an aircraft entering India 
:7=.-: from any place outside India shall not cause or permit the vessel or 
ladia. aircraft to call or land- 25 
(G) for the first time after arrival in India; or 
(b) at any time while it is carrying passengers or cargo 
brought in that vessel or aircraft; 
at any place other than a customs part or a customs airport, as· the 
case may be, unless he is compelled to do so by stress· of' weather, 30 
accident or other unavoidable cause. 
~lifttT of. 30. (1) The person-in-charge of a conveyance carrying imported 
=:retrt goods shall, immediately after arrival thereof at a customs station, 
or import deliver to the proper officer, in the case of a vessel or aircraft, an 
report. import manifest, and in the case of a vehicle. an import report, in 3S 
the' prescribed fOl'm: 
Provided that,-
(a) in the case of a vessel any such manifest may be deliver-
ed-to the proper offtcer before the arrivatof the vessel; 

(b) if the proper officer is satisfied that there was suftlcient 
eause for not delivering the import manifest or import report or 
any part thereof immediately after the arrival of the conveyance, 
he may accept it after such arrival. 
"5 (2) The person delivering the import manifest or import report 
shall at the foot thereof make and subscribe to a declar&tionas to 
the truth of its contents. 
(3) If the proper officer is satisfied that the import manifest or 
import report is in any way incorrect or incomplete, and that there 
10 was no fraudulent intention, he may pennit it to be amended or 
, eu.pplemented. 
31. '(1) The master of a vessel shall not pennit the unlo~ding of I:rted t 
any imported goods until an order has' been given by the proper ~o be =_ 
·ofiieer gr.antlng entry inwards' to such vessel. loaded fromn vessel unt 
IS (2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be given until an import = in-
manifest has been delivered or the proper officer ,is 'satisftedthat ,ranted. 
there ,was sufficient cause for not delivering 'it. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the unloading of baggage 
accompanying a passenger or a member of the crew, mail ,bags, 
'ZO animals, perishable goods and hazardous goods. 
3Z. No imparted goods Tequired to be mentioned under the I:rtod 
'regulations in an import manifest or import report shall, except with ~o be DOt 
the pennission of the proper ofticer, be unloaded at any rustoms ::rded 
station unless they are specified in such manifest or report for' being tione: ~-
2S unloaded at that customs station. =rclt 
or import 
report. 
33. Except with the permission of the proper officer, no imported UDloadfna 
goods shall be unloaded, and no export goods shall ,be loaded, at any :~~~ 
place other than a place approved under clause (a) of section 8 for approved 
the unloading or loading of such goods, places only. 
3034. Imported goods shall not be unloaded from. and export goods Goods not 
shall not be loaded on, any conveyance except under the supervision Ig.~~ u:; 
of the proper officer: loaded D-
b :.a" cept under 
Provided that the Board may, y notmcatJOn 10 the Official Guette, N(:rvidoa 
give general permission 'and the proper . officer may in . any particular ~m:st ... 
'35 case give special permission, for ·any goods or class of goods to be r. 
unloaded or loaded without the supervision of the proper officer. 
35. No imported goods shall be water-borne for being landed from Rettrictiona 
any vessel. and no export goods which are not accompanied by a ~hip- :I:,oo:rer-
ping bill, shall be water-borne for being shfpp,:<l, unless the goods are borne. 
40 accompanied by a boat-note in the preseribed'form' 

'us 
Provided that the Board may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, give general permission, and the proper officer may in any 
particular case give special permission, for any goods or any class of 
goods to be water-borne without being accompanied by a boat-note. 
Reatrictions . 
OD unJ.oadin& 36. No Imported goods shall be unloaded from, and no export goods 5 
-r ~ shall be loaded on, any conveyance on any Sunday or on any holiday 
holct.JS~ :t~. observed by the Customs Department or on any other day after the 
Power to 
board COD-
veyaoc:e .. 
working hours, except after giving the prescribed notice and on 
paymen t of the prescribed fees: 
Provided that no fees shall be levied for the unloading and loading 10 
of baggage accompanying a passenger or a member of the crew, and 
mail bags. 
3'. The proper officer may, at any time, board any conveyance 
carrying imported goods or export goods and may remain on such 
conveyance for such period as he considers necessary. IS 
~; to 38. For the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Act, the 
productioD proper officer may require the person-in-charge of any conveyance or 
~e!~~d animal carrying imported goods or export goods to produce any 
ask questions. document and to answer any Questions and thereupon such person 
shall produce such documents and answer such questions. zo 
~~ :.oodl 39. The master of a vessel shall not permit the loading of any 
loaded OD. export goods, other than baggage and mail bags, until an order has 
= until been given by the proper officer granting entry-outwards to such 
outwards vessel. 
.ranted. 
Export teo The person-in-charge of a conveyance shall not permit the 25 
re'1!3: to loading at a customs station- . _ 
;.~ t~ (a) of export goods, other than baggage and mail bags, :.tnless 
proper a shipping bill or bill of export or a bill of transhipment, as the 
offic:er. case may be, duly passe~ by the proper officer, has been handed 
Delivery of 
export 
JI1IIlifcstor 
nport 
report. 
over to him by the exporter; 30 
(b) of baggage and mail bags, unless their export has been 
duly permitted by the proper officer. 
fl, (1) The person-in-charge of a conveyance carrying export goods 
shall, before departure of the conveyance from a customs station, 
deliver to the proper officer in the case of a vessel or aircraft, an 35 
export manifest, and in the cale of a vehicle, an export report, in the 
prescribed form: 
Provided that if the proper officer is satisfied tbat there was suffi-
cient cause for not delivering the export manifest or export report or 
any part thereof before the departure of the conveyance, he may 40 
accept it after such departure. 

(2) The person delivering the export manifest or export report shall 
at the foot thereof make and subscribe to a declaration as to the truth 
of its contents. 
(3) If the proper officer is satisfied that the export manifest or 
S export report is in any way incorrect or incomplete and that thE're 
was no fraudulent intention, he may permit such manifest or report 
to be amended or supplemented. 
42. (1) The person-in-charge of a conveyance which has brought No ccnyey-
any imported goods Or has loaded any export goods at a customs sta- :~o~ leave 
10 tion shall not cause or permit the conveyance to depart from that written 
customs station until a written order to that effect has been given by order. 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
the proper officer. 
(2) No such order shall be given until-
(a) the person-in-charge of the conveyance has answered the 
questions put to him under section 38; 
(b) the provisions of section 41 have been complied with; 
(e) the shipping bills or bills of export, the bills of tranship-
ment, if any, and such other documents as the proper officer may 
require have been delivered to him; 
(d) all duties leviable on any stores consumed in such 
conveyance, and all charges and penalties due in respect of such 
conveyance or from the person-in-charge thereof have been paid 
or the payment secured by such guarantee or deposit of such 
amount as the proper officer may, direct; 
(e) the person-in-charge of the conveyance has satisfied the 
proper officer that no penalty is leviable on him under section 116 
or the payment of any penalty that may be levied upon him 
under that section has been secured by such guarantee or deposit 
of such amount as the proper officer may direct; 
(f) in any case where any export goods have been loaded 
without payment of export duty or in contravention of any provi-
sion of this Act or any other law for the time being ~n forCE: 
relating to export of goods,-
(i) such goods have been unloaded, or 
(ii) where the Assistant Collector of Customs is satisfied 
that it is not practicable to unload such goods, the person-
in-charge of the conveyance has given an undertaking, secur-
ed by such guarantee or deposit of such amount as the ~roper 
officer may direct, for bringing back the goods to India. 
40 43. (1) The provisions of sections 30, 41 and 42 shall not apply to Exempt!on 
a vehicle which carries no goods other than the luggage of its ~L cerl IIlf .... lse.O 
occupants. conftJlnce. from certaia 
proYilioDI of 
thia Cbapter 
937 (B) LS-4. 

18 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, exempt the following classes of conveyances from all or any 
of the provisions of this Chapter-
(a) conveyances belonging to the Government or any foreign 
Government; 5 
(b) vessels and aircrafts which temporarily enter India by 
reason of any emergency. 
CHAPl'ER VII 
CLEARANCE OF IMPORTED GOODS AND EXPORT GOODS 
Chapter not t4. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to (a) baggage, 10 
~~~Y': and (b) goods imported or to be exported by post. 
poltal 
Udc:le •• 
Reatric:tioaa 
OD custody 
and removal 
of imported 
.ood&. 
Bntry of 
looda on importation. 
Clearance of imported goods 
tIi. (1) Save as otherwise provided in any law for the time being 
in force, all imported goods unloaded in a customs area shall remain 
in the custody of such person as may be approved by the Collector 15 
of Customs until they are cleared for home consumption or are ware-
housed or are transhipped in accordance with the provisions of 
Chapter vm. 
(2) The person having custody of any imported goods in a customs 
area, whether under the provisions of sub-section (1) or under any 20 
law for the time being in force,-
(a) shall keep a record of such goods and send a copy thereof 
to the proper officer; 
(b) shall not permit such goods to be removed from the cus-
toms area or otherwise dealt with, except under and in accordance 25 
with the permission in writing of the proper officer. 
t6. (1) The importer of any goods, other than goods intended for 
transit or transhipment, shall make entry thereof by presenting to the 
proper officer a bill of entry for home consumption or warehousing in 
the prescribed form: 30 
Provided that if the importer makes and subscribes to a declaration 
before the proper officer, to the effect that he is unable for want of 
full information to furnish all the particulars of the goods required 
under this sub-~tion, the proper officer may, pending the produc-
tion of such information, permit him, previous to the entry 35 
thereof (a) to examine the goods in the presence of an officer of 
customs, or (b) to deposit the goods in a public warehouse apprlnted 
under section 57 without warehousing the same. 

(2) Save as otherwise permitted by the proper officer, a bill of 
entry shall incl~de all the goods mentioned in the bill of ladina or 
other receipt given by the carrier to the consignor. 
(3) A bill of entry under sub-section (1) may be presented at any 
5 time after the delivery of the import manifest or import report as the 
case may be: 
Provided that the Collector of Customs may in any special circum-
stances permit a bill of entry to be presented before the delivery of 
such manifest or report. 
10 (4) The importer while presenting a bill of entry shall at the foot 
thereof make and subscribe to a declaration as to the truth of the 
contents of such bill of entry and shall, in support of such declaration, 
produce to the proper officer the invoice, if any, relating to the 
imported goods. 
15 (5) If the proper officer is satisfied that the interests of revenue 
are not prejudicially affected and that there was no fraudulent 
intention, he may permit substitution of a bill of entry for home 
consumption for a bill of entry for warehousing or vice-versa. 
47. When the importer of any goods entered for bome consumption Clearanc 
20 has paid the import duty, if any, assessed thereon and any charges ~oods for 
payable under this Act in respect of the same, the proper officer, if ~m;t:::'­
he is satisfied that the goods are not prohibited goods, may make an 
2rder permitting clearance of the goods for home consumption. 
48. If any imported goods are not cleared for home consumption or Procedure 
2S warehoused or transhipped within two months from the date of the cue of 
unloading thereof at a customs station or within such further time ~C:::d~ot 
as the proper officer may allow, such goods may, after notice to the warehoused, 
importer and with the permission of the proper officer be sold by the ~t=:-
30 
35 
person having the custody thereof: two IDCIGth, after un-
Provided that- loadfq. 
(a) animals, perishable goods and hazardous goods may, with 
the permission of the proper officer, be sold at any time; 
(b) arms, ammunition and military stores may be sold at such 
time and place and in such manner as the Central Government 
may direct. 
49. Where in the case of any imported goods, whether dutiable or Stotlle 0 
not entered for home consumption, the Assistant Collector of Cus- importi: 
to~s is satisfied on the application of the importer that the goods ~hou ~ 
cannot be cleared ~ithin a reasonabl~ time, th~ goods may, pending ~~. 
40 clearance, be perm~tted ~~ ~ stored 10 .a ?ubbc w~rehouse, or in a 
private warehouse If faCIlIties for depOSIt III a pubhc warehouse are 
not available; but such goods shall not be deemed to be warehoused 
goods for the purposes of this Act, and accordingly the provisions of 
Chapter IX shall not apply to such goods. 

Entry of 
loads for 
exportation. 
Clearance of ~ goods 
50. (1) The exporter of any goods shall make entry thereof by 
presenting to the proper officer in the case of goods to be exported 
in a vessel or aircraft, a shipping bill, and in the case of goods to be 
exported by land, a bill of export in the prescribed form. 5 
(2) The exporter of any goods, while presenting a shipping bill or 
bill of export, shall at the foot thereof make and subscribe to a 
declaration as to the truth of its contents. 
Oearancc of 51. When the exporter of any goods has paid the export duty, if 
:X~::HJ.. any, assessed thereon, and any charges payable under this Act in 10 
respect of the same, the proper officer, if he is satisfied that the goods 
are not prohibited goods, may make an order permitting clearance 
and loading of the goods for exportation. 
Chapter !lot 
to apply 10 
baggage. 
poatIIl art i-
clee und 
stores. 
Transit (\ 
goods III 
same vet,,:l 
or aircraft. 
CHAPrER VIII 
GOODS IN TRANSIT 
52. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to (a) baggage, 
(b) goods imported by post, and (c) stores. 
53. Subject to the provisions of section 1l, any goods imported in 
15 
a vessel or aircraft and mentioned in the import manifest as for 
transit in the same vessel or aircraft to any port or airport outside 20 
India or any customs port or customs airport may be allowed to be 
so transitted without payment of duty. 
~~'t~f 54. (1) Where any goods imported into a customs port or customs 
goode WJt&\ airport are intended for transhipment, a bill of transhipment shall 
out paymCi,lt ffi . h 'b d f of duty. be presented to the proper 0 cer In t e prescn e orm. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 1l-
(a) where any goods imported into a customs port are 
mentioned in the import manifest as for transhipment to any 
port outside India, or 
25 
(b) where any goods imported into a customs air-port are 
mentioned in the import manifest as for transhipment to any 30 
air-port outside India, 
such goods may be allowed to be so transhipped without payment 
of duty. 

s 
(3) Where any goods imported into a customs port or a customs 
airport are mentioned in the import manifest as for transhipment-
(a) to any major port as defined in the Indian Ports Act 
1908, or the customs airport at Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi or Madras: 
or any other customs port or customs airport which the Board 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
or 
(b) to any other customs port or customs airport, and the 
proper officer is satisfied that the goods are bona fide intended 
10 for transhipment to such customs port or airport, 
the proper officer may allow the goods to be transhipped, without 
payment of duty, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed 
for the due arrival of such goods at the customs port or customs 
airport to which transhipment is allowed. 
IS 55. Where any goods are allowed to be transitted under :section 53 ;r~~i~~ 
or transhipped under sub-section (3) of section 54 to any customs or tranship-
port or customs airport, they shall, on their arrival at such port or frr1!r:s on 
airport, be liable to duty and shall be entered in like manner as goods customs port 
d h fi . t t· th f d h . . or customs are entere on t erst Impor a lOn ereo an t e prOVISIons of this airport. 
20 Act and any rules and regulations shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to such goods. 
56. Imported goods may be transported without payment of duty J;~n 
from one land customs station to another, and any goods may be coodlasses orb If ssu-transported from one part of India to another part through any Jeet to 
25 foreign territory, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed prescrd. ~ed : con /tIon •. 
for the due arrival of such goods at the place of destmation. 
CHAPTER IX 
WAREHOUSING 
17. At any warehousing station, the Assistant Collector of Customs ~f:~~~nc 
30.., appoint public warehouses wherein dutiable goods may be warehouses. 
cleposited without payment of duty . 
.. (1) At any warehousing station, the Assistant Collector of Lic:eming of 
Customs may license private warehouses wherein dutiable goods Privahte . ware ousea. 
Imported by or on behalf of the licensee. or any other Imported 
35 goods in respect of which facilities for deposit in a public warehouse 
are not available, may be deposited without payment of duty. 
(2) The Assistant Collector of Customs may cancel a licence 
granted under sub-section (1)-
(a) by giving one month's notice in writing to the licensee; or 
40 (b) if the licensee has contravened any provision of this Act 
or the rules or regulations or committed breach of any of the 
conditions of the licence: 

Provided that before any licence is cancelled under cla~e (b), 
the licensee shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(3) Pending an enquiry whether a licence granted under sub-
section (1) should be cancelled under clause (b) of sub-section (2), 
tile Assistant Collector of Customs may suspend the licence. S 
,.uebouam. 51. (1) The importer of any dutiable goods which have been 
,.... entered for warehousing and assessed to duty under section 17 or 
aection 18 shall execute a bond binding himself in a sum equal to 
twice the amount of the duty assessed on such goods,-
(eI) to observe all the provisions of this Act and the rules 10 
aDd regulations in respect of such goods; 
(b) to pay on or before a date specified in a notice of demand 
all duties, rent and charges claimable on account of such goods 
UDder this Act, together with interest on the same from the date 
so specified at the rate of six per cent. per annum or such other 15 
rate as is for the time beirtg fixed by the Board; and 
(c) to discharge all penalties incurred for violation of the 
provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations in respect of 
such goods. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Assistant Collector of 20 
Customs may permit an importer to enter into a general bond in 
such amount as the Assistant Collector of Customs may approve in 
respect of the warehousing of goods to be imported by him within III 
specified period. 
(3) A bond executed under this section by an importer in respect 25 
of any goods shall continue in force notwithstanding the tral'lsfer 
of the goods to any other person or the removal of the goods to 
another warehouse: 
Provided that where the whole of the goods or any part thereof 
are transferred to another person, the proper officer may accept a 30 
fresh bond from the transferee in a sum equal to twice the amount 
of duty assessed on the goods transferred and thereupon the bond 
executed by the transferor shall be enforceable only for a sum 
mentioned therein less the amount for which a fresh bond is accepted 
from the transferee. 3S 
PermissIon H. When the proviSions of section 59 have been. complied with in 
!ir dep~t respect of any goods, the proper officer may make an order permit-
• ~~~~~. ting the deposit· of the goods in a warehouse without payment of duty. 
61. Any warehoused goods may be left in the warehouse in which Period for whk:h they are deposited or in any warehouse to which they may be 40 
'':!:n ma, removed, till the expiry of three years after the date on which the 
:=arrehoused proper officer made an order under section 60 permitting the depollt 
of the goods in a warehouse: 

• 
Provided that-
(i) in the case of any goods which are likely to deteriorate, 
the aforesaid period of three years may be reduced by the 
Collector of Customs to such shorter period as he may deem fit; 
5 (ii) in the case of any goods which are not likely to 
deteriorate, the aforesaid period of three years may, on sufficient 
cause being shown, be extended by the Collector of Customs for 
a period not exceeding one year and by the Board for such 
further period as it may deem fit: 
10 Provided further that when the licence for any private warehouse 
is cancelled, the owner of any goods warehoused therein shall, 
within seven days from the date on which notice of such cancella-
tion is given or within such extended period as the proper officer 
may allow, remove the goods from such warehouse to another ware-
IS house or clear them for home consumption or exportation. 
62. (1) All warehoused goods shall be subject to the control of the Control 
Proper officer over ware-. housed 
(2) No person shall enter a warehouse or remove any goods there- loOOs. 
from without the permission of the proper officer. 
20 (3) The proper officer may cause any warehouse to be locked with 
the lock of the Customs Department and no person shall remove or 
break such lock. 
(4) The proper officer shall have access to every part of a ware-
house and power to examine the goods therein. 
25 63. (1) The owner of any warehoused goods shall pay to the Payment of 
warehouse-keeper rent and warehouse charges at the rates fixed ::~!e 
under any law for the time being in force or where no rates are 80 charles. 
fixed, at such rates as may be fixed by the Collector of Customs. 
(2) If any rent or warehouse charges are not paid within ten drays 
30 from the date when they became due, the warehouse-keeper ma·l. 
after notice to the owner of the warehoused goods and with the 
permission of the proper officer cause to be sold (any transfer of the 
warehoused goods notwithstanding) such sufficient portion of the 
goods as the warehouse-keeper may select. 
35 M. With the sanction of the proper officer and on payment of the C?wner'. 
prescribed fees, the owner of any goods may either before or after d~;'~':b 
warehousing the same-- ;:d..houIed 
(a) inspect the goods; 
(b) separate damaged or deteriorated goods from the rest; 

(c) sort the goods or change their containers for the purpose 
of preservation, sale, export or disposal of the goods; 
(d) deal with the goods and their containers in such manner 
as may be necessary to prevent loss or deterioration or damage 
to the goods; S 
(e) show the goods for sale; or 
(I) take samples of goods without entry for home consump-
tion, and if the proper officer so permits. without payment of 
duty on such samples. 
~n:e 65. (1) With the sanction of the Assistant Collector of Customs 10 
operatiolls and subject to such conditions and on payment of such fees as may 
::=Oin be prescribed, the owner of any warehoused goods may carryon 
• warehouse. any manufacturing process or other operations in the warehouse in 
Power to 
exempt 
imported 
material. 
used in the 
manufacture 
of looda in 
warehou8e. 
relation to such goods. 
(2) Where in the course of any operations permissible in rela- IS 
tion to any warehoused goods under sub-section (1), there is any 
waste or refuse, the following provisions shall apply:-
(a) if the whole or any part of the goods resulting from such 
operations are exported, import duty shall be remitted on the 
quantity of the warehoused goods contained in so much of the 20 
waste or refuse as has arisen from the operations carried on in 
relation to the goods exported: 
Provided that such waste or refuse is either destroyed or duty 
is paid on such waste or refuse as if it had been imported into 
India in that form; 2S 
(b) if the whole or any part of the goods resulting from such 
operations are cleared from the warehouse for home consump-
tion, impOrt duty shall be charged on the quantity of the ware-
housed goods contained in so much of the waste or refuse as has 
arisen from the operations carried on in relation to the goods 30 
cleared for home consumption. 
66. If any imported materials are used in accordance with the 
provisions of. section 65 for the manufacture of any goods and the 
rate of duty le\riable on the imported materials exceeds the rate of 
duty leviable on such goods, the Central Government, if satisfied 3S 
that in the interests of the establishment or development of any 
domestic industry it is necessary 90 to do, may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, exempt the imported materials from the whole 
or part of the excess rate of duty. 

67. The owner of any warehoused goods may, with the permission Rem~1 qf 
af the proper officer, remove them from one warehouse to another, ~:":'ierr:.'" 
without payment of duty, subject to such conditions as may be ho~e to 
prescribed for the due arrival of the warehoused goods at the another. 
5 warehouse to which removal is permitted . 
... The importer of any warehoused goods may clear them for ~~:,ol 
home consumption if- goods for 
. home con-(a) a bill of entry for home consumptIon in respect of such lumption. 
goods has been presented in the prescribed form; 
10 (b) the import duty leviable on such goods and all penalties. 
rent, interest and other charges payable in respect of such gooda 
have been paid; and 
(c) an order for clearance'of such goods for home COIl-
sumption has been made by the proper officer. 
IS 69. (1) Any warehoused goods may be exported to a place ou~i4e ~of 
India without payment of import duty if- ,DOd. for at-
20 
rtatioD. 
(a) a shipping bill or a bill of export has been presented in po 
respect of such goods in the prescribed form: 
(b) the export duty, penalties. rent, interest and other 
charges payable in respect of such goods have been paid; and 
(c) an order for clearance of such goods for exportation has 
been made by the proper officer. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the 
Central Government is of opinion that warehoused goods of any 
25 specified description are likely to be smuggled baclt into India, it 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that such goods 
shall not be exported to any place outside India without p,ayment of 
duty or may be alJowed to be so exported subject to such restrictiQns 
and conditions as may be specified in the notification. 
ao 70. (1) When any warehoused goods to which this section applies Allowance Ia 
are at the time of dp.1ivery from a warehouse found to be deficient ti~l ~~! .. . eg~~ 
in quantIty on account of natural loss, the Assistant Collector of 
Customs may remit the duty on such deficiency. 
(2) This section -applies to such warehoused goods as the Central 
3S Government, having regard to the volatility of the goods and the 
manner of their storage, may, by notificatiQn in the 01llcial Gazette, 
specif,y. . 
'I. No warehoused goods shall be taken out of a warehouse except Goods not 
on clearance for home consumption or re-exportation,or for removal :t~/=-
40 to, another warehouse or as otherwise provided by this Act. bOUle except . , - . .. provided 
937 (B) I.B.-a. bJ thII Act. 

Oooda 1m-
propedJ 
removed 
from WIIe-
house, etc. 
. '12. (1) In any of the following cases, that is to say,-
(a) where any warehoused goods are removed from a ware-
house in contravention of section 71; 
(b) where any warehoused goods have not been removed 
from a warehouse at the expiration of the period during which 5 
such goods are permitted under section 61 to remain in a ware-
house; . 
(c) where any warehoused goods have been taken under sec-
tion 64 as samples without payment of duty; 
(d) where any goods in respect of which a bond has been 10 
executed under section 59 and which have not been cleared for 
home consumption or exportation are not duly accounted for to 
the satisfaction of the proper officer; 
the proper officer may demand, and the owner of such goods shall 
forthwith pay, the full amount of duty chargeable on account of sucbi5 
goods together with all penalties, rent, interest and other charges 
payable in respect of such goods. 
. (2) If any owner fails to pay any amount demanded under sub-
section (1), the proper officer may, without prejudice to any other 
remedy, cause to be detained and sold, after notice to the owner (any 20 
transfer of the goods notwithstanding) such sufficient portion of his 
goods, if any, in the warehouse, as the said officer may select. 
~ '13. When the whole of the goods covered by any bond executed 
of warehoua-under section 59 have been cleared for home consumption or exported 
IDS bond. or are otherwise duly accounted for, and when all amounts due on 25 
account of such goods have been paid, the proper officer shall cancel 
the bond as discharged in full, and shall on demand deliver it, so 
cancelled, to the person who has executed or is entitled to receive 
it. 
CHAPl'ER X 
DRAWBACK 
Drawba: '14. (1) When any goods capable of being easily identified wAich 
~ ':} have been imported into India and upon which any duty has been 
duty-paid paid on importation, are exported to any place outside India, ninety-
aooas. five per cent. of such duty shall, except as otherwise hereinafter pro- 3S 
vided, be re-paid as drawback, if-
(a) tlle goods are identified to the satisfaction of the Assist-
ant Collector of Customs as the goods which were imported; and 
(b) the goods are entered for export within two years from 
the date of payment of duty on the importation thereof; 40 

~vided that in any particular case the aforesaid period of two 
lears may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the Hoard 
by such further period as it may deem fit. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
5 rate of drawback in the case of goods which have been used after the 
importation thereof shall be such as the Central Government, having 
regard to the duration of use, depreciation in value and other relevant 
circwnstances, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix. 
(3) The Board may make regulations for the purpose of carrying 
10 out the provisions of this section and, in particular, such regulations 
may-
15 
20 
(a) provide for the manner in which the identity of goods 
imported in different consignments which are ordinarily stored 
tugether in bulk, may be established; 
(b) specify the goods which shall be deemed to be not cap-
able of being easily identified. 
(4) For the purposes of this section-
(a) goods shall be deemed to have been entere4 for export 
on the date with reference to which the rate of duty is calculated 
under section 16; 
(b) in the case of goods assessed to duty provisionally under 
section 18, the date of payment of the provisional duty shaH be 
deemed to be the date of payment of duty. 
15. (1) Where it appears to the Central Government that in respect Drawblck em 
25 of goods of any class or description manufactured in India and ex- im~ 
ported to any place outside India, a drawback should be allowed of ::i:lltbe 
duties of customs chargeable under this Act on any imported mate- manufac:ture 
rials of a class or description used in the manufacture of such goods, ::h~~:e 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, uported. 
30 direct that drawback shall be allowed in respect of such goods in 
accordance with, and subject to, the rules made under sub-section (2). 
35 
(2) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of sub-section (1) and, in particular, such 
rules may provide-
(a) for the payment of drawback equal to the amount of duty 
actually paid on the imported materials used in the manufacture 
of the goods or as is specified in the rules as the average amount 
of duty paid on the materials of that class or description used in 
th~ manufacture of goods of that class or description either by 
manufacturers generally or by any particular manufacturer; 

I'rohibition 
and reaula-
don or 
drawback in 
certain cases. 
(b) for the production of such certificates, documents and 
other evidence in support of each claim of drawback as may be 
necessary; 
(c) for requiring the manufacturer to give access to eVt!Iy 
part of his manufactory to any officer of customs specially autho- S 
rised in this behalf by the Assistant Collector of Customs to 
enable such authorised officer to inspect the processes of 
manufacture and to verify by actual check or otherwise the 
statements made in support of the claim for drawback. 
"76. (1) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, no draw- 10 
back shall be allowed-
(a) in respect of any goods which are required under the 
regulations to be included in the export manifest or export report 
and are not so included; 
(b) in respect of any goods the market-price of which is leiS IS 
than the amount of drawback due thereon; 
(c) where the drawback due in respect of any goods is less 
than five rupees. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), if the 
Central Governrnent is of opinion that goods of ahy specified descrip- 20 
tion in respect of whiCh drawback may be claimed Under this Chapter 
are likely to be smuggled back into India, it may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, direct that drawback shall not be allowed in 
respect of such goods or may be allowed subject to such restrictions 
and conditions as may be specified in the notification. 2S 
CHAPTER XI 
SPtclAL PROVISIONS REGARDING BAGGAGE, GOODS IMPORTD> OR EXPORTD 
BY POST, AND STORES 
Baggage 
DeClaration. ". The owner of any baggage shall, for the purpose of clearing 0 
by owner of it, me.ke a declaration of its contents to the proper officer. 3 ....... e. 
Dctermina- '8. The rate of duty and tariff valuation, if any, applicable to 
tion of rate baggage shall be the rate and valuation in force on the date on 
~1ru~:~ which a declaration is made in respect of such baggage under section 
tion in res- 77. 3S pea of 
bllPF· 
BDrfII fttU 
baaPF exempted 
from duty. 
71. (1) The proper officer may, subject to any rules made under 
su~!if!iCtion (2), pass free of duty-
(0;) any article in the baggage of a passenger or a member 
of the Crew in respect of which the said officer is satlsfled that it 
has been in his use for such minimum: period as may be specified 40 
in the rules; 

5 
10 
IS 
(b) any article in the bagg.age of a passenger in respect of 
which the said oaicer is satisfied that it is for the use of the 
passenger or his family or is a bona fide gift or souvenir; provided 
that the value of each such article and the total value of all such 
articles does not exceed such limits as may be specified in the 
rules. 
(2) The Central Goverrunent may make rules. for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of this section and, in particular, such 
rules may specify-
(a) the minimum period for which any article has been used 
by a passenger or a member of the crew for the purpose of clause 
(a) of sub-section (1); 
(b) the maximum value of any individual article and the 
maximum total value of all the articles which may be passed free 
of duty under clause (b) of sub-section (1); 
(c) the conditions (to be fulfilled before or after clearance) 
subject to which any baggage may be passed free of duty. 
(3) Different rules may be made under sub-section (2) for different 
classes of persons. 
20 80, Where the baggage of a passenger contains any article which Temporary 
is du:Jable or the import of which is prohibited and in respect of getention of 
which a true declaration has been made under section 77, the proper lIIaage. 
officer may. at the request of the passenger. detain such article for 
30 
the purpose of being returned to him on his leaving India. 
11. The Board may make regulations,- Rqulations 
(a) providing for the manner of declaring the contents of any ~f :::':e. 
baggage; 
(b) providing for the custody, examination, assessment to 
duty and clearance of baggage; 
(c) providing for the transit or transhipment of baggage from 
one cuatoms station to another or to a place outside India. 
Goods imparted or exported by post 
:81. In the case of goods imported or exported by post, any label Label o~ 
or declaration accompanying the goods, which contains the descrip- ~~_ 
35 tion, quantity and value thereof, shall be deemed to be an entry for ina goods 
f h f h ' to bc trelt-import or export, as the case may be, or t e purposes 0 t. 1S Act. ed .. cntry. 
83. (1) The rate of duty and tariff-value, if any, applicable to any Ratc of duty 
goods imported by post shall be the rate and valuation in foree on ~t~rjtr, 
the date on which the postal authorities present to the proper officer ~lU'tc~n In 
. a Hst containing the particulars of such goods for the purpose of ~f goodd· 40 Jmporte or 
assessing the duty thereon: exported by 
poet. 

R.egulation. 
regarding 
pods im-
ported or to 
be exported 
by post. 
Stores may 
be allowed 
to be ware-
housed 
without 
assessment 
to duty. 
Provided that if such goods are imported by a vessel and the 1iat 
of the goods containing the particulars was presented before the date 
of the arrival of the vessel, it shall be deemed to have been presented 
on the date of such arrival. 
(2) The rate of duty and tariff value, if any, applicable to any S 
goods exported by post shall be the rate and valuation in force on 
the date on which the exporter delivers such goods to the .postal 
authorities for exportation. 
U. The Board may make regulations providing for-
(a) the form and manner in which an entry may be made in 10 
respect of any specified class of goods imported or to be exported 
by post, other than goods which are accompanied by a label or 
declaration containing the deSCription, quantity and value thereof; 
(b) the examination, assessment to duty, and clearance of 
goods imported or to be exported by post; IS 
(c) the transit or transhipment of goods imported by post, 
from one customs station to another or to a place outside India. 
Stores 
85. Where any imported goods are entered tor warehousing and 
the importer makes and subscribes to a declaration that the goods 20 
are to be supplied as stores to vessels or aircrafts without payment 
of import duty under this Chapter, the proper officer may permit the 
goods to be warehoused without the goods being assessed to duty. 
Tranait and 86. (1) Any stores imported in a vessel or aircraft may, without 
transhipment payment of duty, remain on board such vessel or aircraft while it is 2S 
of storcs. in India. 
(2) Any stores imported in a vessel or airoraft may, with the per-
mission of the proper officer, be transferred to any vessel or aircraft 
as stores for consumption therein as provided in section 87 or section 
90. 30 
Imported 81. Any imported stores on board a vessel or aircraft (other than 
~orel may ed stores to which section 90 applies) may, without payment of duty, 
OD c:a:':ra be consumed thereon as stores during the· period such vessel or air· 
foreign-going craft is a foreign-going vessel or aircraft. vessel or 
aircraft. 
A plication 88. The provisions of section 69 and Chapter X shall apply to stores 35 
of section 69 (other than those to which section 90 applies) as they apply to other 
·xndt Cs~f:er goods, subject to the modification that for the words "exported to 
o os. d" hey any place outside India" or the word "exporte wherever t occur, 
the words "taken on board any foreign-going vessel or aircraft as 
stores" shall be substituted. 40 

31 
89. Goods produced or manufactured in India and required as fStoresfto be 
t - f" I' f b rtedf freeoez-s ores on any oreIgn-gomg vesse or alrcra t may e expo ree 0 port duty. 
duty in such quantities as the proper officer may determine, having 
regard to the size of the vessel or aircraft, the number of passengers 
S" and crew and the length of the voyage or journey on which the vessel 
or aircraft is about to depart. 
90. (1) Imported stores specified in sub-section (3) may without ~ncc88iODlf 
• • In respect 0 
payment of duty be consumed on board a ShIP of the IndIan Navy. imported 
stores for (2) The provisions of section 69 and Chapter X shall apply to the Navy. 
10 stores specified in sub-section (3) as they apply to other goods, subject 
to the modifications that-
, (a) for the words "exported to any place outside India" or 
the word "exported" wherever they occur, the words "taken on 
board a ship of the Indian Navy" shall be substituted; 
IS (b) for the words "ninety-five per cent." in sub-section (1) 
of section 74, the words "the whole" shall be substituted. 
(3) The stores referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) are the 
following: -
(a) stores for the use of a ship of the Indian Navy; 
20 (b) stores supplied free by the Government for the use of the 
crew of a ship of the Indian Navy in accordance with their 
conditions of service. 
CHAPTER XII 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO COASTAL GOODS AND VESSELS CARRYING COASTAL 
25 GOODS 
91. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to baggage and Chaptelyr not • to app to 
stores. bqpge and 
stores. 
92. (1) The consignor of any coastal goods shall make an entry Bntry of 
thereof by presenting to the proper officer a bill of coastal goods in =J~l 
30 the prescribed form. 
(2) Every such consignor while presenting a bill of coastal goods 
shall, at the foot thereof, make and subscribe to a declaration as to 
the truth of lhe contents of such bill. 
93. The master of a vessel shall not permit the loading of any Coutal 
35 coa~tal goods on the vessel until a bill relating to such goods pre- ~oot!d:J to 
sented under section 92 has been passed by the proper officer and until bill re-
has been delivered to the master by the consignor. ~:a=.~~reto 
etc. 

Clearance of 94. (1) The master of a vessel carrymg any coastal goods shall 
~~~. carry on board the vessel all bills relating to such goods delivered to 
tion. ma him under section 93 and shall, immediately on arrival of the 'vessel 
Master of 
• COllating 
'1essel to 
carry an 
advice boot. 
at any customs or coastal port, deUver to the proper officer of that 
port all bills relating to the goods which are to be unloaded at that S 
port. 
(2) Where any coastal goods are unloaded at any port, the proper 
officer shall permit clearance thereof if he is satisfied that they are 
entered in a bill of coastal goods delivered to him under sub-sectioll 
(1). 
95. (1) The. master of every vessel carrying ~oastal goods shall be 
supplied by the Customs authorities with a book to be called the 
"advice book". 
10 
(2) The proper officer at each port of call by such vessel shall 
make such entries in the advice book as he deems fit, relating to 15 
the goods loaded on the vessel at that port. 
(3) The master of every such vessel shall carry the advice 'book 
on board the vessel Bnd shall on arrival at each port of cail deliver 
it to the proper officer at that port for his inspection. 
Loadi~ and 96. No coastal goods shall be loaded on, or unloaded from, any 20 
:!.~~lng of vessel at any port other than a customs-port or a coastal port appoint-
goodll at ed under section 7 for the loading or unloading of such goods. customs port 
orcoutal 
port only. 
No coasting 97. (1) The master of a vessel which has brought or loaded any 
=l:th t coastal goods at a customs or coastal port shall not cause or permit 
written au the vessel to depart from such port until a written order to that 25 
order. effect has been given by the proper officer. 
(2) No such order shall be given until-
(a) the master of the vessel has answered the questions .put 
to him under section 38: 
(b) all eharges and penalties due in respect of that· vessel or 30 
from the master thereof have been paid or the. payment secured 
by such guarantee or deposit of such amount as tile proper.ofli.cer 
may direct; 
(e) the master of the vessel has satisfied the proper officer 
that no penalty is leviable on him under section 116 or the pay- 35 
ment of any penalty that may be levied upon him under that 
section has been secured by such guarantee or deposit of snch 
amount as the proper officer may direct; 
(d) the provisions of this Chapter and any rules andr~ula­
lions relating to coastal goods and vessels carrying: coastal.ggQ(js 40 
have been complied with. 

• 
k. (1) Sections 33, 34 and 36 shall, so far as may be, apply to Applic:ado. 
coutal goods as they apply to imported goods or export goods. of certafD 
(2) Sections 37 and 38 shall, so far as may be, apply to vessels ~~ 
carrying coastal goods as they apply to vessels carrying imported tc:,:'111 
S ioods or export iOOds. I , etc. 
(.i) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct tat all or any of the other provisions of Chapter VI 
and the provisions of; section 45 shall apply to coastal goods or 
vessels carrying coastal goods subject to such exceptiona and modi-
10 lcationa as may be ipecified in the notification. 
IS 
n. The Central Government may make rules for- Power to 
(a) preventing the baking out of India of any coastal gooca ~..:.;:a 
the export of which is dutiable or prohibited under this Act or of coastal 
any other law for the time being in force; =t:d 
(b) preventing, in the case of a vessel carryin, coastal goods vea.ela. 
as well as imported or export goods, the substitution of imported 
or export aoods by coastal goods. 
CHAPTER XlII 
20 1M. (1) If the proper officer has reason to believe that any person P t . ower 0 
to whom this section applies has secreted about hIS person, any gooos search IUI-
liable to confiscation or any documents r~lating thereto, he may ~t:;ru;. 
aearch that person. or lcavina 
11 . India, etc. 
(2) This section applies to the fo OWlDg persons, namely:-
(A) any person who has landecl from or is about to board or 
18 OIl board any vessel within the Indian customs waters; 
(b) any person who has landed from or is about to board, 
81' is. on board a foreign-going aircraft; 
(c) any person who has got out of, or is about to get into, or 
30 is in, a vehicle, which has arrived from, or is to proceed to an), 
place outside India; I 
(d) any person not included in clause (a), (b) or (c) who 
hu entered or is about to leave India; 
(e) any person in a customs area. 
35 101. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 100, if an 
officer ot customs empowered in this behalf by general or special ~= to 
order of the Collector of Customs, has reason to believe that any pccted ~ 
person has secreted about his person any goods of the description f:1Oz:ertlln 
specified in sub-section (2) which are liable to confiscation, or docu- other caaea. 
40 menta relatina thereto, he may search that person. 
837 (B) LS-6. 

(2) The goods referred to in sub"'section ,(1) are the fol1owiDg!-
(a) gold; 
(b) manufactures of gold or precious stones; 
(c) precious stones; 
(cI) watches; 
(e) any other class of, good. which the Central Governmeat 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
S 
=I:r be In. (1) When any officer of customs is about to seatch any penoD 
require :-Y under the provisions of section 100 or section 101, the 'oftlcerof 
~~aken customs shall, if such person so requires, take him to the nearett 10 uc&ure . 
Quelled Gazetted Officer of Customs or magistrate. 
0fBc:er of 
Cu.tom. or 
mqiltrate. 
(2) If such requisition iscmade, the officer of customs may detain 
the person making it until he can bring him before the Gazetted 
Officer of Customs or the magistrate. 
(3) The Gazetted Officer of Customs or the magistrate before IS 
whom any such person is . brought shall, if he sees no reasonable 
ground for search, forthwith discharge the person but otherwise shall 
direct that search be made. 
(4) A female shall not be tearched by anyone excepting a female. 
Power to 103. (1) Where the proper ofticer has reason to' believe that any 20 
x~::; bt!dies person referred to in 'sub·sectim: (2) of; Mction 10') has, any goods 
of suspected liable to coafiscation secreted inside his body, he may detain such 
~=~ for person and produce him witlwut unnecesary delay befOl'e the nearest 
teereted magistrate. 
loodl. 
(2) A magistrate before whom any person is brought under sub- 25 
section (1) shall, if he sees no reasonable ground for believing that 
such person has any such goods secreted 'inside his body, forthwith 
discharge such persoD. 
(3) Where any such magistrate has reasonable ground for believ-
ing that such person has any such goods secreted inside his body and 30 
the magistrate is satisfied that for the purpose of discovering such 
goods it is nece$sary to have the body of such person 'screened or 
X-rayed, he may make an order to that effect. 
(4)' Where a magistrate ,has made any order under sub-section 
(3), ill relation t'D-any perIOD, the proper oftieerahall, as soon 1135 

lM'aCticable, take· such penon befof.r: a r.ciioIOll.t~ins qupu. 
ftcatioDs recognized· by the Central· Government· for, the purpose of 
this section, and such person shall allow the' radiologist to screen 
or X-ray his body. 
5 (5) A radiologis.t before whom any person is brought under sub-
section (4) shall, after scraening or X-raying the body of such person, 
forward his report, together with any X-ray ,pictures taken by him, 
to the magistrate without unnecessary delay. 
(8) Where on receipt of a report from a radiologist under sub-
10 section.(5),or otherwise, the -magistrate is satisfied that any person 
has any goods liable to conftscation secreted inside his body, he may 
direct that suitable action for bringing out such goods be taken on 
the advice. and under the supervision of a registered medical practi-
tioner and such person &han be bound to comply with such direction: 
IS Provided that in the case of a female no such action shall be 
taken except. on' .the advice and undeJ' the. supervision of a female 
reiwtered medical practitioner. 
(7) Where any person is brought before a magistrate under this 
section, such magistrate may for the purpose of enforcing the pro-
20 vilions of this section order such person to be kept in such custody 
and for such period as he may direct. 
(B)'Nothing in this section shan apply to any person referred to 
in sub-section (1), who admits that goods liable to confiscation are 
lecreted . inside' his.-body; and, who voluntarily. submits himsf'lf for 
25 suitable action being taken for bringing outsuch .. goods. 
~zplanation . .,.....For the purpOies of this. section, the expression 
"reatistered. medical practitioner" means any. person who holds a 
qualification granted by an authority specified in the Schedule to 
, of 1916. the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916, or notified under section 3 of 
30 that Act, or by an authority specified in any of the Schedules to the 
a.a olI9,6. Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. 
1M; (1) If an 'oftieer of eustoms empowered in this behalf by Power to arrelt. 
ieneral or special order of the Collector' of Customs has reason to 
believe that any person in India or within the Indian Customs waters 
35 has been guilty of an oftence punishable under section 135, he may 
arrest such person and shall, as soon as may be, inform him of the 
erounds of such arrest. 
(2) Every person .arrested under lub .. llection (1) shall, without 
unnecel8ary. delay, be taken to a magistrate. 
40 (3) The magistrate before whom such person is taken may. if he 
thinks fit. either. commit him to jail ·or order him to be kept in such 
custody as the magistrate may deem fit, pending investigation by 
ofticers otcuatoma'; 

'ower to 
.-reb pre-
.... 
36 
Provided that when any such person is prepared to give bail, he 
.hall be released on bail in accordance with the provisions of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898. S ef 18,.. 
105. (1) If the Assistant Collector of Customs, or in any area 
adjoining the land frontier or the coast of India an officer of customs 5 
specially empowered by name in this behalf by the Board, has reason 
to believe that any goods liable to confiscation, or any documents or 
things which in his opinion will be useful for or relevant to any pro-
ceeding under this Act, are secreted in any place, he may authorile 
any officer of customs to search or may himself search for such loods. 10 
documents or things. 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, relat- s of IB,S. 
ing to searches shall, so far as may be, apply to searches under W, 
section. 
Powu.: It1. (1) Where the proper oftlcer has reason to believe that allY IS 
~ COD- aircraft, vehicle or animal in India or any vessel in India or within 
ftJID-· the Indian customs waters has been, is being, or is about to be, used 
in the smuggling of any goods or ir. the carriage of any goods which. 
have been smuggled, he may at any time stop any such vehicle, animal 
or vessel or, in the case of an aircraft, compel it to land, and- 20 
(a) rummage and search any part of the aircraft, vehicle er 
vessel; 
,(b) examine and search any goods in the aircraft, vehicle or 
vessel or on the animal; 
(e) break open the lock of any door or package for exerciliDr2S 
the powers conferred by clauses (a) and (b), if the keys are 
withheld. 
(2) Where for the purposes of sub-seetion (1)-
'(a) it becomes necessary to stop any vessel or compel any 
aireraft to land, it shall be lawful for any vessel o~ aircraft in the 30 
service of the Government while flying her proper flag and any 
authority authorised in this behalf by the Central Government to 
summon such vessel to stop or the aircraft to land, by means of 
an intemational signal, code or other recognized means, and there-
upon such vessel shall forthwith stop or such aircraft shall forth- 35 
with land; and if it fails to do so, chase may be given thereto by 
any vessel or aircraft as aforesaid and if after a gun is fired as a 
signal the vessel fails to stop or the aircraft fails to land, it may 
be fired upon; 
(b) it becomes necessary to stop any vehicle or animal, the 40 
proJ)er offtcer may use all lawful means for stopping it, and where 
IU.Ch means fail, the whitol. nr IInimal may be tired upon. 

•• 
.. 
45 of 1160. 
111. Any officer of customs empowered in this behalf by general or Powc~ to . . ~me~~ 
.peClal order of the Collector of Customs may, durmg the course of IOQI. 
any enquiry in connection with the smuggling of any goods,-
(a) require any person to produce or deliver any document 
S or thing relevant to the enquiry; 
(b) examine orally any person acquainted with the facts and 
circumstances of the case; 
(c) require any person referred to in clause (b) to make a 
statement in writing in connection with such enquiry and to sign 
10 such statement. 
1.. (1) AIly officer of customs empowered in this behalf by gene- Powcr to 
ral or special order of the Collector of Customs shall have power to :::: to 
lummon any person whose attendance he considers necessary either r ~ 
to give evidence or to produce a document or any other thing in any p=uce 
I S inquiry which such officer is making in connection with the smugglinJ ciocumeDta. 
of any goodI. 
(2) A summons to produce documents or other things may be for 
the production of certain specified documents or things or for the 
production of all documents or things of a certain description in the 
20 possession or under the control of the person summoned. 
(3) All persons so summoned shall be bound to attend either in 
person or by an authorised agent, as such officer may direct; and all 
persons so summoned shall be bound to state the truth upon any 
subject respecting which they are examined or make statements and 
25 produce such documents and other things as may be required: 
Provided. that the exemption under section 132 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, shall be applicable to any requisition for attendance 
under this sec:tion. 
(4) Every such inquiry as aforesaid shall be deemed to be a judicial 
30 proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the 
Indian Penal Code. 
lot. Any otftcer of customs appointed for any area adjoining the Powcr to 
land frontier of India and empowered in this behalf by general or ~uc:tioa 
special order of the Board, may require any person in possession of of order 
35 any goods which such officer has reason to believe to have been ~::!~ 
imported into India by land, to produce the order made under section of goods 
4:7 permitting clearance of the goods: =~rted br 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any imported 
goods passing from a land frontier to a land customs station by a route 
40 appointed under clause (c) of section 7. 

SeizW'C of 110. (1) If any oftic:er of customs has l'eason to believe that An)' 
~O::~~ aocl goods are liable to confiscation under this Act, he may seize suell 
thiDp. goods : 
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such looda, 
the officer of customs may serve on the owner of the goods an e,rder 5 
that he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with the goods 
except with the previous permission of the officer of customs. 
(2) Any officer of customs may seize any documents or things 
which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any proceedm, 
under this Act. 
CHAPrER XIV 
CoNPISCATION or GOODS AND CONVEYANCBS AND IMPOSmON OF nMAL'lDI 
eooa.catioD nl. The following goods brought from a place outside India ... 
r: :::or:r be liable to confiscation:-
10 
1OOda. etc:. (tI) any goods imported by sea or air which are unloaded or 15 
attempted to be unloaded at any place other than a Clalstoms port 
or customs airport appointed under clause (tI) of section 7 for the 
unloading of such goods; 
(b) any goods imported by land or inland water through any 
route other than a route specified in a notification issued under 20 
clause (e) of section 7 for the import of such goods; 
(c) any dutiable or prohibited goods brought into any bay, 
gulf,creek or tidal river for the purJ)Ose of being landed at a place . 
other than a customs port; 
(d) any goods which are imported or attempted to be import- 25 
ed or are brought within the Indian customs waters, for the pur~ 
pose of being imported, contrary to any prohibition imposed by 
or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force; 
(e) any dutiable or prohibited goods f!>und concealed in any 
manner in any conveyance; 30 
(f) any dutiable or prohibited goods required to be mentioned 
under the regulations in an import manifest or import report 
which are not so mentioned; 
(g) any dutiable or prohibited goods which are unloaded from 
a conveyance in contravention of the provisions of section 32, 35 
other than goods inadvertently unloaded but included in the re-
cord kept under sub-section (2) of section 45; 
(h) any dut1able or prohibited goods unloaded or attempted 
to be unloaded in contravention of the provisions of seetion33 
or section306; 40 

• 
(I) any dutiable or prohibited goods found concealed in any 
manner in any package either before or after the unloading 
thereof; 
(j) any dutiable or prohibited goods removed or attempted 
to be removed from a customs area or a warehouse without the 
permission of the proper officer or contrary to the terms of such 
pennilsion; 
(k) any dutiable or prohibited goods imported by land in 
respect of which the order permitHng clearance of the goods 
10 required to be produced under section 109 is not produced or 
which do not correspond in any material particular with the 
Ipecification contained therein; 
(t) any dutiable or prohibited goods which are not included 
or are in excess of those included in the entry made under 
I S this Act, or in the case of baggage in the declaration made under 
lection 77; 
(m) any dutiable or prohibited goods which do·not corre .. 
pond in any material particular with the entry made under thW 
Act or in the case of baggage with the declaration made under 
section 77 in respect thereof; 
(11.) any dutiable or prohibited goods transitted with or 
without transhipment or attempted to be so transitted in contra-
vention of the provisions of Chaptvr VIII; 
(0) any goods exempted, subject to any condition, from duty 
2S the export of which is dutiable or prohibited under this Act or 
or any other law for the time being in force, in respect of which 
the condition is not observed unless the non-observance of the 
condition was sanctioned by the proper officer. 
111. Any person,- p __ ' , _t)' lor 
30 (a) who, knowing or havin, reason to believe that any other ::r:iOD 
perpn is intending to smuggle any ,ood. into India gives that of aoodl, , etc. 

CooftIc:atioD 
of aooda 
anemptcd 
to be im-
properly 
~llPOrtcd. 
cu:. 
btber person financial or other asaistanee for IUlUllliq IU. 
loodI, or 
(b) who, in relation to any goods, doe. or omit. to do aD,J 
act which act or omission would render such loods liable to 
confiscation under section 111, or 
(c) who acquires possession of or is in any way concerned 
in carrying, removing, depositing, harbouring, keepinl, conceal-
ing or selling, or in any other manner dealing with any loods 
which he know. or has reason to believe are liable to confiacation 
under section 111, 
shall be liable,-
(i) in the case of goods in respect ot which any prohibition 
, 
10 
is in force under this Act or any other law for the time beiDa 
in force, to a penalty not exceeding three times the value 01 
the goods or one thousand rupees, whichever is the greater; IS 
(ii) in the case of dutiable goods, other than prohibited goods, 
to a penalty not exceeding three times the duty sought to be 
evaded on such ,oods or one thousand rupees, whichever ia the 
greater. 
113. The following export goods shall be liable to confiscation: - 20 
(/1) any goods attempted to be exported by sea or air from 
any place other than a customs port or a customs airport appoint-
ed for the loading of such goods; 
(b) any goods attempted to be exported by land or Inland 
water through any route other than a route specified in a notifi- 2S 
cavon issued under clause (c) of section 7 for the export of such 
loods; 
(c) any dutiable or prohibited goods brought near the land 
frontier or the coast of India or near any bay, gulf, creek or 
tidal river for the purpose of being exported from a place other 30 
than a land-customs station or a customs port appointed for the 
loading of such goods; 
(d) any goods attempted to be exported or brought within 
the limits of any customs area for the purpose of being exported, 
contrary to any' prohibition imposed by or under this Act or any 35 
other law for the time being in force; 
(e) any dutiable or prohibited goods found concealed In a 
package which is brought within the limits of a customs area for 
the purpose of exportation; 
(f) any dutiable or prohibited goods which are loaded o~ .. o 
attempted to be loaded in contravention of the provisions of lee-
tion 33 or section 34; 

41 
(g) any dutiable or prohibited goods loaded or attempted 
to be loaded on any conveyance, or water-borne, or attempted 
to be waterborne for being loaded on any vessel, the eventual 
destination of which is a place outside India. without the per-
S mission of the proper officer; 
10 
IS 
25 
30 
3S 
(h) any dutiable or prohibited goods which are not included 
or are in excess of those included in the entry made under this 
Act, or in the case of baggage in the declaration made under 
section 77; 
(i) any dutiable or prohibited goods which do not correspond 
in any material particular with the entry made under this Act 
or in the case of baggage with the declaration made under 
section 77 in respect thereof; 
'(;) any goods on which import duty has not been paid and 
which are entered for exportation under a claim for drawback 
under section 74: 
(k) any goods cleared for exportation under a claim for 
drawback which are not exported except on account of lack of 
space in the conveyance by which they were to be exported. 
114. Any person.- Penalty £01 
attempt to 
(a) who, knowing or having reason to believe that any other :X=im-
person intends to smuggle any goods out of India gives that properly, ct.;. 
other person financial or other assistance for smuggling such 
goods; or 
(b) who, in relation to any goods, does or omits to do any act 
which act or omission will render such goods liable to confis-
cation under section 113: 
thall be liable,-
(i) in the case of goods in respect of which any prohibition 
is in force under this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force, to a penalty not exceeding three times the value of the 
goods or one thousand rupees, whichever is the greater; 
(ii) in the case of dutiable goods, other than prohibited ~oods, 
to a penalty not exceeding three times the duty sought to be 
evaded on such goods or one thousand rupees, whichever is the 
greater; 
O~7 (B) LS-7. it .. , 

42 
(iii) in the case of goods under claim for drawback, to. 
penalty not exceeding three times the amount of drawback 
claimed or one thousand rupees, whichever is the greater. 
Coofbcation of COI1vcy- 115. (1) The following conveyances shall be liable to confisca-S 
ancel. tion : -
PelUlltv (Of 
Dot aa:ount-IDa for 
aoOdl. 
(a) any vessel which is or has been within the India.n cus-
toms waters, any aircraft which is or has been in India, or any 
vehicle which is or has been in a customs area, 
while constructed, adapted, altered or fitted in any manner for 
the purpose of concealing goods; 10 
(b , any conveyance from which the whole or any part of 
the goods is thrown overboard, staved or destroyed so as to 
prevent seizure by an officer of customs; 
(c) any conveyance which having been required to stop or 
land under section 106 fails to do so, except for good and suffi- IS 
cient cause; 
(d) any conveyance from which any warehoused goods 
cleared for exportation, or any other goods cleared for exporta-
tion under a claim for drawback, are unloaded, without the 
permission of the proper officer; 
(e) any conveyance carrying imported goods which has 
entered India and is afterwards found with the whole or subs-
tantial portion of such goods missing, unless the master of the 
vessel or aircraft is able to account for the loss of, or deficiency 
in, the goods. 
20 
25 
(2) Any conveyance or animal used as a means of transport in 
the smuggling of any goods or in the carriage of any smuggled goods 
shall be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of the conveyance 
Gr animal proves that it was so used without the knowledge or 
connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the person 30 
in charge of the conveyance or animal and that each of them had 
taken all such precautions against such use as are for the time being 
specified in the rules: 
Provided that where any such conveyance is used for the car-
riage of goods or passengers for hire, the owner of any conveyance 3S 
shall be given an option to pay in lieu of the confiscation of the 
conveyance a fine not exceeding the market price of the goods which 
are sought to be smuggled or the smuggled goods, as the case may be. 
Explanation.-In this section, "market price" means market price 
at the date when the goods are seized. 40 
111. If any goods loaded in a conveyance for importation into 
India, or any goods transhipped under the provisions of this Act or 
coastal goods carried in a conveyance, are not unloaded at their 

p1ace of destination in India, or if the quantity unloaded is short Oi 
the quantity to be unloaded at that destination, and if the failure 
to unload or the deficiency is not accounted for to the satisfaction 
of the Assistant Collector of Customs, the person-in-charge of the 
5 conveyance shall be liable,-
10 
15 
(a) in the case of goods loaded in a conveyance for impor-
tation into India or goods transhipped under the provisions of 
this Act, to a penalty not exceeding twice the amount of duty 
that would have been chargeable on the goods not unloaded or 
the deficient goods, as the case may be, had such goods been 
imported; 
(b) in the case of coastal goods, to a penalty not exceeding 
twice the amount of export duty that would hav~ been charge-
able on the goods not unloaded or the deficient goods, as the 
case may be, had such goods been exported. 
117. Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or Penalties fat 
abets any such contravention or who fails to comply with any pro- ~ntraveD­
vision of this Act with which it was his duty to comply, where no ~~n:c:; D8t 
express penalty is elsewhere provided for such contravention or mentioned. 
20 failure, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding one thousand 
rupees. 
118. Where any smuggled goods are contained in a package, the Confiscation 
package and any other goods contained therein shall also be liable ~d~~' 
to conflsca tion. content •• 
25 119. Any goods used for concealing smuggled goods shall also Confisc:atioa 
be liable to confiscation. ~~eroofor 
Explanation.-In this section, "goods" does not include a con-==: 
veyance used as a means of transport. goods. 
120. (1) Smuggled goods may be confiscated notWithstanding any Confiscation 
change in their form of smUilled 30' goods DOt-
(2) Where smuggled goods are mixed with other goods in such :;h=, 
manner that the smuggled goods cannot be separated from such in form, 
other goods, the whole of the goods shall be liable to confiscation: etc. 
Provided that where the owner of such goods proves that he had 
35 no knowledge or reason to believe that they included any smuggled 
goods, such part of the goods as is proved by him to have not been 
smuggled, shall not be liable to confiscation. 
121. Where any smuggled goods are sold by a person having ConfiacatJon 
knowledge or reason t.o believe that the goods are smuggled goods, :~ci. of 
40 the sale-proceeds thereof shall be liable to confiscation. ~d .. ~ 

~~~~ 122. In every cue under this Chapter in which anything is liable 
tiona and to confiscation or any person is liable to a penalty, such confiscation 
penalties. or penalty may be adjudged,-
(a) without limit, by a Collector of Customs or a Deputy 
Collector of Customs; S 
(b) where the value of the goods liable to confiscation does 
not exceed ten thousand rupees and where the penalty proposed 
to be imposed does not exceed two thousand rupees, by an 
Assistant Collector of Customs; 
(c) where the value of the goods liable to confiscation does 10 
not exceed one thousand rupees and where the penalty proposed 
to be imposed does not exceed two hundred rupees, by a gazetted 
officer of customs lower in rank than an Assistant Collector of 
Customs. 
B~~ of 123. (1) Where any goods to which this section applies are seized IS 
:rtainl~&eL under this Act in the reasonable belief that they are smuggled goods, 
the burden of proving that they are not smuggled goods shall be on 
the person from whose possession the goods were seized. 
Issue of 
Ihow-cause 
notice 
before con-
fiscation of 
lOll J8, etc. 
(2) This section shall apply to gold, manufactures of gold and 
precious stones, precious stones, watches, and any other class of goods 20 
which the Central Government may by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify. 
124. No order confiscating any goods or imposing any penalty on 
any person shall be made under this Chapter unless the owner of 
the goods or such person- 25 
(n) is given a notice in writing infonning him of the ground 
on which it is proposed to confiscate the goods or 10 impose a 
penalty; 
(b) is given an opportunity of making a representation in 
writing within such reasonable time as may be specified in the 30 
notice against the grounds of confiscation or imposition of penalty 
mentioned therein; and 
(c) is given. a reasona:ble opportunity of being heard in the 
matter: 
Provided that the notice referred to in clause (a) and the repre- 35 
sentation re[eITed to in clause (b) may, at the request of the person 
concerned be oral. 

125. (1) Whenever confiscation of any goods is authorised by this OPtiotCt t~ 
Act, the officer adjudging it may, in the case of any goods, the li:~ eor 
importation or exportation whereof is prohibited under this Aet or confiscatioG. 
under any other law for the time being in force, and shall, in the (:ase 
S of any other goods, give to the owner of the goods an option to pay in 
lieu of confiscation such fine as the said officer thinks fit: 
Provided that, without prejudice to the provisions of the proviso 
to sub-section (2) of section 115, such fine shall not exceed the market 
price of the goods confiscated, less in the case of imported goods the 
10 duty chargeable thereon. 
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that any fine 
in lieu of confiscation of goods imposed under sub-section (1) shall 
not affect the duty payable on such goods. 
126. (1) When any goods are confiscated under this Act, such qn confisca-
d h 11 h · tlon, pro-IS goo S sat ereupon vest m the Central Government. perty to vest 
In Central 
(2) The officer adjudging confiscation shall take and hold posses- Government. 
sion of the confiscated goods. 
127. The award of any confiscation or penalty under this Act by AWnfiard o! 
h 11 h . fi" f 'sh co scatlon an officer of customs s a not prevent t e m lctlon 0 any pum - or penalty 
20 ment to which the person affected thereby is liable under the provi- ~I, customs . U.lIcers not 
sions of Chapter XVI of thIS Act or under any other law. to interfere 
with other 
puni,hmentl. 
CHAPTER XV 
ApPEALS AND REVISION 
128. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed Appeala. 
2S under this Act may, within three months from the date of the com-
munication to him of such decision or order-
30 
35 
(a) where the decision or order has been passed by a Col-
lector of Customs, appeal to the Board; 
(b) where the decision or order has been passed by a Deputy 
Collector or Assistant Collector of Customs, appeal to the Col-
lector of Customs; 
(c) where the decision or order has been passed by an officer 
of customs lower in rank than Assistant Collector of Customs, 
appeal to the Deputy Collector of Customs, or if there is no 
Deputy Collector of Customs, to the Collector of Customs: 
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, if it is satisfied that 
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the 
appeal within the aforesaid period of three months, allow it to be 
presented within a further period of three months. 

Deposit, 
pending 
appeal, of 
duty de-
manded or 
penalty 
levied. 
Powers of 
revision of 
Board and 
Collector of 
Cuatonu. 
(2) The Appellate Authority may, after giving an opportunity to 
the appellant to be heard, if he so desires, and making such further 
inquiry as may be necessary, pass such order as it thinks fit, confirm-
ing, modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed against: 
Provided that no order enhancing any duty or penalty Or fine in 5 
lieu of confiscation or confiscating goods of greater value shall be 
passed unless the appellant has been given a reasonable opportunity 
of showing cause against the proposed order: 
Provided further that where the Appellate Authority is of opinion 
that any duty of customs has been short-levied, no order enhancing 10 
the duty shall, except where the case falls under the proviso to sub-
section (1) of section 28 be passed unless the appellant is given notice 
within the time-limit specified in that section to show cause against 
the proposed order. 
129. (1) Where the decision or order appealed against relates to IS 
any duty demanded in respect of goods which are not under the 
control of customs authorities or any penalty levied under this Act, 
any person desirous of appealing against such decision or order shall, 
pending the appeal, deposit with the proper officer the duty demanded 
or the penalty levied: 20 
Provided that where in any particular case the appellate authority 
is of opinion that the deposit of duty demanded or penalty levied 
will cause undue hardship to the appellant, it may in its discretion 
dispense with such deposit, either unconditionally or subject to such 
conditions as it may deem fit. 2S 
(2) If upon any such appeal it is decided that the whole or any 
portion of such duty or penalty was not leviable, the proper officer 
shall return to the appellant such amount of duty or penalty as was 
not leviable. 
130. (1) The Board may of its own motion or on the application of 30 
any aggrieved person call for and examine the record of any pro-
ceeding in which an officer of customs has passed any decision or 
order under this Act (not being an order passed in appeal under 
section 128) for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or 
propriety of any such decision or order and may pass such order 3~ 
thereon as it thinks fit: 
Provided that no order levying any duty or enhancing any duty 
or penalty or fine in lieu of confiscation or confiscating goods of 
greater wlue shall be passed under this section unless the person 
affected by the proposed order has been given a reasonable opportu- 40 
nity of showing cauae against it: 

Provided further that where the Board is ot "pinion that any duty 
of customs has not been levied or has been short-levied, no order 
levying or enhancing the duty shall, except where the case falls under 
the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 28. be made unless the person 
5 affected by the proposed order is given notice to show cause against 
it within the time-limit specified in that section. 
(2) The power conferred upon the Board under sub-section (1) 
may also, in the like manner and subject to the like conditions, be 
exercised by the Collector of Customs in respect of any decision or 
10 order passed under this Act (not being an order passed in appeal 
under section 128) by an officer of customs subordinate to him. 
(3) No decision or order passed by an officer of customs shall be 
revised under this section by the Board or the Collector of Customs 
of its or his own motion, and no application for the revision of any 
IS such dec!.;ion or order shall be entertained, after the expiry of two 
years frf'm the date of such decision or order. 
20 
131. (1) The Central Government may, on the application of ijny Revision by 
person aggrieved by- &~~ent. 
(a) any order passed unaet section 128. or 
(b) any order passed by the Board or the Collector of Cus-
toms of its or his own motion under section 130, or 
(c) any order passed on the application of any aggrieved 
person under section 130 where the order is of the nature referred 
to in the first proviso to sub-section (1) of that section, 
2,5 annul or modify such order: 
Provided that no order enhancing any duty or penalty or fine in 
lieu of confiscation or confiscating goods of greater value shall be 
passed under this section. 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be made within 
30 Rix months from the date of the communication to the applicant of 
the order against which the application is being made: 
Provided that the Central Government may. if it is satisfied that 
the applicant was prevented bv sufficient cause from presenting the 
application within the aforesaid period of six months. allow it to be 
35 presented within a further period of six months. 
CHAPTER XVI 
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTIONS 
132. Whoever makes. signs or uses, or causes to be made, signed or False . 
used. any declaration, statement Or document in the tranRaction of t:elar~:~: 
40 any business relating· to the customs. knowing or having reason to menta. etc. 
believe that such declaration, statement or document is false in any 

Obstruction 
of officer 
of custom .. 
Refusal to 
be X-rayed. 
material particular, shall be punishable with Imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
133. If any person intentionally obstructs any officer of customs 
in the exercise of any powers conferred under this Act, such 
person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may S 
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
134. If any person-
(a) resists or refuses to allow a radiologist to screen or to 
take X-ray picture of his body in accordance with an order made 
by a magIstrate under section 103, or 10 
(b) resists or refuses to allow suitable action being taken 
on the advice and under the supervision of a registered medical 
practitioner for bringing out goods liable to confiscation secreted 
inside his body; 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may IS 
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
Evasion of 135. Without prejudice to any other action that may be taken 
duty.b .. or under this Act, if any person-prohl ItIOQS. 
Offences by 
officeR of 
customll. 
(a) knowingly and with intent to defraud the Government 
of any duty payable on any goods or to evade any prohibition for 20 
the time being imposed under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force with respect to any goods acquires possession 
of, or is in any way concerned in carrying, removing, depositing. 
harbouring, keeping, concealing or selling or in any manner 
dealing with, such goods; or 2S 
(b) is in relation to any goods in any way knowingly 
concerned in any fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of 
any duty chargeable thereon or of any such prohibition as 
aforesaid; .;, ' 
he shan be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 30 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
136. (1) If any officer of customs enters into or acquiesces in any 
agreement to do, abstains from doing, permits. conceals or connives 
at any act or thinJ( whereby any duty of customs leviable on any 
~oods, or any prohibition for the time being in force under this Act 35 
or any other law for the time being in force with respect to any 
,,"oods is or may be evaded. he shall be puniflhable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) If any officer of customs,-
(a) requires any person to be searched for goods liable to 40 
confiscation or any document relatinl.l thel'pto, without having 

reuon to believe that he has such goods or document secreted 
about his person; or 
(b) arrests any person without having reason to believe that 
he has been guilty of an offence punishable under section 135, 
S he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees. 
(3) If any officer of customs, except in the discharge in good faith 
of his duty as such officer or in compliance with any requisition made 
under any law for the time being in force, discloses any particulars 
10 learnt by him in his official capacity in respect of any goods, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees. 
137. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under CotaiaDce 
section 132, section 133, section 134 or section 135, except with the of o«eueea. 
15 previous sanction of the Collector of Customs. 
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under section 
136,-
(a) where the offence is alleged to have been committed by 
an officer of customs not lower in rank than Assistant Collector 
20 of Customs, except with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government: 
(b) where the offence is alleged to have been commUted by 
an officer of customs lower in rank than Assistant Collector of 
Customs, except with the previous sanction of the Collector of 
2S Customs. 
138. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Offences to 
Procedure. 1898. an offence under this Chapter may be tried sum~ :~:.:n)'. 
marily by a magistrate. 
131t. Where any document is furnished by any person under this Preaua::ptioc 
30 Act or has been seized under this Act from the custody or control of :e:ts ;:c-
any person, and such document is tendered by the prosecutioR in certai:!J. cues. 
evidence against him, the Court shall,-
(al unless the contrary is proved by any such person, 
presume-
35 (i) the truUl of the contents of ~uch document; 
(ii) that the signature and every other part of such 
document which purports to be in the handwriting of any 
partiCUlar person or which the court may reasonably assume 
to have been signed by. or to be in the handwriting of, any 
40 particular person, is in that person's handwriting, and in the 
case of a document executed or attested that it was executed 

50 
or attested by the person by whom it purports to have been 
so executed or attested: 
(b) admit the document in evidence, notwithstanding that it 
is not duly stamped, if such document is otherwise admissible 
in evidence. S 
140. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Chapter 
is a company, every person who, at the time the offence was com-
mitted was in charge of, and was responsible to. the company for the 
conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro- Ie 
ceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to such punishment provided in this Chapter 
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
and that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission ot IS 
such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Chapter has been committed by a company and 
it is proved that the offpnce has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributablp. to any negligence on the part of, any 2::-
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, SUell 
director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall a]so be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
CHAPTER XVII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
30 
CoDv~ 141. All conveyances and goods in a customs area ~hall, for the 
::~ ~t:m. purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Act, be subject to th-
area subject I f control of officers of customs. to contro 0 
officers of 
CUltoms. 
Recovery of 10. Where any duty demanded from any person or any penalty 35 
a::r::e~~. payable by any person under this Act is not paid,-
(a) the proper officer may deduct or may require any (lther 
ofticer of customs to deduct the amount so payable from any 
money owing to such person which may be under the contra] 
of the proper officer or such other ofticer of customs; .01' 40 

S 
10 
51 
(b) the Assistant Collector of Customs may recover or mi~ 
require any other officer of customs to recover the amount 10 
payable by detaining and selling any go~ belonging to such 
person which are under the control of the Assistant Collector 
of Customs or such other officer of customs; or 
(c) if the amount cannot be recovered from such person in 
the manner provided in clause (a) or clause (b), the Assistant 
Collector of Customs may prepare a certificate signed by him 
specifying the amount due from such person and send it to the 
Collector of the district in which such person owns any property 
or resides or carries on his business and the said C~llector on 
receipt of such certificate shall proceed to recover from the said 
person the amount specified thereunder as if it were an arrear 
of land revenue. 
IS 143. (1) Where this Act or any other law requires anything to be P t . .' ower 0 
done before a person can Import or export any goods or clear any allow Import 
goods from the control of officers of customs and the Assistant Col- or -rfrt ~ 
lector of Customs is satisfied that having regard to the circumstances:= :: 
of the case, such thing cannot be done before such import, export:'~ 
20 or clearance without detriment to that person, the Assistant Collec-
tor of Customs may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act 
or such other law, grant leave for such import, export or clearance 
on the person executing a bond in such amount, with such sUl"e'ty 
or security and subject to such conditions as the Assistant Collector 
2S of Customs approves, for the doina of that thing within such time 
after the import, export or clearance as may be specified in the bond. 
(Z) If the thing is done within the time specified in the bond, 
the Assistant Collector of Customs shall cancel the bond as dis-
charged in full and shall, on demand, deliver it, so cancelled, to the 
30 person who has executed or who is entitled to receive it; and in such 
a case that person shall not be liable to any penalty provided in this 
Act or, as the case may be, in such other law for the contravention 
of the provisions thereof relating to the doing of that thing . 
. (3) If the thing is not done within the time specified in the bond 
35 the Assistant Collector of Customs shall, without prejudice to any 
other action that may be taken under this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force, be entitled to proceed upon the bond in 
accl!)rdance with law. 
144. (1) The proper officer may, on the entry or clearance of any Power to 
40 goods or at any time while such goods are being passed through the take l1li1-
customs area, take samples of such goods in the Pl'esence of the plea. 
owner thereof, for examination or testing, or for ascertaining the 
Blue thereof, or for any other purposes of this Act. 

Owner to 
~ operaUODs 
iacidental 
:ce QJDl,s:.-
caatoml 
law. 
(2) After the purpose for which a sample was taken is carried 
out, such sample shall, if practicable, be restored to the owner, if • 
request in that behalf was made at the time the sample was taken, 
or failing such a request be disposed of in such manner as the Col-
lector of Customs may direct. S 
145. All operations necessary for making any goods available for 
examination by the proper officer or for facilitating such examina-
tion shall be performed by. or at the expense of, the owner of the 
goods. 
Cultom 146. (1) No person shall carryon business as an agent relating 10 
:': rrntl to the entry or departure of a conveyance or the import or export 
0IDIed. of goods at any customs-station unless such person holds a licence 
granted in this behalf in accordance with the regulations. 
(2) The Board may make regulations for the purpose of carrying 
out the provisions of this section and, in particular, such regulations IS 
may provide for-
(a) the authority by which a licence may be granted under 
this section and the period of validity of any such licence; 
(b) the form of the licence and the fees payable therefor; 
(c) the qualifications of persons who may apply for a licence 20 
and the qualifications of persons to be employed by a licensee 
to assist him in his work as an agent: 
(d) the restrictions and conditions (including the furnishing 
of security by the licensee) subject to which a licence may be 
granted: 25 
(e) the circumstances in which a licence may be suspended 
or revoked; and 
(1) the appeals, if any, against an order of suspension or 
revocation of a licence, and the period within which such appeals 
shall be flIed. 30 
1Jabilit)' of 147. (1) Where this Act requires anything to be done by the 
priDcip&l owner, importer or exporter of any goods, it may be done on his aad lIeDt. behalf by his agent. 
(2) Any such thing done by an agent of the owner, importer or 
exporter of any good~ shall be deemed to have been done with the 3S 
knowledge nnd CQnsent of such owner, importer or exporter, so that 
in any proceedings under this Act, the owner, importer or exporter 
of the goods shall also be liable as if the thing had been done by 
hiIJUJelf. 

Sa 
(3) When any person is expressly or impliedly authorised by the 
owner, importer or exporter of any goods to be his agent in respect 
of such goods for all or any of the purposes of this Act, such person 
shall, without prejudice to the liability of the owner, importer or 
S exporter, be deemed to be the owner, importer or exporter of such 
goods for such purposes. 
148. (1) Where this Act requires anything to be dqne by the per- Liability of 
son in charge of a conveyance, it may be done on his behalf by his ~~~::edPby 
agent. the penon 
inchuge of 
10 (2) An agent appointed by the person in charge of a conveyance a convey-
and any person who represents himself to any officer of customs as anee. 
an agent of any such person in charge, and is accepted as such by that 
officer, shall be liable for the fulfilment in respect of the matter in 
question of all obligations imposed on such person in charge by or 
IS under this Act or any law for the time being in force, and to penalties 
and confiscations which may be incurred in respect of that matter. 
1". Save as otherwise provided in sections 30 and 41, the proper Amendment 
officer may, in his discretion, authorise any document, after it has :e~::.u­
been presented in the customs house to be amended: 
20 Provided that no amendment of a bill of entry or a shipping bill 
or bill of export shall be so authorised to be amended after the im-
ported goods have been cleared for home consumption or deposited 
in a warehouse, or the export goods have been exported, except on 
the basis of documentary evidence which was in existence at the 
2S time the goods were cleared, deposited or exported, as the case may 
be. 
150. (1) Where any goods are to be sold under any provisions of Procedure 
this Act, they shall, after notice to the owner thereof, be sold by ~~:n':f 
public auction or by tender or with the consent of the owner in any application 
h ofs~-
30 0t er manp.er. proceed •. 
35 
40 
(2) The proceeds of any such sale shall be applied-
(a) firstly to the payment of the expenses of the sale, 
(b) next to the payment of the freight and other charges, if 
any, payable in respect of the goods sold, to the carrier, if notice 
of such charges has been given to the person having custody of 
the goods, 
(c) next to the payment of the duty, if any, on the goods 
sold, 
(d) next to the payment of the charges in respect of the 
goods sold due to the person having the custody of the goods, 
(e) next to the payment of any amount due from the owner 
of the goods to the Central Government under the provisions of 
this Act or any other law relating to customs, 
and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the goods. 

Cenain 
o1Bcen re-
quired to 
usist officers 
of customs. 
54 
151. The following officers are hereby empowered and required. 
to assist officers of customs in the execution of this Act, namely:-
(a) officers of the Central Excise Department; 
(b) officers of the Navy; 
(c) officers of Police; , 
(d) officers of the Central or State Governments employed at 
any port or airport; 
(e) such other officers of the Central or State Government or 
a local authority as are specified by the Central Government in 
this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette. 10 
DelqatioD 15%. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
of powera. Gazette, direct that subject to such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified in the notiftcation-
Service of 
order. de-
cision, etc. 
Correction 
of clerical 
erron, etc. 
(4) any power exercisable by the Board under this Act 
shall be exercisable also by a Collector of Customs empowered IS 
in this behalf by the Central Government; 
(b) any power exercisable by a Collector of Customs under 
this Act may be exercisable also by a Deputy Collector of Customs 
or an Assistant Collector of Customs empowered in this behaU 
by the Central Government; 20 
(c) any power exercisable by a Deputy Collector of Customs 
under this Act may be exercisable also by an Assistant Collector 
of Customs empowered in this behalt"by the Central Government; 
(d) any power exercisable by an Assistant Collector of 
Customs under this Act may be exercisable also by a Gazetted 2S 
officer of customs empowered in this behalf by the Board. 
153. Any order or decision passed or any summons or notice issued 
under this Act, shall be served-
(a) by tendering the order, decision, summons or notice or 
sending it by post to the person for whom it is intended or to his 30 
agent; or 
(b) if the order, decision, summons or notice cannot be 
served in the manner provided in clause (a), by affixing it on the 
notice board of the customs house. 
1M. Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any decision or order 3S 
passed by the Central Government, the Board or any officer of 
customs under this Act, or elTOrs arising therein from any accidental 
slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the Central 
Government, the Board or such officer of customs or the successor 
in office of such officer, as the case may be. 40 

55 
155. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie P~tec:tion of 
against the Central Government or any officer of the Government :d: ~ 
or a local authority for anything which is done, or intended to be Act. 
done in good faith, in pursuance of this Act or the rules Or regulations. 
S (2) No proceeding other than a suit shall be commenced against 
the Central Government or any officer of the Government or a local 
authority for anything purporting to be done in pursuance of this 
Act without giving the Central Government Or such officer a month's 
previous notice in writing of the intended proceeding and of the 
10 cause thereof, or after the expiration of three months from the 
accrual of such cause. 
156. (1) Without prejudice to any power to make rules contained General 
elsewhere in this Act, the Central Government may make rules =:r r~el. 
consistent with this Act generally to carry out the purposes of this 
IS Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matt~rs, namely:-
(a) the manner of determining the nearest ascertainable 
20 equivalent of the normal price of any goods; 
2S 
30 
35 
(b) the conditions subject to which accessories of, and spare 
parts and maintenance and repairing implements for, any article 
shall be chargeable at the same rate of duty as that article; 
(c) the precautions that shall be taken by the owner, his 
agent and the person-In-charge of any conveyance or animal for 
the purposes of sub-section (2) of section 115; 
(d) the detention and confiscation of goods the importatiOll 
of which is prohibited and the conditions, if any, to be fulfilled 
before such detention and confiscation and the information, 
notices and security to be given and the evidence requisite for 
the purposes of such detention or confiscation and the mode of 
verification of such evidence; 
(e) the reimbursement by an informant to any public ofBcer 
of all expenses and damages incurred in respect of any detention 
of any goods made on his information and of any proceedings 
consequent on such detention; 
(f) the information required in respect of any goods mention-
ed in a shipping bill or bill of export which are not exported or 
which are exported and are afterwards re-Ianded. 
40 157. (1) Without prejudice to any' power to make regulations General 
(~ntained elsewhere in this Act, the Board may make regulations =nrc~ 
consistent with this Act and the rules, generally to carry out the ,watioaa. 
purposes of this Act. 

Proviaions 
with respect 
to rules 
and regula-
dom. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the fonn of a bill of entry, shipping bill, bill of export, 
import manifest, import report, export manifest, export report, 5 
bill of transhipment, boat note and bill of coastal goods; 
(b) the conditions subject to which the transhipment of all 
or any goods under sub-section (3) of section 54, the transporta-
tion of all or any goods under section 56 and the removal of 
warehoused goods from one warehouse to another under section 10 
67 may be allowed without payment of duty; 
(c) the conditions subject to which any manufacturing pro-
cess or other operations may be carried on in a warehouse under 
section 65. 
158. (1) All rules and regulations made under this Act shall be 15 
published in the Official Gazette. 
(2) Any rule or regulation which the Central Government or the 
Board is empowered to make under this Act may provide-
(i) for the levy of fees in respect of applications, amendment 
of documents, furnishing of duplicates of documents, issue of 20 
certificates, and supply of statistics, and for rendering of any 
services by officers of customs under this Act; 
(ii) that any person who contravenes any provision of a rule 
or regulation or abets such contravention or any person who 
fails to comply with any provision of a rule or regulation with 2S 
which it was his duty to comply, shall be liable,-
(a) in the case of contravention or failure to comply with 
a rule, to a penalty which may extend to five hundred 
rupees; 
(b) in the case of contravention Or failure to comply 30 
with a regulation. to a penalty which may extend to two 
hundred rupees. 
!~::n ~~tI- 159. Every rule made under this Act and every notification issued 
ficationa to under sections 11, 14, 25, 66, 69. 70, 74, 75, 76, 98, 101 and 123 shall be 
g:f~~d Par- laid as soon as may be after it is made or issued ~fore each House of 3S 
liament. Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comorised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, 
before the exp~ry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or notification or both 40 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made or the 
notification should not be issued, the rule or notification 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 

of 1934. 
s., 
eJtect. as the case may be; so, however, that any sucb moditication or 
annulment shall be' without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule or notification. 
160. (1) The enolctments specified in the Schedule are hereby lleJ?C81au. 
5 repealed to the extent mentioned in the fourth column thereof. .VIllIS. 
10 
IS 
20 
(2) In the Indian Tariff Act. 1934-
(a) for section 2, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"2. The rates at which duties of customs shall be levied ~:~:ed ill 
under the Customs Act. 1962, are specified in the First and tt= Sc:he-
Second Schedules" du~ to be . leYled:' . 
(b) sections 5 and 6 shall stand repealed; 
(3) Notwithstanding the repeal of any enactment by this section,-
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, order or notice issued 
or any appointment or declaration made or any licence, permis-
sion or exemption granted or any assessment made, confiscation 
adjudged or any duty levied or any penalty or fine imposed or 
any forfeiture, cancellation or discharge of any bond ordered or 
any other thing dane or any other action taken under any repeal-
ed enactment shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provision aforesaid; 
(b) any document referring to any enactment hereby 
repealedshaU be construed as referring to this Act ('r to the 
corresponding provision of this Act. 
. (4) This Act shall apply to all goods which are subject to the con-
trol of customs at the commencement of this Act notwithstanding that 
the goods were imported before such commencement. 
(5) Where the period prescribed for any application, appeal, revi-
30 sion or other proceeding under any repealed enactment had expired 
on or before the commencement of this Act, nothing in this Act shall 
be construed as enabling any such application, appeal or revision to 
be made or a proceeding to be instituted under this Act by reason 
only of the fact that a longer period therefor is prescribed or provl-
3S sion is made for extension of time in suitable cases by the appropriate 
authority. 
(6) The provisions of section 65 shall apply to gcods warehoused 
before the commencement of this Act if the operations permissible 
under that section were carried on after such commencement. 
937 (B) LS--9 

58 
t') AD, dut)' or pmalty payable UDder my repealed enactment 
may be recovered In a manner provided under this AC!t but without 
prejudice to any action already taken for the reeovery of sueh duty 
or penalty under the repealed Act. 
(8) nte mention of particular matters in sub-sections (4). (5). (6) 5 
and (7) shall not be held to prejudice or affect th~ general application 
of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 189', with regard to the effect 10 of 1897. 
of repeals. 
(9) Nothing in this Act shall affect any law for the time being in 
force relating to the constitution and powers of any Port authority 10 
in a major part as defiDed in the IIldian Ports Ad, 1908. I S of 1908. 
~., 161. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisiODS of this 
di6:u'ties. Act, particularly in relation to the transition from the enactments 
repealed by this Act to the provUdaBs of this Act, the Central Gov-
ernment may, by general or special order, do anything not inconsis- 15 
tent witJa such pl'Olr'isiaas wbicll appears iD be lieceslaxy or expedient 
for the purpose of remOving the diffieu1ty. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(Sft sectioD ., 
RlP!A~ 
Year No. Short tItle Extent of repreJ 
S I 3 4 
1878 8 The Sea Customs Ita. The whole 
1896 8 The Inland Bonded Ware-
houses Act The whole 
J9a4 19 The Lad C\lltom. Act • The whole 
1934 32 The Aircraft Act . Seed. [6. 
10 
• 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Sea Customs Act which lays dbwn the basic law relating to 
customs was enacted more than 80 years ago. It has been amended 
from time to time and some important amendments were mede by 
the Sea Customs (Amendment) Act, 1955. General and compre-
hensive revision of the Act has not so far been undertaken. Several 
provisions of the Act hav~ become obsolete. Difficulties ha,'e 
also been experienced in the implementation of certain other provi-
sions. The trade has been pressing for certain changes and faci-
lities. Smuggling, consequent to controlled economy, has presented 
new problems. To meet these requirements, it hilS become neces-
sary to revise the Act. 
The Land Customs Act was passed in 1924. It is not a self-
contained Act and applies by reference provisions of the Sea Custom!' 
Act to land customs with certain modifications. There is no separate 
law relating to air customs, and the administration of gir customs is 
governed by certain rules made under the Indian Aircraft Act, 1911. 
While reviSing the Sea Customs Act, it is proposed to consolidate 
the provisions relating to sea customs, land customs and air customs 
into one comprehensive measure. 
The Notes on Clauses explain in detail all the changes which are 
proposed to be introduced in the new law as compared with the 
existing law. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th June, 1962. 
60 
MORARJI R. DESAI. 

Note! on Cla1.L8e. 
Cla1.L8e 2.-A number of new definitions of certain terms which are 
used in the new law have been added. 
Clause 3.-This is a new provision which specifies the classes of 
officers of Customs. The existing statutory designation of "Chief 
Customs Officer" and the "Customs Collector" are being replaced by 
the actual designation of the officers. 
Cla'use 4.-Sub-clause (1) corresponds to first para. of existing 
section 6. Sub-clause (2) is a new provision which empowers the 
Central Government to delegate to the Board and the :;;uperior officers 
of Customs the powers to appoint subordinate officers. 
Clause S.-Sub-clause (1) corresponds to second para. of existing 
section 6 and existing section 9(a). Sub-clause (2) is a new provision 
and will enable officers of Customs to perform the functions of their 
subordinates whenever necessary. 
Clause 6 replaces existing section 8 under which the powers of 
officer!> of Customs at places where there is no Custom House Me 
exercised by the land revenue officers of the district. This is no longer 
necessary because Central Excise Officers are available all over the 
country. Further, powers of Customs Officers have sometimes to be 
conferred on other officers, like Police Officers. The proposed clause, 
therefore, makes a general provision empowering the Central Govern-
ment to entrust functions of an officer of Customs to any officer of the 
Central or a State Government or a local Authority. 
Cla1.L8e 7.-Clause (a) corresponds to existing section 11 (a). The 
Sub-clause as revised provides for a Customs Port being appointed 
for the loading and unloading of only a class of imported goods or 
goods to be exported. Further, the phrase "customs-port" will no 
longer apply to ports which handle coastal goods only. Sub-clauses 
(b) and (c) correspond to section 4 of the Land Customs Act, 1924. 
Clause (d) corresponds to existing section 12. 
Clause 8 corresponds to exjsting section U(c) and 11 (f). The 
power to approve landing placs etc. will now be exercised by the 
Collector of Customs instead of by the Board. 
Clause 9 corresponds to existing section 14. The new clause will 
permit the establishment of warehouses in the interior and at ~and­
customs stations. This will enable the Department to give warehous-
ing facilities in the interior and also in respect of goods imported by 
land. 
81 

d2 
Clause 10 corresponds to existing section 17. The latter part of the 
existing section regarding the appointment of places at which vessels 
may be anchored is being deleted as that power is conferred on Port 
authorities under the Indian Ports Act, 1908. 
Clause 11 replaces eXisting sections 18 and 19. The existing sec-
tion 19 does not specify any guiding principles, for prohibiting the 
import or export of goods. The purposes for which the import or 
export of goods may be prohibited have now been sgecifted in sub-
clause (2) on the lines of the General Agreement on Trade and Tariff 
to which India is a signatory. Items (r), (s) and (t) though not speci. 
fically provided in GATT are nonetheless permitted by GATT. A 
residuary provision has, however, been added to meet unforeseeD 
exigencies. 
Clause 12.-Goods imported or exported by land are at present not 
liable to duty unless they are imported from or exported to a terri-
tory which is declared a foreign territory by a notification issued under 
secticn 5 of the Indian Tariff Act, 1934. In that case duty becomes 
leviable in respect of such commodities as are specified in the notifica-
tion. Basically there is no difference between imports by land or by 
sea. Customs duties are imposed on the products of foreign countries 
and the means by which the goods are imported are not really rele-
vant. It is, therefore, proposed to provide that imports and exports 
by land would automatically attract customs duty. 
This clause replaces section 20 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878. with 
the following amendments:-
(i) Goods imported into or exported from a place ('ther than 
a customs-port which are at present not dutiable would beeome 
liable to duty. 
(ii) Clause (b) of the existing section under which opium, 
salt or salted fish carried coast-wise is dutiable, is being deleted. 
The provisions in Section 2 (4) and Section 6 of the Indian Tariff 
Act, 1934 for levy of duty on opium, salt or motor spirit carried 
.coast-wise is also being omitted. The power to levy differential 
duty on goods manufactured or produced in another State is ODD-
ferred under the ConstitutiOl'l on the State Governments. 
(iii) Sub-section (2) is being amended. The liability to cus-
toms duty of goods belonging to the Central Government which 
is implied at present is being specifically provided. 
Clause 13.-This is a new provision which makes the importer 
liable to pay duty on goods whi9 are pilferred before clearance. 

Onder the exi5ting Aet, an importer can abandon an entire consiga-
ment evoen though it may have been pilferred in which case he is not 
liable to pay duty. 
Clause 14(1) replaces existing section 30. Clause (a) of the exist-
ing section regarding determination of assessable value of goods on 
the basis of their wholesale price in India is being deleted as it does 
not conform to the provisions of GATT, to which India is a signabry. 
This has been one of the persistent demands of importers. Clause (b) 
of the existing section has been re-drafted to confonn to the princiJjles 
enunciated in GATT. It is being specifically provided that the assess-
able value shall be based on transactions in which the seller and 
the buyer have no interest in the business of each other and price is 
the sole consideration. It has also been provided on the lines of 
GATT that where the normal price in independent transactions is 
nut ascertainable, the nearest equivalent of such price, as may be 
determined in accordance with the Rules to be made by the Central 
Government, will be the assessable value. 
CLause 14(2) corresponds to existing section 22, and' specifies in 
addition the guiding principle for fixing tariff values. At IJresent 
tariff values are fixed on the basis cf real value as defined in Section 
30 (8). Since that Sub-section is heing omitted the hasis for fixing 
tariff value is also being changed so as to be in confonnity with the 
revised definition of value. 
Clause 15 corres,?onds to existing section 37. A residuary clause (c) 
has been added, according to which the date for determining the rate 
of duty in the case of goods not cleared in accordance with the normal 
procedure shall be the date of payment of duty. 
Clause 16 corresponds to existing section 38. Instead of the 
existing first proviso which fixes the date for determining duty 
where the export of any goods is permitted without a shipping bill 
or in anticipation of the delivery of a shipping bill, a general residu-
ary clause is being provided specifying that in the <:ase of goods 
not exported in accordance with the normal procedure, the date 
for determining the rate of duty shall be the date of payment of 
du.ty. 
Clause 17.-Sub-clause (1) corresponds to existing section 31, 
with the modification that all imported goods or goods to be export-
ed and not only goods liable to ad valorem duty will now be liable 
to be examined. Another amendment gives to the Customs Officers 
discretion to examine all or any part of the goods. 

64 
Sub-clause (2) corresponds to existing section 87, sub-clause (3) 
corresponds to second p:lra. of existing section 29, and sub-clauae 
(4) corresponds to existing section 29-A. 
Clause 18 corresponds to existing section 29-B, and makes the 
following amendments:-
(i) Provisional assessments will now be pe~ible if the 
Customs Officer deems it necessary to make further enquiries 
before he assesses the goods. This will avoid detention of 
goods in such cases. 
(ii) Even in the case of goods to be warehoused, provision-
al assessment will be permissible. 
Clause 19 replaces existing section 21, with the following amend-
ments:-
(i) Strictly speaking, the provisions of the existing section 
apply even where certain articles liable to different rates of 
duty form ingredients of certain goods. This provision is being 
deleted, as being obsolete. 
(ii) It is being specifically provided that articles which 
are liable to duty with reference to quantity shall be chargeable 
'to that duty only. 
(iii) Two provisos are being added. The first one states 
that accessories of, and maintenance and repair implements for, 
any article which satisfy the conditions specified in the Rules 
made in this behalf by the Ce'ntral Government shall be charge-
able at the same rate of duty as the main article with which 
they are imported. This should give considerable relief from 
the hardships which a strict application of the existing section 
would cause. The second proviso provides that if the importer 
produces evidence to the satisfaction of the Customs Officer 
regarding the value of the articles liable to difterent rates of 
duty, each such article shall be charged to duty at the rate 
applicable to it. This, again, will prove to be a big facility in 
cases of this type. 
Clause 20 corresponds to existing sections 25 and 26, with the 
following changes:-
(i) The condition that property in the re-imported goods 
should not have changed hands, is being deleted, as it ha. 
resulted in the denial of concession in cases where the foreign 
buyer had taken delivery of the goods which were later rejected 

15 
OA iDlpection. The implied condition that the goodJ are the 
same which were exported is being specifically provided. 
(ii) Where goods exported under a claim for dmwback of 
Central Excise duty are re-imported, the amount of drawback 
shall be repaid in the form of a Customs duty. - Under the 
existing provision the amount of Central Excise duty leviable 
at the time of re-importation has to be paid. Since the rate of 
drawback allowed on export is fixed ad hoc and may be more or 
less than the actual duty paid, it is but fair that on re-importa-
tion duty should be levied at the same ad hoc rate. 
(iii) In the case of goods which are exported in bond with-
out payment of customs duty or the Central or State Excise 
duty, an amount equal to such duties calculated at the rates 
prevailing at the time and place of re-importation ojl the goods 
will have to be paid in the form of a Customs duty. This is a 
new provision. 
(iv) The provision giving discretion to the Chief Customs 
Officer to waive the payment of Excise duty even though draw-
back was received at the time of exportatiol'1, is being deleted. 
(v) Sub-clause (2) is a new provision which lays down that 
goods shall be deemed to have been produced or manufactured 
in India if at least 25% of the total cost of production or manu-
facture of the goods has been incurred in India. This provision 
is being made to avoid disputes. 
Cla.use 21 correspondes to existing section 27. 
Cla.use 22 replaces existing sections 33, 34, 34A, 35 apd 114, with 
the following changes:-
(i) Under th~ existing sections, abatement of duty can be 
allowed:-
<a> in respect of goods liable to ad va.lorem duty if they 
are damaged, 
(b) in respect of goods liable to duty on tarift value if 
they have deteriorated to the extent of more than one-tenth 
of the value, 
(c) in respect of. goods liable to specific duty, other 
than wine, spirit or beer, which have been notified by the 
Central Government, and which have deteriorated to the 
extent of more than one-tenth of the value. 
These distinctions are being abolished and abatement will now 
be admissible in respect of all goods and for damage as well as 
9"'7 (B) LS-IO 

deterioration. The revised provision will give relief to import-
ers whose goods may deteriorate Or may get damaged. 
(ii) Under the existing sections, abatement of duty is 
allowed only in respect of damage or deterioration sustained 
before the delivery of the bill of entry. Under the revised 
provision, abatement will be allowed in respect of damage and 
deterioration up to the stage of unloading of the goods. Thus 
the thoughtful importer who puts in his bill of entry before 
the unloading of the goods will not be penalised as at present. 
At the same time, the importer who delays putting in a bUI 
of entry will not get any relief on account of any deterioration 
o~ goods during the period of delay. 
Abatement of duty will also be allowed in respect of 
damage substained due to an unavoiaableaceident after the 
woading of the goods but before their examination. 
(iii) The provision in existing section 33 for determining 
the extent to which abatement of duty may be allowed in 
respect of goods liable to ad valorem duty is being extended to 
other goods also. 
Cl4use 23.-Sub-clause (1) replaces existing section 122. Under 
the existing section remission of duty is permissible only if goods 
are lost or destroyed by unavoidable accident or delay. Under the 
revised provision remission of duty may be 'allowed in all cases 
where goods are lost or destroyed whatever may be the reason. 
Since cases .f total loss or destruction cause considerable hardship, 
a generous approach is being made. Further, the new provision will 
specUlcally permit remission of duty not only in respect of ware-
housed goods as at present but also in respect of other goods which 
are cleared direct for home consumption. Importers will welcome 
this relief. Sub-clause (2) replaces the last para. of existing section 
100 and lays down that the proper officer may require that the 
abandoned goods should be surrendered to the Customs Depart-
ment. Again, the concession in the proposed provision will specifi-
cally cover not only warehoused goods which alone enjoy the con-
cession at present but also goods cleared direct for home consump-
tion. This would be an additional relief to importers whose goods 
have completely deteriorated. 
Cl4use 24 replaces existing section 155. The scope of the present 
concession in the rate of duty is restricted to spirits only. The con-
cession is beil'lg extended to all goods, specified by the Central 
Government which can be used for more than one purpose. The 
importers of goods which can be put to more than one use will get 
considerable relief by ,this provision. The new provision will end 

8? 
sueh disputes as arise at present regarding the proper rate of dutJ 
leviable on such goods. 
Clause 25 corresponds to existing section 23 with the following 
amendments :-
(i) the provision about the grant of exemptions in respect 
of goods imported into or exported from particular ports is being 
deleted. The new provision will permit the grant of exemptions 
in respect of goods imported for consumption in any area having 
special features. 
(ii) sub-clause (2) corresponds to the second. part of exIst-
ing section 23 and specifies a new condition that exemption in 
individual cases may be granted only if the Central Government 
is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest. 
CJatlM 26 is a new provision which permits the refund of exporfl 
duty if the goods are returned to the exporter within one year from 
the date of exportation. This concession has been demanded by the 
trade and is legitimate. 
CIaUBe 27 replaces existing section 40, with the following amend-
ments:-
(i) the period of three months for claiming refund is being 
increased to six months. The Customs Advisory Council recom-
mended such increase so that refunds legitimately due may not 
be rejected as time-barred. 
(ii) it has been specifically provided that where duty has 
been paid under protest, the time-limit will not apply. This 
facility is at present given under executive instructions. 
(iii) claims for refund made before the actual crediting of 
the duty will now be treated as claims made within the time-
limit. 
(Iv) it is being specifically provided that the time-limit for 
claiming refund shall not apply where refunds have to be given 
as a result of any order passed in appeal or revision. 
(v) the new provision will apply to all types of refunda 
without any qualifying condition as at present. 
(vi) the existing provision contains only a time-limit for 
claiming a refund. There is no positive provision for the arant 
of refund. The revised clause makes such a provision. 
(vii) at present, refunds can be claimed even though the 
assessment may have been made by an Assistant Collector of 
CUstoms or the Collector of Customs. It 11 now hem, provided 

ea 
that refunds can be claimed only in respect of an order of assess-
ment made by an officer of Customs lower in rank than aD 
Assistant Collector of Customs. The remedy in respect of orders 
passed by Asstt.· Collectors and higher officers will be to file an 
appeal. . 
CIaUle 28 replaces existing section 39 with the following amend-
ments:-
(1) the existing time-limit of 3 months is being increased to 
8 months. The period laid down for refunds and recoveries 
should obviously be the same. 
(if) there shall be no time-limit for issuing notice of 
recovery where duty has not been levied or has been short-levied 
or has been erroneously refunded by reason of collusion or any 
wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts by the importer 
or the exporter. 
(iii) it is being made clear that the notice which has to be 
issued within the time-limit is not the final one but only a show-
cause notice. But the amount of duty which may finally be 
ordered to be recovered shall not exceed the amount specified 
in the notice. 
(iv) the time-limit will, generally speaking, be computed 
from the date of payment of duty and not from the date of the 
ftrst assessment as at present. 
(v) the new provision will apply to all types of short-levies, 
non-levies and erroneous refunds, without any qualifying condi-
tion as at present. 
Clause 29 is a new provision. In so far as vessels are concerned, 
it makes it obligatory on vessels coming from foreign ports to call 
at a customs-port only until all the passengers have disembarked 
aad aU Imported cargo has been unloaded. This proviSion is necessary 
ior proper control. 
aa7ue 30 replaces existing sections 53, 54, 54-A and 55 with the 
following amendments:-
(i) the person-in-charge of a vehicle will be required to 
deliver an import report. Under clause 43 (1) private carl and 
buses have been exempted from this requirement. 
(ii) under the existing sections 53 and 54, an import mani-
fest has to be filed immediately after arrival of a vessel or 
within 24 hours, depending on whether the Board haa issued a 
notification in respect of a port or not. Under the proposed 
provision, import manifests are to be filed immediately on 

anival of a conveyance, but the proper officer of Customs has 
been given discretion to permit, on sufficient cause being shown, 
IUCh ~ for delivering the manifest as he deems proper. 
(iii) it would no longer be necessary to obtain the permis-
sion of the proper ofticer of Customs for delivering a manifest 
before the arrival of a vessel. 
(iv) the proper ofticer of Customs will now be empowered 
to permit amendment or supplementation of import manifest in 
all cases where he is satisfied that there was no fraudulent 
intention. The existing provision permits amendments in cases 
of obvious errors only. 'I'his amendment will enable the Customs 
Officers to give relief by permitting genuine amendments. 
Clause 31 corresponds to existing sections 57 and 59. Sub-clause 
(2) is a new provision which will enable vessels to unload imme-
diately baggage, mail-bags, animals, perishable goods and hazardous 
goods without waiting for the grant of entry inwards. 
Clause 32 replaces existing section 82 with an amendment which 
specifies that only those goods can be unloaded at a Customs Station 
which are specified in the import manifest for being unloaded at that 
customs-station. This amen.dment is being introduced to prevent 
unauthorised landing of goods. The corresponding penal clause 
111 (g) provides relief in respect of inadvertent landings. 
Clause 33 corresponds to existing section 73 with an amendment 
which gives discretion to the proper ofticer to allow unloading of 
imported goods also at a place other than an approved landing place. 
Clause 34 corresponds to existing section 70. 
Clause 35 corresponds to existing section 76 with the following 
amendments:- I 
(i) the provisions about form of a boat-note and other 
aetails have been omitted. 
(ii) in the case of goods to be exported which are accom-
panied ·by a shipping bill, a boat-note will not be required. 
(iii) discretion has been given to the proper officer of 
Customs to dispense with the requirement of a boat-note in any 
C81e. 
Clause 36 corresponds to existing section 72 but instead of leaving 
it to the discretion of the Customs Officer to give or not to give per-
mission for loading or unloading of goods on holidays and outside the 

'IIorking hours, it provides the conditions subject to which such 
permission may be granted. 
Clause 37 replaces existing sections 67 and 68, but omits matters 
of detail. I 
Clause 38 corresponds to existing section 58 and clause (c) of 
second para. of existing section 73. Under the existing section the 
customs officers can. ask questions in respect of certain specified 
matters. Under the new provision customs officers are bemg given 
the power to ask questions for carrying out the provisions of the 
Act. 
Clauae 39 replaces existing section 61, but omits matters of 
detail, I 
Clause 40 corresponds to certain provisions in existing section 
137. 
Clause 41 replaces the provisions in existing sections 63 ,and 88 
regarding the export manifest, with the following amendments:-
(i) the person-in-charge of a vehicle will be required to 
deliver an export report. Under clause 43 (1), private cars and 
buses have been exempted from this requirement. 
(ii) the proper officer of Customs is being empowered to 
permit amendment or supplementation of export manifest if 
there was no fraudulent intention. The existing provision per-
mits amendment in cases of obvious errors only. 
(iii) the time-limit within which the export manifest may 
be delivered after the departure of a conveyance will now be 
decided by the proper oftlcer of Customs considering the needa 
of each case, whereas the existing section 66 specifies a fixed 
time-limit of five days. 
Cla1&8e 42 replaces the provisions in existing sections 62, 63, 64, 
66 and 68 regarding port . clearance, with the following amend-
ments:-
(I) the pe1'lOn-tn-charge of a vehicle will also have to 
satisfy certain specl1ied requirements. Under clause 43 (1) . 
private can and buses have been exempted from these. 
(li) the provision that masters of vessels shall make ar. 
application for port clearance at least 24 hours before the intenO 
eel departure of the vessel is being deleted. 

71 
(lit) thipping bills and other documents on which clearanee 
of goods has been pennitted will have to be delivered by the 
person-in-charge of a conveyance to the proper officer of Customs, 
before the departure of a conveyance. This provision is being 
made for better control. 
(iv) the obsolete provision in existing section 64 requiring 
the ship's agent to stand guarantee for the discharge of all claims 
for damage or short-delivery which may be established by the 
importers is being deleted. 
(v) item (f) of sub-clause (2) is a new provision which 
specifies the action to be taken where goods have been loaded 
in contravention of the relevant provisions. 
Clause 43--Sub-clause (1) .-Since most of the provisions of this 
Chapter will apply to vehicles also, it is being 'Provided that vehicles 
not carrying any goods other than baggage of persons shall be 
exempt from certain procedural provisions. 
Sub--clause (2) is a new provision which permits the c.entral 
Government to exempt by notification certain specified classes of 
conveyances from all or any provisions contained in Chapter VI. 
Clause 44 exempts from the provisions of Chapter VII baggage 
and postal articles. 
Cl.au.se 45 raplaces existing section 85 with the following amend-
ments:-
(i) the existing section speei1les that either the Port Trust 
or the Customs Department shall take charge of the landed 
goods. The new provision enables the CoUector of Customs to 
approve for this purpose other persons also like officers of State 
Governments in charge of minor ports, agents of the vessel or 
aircraft. 
(ii) item (a) of sub-clause (2) is a new provision which 
provides specifically that the person in whose custody imported 
goods are kept shall keep a record of such goods and shall send 
• copy thereof to the proper officer of the Customs. 
(iii) the existing obsolete provision making the ship's agents 
liable to discharge all claims for damage and short-delivery is 
being deleted. • 

Clause 46 replaces first and third paras. of existiJ1l section 28 
and section 86, with the following amendments:-
(i) the particulars to be mentioned in a bill of entry have 
not been specified in the clause but will be prescribed in the 
regulations. 
(ii) the Collector of Customs is being empowered to permit 
in special circum$f;ances the presentation of a bill of entry even 
before the delivery of the import manifest. This will facilitate 
quick clearance of goods even if the vessel's agent has been 
negligent in not presenting the manifest promptly. 
(iii) the provision that particulars of a bill of entry shall 
correspond with the particulars given in the import manifest is 
being replaced by a provision that except where the proper 
officer so permits a bill of entry shall be for all the goods includ-
ed in the relevant bill of lading. Since an importer is required 
to make a true declaration, he cannot at the same time be asked 
to make a declaration which corresponds with what is contained 
in the import manifest, over which he has no control. 
(iv) sub-clause (4) of the new clause requires the importer 
to produce the invoice, if any, in support of the particulars 
furnished by him in the bill of entry. 
(v) sub-clause (5) is a new provision which permits the 
proper officer of Customs to allow substitution of a bill of entry 
for home consumption for a bill of entry for warehousing or 
vice versa if the interests of revenue are not prejudicially affect-
ed and if there was no fraudulent intention 
Clause 47 corresponds to existing section 89 with an amendment 
which provides specifteaUy that the proper officer shall allow clear-
ance of the goods if he is satisfied that the import of the goods is not 
prohibited. 
Clawe 48 corresponds to certain parts of existing section 88 with 
the following amendments:-
(i) the time-limit of four months allowed in the existing 
section is being reduced to two months. The proposed limit is 
in conformity with the limit laid down in the Port Trust Acts. 
(ii) the proper officer of Customs is being given discretion 
teD extend this time-limit. 
(iii) the sale of the uncleared goods shall now be done by 
the person having custody of the goods after he has obtained 
the permission of the proper officer of Customs. 

'11 
(iv) the power to .n any goods even before the expir1 of 
the time-limit at present reatricted to perishable goods only wU1 
DOW be exerclsable in respect ol animals and hazardou. JoodI 
also. 
Clczuse 49 is a new provision which enablee the Aalstant Collector 
of Customs to permit the keeping of imported goods in a warehoul8 
without the goods being warehoused, if he is satisfied that the goods 
cannot be cleared within a reasonable time. At present if there is 
any delay in the clearance of the goods, the importer has to pay 
demurrage charges and many III time part ol the goods get pilferred. 
The proposed facility of keeping such goods in • warebDule will 
solve both these diftlculties. 
Clause SO replaces the provisioM of existing section 13'1 reprd. 
fng &hipping bills, with the following amendments:-
(i) the particulars to be mentioned in a shipping bm are 
DOt being specified in the clause but will be prescribed in the 
regulations. 
(if) the power vested in the Collector of Customs to exempt 
any goods from the requirement of being entered in a shippln, 
bill is being taken away, because whenever any goods have to 
be exported, there must neoessarily be a document eoverin, 
them. 
Clause 51 replaces certain parts of section 13'1 with an amend-
ment which provides specifically that the proper officer shall allow 
the clearance of goods for export if he is satfafted that the export 
thereof is not prohibited. 
Clause S2 is a new provision which mention" specifically that the 
provisions of Chapter VIII shall not apply to baggage, postal artlcles 
and stores. 
C14use 53 is a new provision which provides that goods mention-
ed in an import manifest as for transit in the same vessel or aircraft 
to any port or airport in India or outside India may be allowed to 
be so transitted without payment of duty. The clause also make. 
it clear that the prohibitions on the bringing or taking of ;oodI 
into or out of India shall apply to such goods. 
Clause 54 replaces existing sections 128 and 134, with the follow .. 
ine amrmdments:-
(1) sub-clause (1) is a new provision which speoifteaU,. 
provides that any person intending to tranship any goods shan 
present a bUl of traaabipment to the proper ofBcer of Cu.m... 
887(B) tB-U. 

74:, . 
. ', . ", (iil sub-clause (2) provides caat when goods are to be 
transhipped" to aport or airport outside India, the prohibitions 
. em the bringing or taking of goods into or out of India shall 
apply.' . 
',' ',. (iii) the existiDgseetion provides that if the transhipment 
-m from a small port, a security or bond may be taken for the 
: ,due 'arrival of the goods at the plaee of destination, and if the 
. tranship'ment, is from a big port, no bond shall be taken. The 
'need for ensuring due arrival of the imported goods at the port 
ohieMin,ation tsdependent on the nature of the goods, the nature 
.Df,theon-carrying, vessel, etc. and not, on the port from which 
goods are being transhipped. Hence, the existing distinction Is 
being abolished. The Central Board of Revenue is being given 
-fM-p6Wer to prescnae by regulations such condItions as i't' con-
siders necessary for the due arrival of any such goods at the 
PQrt of' destination, irrespective of the port fr.om which tranship-
.nt is. to be allowed. 
(iv) a new condition is being specified to the effect that' if 
tile' -goods are' to be transhipped to a minor port or airport in 
lndia, the traDahipm.ent shall be allowed only if the goods are 
bcm4 fi4e hltended for transhipment to such nort or airport. This 
ecmd:ition is being imposed in order tocounteraet mala fide 
attempts to clear the goods at minor ports where the customs 
st~ is no~ very ~eneed or high~powered. 
Clause 55 Co~ds to exiSting section 131. 
" ' 
Clause 56 is a new provision which will enable the transport' Of . 
imported goods from one land customs station to another and trans,", 
port of any goods from one part of India to another part through any 
f<'reign territory, subject' to such conditions as the Board may pres-
cribe by regulations for the due arrival of such goods at the place of 
destination. ' 
Cla~e57 ,corresponds to existing section 15, with an amendment; 
which gives the power of appointment of public warehouses to the 
Assistant ColleCtor of Customs instead of the Collector of Customs. 
Clause 58 replaces existing section 16 with the following 
.men~ts:..,.... 
(i) the power to license private warehouses is being given to 
th~ Msiatant' Collector of, Customs instead of the Collector of 
Costoma. 
\:.":" .'-

'71 
(ii) it is being specifically provided that ~ • pri .. ware-
house, ordinarily the goods belonging to the licensee only' ihaD.'-
kept. ,. 
(iii) the grounds for cancellation of a ·licehce arebeift! ;niade 
comprehensive.' 
(iv) provision for the suspension of a licence; i>endill8 an 
~nguiry, is also being made. 
Claus. 59 corresponds to existing sections 92 and 109, 'With the 
tollowing amendments:-
(i) at present, there is no provision for permitting the ware--
. housing of goods imported by laJ:ld. U Ddet the ~w pi'ov~ions 
gQod,s imported by land wUI -also. be allowe.d to be wareh.Qused. 
(ii) auJ>.clailse '(2) is a new provision which 'will eilable aD 
.importer to enter into a general bond for the wlln!hoUsm'g of 
goods to be imported by him· within a -speettled future period. 
This will help ship-chandlers and aircraft agents. 
(iii) it is being specifically provided that even if the·goods 
are transferred to another person, the bQnd ex~uted by' the 
seller shall remain in force, but if the transferee executes a b:esb. 
bond in respect of the goods purchased by him, the bond 
executed by the transferor shall be deemed to be reduced ~o' the. 
extent of the amount for which the fresh bond is executed. 
Clause 60 replaces existing section 93 and first four paras. of 
eXisting jiection 94, and omits the procedural details mentioned in the, 
Qisting sections. Specific provision has been made. that theproP.t,i. 
officer of Customs shall make an order permitting the deposit of -the-
goods in a warehouse. 
Clause 61 corresponds to existing section 103 with the following 
amendments :- '. . 
(i) the first proviso permits the Collector of 'Customs tol'ectue.', 
the period of three years in tlie case of any goods which are 
likely· to deteriorate. This is essential to iafeguard .. ,reyen1.1e. 
(ii) another proviso permits the Collector to give extension 
of the period of warehousing up to one year and the Boatd to 
give extension for further periods. '. 
Clause 62 corresponds to existing sections 97,,98. and 1.24. 
Clause 63 corresponds to existing section 101 with the I.nlend-
ment that the goods shall be. sold by the warehouse-keeper, with:· the 
permission of the proPer officer of Customs,.. ._ ... ~_'" ~.;: 

........ _ .. _ . .-, ... ~~ .. -._-?- . 
Clauae 64 replaces existing section 99 and certain parts of exist-
inlleCtion 100. Item (e) of the new clause permitting the bonder 
to show the goods for sale is a new facility. 
ClaUBe 65 corresponds to 8ub-sectiODS (1), (2) and (3) of existing 
IICUon 100-A with the following amendments:-
The existiDg section permits the destruction of any refuse 
or surplus goods resulting from any operations and allows the 
remission of duty thereon. Under the new provision duty will 
be remitted on only such portion of the refuse as has resulted 
:from an operation connected with goods which are exported. 
Where the manufactured goods are cleared for home consump-
tion, duty on. the refuse which has resulted from the manufacture 
01 such goods shall not be remitted. This is being provid!!d 
because refuse in manufacture is not a loss to ~e manufacturer. 
While calculating the coat of production, he adds the coat ot 
wasted materials. And it the product is consumed in India, there 
a. DO reucm why duty should not be paid on the wasted. 
materials. 
Clause 66 corresponds to sub-eec:tion (4) of existing section 1~A, 
with an amendment which apecifles a guiding prinCiple for the grant 
of exemption. 
CIcn&ae 67 replacea existing sections 104-108, but the procedural 
detaiJI specifled in the existing section have been omitted. 
Cia,," 6B corresponds to existing section 110. 
CIA ... 69 corresponds to existing section 111. Instead ot the 
aiaUng provim which gives the Central Government the power to 
prohibit the export ot any warehoused goods, sub-clause (2) of the 
new clause specifies a guiding principle that this power shall be 
uerclsed in respect of such goods as are likely to be smuggled back 
iAto India. 
Clau. 10 replaces existing sections 116 and 117, with the tollow:-
JIll amendments :-
(i) the conceasion which is at present giVeD in respect of 
wIDe, spirit and beer ill casks and salt will now be admissible 
in respect of such volatile goods which the Central Government 
may notify. The existing concession in respect of natural lou of 
wine, spirit and beer is being extended to other volatile goods. 
(il) the provisions laying down the maximum percentages 
and givinl discretion to the Board to change the limits generally 
and to the Collector to modify the limit in individual cases, are 
being deleted. Duty will be remitted on the quantity genuinely 
deAcient due to utural 10. without fbtini my atatutory 
.'Uimwa liI'Ilit. 

" Cicuae 71 corresponds to existing section 102. 
Clause 72 corresponds to existing sections 118 and 119 with an 
amendment which permits the proper officer to detain and sell an,. 
warehoused goods belonging to the concerned person instead of only 
the goods on account of which any duty is due. 
Clause 73 corresponds to existing section 121. 
Clause 74 corresponds to existing sections 42, 43, 43A and .w(a) 
1ritIt the following amendments:-
(i) under the existing proV'isions, re-expOrts by land are not 
entitled to drawback. The new provisions provide for the 
payment of drawback in respect of re-exports by land also. 
(ii) under the existing section 42, the rate of drawback: is 
7/8ths of the import duty paid and the whole of it in the case of 
silver bullion. A uniform rate of 95 per cent. of the import duty 
paid is proposed under the new clause. 
(iii) under the existing section 43, the normal period of two 
years within which drawback may be claimed is extended to 
three years when goods are re-exported from a port other than 
the one where they were imported. Under the new clause, 
drawback claims in respect of exports from other ports also have 
to be made within the same period. 
(iv) the power conferred on the Collector of Customs to 
extend the period to three years is being taken away consider~ 
ing that in other countries the time-limit is usually one year 
only; but the Board is being empowered to give such extenaiOD 
u it may deem fit. 
(v) the period of two years will now be counted from the 
date of payment of duty up to the date when goods are entered 
for export, whereas under the existing provision the period is 
counted from the date of importation to the date of exportation. 
The new method of calculating the time-limit will be easier and 
is more favourable to the trade. 
(vi) specific provision is being made for prescribing the 
manner in which identity may be established of goods imported 
in different consignments but stored together in bulk. The 
concession is at present granted under executive instructions. 
(vii) for regulating the rate of drawlilack in the case of used 
goods a guiding principle has been laid down in sub-clause (2). 
Clause 75 corresponds to existing section 43B with the followin, 
aMendment: 
For fixing the rate of drawback in respect of exports of nny 
B0ods, the existing section has a specific provision for averaiin, 

the quantity of imported materIal used in the manufaeture, 01 
goods of that class or description. There is no specific provision 
,for averaging the price of the imported material, or for averag-
ing the rate of duty in case the imported materials are assessable 
on standard as well as preferential rates. Specific provision is 
now being made for averaging the amount of duty paid which 
implies the averaging of quantity, price and rate of duty. This 
will give statutory authority to the existing practice. 
. Clause 76.-Sub-clause (1) coITeftponds to existing section 50, with 
the' f0l:l0wing amendments: 
(i) the condition that goods under claim for drawback must 
have been .included in the export manifest will apply in respect 
of only those goods which are required under the regulations to 
be included in an export manifest. 
(ii) it is being made clear that the value of goods under claim 
for drawback which must not be less than the amount of draw-
back refers to the market-price of such goods, 
(iii) the discretion vested in the officers of Customs to allow 
drawback for less than rupees five is being taken away. 
Sub-clause (2) of the new clause corresponds to the existing section 
49(b). It speCifies a guiding principle that prohibition against the 
payment of drawback may be imposed only in those cases in whieh 
the Central Government is of opinion that the goods exported under 
a claim for drawback are likely to be smuggled back into India. 
Cla'use 77 is a new prOVision which specifies that the owner of 'any 
baggage shall make a declaration of its contents to the proper officer 
of Customs. 
Clause 78 is a new provision which specifies that the rate (,f duty 
and tariff valuation applicable to baggage shall be the rate arid valua-
tion in force on the date on which the owner of the baggage makes a 
declaration under the previous clause to the proper officer. 
Clause 79 replaces existing section 24 with the following changes: -
(i) the existing section specifies that baggage in actual use 
will be exempt. Obviously, everything in actual use cannot be 
passed free of duty. It is now being stipulated that cnly such 
articles shall be exempt from duty as have been in the owner's 
use for the minimum period specified in the rules to be made by 
the Central Government. 
(ii) provision is being made to exempt even new articles from 
duty under certain circumstances, so that gifts, souvenirs and 
novelties that passengers usually brini may be passed free of 
ciuty. 

Clause 80 is a new provision which gives to the pa~engers the 
facility of temporarily leaving the baggage with the CUitomS Depart-
ment if they are unable to clear it. 
Clause 81 replaces existing section 75 in so far as the latter relata 
to baggage. 
Clause 82 is a new provision which lays down that a label or decla-
ration accompanying postal goods which contains the description, 
quantity and value thereof shall be deemed to be an entry for Customs 
purposes. 
Clause 83 is a new provision which ,pecifies the crucial date for 
determining the rate of duty and tariff valuation in respect of goods 
imported or exported by post. 
Clause 84 replaces existing section 75 in so far as the latter relates 
to postal goods. 
Clause 85 is a new provision which permits the warehousing of 
5tores without their being assessed to duty. 
Clause 86.-Sub-clause (1) provides speCifically that any stores 
imported in a vessel or aircraft may, without payment of duty, remain 
On board such vessel or aircraft while it is in India. This will enable 
foreign-going vessels to keep stores on board while they are tempo-
rarily engaged in coastal trade, instead of paying duty and then 
claiming drawback. 
Sub-clause (2) replaces the existing section 132 and deleting the 
existing condition that the vessels must belong to the same owner 
and should be in port at the same time, but specifies· a new condition 
that transfer shall be allowed only if the receiving vessel is entitled 
to conSume the stores free of duty. 
Clause 87 is a new provision which gives to vessels or aircrafts the 
facility of consuming stores without payment of duty during the 
period they can be cla!!lified as 'foreign going' whereai under tke 
existing provision the facility is allowed only when a vessel is pro-
ceeding to a foreign port. 
Clause 88 specifies the concessions in respect of stores admissible 
under the existing sections 42, 43B and 112. 
Clause 89 corresponds to existing section 28. The scope of the new 
clause is limited to customs duty only, and does not extend to excise 
duty (Central or State). The Central Excise Act has a separate provi-
sion for granting such exemption, For State excise, the provision has 
to be made by the States. 

80 
Clauae 90 replaces existine section 48 in respect of imported 8t01'8l 
for the use of the Indian Navy. As regards provisions for naval 
ofBcers and seamen which have to be paid for by them, the exiatiDC 
obsolete facility of allowing the whole of the import duty aa draw· 
ba~k is being taken away. On such provisions, the rate of drawback 
will be 95 per cent., as for other goods. 
Cha;>ter XII (Clauses 91 to 98) which corresponds to Chapter XV 
cf the existing Act has been completely re-cast because an entirely 
new procedure for the carriage of coastal goods has been devised. 
The outlines of the new procedure are as follows: 
The consignor of any coastal goods shall present a bill of coastal 
goods in the prescribed form. After it has been passed by the Customs 
Officer, the goods will be loaded and the bill handed over to the II18&-
ier of the vessel. If the charges and penalties due have been paid, 
the vessel will be permitted to depart. At the port of destinatiOn, 
the master will hand over the respective bills of coastal ~ds to the 
Customs Officer who will permit clearance of the goods if they 
correspond to the entries in this bill. 
The master of the vessel will also carry an advice book in which 
the Customs Officers will make suitable entries as an advice to the 
respective ports of destinations. The new procedure '\\;11 be a big 
step forward in the speedy clearance of coastal goods. Fonnalities 
will be reduced to the absolute minimum. From the administrative 
point of view also the system will be better. 
ClaUle 99 corresponds to clauses (c) and '(d) of the existing sectioa 
157. The purposes for which restrictions may be placed on the coast-
wise carriage of goods are being indicated as guiding principles. 
CiaUle 100 corresponds to the existing section 169 but provide. In 
addition to the existing categories, the following categories of persolls 
who may be searched on suspicion:-
(i) any person who is about to board a vessel within the 
Indian Customs waters or is about to board an aircraft or vehicle 
proceeding to a place outside India; and 
(U) any person in a Customs area. 
It is necessary to have the power to search outgoing pasaengers, 
when they present themselves for customs clearance, in order to 
check smuggling out of wealth, etc. Further, since persons in the 
dock area sometimes rec:eive smuggled goods and then pass them out, 
it is necessary to have the power to search such suspected persons. 
The powers to search shall also be exercisable if a person fa 
lupected to have secreted about his person any document. relattn, 

81 
to goods ,liable to confiscation. Documents in possession of suspect. 
ed persoDS give many olues. Further, they can be tendered as 
evidenee if a prosecution is launched. 
,Clause 101 is a new provision which will enable certain duly 
empowered officers of customs to search suspected persons anywhere 
in India if they are suspected to have secreted about their person, 
gold, precious stones, watches and other notified a:-ticles liable to 
confiscation. The markets at which smuggled goods are sold are 
spread all over the country. Hence it is essential to have the 
powers of search anywhere in India. The powers shall, however, 
be confelTed only in respect of certain specified articles which are 
being smuggled on a large scale. Further, they will be exercised 
only by such officers as are empowered by the Collectors of Customs. 
Clause 102 corresponds to the existing section 170. 
Clause 103 corresponds to the existing section 170-A. 
Clause 104 replaces the existing sections 173, 174 and 1751 with 
the following amendments:-
(i) under the existing section 173, any person suspected to 
be guilty of any offence under the Customs Act may be arrested. 
Under the proposed clause, persons suspected to be guilty of 
an offence of smuggling only shall be liable to be arrested. 
Since arrest deprive. a person of his personal liberty, it will 
pe confined only to those cases where smuggling in involved. 
(ii) only such officers of customs who have been empower-
ed in this behalf by general or special order of a Collector of 
Customs will have the' power to arrest persons. This is intend-
ed to prevent the abuse of this power. 
(iii) in addition to the power to commit an arrested person 
to jail or order him to be kept in poHce custody, the magistrate 
is being empowered to order the aITested person to be kept in 
such other custody as he deems ftt. 
'(Iv) under the npw provision the power to detain a person 
accused of an offence, unless he offers bail. can be exercised 
pending investigation of the offence by officers of customs. 
Clause 105 replaces the existing section 172, with the following 
amendments:-
. (1) The power to authorise search of premises will now be 
"ftJlerelsed by the Assistant Collectors of Customs whereas at 
,." pn.aenttt·is exercised by magistrates nn the basis of the belief 
937 (B)LS-t2 " 

82 ... 
of a customs officer incharge of a customs-station or the belief 
of an Assistant Collector of Customs. The existing dual system 
is unsatisfactory. The Customs officers charged with the 
checking of smuggling have no power to issue search warrants, 
and the magistrate empowered to issue a search warrant has to 
act on the belief of the Customs officers. Essentially, the 
decision whether under certain circumstances particular 
premises are likely to have been usee! for concealing smuggled 
goods is an executive decision and not a judicial one. In the 
laws of other revenUe departments e.g. Income-tax, Central 
Excise, State Excise, Sales Tax, and in the customs laws o~ 
other countries, the power to search premises is conferred on 
departmental officers. The Taxation Enquiry Commission had 
also recommended this change in the Customs law. 
(ii) In the areas adjoining the land-frontier Or the coast of 
India, officers of Customs specially empowered by name in this 
behalf by the Board will also have the power to search suspect-
ed premises. Across the land and sea frontier, goods can be 
smuggled at any point and it will be impracticable to get an 
authorisation from an Assistant Collector of Customs whose 
jurisdiction may spread over 200 miles or so of the border. It 
is, therefore, proposed that the Central Board of Revenue will 
specially select certain officers and {hese officers will have the 
powers of search. The proposal is on the lines of the system 
prevailing in U.K. and Australia. 
'(iii) Premises may be searched if they are suspected to 
contain inter alia any documents or thin~ which would be 
useful or relevant to any proceedin-~ under the Act. whereas 
the existing provision permits search only for any documents 
relating to goods liable to confiscation. 
Clause 106 replaces existing section 171, with an amendment 
which permits the use of force when it becomes necessary to land 
aircrafts or stop vehicles and animals, while the existing section 
gives this power in respect of vessels only. 
Clause 107 is a new provision which will enable officers of 
Customs empowered in this behalf by general or special order of 
the Collector of Customs to examine persons, require them to pro-
duce documents or to make and si,:01 statements. At present. 
strktly speaking the person concerned has to be summoned by the 
Customs officer. This causes avoidable inconvenience to the p@!'8on. 
Further, the time factor is very valuable in certain enquiries. The 

r ... ····· 
dtiato~ process of issuing summons is not suitable in such investI-
gations. These powers will be exercised only in connection with 
the smuggling of goods. 
Clause 108 corresponds to the existing section lll-A, with aD 
amendment which provides that the powers to summon shall be 
exercised only by such officers of customs as have been empowered 
in this behalf by general or special order of the Collector of 
Customs. 
Cl4use 109 corresponds to sub-section (3) of the existing section 
5 of the Land Customs Act, 1924. The provision regarding confisca-
tion of goods in respect of which the order of clearance is not 
produced has been made in item (k) of Clause 111. 
Clause 110 replaces the existing section 178 with the following 
amendments:-
(i) sub-clause (1) specifies the action to be taken where it 
is not practicable to seize any goods liable to confiscation. 
(ii) sub-clause (2) is a new provision which empowers the 
proper officer to seize any documents or things which will be 
useful or relevant to any proceeding under the Act. These 
documents etc. give valuable clues and help in the prosecution 
of persons accused of any offence. 
Clauses 111 to 117.-GENERAL.-These Clauses replace 75 out o~ 
a total of 87 penal clauses of the existing section 167, the remaining 
12 offences being triable by magistrates. Under the new clauses, 
the re-arrangement in respect of contravention of the provisions of 
the Act is as follows:-
Clause 111 groups together serious contraventions for 
which the imported goods are liable to confiscation. 
Clause 112 concerns the imposition of a personal penalty on 
persons who contravene any of the provisions of clause 111 or 
who abet such contravention. 
Clause 113 groups together all serious contraventions in 
relation to goods to be exported for which the export goods are 
liable to confiscation. 
Clame 114 speCifies the personal penalty on persons who 
contravene any of the provisions of Clause 113 or who abet 
such contravention. 
Clause 115 relates to confiscation of conveyances. 

Clause 116 specifies the penalty that may be irilposed 01\ M 
person-in-cbarge of a conveyance for his inability to accourit 
for any goods carried in sucb conveyance. • 
Clause 117 is a residuary clause which specifies the penalty 
for contravention of any provision or abetment of such contra-
vention, wbere no express penalty is provided for elsewhere. 
The main changes introd.uced are indicated clause by clause: 
Clause lll.-A general ohange from the existing provisioas js 
that except where goods are attempted to be imported throUgh 
unauthorised places, the new provisions will apply to dutiable or 
prohibited goods only. In the case of similar contravention ill 
respect of goods whicb are free and for the importation or exporta-
tion of which there is no prohibition, the' person concerned will. be 
liable to a personal penalt,y not exceeding one thousand rupees 
under clause 117. 
Items (a) and (b) correspond to tbe first part of existing clause 
2 of Section 167. 
Item (c) corllesponds to second part of the existing clause 2 of 
Section 167. 
Item .(dl corresponds to the first two sub-clauses of existin8 
dawse 8·of SectJon 167, subject to aD amendment that goods bmught 
within the Indian customs waters for the purpose of being import-
ed contrary to any prohibition will also be liable to confiscation. 
Item .(e) corresponds to the existing clause 34 and the foW't.b 
sub-clause of existing clause 8 of Section 167. 
Item (f) corresponds to the existing clause 35 of Section 167. 
Item ~(g) is a new provision whicb specifies that, any dutiable or 
prohibited good$ not mentioned in the import manifest for unload-
ing at a particular customs station will become liable to confiscation 
if they are unloaded there. But a saving provision bas been made 
in respect of goods which are inadvertently unloaded. but are in-
cluded in the record kept by the Port Trust or other person in 
whose custody the goods are unloaded. This penal clause is neces-
sary to check smuggling by landing unmanifested goods and later 
on surreptitiously removin8 them. 
Item (b) replaces the existing clauses 28 and 31 of Section 167 
in so far as they relate to the landing of goods without customs 
supervision or at a place otber than an approved landinl place. . ' 

Item ·(i) replaces sub-clause (d) of. the existing clause :n and the 
eKistmg . clause 49 of Section 167. Under the existing clauae 37(d), 
action for concealment can be taken only after a bill of entry has 
been presented, -whereas under the proposed provision action can 
be taken even before the presentation of the bill of entlly. 
Itepl (j) replaces the existing clauses 36, 39, 42, 50 and 52 of 
Section 167. 
Item (k>. corresponds to sub-section (3) of section 5 of the Land 
-Customs Act, 1924. 
Item _(1). replaces the existing clause 37 of Section 11? but the' 
new provision has been so drafted that the goods shall continue to 
be liable to confiscation even aLter they have been cleared, while 
u,nder tlu! existing clause the liability ceases after clearance. 
Item (m) replaces the existing clause 37 of Section 167 with the 
amendment mentioned in Item (1). 
Item (n) corresponds to the existing clause 54 of Section 167. 
Item (o) is a new provision under which any goods exempted 
from duty or from import prohibitions subject to certain conditions 
will become liable to confiscation if those conditions are not observ-
-ed without the prior permission of the proper officer. This penal 
clause is being introduced to check misuse of exemptions granted 
in respect of baggage, postal goods etc. These exemptions will 
henceforth be granted subject to appropriate conditions to the effect 
that the exempted goods may not be sold etc. If these conditions 
are not fulfilled, the goods shall be liable to confiscation. 
Clauss 112 makes the following changes in the existing provi-
sions:-
(i) the existing provisions do not provide for personal penalty 
on the concerned persons for every contravention specified in the 
existing provisions corresponding to the new Clause 111. Under 
the proposed Clause 112, the persons concerned in every contra-
vention mentioned in Clause 111 will become liable to e personal 
penalty. 
(ii) under the existing provisions even where a personal 
penalty is provided in respect of a contravention, it is leviable 
only on the persons actually concerned in the contravention. 
Under the proposed clause any person who abets such contraven-
tion will also become liable to a personal penalty. Thus a ftnan~ 
eier who finances smuggling or a dealer who helps in the disposal 
of smuggled.goods will also be liable to a personal penalty. 

,(iii) under the existing provisions, the maximum persona! 
penalty that may be imposed for a contrav~tion involvinl eva-
sion of revenue is one thousand rupees. This is beinl enhanced 
to three times the duty sought to be evaded or one thousand 
rupees, whichever is the higher. The maximum penalty of one 
thousand rupees is inadequate considering that duty amounting 
to several thousands of rupees is many a time sought to be 
evaded. 
Clause 113.-A general change from the existing pena. provisions 
is that except where the goods are attempted to be exported through 
places other than customs stations, it is only the dutiable or prohibited 
good& which become liable to confiscation. In respect of goods which 
are free and are not prohibited goods, there will only be a personal 
penalty under Clause 117 on the persoas who contravene the provi-
sions or who abet such contravention. 
Items (a) and (b) correspond to the first part of the existing clause 
2 of Section 167. 
Item (c) is a new proviSion under which if any dutiable or prohi-
bited goods are brought near the land frontier or the coast of India for 
the purpose of being exported from a place other than a customs-
station, the goods shall be liable to confiscation. This new provision 
is being made because an attempt to export cannot be said to have 
been made even if a large amount of currency is taken to a small 
village near the border for the purpose of export in payment of 
t;muggled gold. 
Item (d) corresponds to the provisions in sub-clauses 1, 2 and 5 
of the existing clause 8 of Section 167 conceminl exports, subject to 
an amendment under which the liability to confiscation shall arise 
the moment goods are brought within the limits of the Customs area 
(dock limits) for the purpose of being exported contrary to a prohibi-
tion, whereas under sub-clause 5 of the existing clause 8 of Section 
167 the liability to confiscation is incurred only when the goods are 
brought· to a wharf. 
Item (e) is a new provision under which any dutiable or prohibited 
goods found concealed in a package which is brought within the limits 
of 3 customs area for the purpose of export will be liable to confisca-
tion. This will help in checking smuggling out of unauthorised 
goods. 
Item (f) replaces the existing clauses 28 and 31 of Section un 
in so far as they relate to the loading of goods without customs super-
vision or at a place other than an approved loading place. 

..... -.----- - ... - .. 87 
It .·m Cg) is a new provision under which any goods loaded or 
attempted to be loaded without the permission of the proper officer 
on any conveyance the eventual destination of which is a place outside 
India shall be liable to confiscation. This will remove a lacuna in 
the existing penal provisions. 
Item (h) replaces the existing clause 37 in so far as it relates to 
exports. 
Item (i) replaces the existing clause 37 in so far as it relates to 
exports. 
Item (j) is a new provision under which if any goods on which 
import duty has not been paid are entered for exportation under a 
claim for drawback, the goods shall be liable to confiscation. This 
",ill penalise an attempt to get drawback on the export of indigenous 
goods. 
Item (k) replaces the existing clause 10 of Section 167. Under the 
existing clause the liability to confiscation arises only after drawback 
has been paid. Thus, if before the payment of drawback, it is found 
that the goods have not been exported, the existing penal clause is 
not applicable. Under the new clause the liability to confiscation 
will commence if the goods cleared for exportation under a claim for 
drawback are not exported except on account of lack of space in the 
conveyance by which they were to be exported. 
Clause 114 makes similar amendments on the export side which 
clause 112 makes on the import side. 
Clause 115.-Sub-clause (1): Item Ca> corresponds to the existing 
clause 12A of Section 167. Since the new Act will apply to aircrafts 
and vehicles also, the scope of the new clause has been extended to 
any aircraft which is or has been anywhere in India or any vehicle 
which is or has been in a customs area. As in the case of the penal 
provision regarding vessels, the new provision regarding aircrafts and 
vehicles is also modelled on the lines of a similar provision in the 
U.K. Act. 
Item (b) corresponds to the existing clause 3A of Section 167. 
Item (c) corresponds to the existing clause 76C of Section 167. 
Item Cd) corresponds to the existing clause 10 of Section 167. The 
scope of the new clause has been extended to cover unloading of 
warehoused goods also. 
Item (e) corresponds to the existing clause 4 of Section 167. The 
liability to confiscation will, however, be attracted only if the whole 
or a substantial portion of the cargo is found missing, whereas under 

88 
the existing clause liability to confiscation arises if any part of the 
cargo is found missing. The amendment seeks to protect the' caniel'· 
if. as often happens, be is unable to account for the shortage of a few 
packages. 
Sub-clause (2): replaces the second part of the existing section 168 
subject to the following amendments: 
Whe&'eas under the existing sectioR a conveyance used in the 
removal of smuggled goods is liable' to confiscation, under the new 
provision any conveyance used in the smuggling of any goods or in 
the carriage of any smuggled goods shall be liable to confisca!ion. 
Thus conveyances used in the smuggling of goods into India will now 
become liable to confiscation. The following safeguards have, how-
ever, been pmvided:-
'(a) if the owner, his agent and the person in charie of the 
conveyances are able to prove that the conveyance was so used 
without their knowledge or connivance and that they had taken 
all the precautions which may be specified in the rules made by 
the Central Government, the conveyance shall Dot be liable to 
confiscation. 
(b) in the case of conveyances which are used for the 
carnage of goods or passengers for hire, the maximum' fine in 
lieu of confiscation that may be imposed is limited' to the 
market-price of the goods sought to be smuggled. 
Clause 116 replaces clause 17 of the existing section 167. The 
existing clause specifies that the penalty for \D1accounted for goods 
may extend to twice the duty chargeable on the goods. It has been 
clarified that in the case of goods loaded for importation the duty 
referred to is the import duty, and in the case of coastal goods the 
duty referred to is the export duty. Secondly, the provision in the 
existing clause· that where the duty leviable cannot be ascertaineci, 
the penalty shall not exceed Rs. 500 per package has been deleted. 
Clause 117. This is a residuary clause which covers all the con-
traventions which are not so serious as to justtfy confiscation of the 
goods and the tnftietion, of severe personal penalties. The Clause 
specifies that any person who contravenes any provision of the Act 
or who abets in such contravention or who fails to comply With any 
provision of the Act with which it was his duty to compiy shall. 
where no express penalty is elsewhere provided, be liable to a 
penalty not exceeding one thousand rupees. 
Clause 118 corresponds to the first para. of the existing section 
168. Under the existing provision, the package in which the good~ 

Hable to confiscation are contained and its other contents automatI-
cally get confiscated. Under the new provision their confiscation 
will be optional. 
Clause 119 is a new provision under which any goods used for 
concealing smuggled goods shall also be liable to confiscation. 
Clause 120 is a new provision. Sub-clause (1) provides that 
smuggled goods may be confiscated notwithstanding any change in 
their form. This provision is made to meet such cases as smuggled 
gold being converted into ornaments. Sub-clau.se (2) specifies that 
where the smuggled goods are inextricably mixed with other goods, 
the combined goods shall be liable to confiscation but a proviso has 
been added to ensure that an innocent owner who proves that any 
part of the seized goods has not been smuggled is not deprived of 
that part of the goods. 
Clause 121 is a new provision to the effect that where any 
smuggled goods are sold by a person having knowledge or reason to 
believe that the goods are smuggled goods, the sale-proceeds thereof 
shall also be liable to confiscation. The intention is that when a raid 
is made, and it is found that the smuggled goods have already been 
sold, the sale proceeds in the hands of the smuggler or his accom-
plices may be seized and confiscated. 
Clause 122 corresponds to the existing section 182 with the follow-
ing amendments:-
The existing provisions in clause (a) regarding the powers of 
Customs-collector and in clause (b) regarding the powers of Assis-
tant Collector of Customs are being replaced by clause (b) of the 
new provision, which specifies that Assistant Collectors of Customs 
may exercise powers of confiscation of goods of a value not exceed-
ing ten thousand rupees. This limit has been proposed in order that 
contraventions in respect of small consignments are adjudicated by 
the Assistant Collectors. The power for imposing personal penalty 
is being extended to two thousand rupees which is the same as the 
power of a First Class Magistrate. Item (c) of the new Clause 
replaces clause (c) of the existing section and gives to gazetted 
omcers of Customs lower in rank than an Assistant Collector of 
Customs, the power to confiscate goods of a value not exceeding one 
thousand rupees and the imposition of personal penalty not exceed-
ing two hundred rupees. 
Clause 123 corresponds to the existing section 178-A, Sub-clause 
(1) corresponds to the existing sub-section (1). In sub-clause (2) 
"watches" have been added, as smuggling in watches is very wide-
.pread. Cigarettes 8l.1d cosmetics have been deleted. They are in 
937 (B) L~13. 

90 
the l8Wle catec«Y as other luxury goods sueh a. .ilk !&Nics, 
-meras. traDSlstOl's, perfumes, alchobolic liquors. In view of the 
newly introduced item (0) of Clause-111 it would be possible to take 
action against such goods without resort to the extreme remedy 
under clause 123. 
Clause 124 is a new provision which specifically provides (a) for 
the iaNe of a show-eause iaOtice COIltawng tile groUDds for taking 
action, (b) for the giving of an opportunity of making a repreaenta-
tioa agam.t the srounda meRtieaeal ill the show-cause notice, and 
(e) fM tt.e giving of allopportuBity of being heard in the matter. 
Tbia proviliOll is being introduced in «del' to eoolorm to the prm-
ciples of .atural justiee. 
CIa.we 125.-Sub-clause (1) replaces the existing section 183 
with the following amendments:-
(i) under the existing section, a fine in lieu of confiscation 
has to be bnposed even it the impDrt Dr expDrt Df gDods is prD-
hibited. Under the amended proviso, in the case Df prohibited 
!,Dods it will be within the discretiDn of the adjudicating oftlcer 
to release the goods on payment of a tine in lieu Df confiscation 
Dr nDt. It would thus be pDssible to cDnfiscate absolutely goods 
endangering public order, obscene pictures, etc. whereas at 
present the only remedy is to impDse a dispropDrtiDnately heavy 
fine which may be objected to on the ground that it makes the 
optiDn illUSOry. 
(ii) a prDviso has been added to the clause for making it clear 
that the fine in lieu Df confiscatiDn shall not exceed the market-
price of the goods less in the case of imported goods, the import 
duty leviable thereon. This prDviso has been inserted in order 
that the option given ShDUld be real and not illusory. Sub-
clause (2) has been newly introduced to remove doubts regard-
ing the payment of duty in cases where a fine in lieu of confis-
ca~ion is imposed. 
Clause 126 eorresponds to the existing sectiOB 1M. 
qause 127 corresponds to the existing section 186. 
Clause laB replaces the eXHlting section 188 with the fDllowmg 
ament1ment •. :-
(i) . the authorities to whom aF'peal shall lie have been 
specifically mentiDned in the new provision instead of being 
specified by the Central Government. 
(Ii) the appellate authority is being empowered to extend 
on S\lflieierat eaUSe beiJll;g shown the period of limitation for 
ftMng an appaal. 

91 
(Iii) the existing provision that an order in appeal shaD not 
have the effect of enhancing any confiscation or penalty is being 
deleted. This leads to frivolous appeals which watse the time 
of senior officers. Further, if a senior officer has considered the 
merits of a case, there is no reason why his judgment should not 
prevail whether it be in favour of the appellant or against him, 
especially when the appellant has the further right of making 
an application for revision to the Central Government. It is, 
therefore, proposed to empower the appellate authority to 
enhance the amount of duty or penalty or fine in lieu of confis-
cation, or of confiscating goods of greater value. But it is being 
provided that before doing so, it shall give to the appellant 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed 
9rder. -
(iv) it is being specifically provided that the time-limit laid 
down in clause 28 for issuing notice of short-levy etc. will apply 
even where an appellate authority wishes to enhance the amount 
of duty. 
Clause 129 replaces the existing section 189 with the following 
amendments :-
(i) it will not be necessary to make a deposit of duty before 
an appeal is filed in those cases where the goods are still under 
the control of the Customs. This will remove an unnecessary 
existing requirement. ' 
(ii) personal penalty will have to be deposited on whomso-
ever it may have been levied, whether he is the owner of the 
goods or not. 
(iii) in cass wh~re depo.sit of duty or ,Penalty is required, 
the appellate authority is beIng given the dIscretion to dtspense 
with this requirement if it causes uftdue haTdBhip to the appel--
lant. This provision will enable the appellate authority to! gtge 
relief in deserving cases. 
Clause 13D replaces the existing &eetioD IINlA with aa amenclmenfl 
which specifically provides that the time-limit laid down in section 
28 f« issuing notice fIIf short-levy etc. will apply even where an 
order claiming smon-levy is made in revision. 
Claae 131 corresponds to the existing aectlon 191 with the' fol-
lowing aml!llciments: ...... 
(1) under the existing section, the()retically an applicati(ln 
for revision to the Central Government can be made in respect 
of any decision or order passf!d under the new law. 'Under the 
Dew clause it is being specifically prcwided that revision by the' 

92 
Central Government will only lie against an order in appeal or 
against certain specified categories of orders in revision passed 
by the Board or the Collector. 
(ii) the proviso to sub-clause (1) specifies that no order 
enhancing any duty or penalty or flne in lieu of conftscation or 
conftscating goods of greater value shall be passed on a revision 
applkation. 
(iii) a time-limit of six months which may be extended by 
another six months is being speciflcally provided for making 
a revision application. 
Clause 132 replaces the ftrst sub-clause of clause 72 of'the existing 
section 167, with the following amendments:-
(i) an abettor is also being made liable to punishment. 
(ii) the new clause provides that the punishment may 
extend to six months' imprisonment, whereas the punishment 
under the existing provision is a flne not exceeding one thousand 
rupees. Under other Acts, e.g. Income Tax Act, 1961, imprison-
ment has been provided for similar offences. The other sub-
clauses of clause 72 of the existing section 167, being offences 
under the Indian Penal Code, have been deleted. 
Clame 133 corresponds to clause 78 of the existing section 167. 
Clause 134 corresponds to clauses 76A and 76B of the existing 
section 167. 
Clause 135 corresponds to clause 81 of the existing section 167. 
Clause 136.-'sub-clause (1) corresponds to clauses 75 and 76 of 
the existing section 167 with an amendment which restricts the 
scope of the Clause to cases involving evasion of duty or prohibi-
tions only. 
Sub-clause (2): Item (a) of this sub-clause corresponds to clause 
7. of the existing section 167, but the maximum punishment that 
may be imposed has been increased from Rs. 500 to Rs. 1000. 
Item (b) of this sub-clause is a new provision under which vexatious 
errest like a vexatious search has also been made an offence. 
Sub-clause (3) replaces clause 79 of the existing section 167, 
with an amendment which permits a Customs officer to disclose, in 
complianee with any requisition made under any law for the time 
being in force, any particulars learnt by him in his official capacity. 
Further, showing of samples will no longer be an offence as that 
does not lead to disclosure of any secrets. 

93 
Clau.se 137.-Sub-clause (1) replaces the existing section 187A. 
with the followine amendments:-
(i) the existine condition that the complaint in writing 
should be made by the Collector of Customs or an Assistant 
Collector authorised by the Collector is being replaced by a 
condition that the preVious sanction of the Collector of Customs 
should be obtained. 
(ii) previous sanction will be necessary not only for 
offences under Clause 135 which corresponds to clause 81 of the 
existing section 167 but also in respect of other offences. 
Sub-clause (2) is a new provision under which the sanction of 
the Central Government or the Collector of Customs will be neces-
sary for prosecuting superior and subordinate Customs officers 
respectively. 
Clause 138 corresponds to the existing section 187. 
Clau.se 139 is a new provision which requires the courts to make 
certain presumptions in respect of documents seized from the 
custody or control of persons. This provision which is being 
inserted on the lines of a similar provision in the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act will be helpful in the prosecution of smuaglers and 
their accomplices. 
ClaiUse 140 is the usual provision which relates to offences by 
companies. 
ClaUle 141 is a new provision under which all conveyances and 
goods in a customs area shall for the purposes of enforcing the pro-
visions of the new law be subject to the control of customs officers. 
This is necessary for effective control over goods and conveyances. 
The new clause covers the provisions in the existing Sections 77 
and 78. 
Clau.se 142 replaces the second clause of the existing section 
39(1) and the existing sections 192 and 193, with the following 
modifications:-
(i) item (a) of the clause is a new provision which pro-
vides specifically that the money due to the Customs Depart-
ment may be deducted from any money which may be under 
the control of the Customs Department. 
(ii) the existing sections 192 and 193 provide that for 
recovery of personal penalty any goods belonging to the con-
cerned person may be detained and sold in any other custom 

house, but there is no power under tbeexisting sectioa 39 to 
recover the duty by detaining 8lid selling the goods of such 
person at another custom house. Provision to this effect has 
been made in item (b). 
(iii) Similarly. there is no provision in the existing section 
39 for recover.y of customs duty through the Distric:t Collector 
on a certificate being issued by the Assistant Collector of 
Customs. This provision has been made in item (c). 
Clause 143 corresponds to the existing section 195B. 
Cloue 144 COITesporuis to sulHection (1) of the existm, section 
195. 
ClaUle 146 corresponds to the existing section 202. 
Cl4U8e 147.-8ub-clause (1) replaces the existing section 203 but 
the procedural provisIon regarding production of authority is being 
omitted. 
Sub-clause (2) is a new provision which makes the principal 
liable for the actions of his agent. This provision is necessary so 
that the principal daee not escape the consequences of what has been 
done by his agent. 
SuD-clause (3) owrapunds to the nisting section 4. 
Clause 148.-Sub-clause (1) corresponds to the existing S:!ction 5. 
Sub-clause (2) is a new provision which makes the agent 
responsible for all the penalties and cOnfiscations to which the 
person-in-charge 01 a conveyance may be lia·ble. Since the person-
i~harie of a conveyance has to leave with the conveyance, it is 
necessary that his agent in India should be made responsible for 
all the penalties and confiscations. 
C1cue 16.-Tbe main clause oorrespoDCis to the exi.Ung aectloa 
201. 
The proviso corresponds to the existing section 36 and the last 
para. of the existing section 94, with a modification which will 
permit an amendment of a bill of entry or a shipping bill being 
made even after the goods have been cleared for home-cotlsumption 
or deposited in a warehouse OJ' have been exported, if the amend-
ment caD be suhetanti.ted on the basis of documentary evidence in 
exu.tence at the time the goods were cleared, deposited 01' expgrted. 

this proviso has been introduced to regulariae the CGDC8asioa at 
Jll'esent ,iven under executive i~ 
Clause 150 replaces the provisions of the existing sections sa. 
~l and 111 regardin,the sale of goods, with the following amend-
menta:-
(i) in addition to sale by ·public auction, sale by tender and, 
with the Co.Jlilel1t of the owner, sale in any other manner hal 
also been provided, so that the maximum price lWly be realised. 
(ii) the balance, if any, after meeting all the charges on 
the goods and any other amount due from the owner of the 
goods to the Customs Department shall be paid to the owner 
without any time-limit whereas the existing section specifies 
that an application for claiming the balance shall be made 
within one year. 
Clause 151 is a new provision which empowers and requires 
officers of Central Excise Department, the Navy, the Police, the 
Port officers, the Airport officers and other notified officers to assist 
officers of customs in the execution of. the new law. 
Clause 152 replaces the existing section 9(b). It provides that 
the functions of officers of customs may be delegated to any officer 
immediately subordinate to him. 
Clause 153 is a new provision which specifies the manner in 
which any order, decision, summons or notice may be served. 
Clause 154 is a new provision which permits clerical or arithme-
tical mistakes to be corrected. 
Clause 155.-Sub-clause (1) repleces the existing section 197 
with certain modifications. It contains the usual provision regard-
ing protection given to officers etc. for acts done in good faith. 
Sub-clause (2) corresponds to the existing section 198. 
Clause 156.-Items (a), (b) and (c) correspond to the existing 
section 9. Items (d) and (e) of sub-clause (2) cover the provisions 
of the existing Section 19-A. Item (f) covers the provisions of the 
existing Section 140. 
Clause 157 is a new provision which empowers the Board to 
make regulations to carry out the purposes of the new law. 
Clause 158 replaces the existing section 204. It specifies certafD 
ancillary matters in respect of which Rules and Regulations rna,. 

ir-'''' ':," .J 
. . 
be made. Sub-clause (2) further provides that any contravention 
of a rule or regulation shall be punishable with a penalty which 
may extend to Rs. 500 or Rs. 200 respectively. 
Clause 159 provides that all rules under the new law and notHl-
cations issued under certain important provisions shall be placed 
before both Houses of Parliament. 
Clause 160 repeals certain existing enactments. Sub-clauses (3) 
to (8) pertain to tnmsitional arrangements. Sub-clause (9) corres-
ponds to the existing section 207. 
Clause 161.-This is the usual provision regarding the removal of 
difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the new law. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Thi& Sill seeks to replace the Sea Customs Act, 1878, and other 
laws relating t~ customs and t1!us no new e~pendlt'!lre apart from 
\\;ha't 'isa~r~ciy bei'iig ',spenf ~ll' the"administratioli ofl tbf'existin~ 
l~~ '~~'cq~t~nil>l~t!!~' t;(~~~~~~ 'In~~e~y"?f 'th~' p~ss.i~f~t t~is ~il1.'·· 
937CB)LS-14, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 24, 75(2), 79(2), 99 and 156 contain provisions authorising 
the Central Government to make rules in respect of certain matters. 
The important matters in respect of which rules may be made are the 
following:-
(a) the denaturing or mutilation of imported goods ordinarily 
used for more than one purpose so as to render them unfit for 
one or more such purposes; 
(b) the cases in which draw-back shall be allowed on import-
ed materials used in the manufacture of goods which are 
exported and the conditions subject to which such draw-back 
shall be allowed; 
(c) the circumstances in which, and the conditions subject 
to which, baggage may be passed free of duty; 
(d) the manner of detennining the nearest ascertainable 
equivalent of the normal price; 
(e) the conditions subject to which accessories of, and spare 
parts and maintenance and repairing implements for, any article 
shall be chargeable at the same rate of duty as that article; and 
(f) the precautions that shall be taken by the owner, his 
agent and the person-in-charge of a conveyance or animal for 
preventing the confiscation of the conveyance or animal under 
sub-clause (2) of clause 115. 
2. Clauses 74(3), 81, 84, 146 (2) and 157 confer on the Central Board 
of Revenue the power to make regulations. The important matters 
ill respect of which regulations may be made are the following:-
(a) the examination, assessment of duty and clp.arance of 
goods imported or to be exported by post; 
(b) the restrictions and conditions subject to which a licence 
may be granted to customs house agents; 
(e) the form of a bill of entry, shipping bill, export m9ni-
fest, etc. 
3. the matters in respect of which rules or regulations can be 
made are matters of procedure or administrative detail and it is 
98" 

99 
hardly possible to provide for them in the Act itself. Moreover, pro-
vision in respect of these matters must necessarily be flexible so that 
they can be altered from time to time according to the changing 
circumstances. The rule-making and regulation-making powers con-
templated in the aforesaid clauses are thus of a nonnal character. 
4. Power is also being conferred on the Central Government to 
Issue notifications under clauses 11, 14, 25, 66, 69, 70, 74, 75, 76, 98, 
101, 123 and several other clauses in respect of certain matters such 
as:-
'(a) the prohibition of importation or exportation of certain 
goods for the purposes specified in sub-clause (2) of clause 11; 
(b) the fixation of tariff values for any class of imported 
goods or goods to be exported, for purposes of assessment of 
customs duty; 
(c) the exemption in the public interest of goods of any speci-
fied description from payment of duty. 
The powers under the above clauses are intended to provide for a 
certain amount of flexibility. If these provisions are made rigid, the 
.dministration of the Act will become difficult. 

ANNEXURE 
Duties ~. (1) There sh~~ be levied and coUecteq in every port to this 
~~~!r:~5i~o ~~( appJies, ~ht; duti~ sp~cifi~ in t~e rir~t and Sec?P.~ ~~~ul~.:i. 
be le\'ied. (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the OfIicial 
Gazette, fix, for the purpose of levying the said duties, tariff values 
of ~~y art~cl~~ r~~~erated, ~~th~~ ~~~¥y or ~Jl~~r ~~Il~ral head-
ings, i~ t~~ s~~~ ~h~~l~ ~s char~~~~ ~~~~. 4pty ~~ 'I.!(llOT~m, nnd 
lllt3y alter any tanff va1ues for the tIme bemg 10 force. 
(3) l)i~~r~nt ta~i~ values may Pe fixed for c!iff~~ent c~~~ses or 
descdptionsof. the same article. 
(4) Notr~ng ~ t~is ~ct ~a~~ ~~thori~ tR~ ~~~ of custo~s duties 
on any artic~e· carried from one c~stQ1'Il$ port ~n lndia to ~otper ;;uch 
"illl, .' \ .1 •. ' 
port except salt, opium and spirit . 
• • • • • 
Duties 011 5. Where a customs ~\.\~y at ~~y rate prel,l~i~d ~y ~r Wlder tois 
impom and Act or any other law for the time being in force is leviable on any 
c:::rts hy article when imported into, or on any article when exported from, a 
port in India, the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazett~, direct that a duty of customs at the like rate shall 
be leviable on any such article when imported or exported, as the 
t'tise may be, by land from or to any territory outside India, which it 
may, by a like notification, declare to be foreign territory for the 
purposes of this section. 
Duty on 6. (1) Salt, opium and spirit imported from any port in India &!ld 
=. :~m protected by the certificate of any ofBcer empowered in that behalf 
whea protcc- by the Central Government are chargeable with only the amount, 
~~i,t;:e. if any, by which the duty leviable thereon under the First Schedule 
exceeds the duty shown by such certificate to have been already paid 
in respect thereof. 
(2) The amount, if any, paid to the Government as the price of 
such salt or opium is not duty within the meaning of this section. 
(3) Nothing in this section applies to spirit which is exported 
under bond for excise duty from one customs-port to another customs-
port under the provisions of Chapter XIV of the Sea Customs Act, 
• or 1878. 1878. 
• • • • • 
100 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to custOIlli. 
(Shrt Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 