As INTRODtTCED IN LaIC SABRA 05 
---d-6 __ SEP_1965 _____________ _ 
b-'1 ~ 
Bill No. 56 of 1985. 
THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (ABSORBED EMPLOYEES) 
BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of th.e conditions of Bervic~ of persons 
absorbed for service in connection with the administTation of the 
Union territory af Goa, Daman and Diu and for matters connected 
therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as fonows:-
L This Act "may be called the Goa, Daman and Diu (Absorbed SbOrt Udi. " 
Employees) Act, 1965. 
z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "absorbed employee" means a person who immediately 
before the 20th day of December, 1961, was holding an absorbed 
post. and who on and after that date" either served or has been 
DebitioM. ,-

~ 
H1'Vbig in that or any other post in connection with the 
administration of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu 
or in any-of the Departments--4f.-the-Cen1raLGovernment; __ _ 
(b) "absorbed post" means a civil service or post which 
existed under the former Portuguese Administration in Goa, , 
Daman and Diu immediately before the 20th day of December, 
1961. 
3. (1) The Central Government may make rules-
(a) for the regulation of recruitment to absorbed posts and 
the eoaditlons of service of absorbed employees; 10 
(b) for the regulation of the eGnditions of serviee of persona 
who were in the serviee of a Corporation (whether known .s • 
junta or otherwise) immediately before the 20th day of Deeem-
her, 1961, and who on or after: that date either served or have 
been serving in eonneetioo with the administration of the Union IS 
territory of Goa. Daman and Diu or iDl any of the Departments 
01 the Central Government. 
(2) Any sueh nile may be made so as to be retrospeetive to any 
date not earlier than the 20th day of Deeember, 1961: 
Provided that no person shall, 'by virtue of such retrospective 20 
effect, bet liable to refund any amount paid to him by way of salary , 
or allowances or pension before the making' of any such rule. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon a8 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 2S 
in one session or in two successive sessions and if, before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall, thereafter, have effect! only in such modified fonn or be of no 30 
effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification 
-or annulment shall be without prejudice to tlNavalidity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
,. (1) On the making of any rule under section 3, the corres-
ponding law, if any, in respect of any matter for which provision is 3S 
made in that rule, shall stand repealed with effect from the date of 
the coming into 'force of that rule. 
(2) The provisions of sections 6 and 24 of the General Clauses 
Act, -1897, shallj apply to such repeal as if the rule and the corres-
ponding law ~erred to in sub-section (1) were Central Acts. 
10 ot 11191 
40 

-'7 
5. If any difticulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to 
Act or any rule made thereunder in relation to any absorbed =: dill-
employee 01'- any personreferred-tG- inclause.(bJ-.of sub-section (1) 
of section 3, the Central Government may, by order, make such pro-
S vision as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that the power under this section shall not be exercllo-
able after the expiration of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
When Goa, Daman and Diu were integrated with the Union of 
India and constituted a Union territory in Decem~~ 1961, a number 
of Persons who -were-irrthe-serviceof .. the Portuguese J\~stra .. 
tion including persons employed in some of the corporate bOdies, 
were taken over by the Government of India. By virtue of section 
5 of the Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Act, 1962, the con-
ditions of service of these employees are still regulated by a Decree 
called' "the Estatuto do Funcionalismo Ultramarino", i.e., the Statute 
of the Overseas Functionaries. This Statute also regulates the mode 
of recruitment to the civil services and postS which existed in th~~ 
areas when they became part of India. The pattern of conditions q.f 
service provided by the Statute and the other provisions thereof 
are different from those applicable to other persons employed in 
connection with. the affairs of the Union. Consequently, difficulties 
have arisen in properly: integrating these employees and also in re-
organising the administrative agencies in the Union territory of 
Goa, Daman and Diu on the lines obtaining in the rest of the country. 
To remove these difficulties, it is necessary to modify the provisions 
of the Statute but, as the Statute has the force of law, its provisiOns 
cannot be modified' except by or under an Act of Parliament. The 
Bill, therefore, seeks to empower the Central Government to regu-
late recruitment to the civil services and posts referred to above 
and also to regulate the conditions of service of the absorbed 
employees and for the repeal of the corresponding provisions of the 
Statute of the Overseas Functionaries. ' 
G. L. NANDA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 27th August, 1985. 
PRESmENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 1-45/64-Goa, dated the 7th September, 1968 
from Shri Jai Sukh La! HaWli, Minister of State in the Ministry of 
Home Mairs to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] . 
The President haVing been informed of the subject matter of the 
Bill to provide for the regulation of the conditions of service of 
persons absorbed for service in connection with the administration 
of the Union Territory of Goa, Daman and DiU, recommends, under 
clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution, the consideration of the 
said Bill in the Lok Sabbs. 
4 

About 5,000 persons who were serving in the Portuguese 
Administration or corporate bodie. were taken over by the Central 
Government consequent on integration of Goa, Daman and Diu 
with the Union of India. Of these, about 1,250 emplOYt!\'. have 
been absorbed by the various Departments of the Central ~~vern­
mentand the others have served or are serving in connection with 
the administration of the Union territory. The Bill if enacted and 
brought into force will involve additional~nditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India in respect of the employees absorbed 
by the Departments of the Central Government, only if the rules 
which may be made provide for conditions of service more liberal 
than those at present enjoyed by these employees. As details of 
the scale of pay, etc., which may be allowed to these employees are 
still being worked out, it is not possible to give an estimate of the 
additional expenditure, if any, involved at this stage. Any expendi-
ture which may arise consequent on the appUcation of the rules to 
the persons serving in connection with the administration of the 
Union territory will be met from the Consolidated Fund of the 
Union territory . 
• 

MIMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA'rtON 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides that the ~entrai 
Government may make rules for regulation of recruitment to 
absorbed· posta and conditiOllS of service of absorbed employees as 
well as of employees serving in corporate bodies before the 20th 
D&eember, IB61, and subsequently absorbed by the Administration of 
the territory or any Department of the Central Gover.ra.m.ent. Under 
sub-clause (2) of clause 3, the Central Government ·may give retros-
pEctive e1!ect to any of the rules from a date not earlier than 20th 
December, 1961. 'This provision has been made because in regard to 
certain matters like travelling allowance, the Central rules have 
already been made applicable to these employees. The matters in 
res.pect of which rules are to be made are those mentioned in the 
proviso to article 309 in respect of which the President is already 
empowered to make rules. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a normal character. 
6 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of the conditions of service of 
persons absorbed for service in connection with the adminis-
tration of the Union Territory of Goa, Damw. and Diu 
and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, Minister of Home Affairs.) 