1
Bill No. 56 of 2015
THE TAILORING WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI  P.  KARUNAKARAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for tailoring workers and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tailoring Workers (Welfare) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Fund” means the Tailoring Workers Welfare Fund constituted under section 3
of this Act;
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(c) “tailoring workers” means any person engaged in any activity connected
with cutting and stitching of clothes, embroidery and includes self-employed or persons
working on salary or commission or on contract basis.
3. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be known as the Tailoring
Workers Welfare Fund for the welfare of tailoring workers in the country.
(2) The Central Government and every State Government shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The owners of textile mills and showrooms where readymade garments are sold and
exporters of readymade garments shall also contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be
prescribed.
4. The Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of:—
(i) a Chairperson who shall be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) one member to represent the Central Government who shall be designated
as the Member-Secretary;
(iii) two representatives representing the tailoring workers; and
(iv) one representative each from all States and Union territories who shall be
nominated by the respective State Government and Union territory Administration.
5. The Fund shall be used for—
(i) payment of unemployment subsistence allowance to tailoring workers during
off season period;
(ii) providing free health facilities to the tailoring workers and their families;
(iii) providing free educational facilities to the children of the tailoring workers;
(iv) payment of compensation to tailoring workers who are injured during the
course of their work;
(v) payment of compensation to the next of the kin of tailoring workers who die
in harness;
(vi) payment of disability allowance to tailoring workers who are injured during
the course of the work and are not able to work;
(vii) payment of old age pension to those tailoring workers who have attained
the age of sixty years or above ; and
(viii) payment of family pension.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definition.
Constitution
of Tailoring
Workers
Welfare Fund.
Administration
of Tailoring
Workers
Welfare Fund.
Utilisation of
Fund.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Lakhs of workers are engaged in the work related to embroidery, cutting and stitching
of clothes throughout the country but they are not covered under any labour law. Many of
them are self employed or working in the commercial establishments and also in textile
industry. Their living condition is extremely bad. The nature of their work is such that they
are prone to severe ailments such as tuberculosis, etc. In case of ill health or old age, there is
no social security provision for them. It is therefore, necessary to give social security to
tailoring workers and their dependents.
N
EW DELHI; P. KARUNAKARAN
February 9, 2015

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Tailoring Workers Welfare Fund
for the welfare of tailoring workers in the country. It further provides that Central Government
shall also contribute to the Fund. Clause 4 provides for the constitution of a Committee for
administration of the Fund. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one
hundred crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for tailoring workers and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri P . Karunakaran, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4752LS(S3)—03-03-2015.