THE EMPLOYEES' STATE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
 BILL
further to amend the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rd day of July, 2008.
2. In the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948  (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for Chapter V A, the following Chapter shall be substituted, namely:—
‘CHAPTER V A
SCHEME FOR OTHER BENEFICIARIES
73A. In this Chapter,—
(a) “other beneficiaries” means persons other than the person insured
under this Act;
(b) “Scheme” means any Scheme framed by the Central Government from
time to time under section 73B for the medical facility for other beneficiaries;
(c) “underutilised hospital” means any hospital not fully utilised by the
persons insured under this Act;
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution
of new
Chapter for
Chapter VA.
34 of 1948.
Definitions.
Bill No.  56 of 2008
5
10
AS  INTRODUCED IN  LOK  SABHA

2
(d) “user charges” means the amount which is to be charged from the
other beneficiaries for medical facilities as may be notified by the Corporation in
consultation with the Central Government from time to time.
73B.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame Scheme for other beneficiaries and
the members of their families providing medical facility in any hospital established by
the Corporation in any area which is underutilised hospital on payment of user charges.
73C. The user charges collected from the other beneficiaries shall be deemed to
be contribution and shall form part of the Employees’ State Insurance Fund.
73D. The Scheme may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(i) the other beneficiaries who may be covered under this Scheme;
(ii) the time and manner in which the medical facilities may be availed by
the other beneficiaries;
(iii) the form in which the other beneficiary shall furnish particulars about
himself and his family whenever required as may be specified by the Corpora-
tion;
(iv) any other matter which is to be provided for in the Scheme or which
may be necessary or proper for the purpose of implementing the Scheme.
73E. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to,
amend, vary or rescind the Scheme.
73F.  Every Scheme framed under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session,  for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the Scheme or both Houses agree that the Scheme should not be made, the Scheme
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without preju-
dice to the validity of anything previously done under that Scheme.'.
3.  ( 1) The Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2008, is hereby
repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
principal  Act  as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the Principal  Act, as amended by this Act.
Power to frame
Scheme.
Collection of
user charges.
Scheme for
other benefi-
ciaries.
Power to
amend
Scheme.
Laying of
Scheme
framed under
this Chapter.
Repeal and
saving.
Ord. 7 of
2008.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 is a social security legislation that provides
for certain benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity and employment injury and
to make provision for certain other matters in relation thereto.
2. The Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana Scheme has already become operational with
effect from 1.4.2008. The Scheme has picked up momentum. Almost all the States have
agreed to implement the Scheme and a majority of them have already advertised for the
implementation of the same. More than 1.25 lakh smart cards have been issued by 15.6.2008.
This number at present has risen to over 2 lakhs.  Some recipients of these cards have
already been assisted by way of hospitalisation. It is, therefore, considered essential and
urgent to enable Employees’ State Insurance Corporation to participate in the Scheme with
immediate effect. By providing health services to the unorganised sector workers under the
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana Scheme, both the unorganised sector workers and the
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation will benefit by the Employees’ State Insurance
Corporation making available its vast network of hospitals for providing medical care on
user charges, wherever the same are underutilised. In view of the urgency as pointed out
above, the Employees'  State Insurance (Amendment) Ordinance, 2008 was promulgated on
the 3rd July, 2008.
3. The salient features of the said Ordinance are as follows:—
(i) it empowers the Central Government to frame Schemes for any other person
who is not insured under the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 also to avail the
medical facility in the Employees’ State Insurance run hospitals;
(ii) the facilities to other persons shall be given in the underutilised hospitals
which are not fully utilised by the Employees’ State Insurance beneficiaries;
(iii) for availing medical facilities, the other persons shall pay the charges as
may be notified by the Corporation in consultation with the Central Government from
time to time;
(iv) the Scheme shall provide the time and manner in which the medical facilities
may be availed by other beneficiaries. It shall also provide for the form in which the
beneficiary shall furnish particulars about himself and his family members whenever
required by the Corporation.
4. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
N
EW DELHI; OSCAR  FERNANDES.
The 29th September, 2008.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute Chapter V A so as to empower the Central
Government to frame a Scheme for other beneficiaries and the members of their families
providing medical facility in hospital established by the Corporation in any area which is
underutilised on payment of user charges.
2. The Scheme may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(i) the other beneficiaries who may be covered under this Scheme;
(ii) the time and manner in which the medical facilities may be availed by the
other beneficiaries;
(iii) the form in which the other beneficiary shall furnish particulars about him-
self and his family whenever required as may be specified by the Corporation;
(iv) any other matter which is to be provided for in the Scheme or which may be
necessary or proper for the purpose of implementing the Scheme.
3. The matters in respect of which the Scheme may be framed are of administrative and
procedural details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948
(34 OF 1948)
*****
CHAPTER V A
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
73A. (1) For so long as the provisions of this Chapter are in force, every principal
employer shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, pay to the Corporation a
special contribution (hereinafter referred to as the employer’s special contribution) as the
rate specified under sub-section (3).
(2) The employer’s special contribution shall, in the case of a factory or establishment
situate in any area in which the provisions of both Chapters IV and V are in force, be in lieu
of the employer’s contribution payable under Chapter IV .
(3)  The employer’s special contribution shall consist of such percentage, not exceed-
ing five per cent. of the total wage bill of the employer, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify from time to time :
Provided that before fixing or varying any such percentage the Central Government
shall give by like notification not less than two months’ notice of its intention so to do and
shall in such notification specify the percentage which it proposes to fix or, as the case may
be, the extent to which the percentage already fixed is to be varied :
Provided further that the employer’s special contribution in the case of factories or
establishments situate in any area in which the provisions of both Chapters IV and V are in
force shall be fixed at a rate higher than that in the case of factories or establishments situate
in any areas in which the provisions of the said Chapters are not in force.
(4)  The employer’s special contribution shall fall due as soon as the liability of the
employer to pay wages accrues, but may be paid of the Corporation at such intervals, within
such time and in such manner as the Central Government may, by notification in the Office
Gazette, specify, and any such notification may provide for the grant of a rebate for prompt
payment of such contribution.
Explanation.— “Total wage bill” in this section means the total wages which have
accrued due to employees in a factory or establishment in respect of such wage periods as
may be specified for the purposes of this section by the Central Government by notification
in the Official Gazette.
73B.  (1) If any question of dispute arises in respect of the employer’s special contri-
bution payable or recoverable under this Chapter and there is no Employees’ Insurance
Court having jurisdiction to try such question of dispute, the question or dispute shall be
decided by such authority as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 76, sections 77 to 79 and 81 shall, so
far as may be, apply in relation to a proceeding before an authority specified under sub-
section (1) as they apply in relation to a proceeding before an Employees’ Insurance Court.
73C.  The payment of the employee’s contribution for any week in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter IV in any area where all the provisions of that Chapter are in force
shall for the purpose of Chapter V , have effect as if the contributions payable under Chapter
IV in respect of that employee for that week had been paid, and shall accordingly entitle the
employee as an insured person to the benefits specified in Chapter V if he is otherwise
entitled thereto.
Employer’s
special
contribution.
Special tribunals
for decision of
disputes or
questions under
this Chapter
where there is
no Employees’
Insurance Court.
Benefits under
Chapter V to
depend upon
employee’s
contribution.
5

6
Explanation.—  In the case of an exempted employee, the employer’s contribution
shall be deemed to have been paid for a week if the Corporation is satisfied that during that
week the employer’s contribution under Chapter IV would have been payable in respect of
him but for the provisions of this Chapter.
73D.  The employer’s special contribution payable under this Chapter may be recov-
ered as if it were an arrear of land-revenue.
73E.  Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this Act the Corporation
may, for the purpose of determining whether the employer’s special contribution is payable
under this Chapter or for determining the amount thereof, by general or special order, require
any principal or immediate employer or any other person to furnish such information or
returns to such authority, in such form and within such time as may be specified in the order.
73F.  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may,
having regard to the size or location of, or the nature of the industry carried on in, any factory
or establishment or class of factories of establishments, exempt the factory or establishment
or class of factories or establishments from the payment of the employer’s special contribu-
tion under this Chapter and nothing contained in sections 87 to 91 inclusive shall be deemed
to authorise any State Government to grant any such exemption.
73G.  Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, the provisions of Chapter
IV, section 72 and Chapter VII and any rules and regulations made under this Act shall, so far
as may be, apply in relation to the payment or recovery of employer’s special contributions,
the penalties specified in connection therewith and all other matters incidental thereto as
they would have applied in relation to an employer’s contribution if this Chapter were not in
force and the employer’s contribution had been payable under this Act.
73H.  [Power to remove difficulties.] Rep. by the Employees’ State Insurance (Amend-
ment) Act, 1966 (44 of 1966), s. 31 (w.e.f. 17-6-1976).
73-I.  The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that
the provisions of this Chapter shall cease to have effect on such date as may be specified in
the notification, not being a date earlier than three months from the date of the notification :
Provided that on the provisions of this Chapter so ceasing to have effect the provi-
sions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply as if the provisions of this
Chapter had then been repealed by a  Central Act.
*****
Mode of
recovery of
employer’s
special
contribution.
Power to call
for additional
information or
return.
Power to
exempt to be
exercised by
Central
Government
alone in respect
of employer’s
special
contributions.
Application
of certain
provisions of
this Act to
employer’s
special
contribution.
Duration of
Chapter VA.
10 of 1897.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948.
————
(Shri Oscar Fernandes, Minister of  State for Labour and Employment)
GMGIPMRND—3353LS(S5)—16.10.2008.