1
Bill No. 56 of  2019
THE EMBLEMS AND NAMES (PREVENTION OF IMPROPER USE)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2019
By
SHRI PARVESH SAHIB SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Emblems and Names (Prevention of  Improper Use)
(Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950, in the Schedule,
after entry 27, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“28. The names and emblems that may have high religious regard and whose
improper use may hurt religious sensibility of any class, section or community of
India.”.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
the Schedule.
12 of 1950
5
10

2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is the second most populous nation in the world. As a result, we are home to
many business firms, trading companies, corporate houses and their incalculable products
and brand names. People generally have their product and brand names based on personal
preference, family lineages, marketability, consumer attraction and several such
considerations. However, Government has to ensure that naming of products does not
cause copyright infringement of either Government symbols or other publicly renowned
names and emblems.
The Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950 was enacted to make
sure that no such imitations or improper use happens by private companies while naming
professional or commercial products. The Act prohibits private parties from using title,
trademarks or emblems which are mentioned in the exhaustive list provided in the Schedule.
However, there is a need that there should also be provisions which exercises some
kind of regulation on the use of names and emblems for some commercial products which can
potentially hurt religious sensibility of any class, group or community. Certain names and
emblems may have a very high religious sanctity attached with them. Use of such words for
certain products and items which may cause disregard to any religion or faith should be
prevented for the overall benefit of the society. The Emblems and Names (Prevention of
Improper Use) Amendment Bill, 2019 seeks to bring in a provision in the parent Act whereby
any kind of names or emblems which may have high religious regard shall be censored from
being used for certain kind of products and items which may cause disregard to the sentiments
of faith of any particular religion, class or community.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PARVESH SAHIB SINGH
June  4, 2019.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE EMBLEMS AND NAMES (PREVENTION OF IMPROPER USE) ACT, 1950
[12 OF  1950]
THE SCHEDULE
* * * * * *
* * * * * *
27. The name “National Human Rights Commission”and its abbreviation “NHRC/
nhrc”[Ins. By notification No. S.O. 458(E), dated the 10th March, 2008].

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Emblems and Names (Prevention of  Improper Use) Act, 1950.
————
(Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh, M.P. )
MGIPMRND—347LS(S3)—12-06-2019.