As inTropuced IN Lok SaBHa

/
U6 Zag,

No, 56 of 2001

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES BILL, 2001 4

By
Sui SUSHILKUMAR SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL.

to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the rehabilitation and welfare of the
persons with disabilities including the mentally and visually disabled persons and
for the matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Persons with Disabilities Short title.

Act, 2001. extent and
commence-
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India. ment.

3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions.

(a) “Commission” means the National Commission for persons with disabilities
10 established under section 3;
(b) “disability” has the same: meaning assigned to it in the Persons with Disabilities
of 1996. (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995;
(० “person with disability” has the same meaning assigned to it in the Persons

with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act,
1 of 1996. 15 1995;


Constitution
of the
National
Commission
for persons
with
disabilities.

Functions of
the Commis-
sion.

Power to
make rules.

carrying out the purposes of this Act.

2

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish

National Commission for persons with disabilities with its headquarter at New Delhi.

(2) The National Commission shall consist of the following members, namely :—

(i) the Union Ministers of Health and Family Welfare, Labour, Finance and the
Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission;

(ié) the Chairman or a representative of the Central Social Welfare Board;

(iii) a representative each of the State Governments and Union territory
administrations,

(iv) arepresentative each of the blind and the physically disabled and one expert
in mental diseases, to be nominated by Central Government;

(0 a representative representing the associations and voluntary organizations
engaged in welfare of the blind, the physically disabled and the mentally retarded:

(vi) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha and one
from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the Speaker and the Chairman, respectively.

(3) The Union Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment shall be the Chairman of

the Commission.

(4) The Commission shall meet at Jeast once in every six months.
(5) The sub-committee of the Commission shall visit various parts of the country to

monitor the working of the police and programmes laid down by it.

4, It shall be the duty of the Commission to:—
(a) evolve a national policy for the rehabilitation of the persons with

(b) lay down programmes, operate services and pilot projects for the
rehabilitation of the persons with disabilities by way of issuing instructions and
directions to Central and State Government agencies for ‘implementation ‘hereof;

(c)lay-down guidelines for rehabilitation of the persons with disabilities;

(d) create and operate a Fund financing benevolent and rehabilitation schemes
for the persons with disabilities;

(o)review the facilities available to the persons with disabilities from time to time.

() ensure implementation of the laws in force for welfare of persons with
disabilities and provision of this Act effectively.

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Persons with disabilities are as much integral to the nation as any other able-bodied
citizen. Millions of persons suffer from one handicap or the other and yet most of them are
well talented provided suitable opportunity and support is afforded to them. Even the men-
tally retarded deserve the nation’s support to help them develop their ability and contribute.
their mite for the nation and live a life with dignity.

While some effort on the part of the Government and the society is seen for providing
opportunities, though inadequate, for physically handicapped, the mentally handicapped
are simply consigned to their lot. Experts in psychiatry and medicine maintain that a large
percentage of the mentally retarded and handicapped persons too can well be rehabilitated
enabling them a life with dignity, if suitable aid is given to them, which includes a large
measure of support from the society. At present there is no support worthwhile from any
quarter. They are left to their fate and indifference by the society aggravates their malady.

‘The nation owes a responsibility to provide for opportunities to these disabled and
handicapped people to lead a life with dignity, as useful citizens of the motherland. There is
a pressing need for: constituting a National Commission to evolve and implement a national
policy and programme for the resettlement of the persons with disabilities and to co-ordinate
and oversee the activities of different agencies functioning in this field.

Hence this Bill.

New Deu; SUSHILKUMAR SHINDE
June 25,2001.

w


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Commission for the
persons with disabilities. Clause 4 also contemplates creation of a Fund for benevolent and
rehabilitation schemes. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consoli-
dated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees
one hundred crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

Anon recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.

‘The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Commission for the rehabilitation and welfare

of the persons with disabilities including the mentally and visually disabled
persons and for the matters connected therewith,

(Shri Sushilkumar Shinde, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—97 1LS—17-07-2001.