5
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 56 of 2024
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024
By
Adv . Dean Kuriakose, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

2. In article 43A of the Constitution, for the words, ‘engaged in any industry’, the 
words, ‘engaged in any industry including labour engaged in plantation industry’ shall be 
substituted.
Amendment of 
article 43A.
2

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Forty-second Amendment Act, 1976 was a seminal legislation that added many 
seminal worker and downtrodden friendly provisions to the constitution. One such Article 
hitherto inserted is the Article 43A. It seeks to promote the involvement of labour in the way 
industries and other enterprises are being run. It is well known that the plantation labour in 
India is one of the most marginalised sections amidst the labour community. Despite their 
whole lives dedicated to the upkeep of the plantation estates, they seldom get the fruits 
of their labour. They live in sub-human conditions with scant avenues for social mobility. 
There is a need for an urgent intervention to make sure that they get a fair share of their 
labour by getting an opportunity to be part of the management. 
The Bill seeks to achieve this aim.
Hence this Bill.
New Delhi;                                   D E A N  K U R I A K O S E  
June 21, 2024.

4
ANNEXURE
Extract from the Constitution of India 
 * * * * *
43A. The State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure 
the participation of workers in the management of undertakings, establishments or other 
organisations engaged in any industry.
 * * * * *
Participation 
of workers in 
management of 
industries.

LOK SABHA
a
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Adv. Dean Kuriakose, M.P .) 