‘As inrropucen IN Lox SABHA

17 DEC 2004

Bill No. 56 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
by
‘SHRI PAWAN KUMAR BANSAL, M.P,
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004,

2. Inarticle 85 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added
at the end, namely:—

"Provided that each House shall sit and transact business for a minimum of one
hundred and twenty days in a calendar year."

3. Inarticle 174 of the Constitution, in clause (1), the following proviso shall be added
at the end, namely:—

"Provided that the House or each House of the Legislature of States, where the
Legislative Assembly consists of more than ninety members, shall sit and transact business
for a minimum of one hundred days and where the Legislative Assembly consists of ninety
or less than ninety members for a minimum of sixty days in a calendar year."

4, After article 240 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—

"240A. Where a Union territory has a Legislative Assembly, it shall sit and transact
business for a minimum of forty-five days in a calendar year.".

Short title,

Amendment of
article 85.

Amendment of
article 174,

Insertion of new
article 240A.
Session of the
Legislative
Assembly of a
Union
Territory.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

Over the years there has been a steady decline in the number of sittings |
Houses of Parliament and that of the State Legislatures, While the first Lok Sabha sat
135 days in a calendar year, this number has now fallen below one hundred.

The situation in the States is still worse. While most of the State Legislatures meet
an average for between 45 to 55 days, the position in the case of others has been very di
with this number being as low as seven sittings a year.

‘This trend to curtail the sittings of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha and the State Legis

is alarming and quite destructive for the growth ofa healthy democracy, The present provi
of articles 85(1) and 174(1) of the Constitution only stipulate that six months should
intervene between two successive sessions of the House. A pedantic interpretation of
provisions has led to this fall in the number of sittings of the Houses and the concomit
rise in the cynicism about their relevance and efficacy in the polity. These provisions
perhaps intended to ensure that not more than six months elapsed between the c

of a House after fresh elections and not to provide for just three one-day sessions in a

To restore the due place of Legislature in our political system and to ensure adequat
consideration of the agenda before them, it is imperative to provide for a minimum number:
sittings, For Parliament, it should be atleast 120 days, for bigger States 100 days, for smal
States 60 days and for Union territories 45 days.

This Bill seeks to achieve this objective.

‘New Devt; PAWAN KUMAR BANS
July 29,2004,


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

. * . * * * .

85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet at
such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting,
in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.

. . . * . * .

174. (1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or each House of the
Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall
not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting
‘in the next session.

. . * . . * .

240. (1) The President may make regulations for the peace, progress and good government
of the Union territory of —

(@) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(b) Lakshadweep;

(©) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;

(@ Daman and Diu;

(@) Pondicherry:

Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function asa Legislature for
the Union territory of Pondicherry, the President shall not make any regulation for the peace,
progress and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date appointed
for the first meeting of the Legislature:

Provided further that whenever the body functioning as Legislature for the Union territory
of Pondicherry is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature remains
suspended on account of any action taken under any such law as is referred to in clause (1)
ofarticle 239A, the President may, during the period of such dissolution or suspension, make
regulations for the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory.

. . . * . . *

Sessions of
Parliament,
prorogation
and
dissolution.

Sessions of
the State
Legislature,
prorogation
a
dissolution

Power of
President 10
make
regulations
for certain
Union
territories


LOK SABHA

nN
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, M.P)

MGIPMRND—1695LS—13.08.2004.