4 As IxrropuceD IN Lok 53863

2 8 JUL 2006

Bill No. 56 of 2006.

THE FOREST PRODUCE MANAGEMENT BOARD BILL, 2006
By :
Suri HANsRAJ GANGARAM# AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for right to earn livelihood to the tribals and other persons who are
dependant on forest produce and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Forest Produce Management Board Act, 2006.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case ofa State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;

(b) "dependant" means any person living within or near forest areas and who is
entirely dependant on forest produce for his livelihood;

(c) "forest produce" means and includes any of the things found in or removed
from any forest such as fruits, flowers, herbs, leaves, gum, honey, barks, moha and
other such materials;

Short title and
extent.

Definitions.


Right to
derive
livelihood
from forest
produce,

Application,

Forest
Produce
Management
Board.

Forest
Produce
Management
Fund,

Functions of
the Board.

es
(व) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(e) "processing" means use of forest produce as a raw material to manufacture
new products;

(/) "right" means rights conferred upon oy the provisions of this Act, and

(g) "tribal" means a person who belongs to a tribe included in the Schedule to
the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.

3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every tribal or dependant shall have the right
to derive livelihood from forest produce.

4. Any tribal or dependant may apply to a loca! Committee of his area set up under
section 8, of his intention to sell forest produce after due processing.

5. (1) The Central Government shail, by notification in the official gazette, set up a
Board to be known as the Forest Produce Management Board under the Union Ministry of
Environment and Forests for preparing guidelines regarding uses of forest produce.

(2) The Board shall be established as a body corporate under this Act having
perpetual succession 810 8 common seal. हु

(3) The Chairman of the Board shail be appointed by the Central Government.
(4) The Board shail have such other members as may be prescribed.

(5) The salaries and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and
other members of Board shail be such as may be prescribed.

(6) The Board shail have its office in the capital of every State and Union Territory.

(7) The Central Government shail provide te the Board such number of officers
and staffs is necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board.

(8) The Central Government, in consultation with the Board, may issue general
directives relating to salary payable to the staff, their recruitment, training and other service
conditions.

6. (/) The Central Government shail set up a fund to be known as the Forest Produce
management Fund for the implementation of the provisions of this Act.,

(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the
fund in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Board.

7. The Board constituted under section 5 of this Act shall perform the following
functions:—

(i) prepare a list of forest produce available in every State;

(ii) issue licenses for collection, processing, buying and selling of forest produce
to tribals/dependants;

(iii) provide financial assistance in the form of either grants or loans at
concessional rates of interest to the tribals/dependants for setting up of projects
relating to processing of forest produce in such manner as may be prescribed;

(iv) provide marketing facility for the forest produce;

(v) pay compensation to the tribais/dependants sustaining loss in projects
approved by the Board in such manner as may be prescribed; and

(vi) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.

20

25

30

35

40



20

25

30

35

3

8. (J) The appropriate Government shall set up a Local Committee in every district, in
consultation with the Board established uuder section 5 of this Act, to assist the Board in
performing the functions relating to forest produce collection, processing, buying and
selling.

(2) Every Local Committee shall consist of such number of members as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government.

(3) The appropriate Government shall provide to every local Committee such number
of officers and staff as is necessary for the efficient functioning of the Committee.

9. Every Local Committee shall perform the following functions: —
(0 prepare a list of forest produce available within the district;

(ii) receive application for obtaining license from any tribal or dependant for
setting up of a project for forest produce collection, processing, buying and selling in
the district;

(iii) examine and forward the application received under sub-clause (ii) to the
Board for granting license or providing financial assistance to set up a project;

(iv) communicate granting of license or rejection of an application for license or
financial aid or any other detail sent by the Board to the applicant;

(0) forward application for reconsideration to the Board, if any, for granting of
license or financial aid in setting up of a project;

(vi) take up with authority concerned for provision‘of land, water and power on
priority basis to the license holders for setting up of their project;

(vii) inspect every project set up with financial assistance of the Board to ensure
proper utilisation of funds released by the Board;

(viii) initiate inquiry against license holders on receipt of complaints of
irregularities / misconduct; and

(४0 recommend action against license holders found guilty or irregularities/
misconduct to the Board.

10. (7) Every applicant whose application for granting of license or financial aid has
been rejected, shall have the right to appeal to the Board directly.

(2) The Board shall dispose off the appeal within three months of the receipt of the
same.

11. The Board may impose a fine which may extend to rupees one lakh on any person
found guilty after an inquiry conducted under clause (viii) of section 9 of this Act.

12. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.

Establishment
of Local
Committee.

Functions of
the Local
Committee.

Right to

Appeal.

Penalty.

Power to
make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The tribals and other persons living in or near forest areas have been earning their
livelihood from the forest for centuries. They have been enjoying rights over forest produce
traditionally. Earlier the forest areas were supposed to be under the control of society as a
whole. During the British period, control over forest areas passed into the hands of the
Government. Legislations were enacted to this effect. Such legislations caused adverse
impact on the ability of tribals and other persons settled in the forest areas to earn their
livelihood. They lost their traditional rights over forest produce.

After independence, the Government of India made various rules to check the massive
deforestation and misuse of forest lands. The strict approach of local forest officers made it
difficult for those depending on forests to earn their livelihood. Once the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 was brought into effect, it became difficult for people living in or
around forest areas to exploit forest produce for their livelihood. Such tribal people are poor
and they are not in a position to earn their livelihood from any other source. It is the duty of
the Government to provide self-employment to such people who live in or around forest
areas. They should be permitted to carry on their traditional occupation which is based on
processing of forest produce. Enabling them to start their own forest based processing
plants, industries, etc. through financial assistance by the Government is the only way to
bring these under privileged sections into the mainstream of the society. It will also help in
eradicating problems of poverty, unemployment and malnutrition in tribal areas. It is necessary
that the traditional rights of the tribals over forest produce be restored.

Hence this Bill.

New Detui; HANSRAJ GANGARAMJI AHIR
May 9,2006.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the setting up of the Forest Produce Management
Board. Clause 6 provides for the setting up of the Forest Produce Managemer:t Fund to
which the Central Government and State Governments shall contribute in such ratio, as may
be prescribed. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for establishment of local committees to assist the
Board in performing the functions relating to forest produce collection, processing, buying
and selling in every district. The expenditure relating to States shall be met out of the
Consolidated Fund of the States concerned. The expenditure in respect of Union territories
shall be met out of Consolidated Fund of India. :

The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred
crore. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.



; LOK SABHA ©

A

BILL

to provide for right to earn livelihood to the tribals and other persons who are dependant
‘on forest produce and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—1255LS(S5)—11-07-2006.