Bill No. 56-F of  2021
O                                                                                                                       INAL
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND
PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 24TH MARCH, 2021
RAJY A  SABHA ON 28TH  JULY, 2021)
ASSENTED  TO ON 7TH AUGUST, 2021
ACT  NO. 23 OF 2021

Bill No. 56-F of 2021
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
 to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Amendment Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(i) clause (4) shall be omitted;
Amendment of
section 2.
Short title and
commencement.
2 of 2016.

2
(ii) in clause (14),—
(a) in sub-clause (ii), after the words “contravention of”, the words “the
provisions of this Act or” shall be inserted;
(b) for sub-clause (vi), the following sub-clause shall be substituted,
namely:–
“(vi) who does not have parents and no one is willing to take care of
and protect or who is abandoned or surrendered;”;
(c) in sub-clause (ix), for the words “is likely to be”, the words “has been
or is being or is likely to be” shall be substituted;
(iii) in clause (17), for the words “Children’s Home”, the words “child care
institution” shall be substituted;
(iv) in clause (26), for the words “which is the focal point”, the words “which
shall function under the supervision of the District Magistrate” shall be substituted;
(v) after clause (26), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(26A) “District Magistrate” includes Additional District Magistrate of
the District;’;
(vi) in clause (46), the words “the person in-charge of which is willing” shall be
omitted;
(vii) for clause (54), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(54) “serious offences” includes the offences for which the punishment
under the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force, is,—
(a) minimum imprisonment for a term more than three years and not
exceeding seven years; or
(b) maximum imprisonment for a term more than seven years but no
minimum imprisonment or minimum imprisonment of less than seven years
is provided.'.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for the words “the Board, and”, the words “the
Board, the Committee, or” shall be substituted.
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), in clause (iii), for the words
“less than”, the word “minimum” shall be substituted.
5. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (m), for the words “of
such a child to the observation home”, the words “that child to an observation home or place
of safety, as the case may be,” shall be substituted.
6. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the words “observation
home”, the words “or a place of safety, as the case may be,” shall be inserted.
7. In section 16 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) The District Magistrate may, as and when required, in the best interest of a
child, call for any information from all the stakeholders including the Board and the
Committee.”.
8. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words “heinous
offence,”, the words and figures “or a child above the age of sixteen years has committed a
heinous offence and the Board has, after preliminary assessment under section 15, disposed
of the matter” shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section 3.
45 of 1860.
Amendment
of section 4.
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 18.

3
9. In section 27 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) No person shall be appointed as a member of the Committee unless
he has a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or law or social work or
sociology or human health or education or human development or special
education for differently abled children and has been actively involved in health,
education or welfare activities pertaining to children for seven years or is a
practicing professional with a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or law or
social work or sociology or human health or education or human development or
special education for differently abled children.
(4A) No person shall be eligible for selection as a member of the Committee,
if he––
(i) has any past record of violation of human rights or child rights,
(ii) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude, and
such conviction has not been reversed or has not been granted full pardon
in respect of such offence,
(iii) has been removed or dismissed from service of the Government
of India or State Government or an undertaking or corporation owned or
controlled by the Government of India or State Government,
(iv) has ever indulged in child abuse or employment of child labour
or immoral act or any other violation of human rights or immoral acts, or
(v) is part of management of a child care institution in a District.”;
(ii) in sub-section (7), in clause (iii), for the words “less than”, the word
“minimum” shall be substituted;
(iii) for sub-section (8),the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(8) The Committee shall submit a report to the District Magistrate in
such form as may be prescribed and the District Magistrate shall conduct a
quarterly review of the functioning of the Committee.”;
(iv) for sub-section (10), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(10) The District Magistrate shall be the grievance redressal authority to
entertain any grievance arising out of the functioning of the Committee and the
affected child or anyone connected with the child, as the case may be, may file a
complaint before the District Magistrate who shall take cognizance of the action
of the Committee and, after giving the parties  an opportunity of being heard,
pass appropriate order.”.
10. In section 32 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) The information regarding a child referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
uploaded by the Committee or the District Child Protection Unit or the child care
institution, as the case may be, on a portal as may be specified by the Central Government
in this behalf.”.
11. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words “submitted by Child
Welfare Officer” shall be omitted.
12. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), after the words “shall inform”,
the words “the District Magistrate,” shall be inserted.
Amendment of
section 32.
Amendment of
section 37.
Amendment of
section 38.
Amendment of
section 27.

4
13. In section 40 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) The Committee shall submit a quarterly report regarding restored, dead and
runaway children to the State Government and the District Magistrate in such form as
may be prescribed.”.
14. In section 41 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), the words “, within a period of six months from the date of
commencement of this Act,” shall be omitted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “shall determine”, the words “shall, after
considering the recommendations of the District Magistrate, determine” shall be
substituted.
15. In section 54 of the principal Act,––
(i) in sub-section (2), for the words “District Child Protection Units or State
Government, as the case may be”, the words “District Magistrate” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words “District Child Protection Unit or the State
Government”, the words “District Magistrate” shall be substituted.
16. In section 55 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words “State
Government”, the words “or District Magistrate” shall be inserted.
17. In section 56 of the principal Act,  in sub-section (5), for the word “Court”, the
words “District Magistrate” shall be substituted.
18. In section 58 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (3), for the words “in the court”, the words “before the District
Magistrate” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (4), for the words “court order”, the words “order passed by
the District Magistrate” shall be substituted.
19. In section 59 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (7), for the words “in the court”, the words “before the District
Magistrate” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (8), for the words “court order”, the words “order passed by
the District Magistrate” shall be substituted.
20. In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word “court”, the
words “District Magistrate” shall be substituted.
21. In section 61 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted,
namely:—
“Procedure for disposal of adoption proceedings.”;
(ii) in sub-section (1), for the word “court”, the words “District Magistrate”
shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-section (2), for the word “court”, the words “District Magistrate”
shall be substituted.
22. In section 63 of the principal Act, for the word “court”, the words “District
Magistrate” shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 40.
Amendment of
section 41.
Amendment of
section 54.
Amendment of
section 55.
Amendment of
section 56.
Amendment of
section 58.
Amendment of
section 59.
Amendment of
section 60.
Amendment of
section 61.
Amendment
of section 63.

5
23. In section 64 of the principal Act, for the words “concerned courts”, the words
“District Magistrate” shall be substituted.
24. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the word “court”, the
words “District Magistrate” shall be substituted.
25. In section 74 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words “in cases where
the case”, the words “in the pending case or in the case which” shall be substituted.
26. For section 86 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“86. (1) Where an offence under this Act is punishable with imprisonment for a
term of more than seven years, then, such offence shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
(2) Where an offence under this Act is punishable with imprisonment for a term
of three years and above, but not more than seven years, then, such offence shall be
non-cognizable and non-bailable.
(3) Where an offence, under this Act is punishable with imprisonment for less
than three years or with fine only, then, such offence shall be non-cognizable and
bailable.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 or the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 or the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, offences under this Act shall be triable by the
Children’s Court.”.
27. In section 87 of the principal Act, for the “Explanation”, the following Explanation
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “abetment”
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 107 of the Indian Penal Code.’.
28. In section 101 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–
“(3) No appeal shall lie from any order of acquittal made by the Board in
respect of a child alleged to have committed an offence other than the heinous
offence by a child who has completed or is above the age of sixteen years.”.
(ii) after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6) Any person aggrieved by an adoption order passed by the District
Magistrate may, within a period of thirty days from the date of such order passed
by the District Magistrate, file an appeal before the Divisional Commissioner.
(7) Every appeal filed under sub-section (6), shall be decided as
expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to dispose it within a
period of four weeks from the date of filing of the appeal:
Provided that where there is no Divisional Commissioner, the State
Government or Union territory Administration, as the case may be, may, by
notification, empower an officer equivalent to the rank of the Divisional
Commissioner to decide the appeal.”.
29. In section 110 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (xiv), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(xiva) the form of report submitted to the District Magistrate under
sub-section (8) of section 27;”;
Amendment
of section 64.
Amendment of
section 65.
Amendment of
section 74.
Substitution of
section 86.
Classification
of offences
and designated
court.
2 of 1974.
4 of 2006.
32 of 2012.
Amendment of
section 87.
45 of 1860.
Amendment of
section 110.
Amendment of
section 101.

6
(b) after clause (xxii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(xxiia) the form of quarterly report regarding restored, dead and runaway
children under sub-section (4) of section 40;”.

A
BILL
 to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—724RS(S3)—17-08-2021.