Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE NATIONAL SPORTS ETHICS COMMISSION BILL, 2016
By
SHRI ANURAG SINGH THAKUR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Sports Ethics Commission to ensure
ethical practices and fair play in sports including elimination of doping
practices, match fixing, fraud of age and sexual harassment of women in
sports and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the United Nations in its resolution 58/5 adopted by the General Assembly
on the 3rd day of November, 2003 recognizes sport as a means to promote education, health,
development and peace:
A
ND WHEREAS the International Convention adopted on the 19th day of October,
2005 at Paris provides for action against doping in sports and India ratified the said
Convention on the 10th day of September, 2007.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Sports Ethics Commission Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 56 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "athletic competition" means any sports competition at local, national or
international level in which sportsperson compete;
(b) "coach" means a person or a group of persons engaged in imparting training
to, and promotion of professional skills of, a sportsperson;
(c) "eminent athlete" means an athlete who has either won an Olympic Medal,
Asian Games Medal, a World Cup/World Championship medal or a Commonwealth
Games Medal in an Olympic or non-Olympic sport;
(d) "executive body" means a group of elected Office bearers and members
including nominees of the Federation Committee, by whatever name called, who
collectively manages and controls the affairs of a Sports Federation;
(e) "Federation Committee" means a Federation Ethics Committee to be
constituted by every Sports Federation under section 3;
(f) "National Commission" means the National Sports Ethics Commission
constituted under section 6;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) "sportsperson" means a person who participates in sports;
(i) "Sports Federation"means—
(a) a federation recognised by the International Olympic Committee in
respect of an Olympic sport;
(b) a federation which regulates the sport at international level in respect
of non-Olympic sports;
(c) any other federation which regulates any other sport internationally;
and
(d) any other sports federation recognised by the Central Government.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNCTIONS OF BODIES
3. (1) Every Sports Federation shall, within six months of the coming into force of
this Act, frame its own rules for constituting, by election or nomination, a Federation
Ethics Committee.
(2) The Federation Committee shall consist of elected members, coaches, eminent
athletes and such other persons which the executive body may deem appropriate.
(3) The Federation Committee shall be constituted within six months of the framing
of rules under sub-section (1).
(4) The term of the members of the Federation Committee shall be for four years from
the date of election or nomination or attainment of age of seventy years, whichever is
earlier.
(5) A member of the Federation Committee shall not be eligible for the re-election or
re-nomination.
(6) Every Sports Federation shall, within one year of the coming into force of this
Act, evolve a mechanism for receiving complaints and removal of a member of the Federation
Committee.
Definitions.
Constitution
of the
Federation
Ethics
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
4. (1) Every Federation Committee shall, within one year from the date of its constitu-
tion, frame a Code of Ethics comprising rules and regulations for prevention, monitoring
and detection of unethical practices in sports and offences under this Act.
(2) Every Federation Committee shall submit the evidence and its report thereon in
regard to any offence committed by its sportsperson to the National Commission within
such time as may be provided for in its Code of Ethics.
5. Every Federation Committee shall submit an annual report to the National
Commission in respect of its functioning, precautionary initiatives and such other matters
as the National Commission may specify.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, within six months from coming into force,
constitute a National Sports Ethics Commission for enforcing the Code of Ethics and
adjudicating upon offences referred to in Chapter III.
(2) The National Commission shall consist of six members to be appointed by the
Central Government in such manner, as may be prescribed:
Provided that four members of the National Commission shall be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst persons, who have been Judges of the Supreme Court
or a High Court in consultation with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee Judge.
7. (1) The National Commission shall sit in Benches of three members.
(2) Every Bench shall have two judicial members and shall be presided over by such
judicial member as the Chief Justice of India may specify.
(3) The term of the members of the National Commission shall be for four years from
the date of appointment or attainment of the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
(4) A member of the National Commission shall not be eligible for re-appointment.
(5) No member of the National Commission, after serving as a member, shall be entitled
to seek any position or benefit in any Sports Federation.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of
service of the members of the National Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) A member shall, while discharging his duties, be governed by the conduct rules
applicable to the members of the Union Public Service Commission to the extent that such
rules are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
8. (1) The head office of the National Commission shall be in New Delhi and the
National Commission may establish branch offices at such other places, as it may deem
necessary.
(2) The National Commission shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers
and staff as may be required for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
officers and staff of the Secretariat shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The National Commission may engage experts in the field of sports on a contract
basis for a period not exceeding three years at a time and on such terms and conditions as
the Central Government may prescribe.
9. (1) No member of the National Commission shall be removed from his office except
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office any member, if he—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent by the competent court; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
Functions of
the
Federation
Committee.
Annual
reporting by
Federation
Committee.
Constitution
of the
National
Sports Ethics
Commission.
Seat and
Benches of
the National
Commission.
Office and
staff of the
National
Commission.
Removal of
members of
the National
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his function; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(f) has been guilty of proven misbehaviour; or
(g) has failed to discharge his duties.
(3) No member shall be removed from his office unless a recommendation to this
effect is made by the Chief Justice of India in case of a judicial member and by the
Central Government in case of a non-judicial member:
Provided that no member shall be removed from his office on a ground specified in
clauses (d), (e), (f) or (g) of sub-section (2) unless an enquiry has been conducted for this
purpose and the member has been given an opportunity to defend himself.
10. (1) The National Commission shall exercise, perform and discharge its powers,
functions and duties reasonably with fairness, impartiality and independence and in a
manner that is timely, transparent, proportionate, accountable and consistent with this Act
and the applicable laws.
(2) The National Commission may—
(i) suo motu order report from a Sports Federation against any sportsperson
regarding commission of any offence under this Act;
(ii) frame guidelines for structure of annual reports and other documents expected
from Federation Committee; and
(iii) order any Sports Federation to amend its Code of Ethics if, in the opinion of
the National Commission, it is not in consonance with the laws and principles enshrined
in this Act or the Constitution of India.
(3) The National Commission shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely, for:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of section 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or
document from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) reviewing its decisions;
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex-parte;
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any
order passed by it, ex-parte; and
(i
) any other matter which may be prescribed.
11. (1) All civil cases in which Sports Federations have been impleaded as party
and pending adjudication before any court or authority other than a High Court or the
Supreme Court shall, immediately before the date of Constitution of National Commission,
stand transferred to the National Commission.
Duties and
functions of
National
Commission.
Transfer of
pending case.
1 of 1872.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
50

5
(2) Any case pending adjudication before a High Court except a case under article 226
or 227 of the Constitution of India, in which a Sports Federation is a party, may, with the
leave of the Court, be transferred to the National Commission.
(3) The cases transferred to the National Commission under sub-section (1), shall be
heard and adjudicated from the stage at which such case was pending in the court or the
authority, as the case may be, unless the National Commission is of the opinion that such
case needs to be heard afresh.
12. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect
of any matter which the National  Commission is empowered by or under this Act to determine
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.
13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in
any other law, and appeal shall lie against any order, not being an interlocutory Order, of the
National Commission to the High Court or the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds
specified in section 100 of that Code.
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision made by the National Commission with
the consent of the parties.
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days
from the date of the decision of the National Commission:
Provided that the Supreme Court or a High Court may entertain the appeal after the
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time.
14. (1) An order passed by the National Commission under this Act shall be executable
as a decree of civil court, and for this purpose, the National Commission shall have all the
powers of a civil court.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the National Commission
may transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such
civil court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court.
CHAPTER III
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
15. (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of
the provisions of any other law providing for prosecution for offences thereunder.
(2) The Code of Ethics referred to in section 4 shall be made by Federation Committee
in accordance with the guidelines of the National Commission.
16. (1) Without prejudice to any provisions of law, judgement of court  or rules made
by the Central Government to prohibit sexual harassment, any person including a member
of any sports federation, a coach or a sportsperson, who has been found guilty of sexual
harassment, shall be debarred by the Sports Federation from participating in any existing or
future sports event in any capacity, whether as a member of any Sports Federation or coach
or sportsperson or otherwise.
(2) The National Commission shall ensure that all Sports Federations follow the
guidelines framed under Sexual  Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition
and Redressal) Act, 2013.
17. (1) For the purpose of this section 'match fixing' means—
(a) instances where an individual sportsperson or coach or member or
Sports Federation or a group of them receives money individually or collectively
to underperform;
(b) instances where an individual sportsperson or coach or member of
Sports Federation or a group of them places bets in athletic competitions in which
they play or influence decision that shall naturally undermine the performance;
Bar on
jurisdiction
of a civil
court.
Appeal to
High Court
and Supreme
Court.
Orders passed
by the
National
Commission
to be
executable as
decree.
Power to
frame
guidelines.
Penalty for
sexual
harassment.
Penalty for
match fixing.
14 of 2013.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

6
(c) instances where an individual sportsperson or coach or member of
Sports Federation or a group of them passes information to a betting syndicate about
team composition, probable result or any other insider information regarding the sports;
(d) instances where grounds men are given money to prepare a pitch in a way
which suited the betting syndicate; and
(e) instances where former or current individual sportsperson or coach or member
of Sports Federation or a group of them are used by bookies to gain access to Indian
and foreign players to influence their performance for a monetary consideration.
(2) Without prejudice to any provisions of law, judgement of court or rules made by
the Central Government, any person including a member of any Sports Federation, a coach
or a sportsperson, who has been found guilty of match fixing, shall be debarred by the
Sports Federation from participating in any existing or future sports event in any capacity,
whether as a member of any Sports Federation or coach or sportsperson or otherwise.
(3) Any person found guilty of match fixing shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years and or with fine which shall
be five times the amount involved in the match fixing.
18. (1) Any sportsperson, his guardian, a coach or a member of Sports Federation
who withholds the information regarding true age or gender of a sportsperson shall be—
(i) punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six
months and with a fine of one lakh rupees; and
(ii) debarred by the Sports Federation from participating in any existing or future
sports event in any capacity, whether as a member of any sports federation or coach or
sportsperson or otherwise.
(2) Any sportsperson, not being minor, along with the guardian, coach or member of
Sports Federation who internationally allows that sportsperson to participate in an athletic
competition, which is not suitable for the age or gender of that sportsperson shall be—
(i) punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year
and with fine of five lakh rupees; and
(ii) debarred by the Sports Federation from participating in any existing or
future sports event in any capacity, whether as a member of any sports federation or
coach or sportsperson or otherwise.
19. (1) Any sportsperson, who under this discretion or under the influence of a coach
or a member of Sports Federation, indulges in substance abuse or any form of doping as
specified in the Code of Ethics of Sports Federation, and the Coach or the member of
Sports Federation who influenced the sportsperson, shall be—
(i) punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
ten years and/or with a fine of ten lakh rupees; and
(ii) debarred by the Sports Federation from participating in any existing or
future sports event in any capacity, whether as a member of any Sports Federation or
coach or sportsperson or otherwise.
20. (1) Any sportsperson or  coach or member of Sports Federation or any other
person, who willfully fails to comply with the order of the National Commission, shall be
punished with fine which may extend upto one lakh rupees and in case of a second offence
with fine which may extend upto two lakh rupees and in the case of continuing contravention
with additional fine which may extend upto twenty thousand rupees for each day during
which such default continues.
(2) Where the National Commission is of the opinion that an application before it is
frivolous or mala fide, it may impose a fine on the applicant which shall not be less than
ten thousand rupees but which may extend upto one lakh rupees.
(3) The National Commission may award costs of litigation to a party.
Penalty for
false age or
gender.
Penalty for
doping.
Penalty for
wilful failure
to comply
with orders of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

7
CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS
21. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person or
authority for anything which has been done or intended to be done in good faith under this
Act or the rules made thereunder.
22. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
23. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Recently, corruption and match fixing charges were thrown up in Indian cricket and
other sports by multiple players. It was only about a few years back, when the racket of
'match fixing' in Indian cricket came to fore when eminent players were all charged with
'fixing' the matches. The concerned players are currently charged under inappropriate
sections of Dishonesty and Cheating under Indian Penal Code, 1860 as well as the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988 which do not apply to their profession. Although action against
players were taken by Sports Federations and they have been banned for life, there is still
an issue because there is nothing in any of the Indian law which bring match fixing and such
offences under specific criminal law. There are other latches and loopholes for cases of false
age or gender or doping charges and there is an urgent need to check such offences under
the legal system.
United Nations in its resolution 58/5 adopted by the General Assembly on the
3rd November, 2003 has recognized sport as a means to promote education, health,
development and peace. The International Convention adopted on the 19th October, 2005
at Paris provides for action against doping in sports and India ratified the said Convention
on the 10th September, 2007. The Bill fulfils the purpose of fair play, conducive environment
for sports and justice to those wronged by others.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANURAG SINGH THAKUR
February 10, 2016.
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for establishment of a National Sports Ethics Commis-
sion. Clause 8 provides for establishment of offices, Secretariat and staff of the Secretariat
of the Commission. It also provides for engagement of experts on contractual basis. Clause
21 provides that all sums realised by way of penalties shall be credited to the Consolidated
Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty crore is also likely to be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for engagement of experts on a contractual basis.
Clause 10 empowers the National Sports Ethics Commission to frame guidelines. Clause 23
empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules relate to matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal
character.
10

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a National Sports Ethics Commission to ensure
ethical practices and fair play in sports including elimination of doping practices,
match fixing, fraud of age and sexual harassment of women in sports and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Anurag Singh Thakur, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4408LS(S3)—01.03.2016.