As inTRopUCED. IN Lok SABHA

28 yy 2000

Bill No. 56 of 2000

THE ACQUIRED IMMUNO DEFICIENCY SYNDROME (AIDS)
PREVENTION BILL, 2000
By
Dr. V. 5808, MP,
A

BILL

to provide for the prevention and control of the spread of Human Immuno Deficiency
Virus (HIV) infection and to provide for specialised medical treatment and social support

to and rehabilitation of persons suffering from Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome
(AIDS) and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Brit enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)
| Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “AIDS” means Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome in a person
resulting from HIV infection;

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment,

Definitions.


(2) "designated health authority” means an authority designated as such by a
State Government under section 3;

(©) "HIV" means Human Immuno Deficiency Virus;

(d) "HIV infection" means the presence in the body of a person of HIV
antibodies or antigens detected on the basis of test; 3

(e) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

() “registered medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who
Possesses any recognised medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 2
of Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and whose name has been entered in a State of
medical register; Le

(g) “surveillance centre” means a surveillance centre established-under section
8; and

(A) “test” means a serological procedure followed for detection of HIV
antibodies or antigens in the body of a person.

CHAPTER II 15

DesiNaTeD Heat AUTHORITIES

Appointment 3. Every State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
ohne Such person or authority as it may deem fit as the designated heaith authority in every
authorities, district and define the local limits within which such authority shall exercise the power
and discharge the functions conferred or imposed on it by or under this Act, 20
Registered 4. Every registered medical practitioner who, in the course of his practice becomes
Medical Cognizant of any case of HIV infection in a person, or of a persons suffering from AIDS or
pirat oat a drug addict in any private or public dwelling hospital, nursing home or any other place,
fion, shall give information of such persons in such form and manner as may be prescribed and
with the least practicable delay to the designated health authority within whose local limits 25
he is practising.
Explanation:— For the purposes of this section, “drug addict” means an addict within 1 of
the meaning of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985,
Designated 5. On the receipt of an information under section 4 or from any other source, the

authority to call designated health authority shall have the Power to direct the person referred to in 20
for infarmation. eetion 4 to—

(@) furnish such infcrmation as that authority may require from him for
initiating action under section 7 and section 9;

(8) submit himself for test;

(c) remove himself forthwith to a hospital or other place for special care 35
and medical treatment where the authority considers it necessary so to do in the
interest of such person and also to prevent the spread of HIY infection.

Ressons belong- 6. The designated health authority may, having regard to the kinds of persons frequenting

cegoricctran OF living in any area or areas within is local limits and who are exposed to greater risk of

dergo est” Acquiring ortrasmitting HIV infection or any other relevant considevation, provide facilities ao
and make necessary arrangements for such persons to undergo test.

Steps to be 7. The designs-ed health authority shall, on receipt of information under section

taken by desig- 4 or from any other source, take steps to provide for—
nated health

authority. (@) counselling by qualified and specially trained persons;
(0) health education; 45


(c) specialised medical treatment;
(@) periodical clinical and serological follow up action;

(e) social support (including rehabilitation); to the HIV infected persons
and persons suffering from AIDS and also take such other precautionary steps
to prevent the spread of HIV infection as it may deem necessary.

‘CHAPTER III
‘SURVEILLANCES AND REHABILITATION

8. The Central Government, after consultation with a State Government, may,
notification iit the Official Gazette, establish one or more surveillance centres in
that State, for the purposes of this Act.

9. (1) Every surveillance centre shall conduct clinical or laboratory tests or shall
cause such tests to be conducted for the purpose of detecting, determing or monitoring the
rate of HIV infection or for identifying the persons so infected amongst the general public
or selected groups of persons.

(2) Where a person has been detected to be having HIV infection or suffering from
AIDS, the designated health authority may require this surveillance centre to take necessary
steps to trace the sources from which such person has acquired HIV infection and the sources
through which he might have wransmitted the infection to others.

10. (1) No person who knows that he is infected with HIV or is suffering from AIDS,
shall donate his blood, any organ or semen to any blood bank, hospital, laboratory or any
other institution. ‘

(2) No professional blood donor shall give blood to any blood bank, hospital,
laboratory or any other institution unless he has got his blood tested every time he gives
blood for the presence of HIV antibodies in his blood and such test has proved that ‘t is free
from HIV antibodies.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “professional blood
donor” means a person who gives his blood more than once within a period of three months
and for monetary consideration.

वा, Every designated health authority shall,—

( keep track of blood donors whose blood is found sero positive and
remove him immediately to a surveillance centre;

(i cause to display of visuals or written messages in public transport
about the effects of AIDS:

(iii) provide for counselling to inmates of jai

(iv) give special attention to migratory labour and create awareness
among them of the need for safe sex and supply them with qualitative condoms;

(0 involve influential people in the society like Members of Parliament,
Members of Legislature of the State, Members of Municipal Corporation or
Committees and Panchayats and also other important religious leaders for
spreading messages for prevention of AIDS;

(0 frame a policy which will ensure participation of medical and para
medical personnels in Government sectors in providing care and support to the
people living with HIV and AIDS;

(vil) provide protection to health care participants against infection while
dealing with HIV/AIDS patients;

(iii) provide proper health check up facilities for commercial sex workers

Establishment
of surveillance
centres,

Surveillance
Centres to con-
duct survey and
to report cases
of HIV infec-
tion to desig-
nated health au-
thority.

Bar to donation
of blood, or-

‘gans, ete,

Steps by desig-
nated health
authority


Steps by the
Central Gov-
ernment.

Measures re~
lating to ante-
natal cases.

Legislation by
Central Govern-
ment

with the provision of health cards to them;

(60 propogate hundred per cent use of condom during , sex
activity;

(x) establish sexually transmitted diseases clinics in red right areas:

(xi) establish computerised AIDS information system in high HIV
prevalent districts;

(xii) establish diagnostic centre of AIDS in every district;

(पर) cause exhibition of short film on sexually transmitted diseases and
HIV/AIDS, atleast for 10-15 minutes duration during interval in every cinema
hall;

(xiv) provide licences to commercial workers and for their periodical
check up facilities for treatment in case they are found sero positive;

(xv) cause screening of short films on HIV/AIDS in every college once in
six months;

(xi) make compulsory HIV testing for college students at the time of

(एम) make compulsory testing of truck and other heavy vehicle drivers
at the time of issuing licence or its renewal.

12. The Central Government shall,—

() immediately conduct a census in the country of persons suffering from
HIV/AIDS;

(i frame a policy whether it is necessary to ascertain HIV status of a
person before marriage and if found positive to inform the family members
concerned;

(if frame a suitable policy regarding payment of life insurance amount
in case of death of the individuals due to HIV/AIDS and related diseases;

(i) encourage harm minimisation approach to combat the problem of
HIV transmission in intravenous drug users;

() promote indigenous system of medicines and homoeopathy in all
aspects of national programme;
(vi) make available at all tourist places a brochure on prevention and
control of HIV/AIDS; and

(vii) encourage research and development in the field of HIV/AIDS,
especially in the field of prevention of mother to child transmission and preventive
HIV vaccine(s).

13... (0) Every State Government shall cause every antenatal case to
screened for AIDS at every maternity home or other hospital.

(2) Every State Government shall supply low cost indigenous kits to all antenal
clinics.

(3) Every State Government shail set up centres for the care of positive
antenatal mothers.

14. The Central Government shall, as soon as possible, bring forward suitabl
legislation, — :

(ito provide for medical termination of pregnancy for those antenatal
who are HIV positive and beyond twenty weeks of gestation period;



‘Wi to ban on professional blood donation and to have strict regulation of
blood banks run by commercial organisations; and

(iii) to provide for compulsory notification in case blood donated has been
found positive for HIV/AIDS and to make prohibition of such person from blood
donation in future. a

15, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules Power to make
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. nes.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome, more commonly known as AIDS; has of
late assumed proportions ofa major health hazard in several parts of the world. No vaccine
is presently available for affording immunisation against the virus nor it is possible to cure
the disease which invariably results in death. The World Health Organisation estimates
that 5-10 million people have already been infected by HIV throughout the world.

2. In India, a surveillance programme on AIDS was initiated in 1985, Till 31st July,
1989, 3.33 lakh persons mainly belonging to “high risk groups” like sexually promiscuous
men and women have been screened and 1,392 individuals were found to have HIV infection.
The long incubation period (about 8 years) renders identification based on clinical symptoms
alone is inadequate at the initial stage of infection. Therefore, surveillance based on serology
is necessary to prevent the spread of HIV, which causes AIDS

3. Having regard to potential of rapid spread of infection and the mode of its
transmission, it is necessary to take effective measures to prevent the spread of HIV, by
detecting persons infected, preventing transmission by them of infection to others and by
providing counselling, health education and social support to, and rehabilitation of, infected
persons.

The Bill seeks to provide for comprehensive measures for the prevention and control
of AIDS.

New Deut; V. SAROJA
March 10, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides appointment of designated health authority in every
district, Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the designated authority shall have the power to
direct certain persons for test with respect to detecting HIV infection or AIDS. Clause 7
provides for counselling, health education, specialised medical treatment and social support
and rehabilitation of persons suffering from AIDS or HIV infection. Clause 8 provides for
establishment or surveillance centres for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. Clauses 11
and 12 provide that every State Goverament and Central Government shall make necessary
steps for the prevention of AIDS. Clause 13 of the Bill provides for taking measures relating
to antenatal cases. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. The Central Government will have to assist the States for
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees one hundred crore. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred
crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM. REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central

the purposes of the Bill. As the matters will rel

Government to make rules for carrying out
power is of a normal character.

late to detail only, the delegated legislation of


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the prevention and control of the spread of Human Immuno Deficiency
Virus (HIV) infection and to provide for specialised medical treatment and social support
to and rehabilitation of persons suffering from Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrom
(AIDS) and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

(Dr. V. Saroja, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4508LS—31-3-2000. ~