As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

22 AUG 203

Bill No. 56 of 2003

THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
By
Dr. V. Sarosa, M.P.
i
BILL
Surther to amend the Railways Act, 1989.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7 ) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2003.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

f 1989. 5 2. After section 124A of the Railways Act, 1989, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—

“124B(1), Every passenger shall be compulsorily insured for loss of life or
disability due to any accident and the premium thereof shall be charged along with
fare of ticket:

10 Provided that different rates of premium may be charged for different classes of
travel:

Short title and
commencement.

Insertion of
new section
1248.


2
Provided further that different amount may be fixed for loss of life or in case of

each disability.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the railways may enter into contract with
insurance companies.

(3) In case of an accident, the insurance amount, i.e. assured sum shall be paid to the
dependent in case of death of passenger or to the passenger in case of disability.

(4) An application for settlement of claim for insurance amount shall be presented to
such authority and in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.”.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In recent years, railway accidents are frequent. There is a heavy toll of lives in almost
every accident. Besides, several passengers lose their limbs and become disabled. There is
a provision for payment of claim in respect of loss of life or disability on the basis of award
given by Tribunals. However, the compensation amount is not sufficient for the family of the
deceased to lead a decent life. Therefore, it is proposed that each and every passenger shall
be compulsorily insured. Since meager premium in this regard may not be significant, it may
not be a burden to the passengers. There is a similar provision in regard to air journey in the
country.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; V.SAROJA
July 22, 2003.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rule will relate to matters of details only, the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.



LOK SABHA

i
BILL =
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989... 3

(Dr. V. Saroja, MP.)

1
MGIPMRND—2186LS—04-08-2003.