THE BENAMI TRANSACTIONS (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2011
________
ARRANGEMENT  OF CLAUSES
________
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF BENAMI TRANSACTION
3. Prohibition of benami transaction.
4. Property held benami liable to confiscation.
5. Prohibition of right to recover property held benami.
6. Prohibition to re-transfer property in benamidar.
CHAPTER III
AUTHORITIES
7. Authorities.
8. Jurisdiction of authorities.
9. Powers of authorities regarding summons, production of documents and to give
evidence, etc.
10. Power to call for information.
11. Power of authority to impound documents.
12. Power to cause inquiry or investigation.
CHAPTER IV
A
TTACHMENT, ADJUDICATION AND CONFISCATION
13. Notice and attachment of property involved in prohibited benami transaction.
14. Manner of service of notice.
15. Adjudication of benami property.
16. Confiscation and vesting of benami property.
17. Management of properties confiscated under this Act.
18. Possession of the property.
Bill No. 56 of 2011
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CHAPTER V
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
19. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.
20. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.
21. Powers of Appellate Tribunal.
22. Rectification of mistakes.
23. Right to representation.
24. Appeal to High Court.
CHAPTER VI
S
PECIAL COURTS
25. Special Courts.
26. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special
Court.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
27. Penalty for benami transaction.
28. Penalty for false information.
29. Previous sanction.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30. Certain transfers to be null and void.
31. Exemption.
32. Power of  Central Government to issue directions, etc.
33. Findings under other laws not conclusive for proceedings under this Act.
34. Application of other laws not barred.
35. Bar of Jurisdiction.
36. Offences to be non-cognizable.
37. Offences by companies.
38. Notice, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds.
39. Protection of action taken in good faith.
40. Transfer of pending cases.
41. Legal heir.
42. Overriding effect of Act.
43. Power to make rules.
44. Rules to be laid before Parliament.
45. Power to remove difficulties.
46. Repeal and saving.
47.  Amendment of enactment.
THE SCHEDULE
(ii)

THE BENAMI TRANSACTIONS (PROHIBITION) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to benami transactions, prohibit holding
property in benami and restrict right to recover or transfer property held benami, and
provide mechanism and procedure for confiscation of property held benami and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title, ex-
tent and com-
mencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 56 of 2011
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Adjudicating  Authority” means the Adjudicating Authority appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002;
(b) “Administrator” means an Income-Tax Officer as defined in clause (25) of
section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(c) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal established under section
25 of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002;
(d) “Approving Authority” means a Joint Commissioner of Income-Tax as defined
in clause (28C) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(e) “authority” means an authority referred to in section 7;
(f) “ benami property” means any property which is the subject matter of a
benami transaction;
(g) “benami transaction” means,—
(A) a transaction or arrangement—
(a) where a property is transferred to, or is held by, a person for a
consideration provided, or paid by,  another person; and
(b) the property is held for the immediate or future benefit, direct or
indirect, of the person providing the consideration, except when the property is
held by—
(i) a karta, or a member  of a Hindu undivided family, as the
case may be,  and the property is held for his benefit or  benefit of
other members in the family; or
(ii) a person standing in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of
another person towards whom he stands in such capacity and
includes a trustee, executor, partner, agent, director of a company or
legal adviser, a depository or a participant as an agent of a depository
under the Depositories Act, 1996 and any other person as may be
notified by the Central Government for this purpose;
(B) a transaction or arrangement in respect of a property carried out or
made in a fictitious name; or
(C) a transaction or arrangement in respect of a property where the owner
of the property is not aware of,  or, denies knowledge of, such ownership;
(h) “benamidar” means a person or a fictitious person, as the case may be, in
whose name the benami property is transferred or held and includes a name lender;
(i) “beneficial owner” means a  person, whether his identity is known or not,  for
whose benefit the benami property is held by a benamidar;
(j) “fair market value”  in relation to a property, means—
(i) the price that the property would ordinarily fetch on sale  in the open
market on the relevant date; and
(ii) where the price referred to in sub-clause (i) is not ascertainable, such
price as may be determined in accordance with the rules made under this Act.
(
k) “Initiating Officer” means an Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax as defined
in clause (9A) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(l) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notified” shall be construed accordingly;
  (m) “High Court” means—
(i) the High Court within the jurisdiction of which the aggrieved party
ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain; and
15 of 2003.
43 of 1961.
15 of 2003.
43 of 1961.
22 of 1996.
43 of 1961.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) where the Government is the aggrieved party, the High Court within
the jurisdiction of which the respondent, or in a case where there are more than
one respondent, any of the respondents, ordinarily resides or carries on business
or personally works for gain;
(n) “person” includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) a company;
(iv) a firm (including a limited liability partnership under the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008);
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated
or not;
(vi) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, an association of persons or a
body of individuals or an artificial juridical person shall be deemed to be a person,
whether or not such person or body or artificial juridical person was formed or
established or incorporated with the object of deriving income, profits or gains;
(o) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(p) “property” means property of any kind, whether movable or immovable,
tangible or intangible, and includes any right or interest in such property and where
the property is capable of conversion into some other form, then the property in such
converted form;
(q) “Schedule” means  the Schedule appended to this Act;
(r)  “Special Court” means a Court of Session designated as Special Court under
sub-section (1) of section 25;
(s) “transfer” includes sale, purchase or any other form of transfer of right, title,
possession or lien.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF BENAMI TRANSACTION
3.   ( 1) No person shall, on and after the commencement of this Act, enter into any
benami transaction.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to a benami transaction entered
into by any person, being an individual,  in the name of his–
(a) spouse;
(b) brother or sister;  or
(c) any lineal ascendant or descendant.
4.  Any property, which is subject matter of benami transaction, not being a benami
transaction referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3, shall be liable to be confiscated by the
Central Government.
5. (1) No suit, claim or action to enforce any right in respect of any property held
benami against the person in whose name the property is held or against any other person
shall lie by, or, on behalf of, a person claiming to be the real owner of such property.
(2) No defence based on any right in respect of any property held benami, whether
against the person in whose name the property is held, or, against any other person, shall be
allowed in any suit, claim or action by or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner
of such property.
6 of 2009.
Prohibition of
benami  trans-
action.
Property held
benami liable to
confiscation.
Prohibition of
right to recover
property held
benami .
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
6.  No person, being benamidar shall re-transfer the benami property held by him to
the beneficial owner or any other person acting on his behalf.
CHAPTER III
AUTHORITIES
7.   The following shall be the authorities for the purposes of this Act, namely:—
(a) the Initiating Officer;
(b) the Approving Authority; and
(c) the Administrator.
8. (1) The authorities shall exercise all or any of the powers and perform all or any of the
functions conferred on, or, assigned, as the case may be, to it under this Act or the rules
framed thereunder in accordance with such directions as the Central Government may issue
for the exercise of powers and performance of the functions by all or any of the authorities.
(2) In issuing the directions or orders referred to in sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government may have regard to any one or more of the following criteria, namely:—
(a) territorial area;
(b) classes of persons;
(c) classes of cases; and
(d) any other criterion specified by the Central Government in this behalf.
9.  (1) The  authorities shall, for the purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are
vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
(c) compelling the production of books of account and other documents;
(d) issuing commissions;
(e) receiving evidence on affidavits; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, any authority under this Act may requisition the
service of any police officer or of any officer of the Central Government  or  State Government
or of both to assist him for all or any of the purposes specified in sub-section (1),  and it shall
be the duty of every such officer to comply with such requisition or direction.
10. The Initiating Officer or the Adjudicating Authority shall have power to require
any officer or authority of the Central Government or State Government or a local authority
or any person or authority who is responsible for registering and maintaining books of
account and other documents containing a record of any transaction relating to any property
or any other person  to furnish such information in relation to such persons, points or
matters as in his opinion will be useful for or relevant to the purposes of this Act.
11. (1) Where any books of account or other documents are produced before the
authority in any proceedings under this Act and the authority in this behalf has reason to
believe that any of such books of account or other documents are required to be impounded
and retained for any inquiry under this Act, it may impound and retain such books of account
or other documents for a period not exceeding three months from the date of attachment
made by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (3) of section 15.
Prohibition to
re-transfer
property in
benamidar.
Authorities.
Jurisdiction of
authorities.
5 of 1908.
Power to call
for informa-
tion.
Power of
authority to
impound docu-
ments.
Powers of
authorities
regarding
summons,
production of
documents and
to give
evidence, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(2) The person, from whom the books of account and other documents were impounded,
shall be entitled to obtain copies of the books of account or other documents impounded
under sub-section (1).
(3) On the expiry of the period specified under sub-section (1), the books of account
and other documents shall be returned to the person from whom such books of account or
other documents were impounded unless the Approving  Authority  or  Adjudicating  Authority
permits retention of such books of account and other documents beyond the said period.
12. The Initiating Officer, after obtaining prior approval of the Approving Authority,
shall have power to cause to be conducted any inquiry or investigation in respect of any
person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account or any other relevant matters
and it shall be competent upon him to exercise the powers conferred under sub-section (1) of
section 9.
CHAPTER IV
A
TTACHMENT , ADJUDICATION  AND  CONFISCATION
13. (1) Where the Initiating Officer, on the basis of material in his possession, has
reason to believe that any person, not being a person referred in sub-section ( 2) of section
3, is a benamidar in respect of a property, he may, after recording reasons in writing, issue a
notice to such person to  show  cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why
such property should not be treated as benami property.
(2) Where a notice under sub-section ( 1) specifies any property as being held by a
benamidar referred to in that sub-section, a copy of the notice shall also be served upon
such other person who is a beneficial owner.
(3) Where the Initiating Officer is of the opinion that the person in possession of the
property held benami may alienate such property during the period specified in the notice,
he may, with the previous approval of the Approving Authority, by order in writing, attach
provisionally such property in the manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Initiating Officer,  after making such inquires and calling for such reports or
evidence as he deems fit  and taking into account  all relevant materials, shall, within a period
of ninety days from the date of issue of notice under sub-section (1),—
(a) where the provisional attachment has been made under sub-section (3),—
(i) pass an order continuing the provisional attachment of the property
with the prior approval of the Approving Authority, till  the date of  the order
made by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (3) of section 15; or
(ii) revoke the provisional attachment of the property with the prior
approval of the Approving Authority;
(b) where provisional attachment has not been made under sub-section (3),—
(i) pass an order provisionally attaching the property till the date of order
made by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (3) of section 15; or
(ii) decide not to attach the property as specified in the notice, with the
prior approval of the Approving Authority.
(5) Where the Initiating Officer passes an order continuing the provisional attachment
of the property under sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or passes an order provisionally attaching
the property under sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (4), he shall, within fifteen days
from such attachment, draw up a statement of the case and refer it to the Adjudicating
Authority.
Power to cause
inquiry or
investigation.
Notice and
attachment of
property
involved in
prohibited
benami
transaction.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
14. (1) A notice under sub-section ( 1) of section 13   may be served on the person
named therein either by post or as if it were a summons issued by a Court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.
(2) Any  notice referred to in sub-section (1) may be addressed—
(i) in case of an individual, to such individual;
(ii) in the case of a firm, to the managing partner or the manager of the firm;
(iii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, to karta or  any member of such
family;
(iv) in the case of a company, to the principal officer thereof;
(v) in the case of any other association or body of individuals, to the principal
officer or any member thereof;
(vi) in the case of any other person (not being an individual), to the person who
manages or controls his affairs.
15. (1) On  receipt of a reference under sub-section (5) of section 13, the Adjudicating
Authority shall serve notices, to furnish such documents, particulars or evidence as is
considered necessary on a date to be specified therein, on the following person, namely:—
(a) the person specified as a benamidar therein;
(b) any person referred to as the beneficial owner therein or identified as such;
(c) any interested party, including a banking company;
(d) any person who has made a claim in respect of the property.
(2) Where such property is held jointly by more than one person, such notice shall be
served to all persons holding such property.
(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall, after—
(a) considering  the reply, if any, to the notice issued under sub-section (1);
(b) making or causing  to be made such inquiries and calling  for such reports or
evidence as he deems fit; and
(c) taking  into account all relevant materials,
provide an opportunity of being heard to the person specified as a benamidar therein, the
Initiating Officer, and any other person who claims to be the owner of such property, and,
thereafter, pass an order—
(i) holding the property not to be a benami property and revoking the attachment
order; or
(ii) holding the property to be a benami property and confirming the attachment
order.
(4) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that some part of the properties in
respect of  which reference has been made to him is benami property, but is not able to
specifically identify such part, he shall record a finding to the best of his judgment as to
which part of properties is held benami
.
(5) Where in the course of proceedings before him, the Adjudicating Authority  has
reason to believe that a property, other than a property referred to him by the Initiating
Officer is benami property, it shall provisionally attach such property and such property
shall be deemed to be a property referred to it on the date of receipt of the reference under
sub-section (5) of section 13.
5 of 1908.
Manner of
service of
notice.
Adjudication
of benami
property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(6) The Adjudicating Authority may, at any stage of the proceedings, either on the
application of any party, or suo motu, strike out the name of any party improperly joined or
add the name of any person whose presence before the Adjudicating Authority may be
necessary to enable it to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the
reference.
(7) No order under sub-section (3) shall be passed after the expiry of one year from the
end of the month in which the reference under section 13 was received.
16. (1) Where  any property  is attached  under sub-section ( 3) of section 15, the
Adjudicating Authority shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the person
concerned, make an order confiscating the property held to be a benami property.
 (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a property held or acquired by a person
from  the benamidar for adequate consideration, without his having knowledge of the
benami transaction.
(3) Where an order of confiscation has been made under sub-section (1), all the rights
and title in such property shall vest absolutely in the Central Government free of all
encumbrances and no compensation shall be payable in respect of such confiscation.
(4) Any right of any third person created in such property with a view to defeat the
purposes of this Act shall be null and void.
(5) Where no order of confiscation is made upon the proceedings under this Act
attaining finality, no claim shall lie against the Government.
17. (1) The Administrator shall have the power to receive and manage the property, in
relation to which an order  of confiscation  under  sub-section ( 1) of  section 16 has been
made,  in such manner  and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, notify as
many of its officers as it thinks fit, to perform the functions of an Administrator.
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may
direct, to dispose of the property which is vested in the Central Government under section 16.
18. (1) Where an order of confiscation in respect of a property under sub-section (1)
of section 16 has been made, the Administrator shall proceed to take the possession of such
property.
(2) The Administrator shall,—
(a) by notice in writing, order within seven days of the date of the service of
notice any person,  who may be in possession of the benami property,  to surrender or
deliver possession thereof to him or any other person duly authorised in writing by
him in this behalf;
(b) in the event of non-compliance of the order referred to in clause (a), or if in his
opinion, taking over of immediate possession is warranted, for the purpose of forcibly
taking over possession, requisition the service of any police officer to assist him and
it shall be the duty of such officer to comply with such requisition.
CHAPTER V
A
PPELLATE TRIBUNAL
19. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal established under
section 25 of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 shall be the Appellate Tribunal
for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the powers
conferred on it by or under this Act.
20. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Adjudicating Authority   may prefer an
appeal in such form and along with such fee, as may be prescribed, to the Appellate Tribunal
against the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under section 15  within forty-five
days from the date of such order.
Confiscation
and vesting of
benami
property.
Management
of properties
confiscated
under this Act.
Possession of
property.
Establishment
of Appellate
Tribunal.
15 of 2003.
Appeals to
Appellate
Tribunal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the said period of forty-five
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal in time.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after
giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as
it thinks fit.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal, as far as possible, may hear and decide such appeal within
a period of two years from the last date of the month in which the appeal is filed.
21. An Appellate Tribunal shall have the power—
(a) to determine a case finally, where the evidence on record is sufficient;
(b) to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken by the
Adjudicating Authority, where the Adjudicating Authority has refused to admit
evidence, which ought to have been admitted;
(c) to  require any document to be produced or any witness to be examined for
the purposes of  proceeding  before it;
(d) to frame issues which appear to the Appellate Tribunal essential for
adjudication of the case  and refer them to the Adjudicating Authority for determination;
(e) to pass final order and affirm, vary or reverse an order of adjudication passed
by the Adjudicating Authority  and pass such order as may be necessary to meet the
ends of justice.
22. (1) The  Appellate Tribunal  or the Adjusticating Authority or as the case may be,
the initiating Officer, in order to rectify any mistake apparent on the face of the record, may
amend any order made by it, within a period of one year from the end of the month in which
the order was passed.
(2) No amendment shall be made under sub-section (1) if such amendment is likely to
affect any person prejudicially, unless he has been given notice of the intention to do so and
has been allowed an opportunity of being heard.
23. (1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under this Act may
either appear in person or take the assistance of an authorised representative of his choice to
present his case before the Appellate Tribunal.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “authorised
representative” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under sub-section ( 2) of
section 288 of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
(2) The Central Government may authorise one or more authorised representatives or
any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every person so authorised may present
the case with respect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
24. (1) Any party aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal may  file
an appeal to the High Court  within one hundred and twenty days from the date of
communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of
law arising out of such order.
(2) The High Court may entertain any appeal after the said period of one hundred and
twenty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was  prevented  by  sufficient  cause from filing
the appeal within the period specified in sub-section (1).
(3) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in
any case, it shall formulate that question.
(4) The appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the respondents
shall, at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such question.
(5) Nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of
the court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of
law not formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.
Powers of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Rectification
of mistakes.
43 of 1961.
Right to
representation.
Appeal to High
Court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

9
(6) The High Court shall decide the question of law so formulated and deliver such
judgment thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded and may
award such cost as it deems fit.
(7) The High Court may determine any issue which—
(a) has not been determined by the Appellate Tribunal; or
(b) has been wrongly determined by the Appellate Tribunal, by reason of a
decision on such question of law as is referred to in sub-section (1).
(8) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908,  relating to appeals to the High Court shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals
under this section.
 CHAPTER VI
S
PECIAL COURTS
25.   (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
Court, shall for trial of an offence punishable under this Act, by notification, designate one
or more Courts of Session as Special Court or Special Courts for such area or areas or for
such case or class or group of cases as may be specified in the notification.
(2) While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an offence
other than an offence referred to in sub-section (1), with which the accused may, under the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same trial.
(3) The Special Court shall not take cognizance of any offence punishable under this
Act except upon a complaint in writing made by—
(i) the authority; or
(ii) any officer of the Central Government or State Government  authorised in
writing in this behalf by the Central Government by a general or special order made in
this behalf by that Government.
(4) Every trial under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously as possible and
an endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of filing of
the complaint.
26.   (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes
of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the
persons conducting the prosecution before the Special Court, shall be deemed to be a public
prosecutor:
Provided that the Central Government may also appoint for any case or class or group
of cases a Special Public Prosecutor.
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special
Public Prosecutor under this section unless he has been in practice as an advocate for not
less than seven years, under the Union or a State.
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor
under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u)
of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of that Code shall
have effect accordingly.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
27.  ( 1) Where any  person  enters into a benami transaction, not being a benami
transaction  reffered to in sub-section (2) of section 3, in order to defeat the provisions of any
law or to avoid payment of statutory dues or to avoid payment to creditors, the beneficial
owner, benamidar and any other person who abets or induces any person to enter into such
benami transaction, shall be guilty of the offence of benami transaction.
Special Courts.
2 of 1974.
Application of
Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973 to
proceedings
before Special
Court.
2 of 1974.
Penalty for
benami
transaction.
2 of 1974.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(2) Whoever is found guilty of the offence of benami transaction referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than  six
months,   but which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend
to twenty-five per cent. of the fair market value of the property.
28. Any person who wilfully gives false information to any authority or furnishes any
false document in any proceeding under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years or with
fine which  may extend to ten per cent.  of the fair market value of the property.
29.  No prosecution shall be instituted against any person in respect of any offence
under section 27 without the previous sanction of the Approving Authority.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30.  Where, after the issue of a notice under section 13, any property referred to in the
said notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever, such transfer shall, for the purposes of
the proceedings under this Act, be ignored and if such property is subsequently confiscated
by the Central Government under section 16 then, the transfer of such property shall be
deemed to be null and void.
31.  (1) The Central Government may,  by notification, exempt any property or class of
properties from the operation of this Act.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
32. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue such orders, instructions
and directions to the authorities as it may deem fit for the proper administration of this Act
and such authorities and all other persons employed in execution of this Act shall observe
and follow such orders, instructions and directions of the Central Government.
 (2) No orders, instructions or directions under sub-section ( 1) shall be issued so as
to—
(a) require any authority to decide a particular case in a particular manner; or
(b) interfere with the discretion of the Adjudicating Authority in exercise of his
functions.
33.  No finding of any officer or authority under any other law shall be conclusive for
the purposes of any proceedings under this Act.
34.  The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not, save as hereinafter
expressly provided, in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
35.  Save as otherwise provided under this Act, no order passed or declaration made
under this Act shall be appealable except as provided therein and no civil court shall have
jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Appellate Tribunal or any Authority is
empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by or under this Act.
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an
offence under this Act shall be non-cognizable and bailable.
Penalty for
false informa-
tion.
Certain
transfers to be
null and void.
Exemption.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions, etc.
Findings under
other laws not
conclusive for
proceedings
under this Act.
Application of
other laws  not
barred.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
2 of 1974.Offences to
be non -
cognizable.
Previous
sanction.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
37.  (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of this
Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the
time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,  the company,
for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to
be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1), shall render any such person liable to
punishment if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shal1 also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—
(i) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
of individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
38. No notice, summons, order, document or other proceeding, furnished or made or
issued or taken or purported to have been furnished or made or issued or taken in pursuance
of any of the provisions of this Act shall be invalid, or shall be deemed to be invalid merely
by reason of any mistake, defect or omission in such notice, summons, order, document or
other proceeding if such notice, summons, order, document or other proceeding is in substance
and effect in conformity with or according to the intent and purpose of this Act.
39.  No prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie against the Government or any
officer of the Government or the Appellate Tribunal or the Adjudicating  Authority established
under this Act, for anything done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
40. (1) Every suit or proceeding in respect of a benami transaction pending in any
Court (other than the High Court) or Tribunal or before any authority on the date of the
commencement of this Act shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal or the Adjudicating
Authority, as the case may be,  referred to in this Act having jurisdiction in the matter.
(2) Where any suit, or other proceeding stands transferred from any court (other than
High Court) or Tribunal or other authority to the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1),—
(a) the court, Tribunal or other authority shall, as soon as may be, after such
transfer, forward the records of such suit, or other proceeding to the Appellate Tribunal;
(b) the Appellate Tribunal may, on receipt of  such records,  proceed to deal with
such suit, or other proceeding, so as may be, in the same manner as in the case of a
reference  made under sub-section  (5) of section 15, from the stage which was reached
before such transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo as the Appellate Tribunal may
deem fit.
41.  (1) Where a person dies during the course of any proceeding under this Act, any
proceeding taken against the deceased before his death shall be deemed to have been taken
against the legal heir and may be continued against the legal heir from the stage at which it
stood on the date of the death of the deceased.
(2) Any proceeding which could have been taken against the deceased if he had
survived, may be taken against the legal heir and all the provisions of this Act shall apply
accordingly.
Notice, etc.,
not to be
invalid on
certain
grounds.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Transfer of
pending cases.
Legal heir.
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(3) Where any property of a person has been held benami under section 15, then it
shall be lawful for the legal heir of such person to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal,
in place of such person and the provisions of section 20 shall, so far as may be, apply, or
continue to apply, to such appeal.
42. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
43. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) determination of the price where the price is not ascertainable under clause (j)
of section 2;
(b) the powers and functions to be exercised by the authority under section 8;
(c) any other matter under sub-section (1) of section 9;
(d) the manner of provisional attachment of the property under sub-section (3)
of section 13;
(e) the manner to receive and manage property under sub-section (1) of section 17;
(f) the form in which appeal shall be filed the fee for filing the appeal under sub-
section (1) of section 20.
44.  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
45. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty.
(2) No order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
46. (1) The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to
have been done or taken including any rule, notification, inspection, order or notice made or
issued or any appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any licence, permission,
authorisation, exemption granted or any document or instrument executed or any direction
given under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this
Act.
(3) Notwithstanding the repeal of section 281A of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the operation
of the said section shall continue in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
47. The enactment specified in the Schedule is hereby amended to the extent  and in
the manner as given below:—
Overriding
effect of Act.
Power to make
rules.
Rules to be
laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
45 of 1988.Repeal and
saving.
43 of 1961.
Amendment of
enactment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 47)
AMENDMENTS TO THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING ACT, 2002
(15 OF 2003)
  1. In section 6,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after the words “conferred by or under this Act’’, the
words, brackets and figures  “or the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011 or
any other law for the time being in force’’ shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 15), after the words “other provisions of this Act’’, the
words, brackets and figures “or the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011 or
any other law for the time being in force,’’  shall be inserted.
2.  In section 11, in sub-section (1), after the words “purposes of this Act”, the words,
brackets and figures “or the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011 or any other law for
the time being in force’’ shall be inserted.
3. In section 25, after the words “authorities under this Act’’, the words, brackets and
figures “or the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011 or any other law for the time
being in force’’ shall be inserted.
4. In section 35,—
(i) in sub-section (1),  after the words “other provisions of this Act’’, the words,
brackets and figures “or  the Benami Transactions (Prohibition)  Act, 2011 or any other
law for the time being in force’’ shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), after the words “discharging its functions under this
Act’’, the words, brackets and figures “or the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act,
2011 or any other law for the time being in force’’ shall be inserted;
(iii) in sub-section (3),  after the words “under this Act”,  the words, brackets
and figures “or the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011 or any other law for
the time being in force’’ shall be inserted.
13

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 was enacted to prohibit benami
transactions and the right to recover property held benami.   However, the said Act, inter alia,
provides that—(a) all the properties held benami shall be subject to acquisition by such
authority in such manner and after following such procedure as may be prescribed;  (b) no
amount shall be payable for the acquisition of any property held benami; (c) the purchase of
property by any person in the name of his wife or unmarried daughter for their benefit would
not be benami transaction;  (d) the securities held by a depository as registered owner under
the provisions of the Depositories Act, 1996 or participant as an agent of a depository would
not be benami transactions.
2. During the process of formulating the rules for implementing certain provisions of
the Act, it was found that the provisions of the aforesaid Act are inadequate to deal with
benami transactions as the Act, inter alia,—(i) does not contain any specific provision for
vesting of confiscated property with the Central Government; (ii) does not have any provision
for an appellate mechanism against an action taken by the authorities under the Act, while
barring the jurisdiction of a Civil Court; (iii) does not confer the powers of the Civil Court
upon the authorities for its implementation.
3. In view of the circumstances stated above, a comprehensive legislation, in place of
the Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Act, 1988 has become necessary in order to prohibit
holding property in benami and restrict right to recover or transfer property held benami and
also to provide a mechanism and procedure for confiscation of property held benami.
4. It is, therefore, felt necessary to repeal the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act,
1988 and enact a new comprehensive legislation to deal with benami transactions. The
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011, inter alia , provides for the following,
namely:—
(i) it prohibits benami transactions by any person, except in the case of benami
transactions entered into in the name of spouse, brother or sister or any lineal ascendant
or descendant;
(ii) it provides that Benami property arising out of prohibited Benami transaction
is liable to confiscation by the Central Government and such property shall vest
absolutely in the Central Government without paying any compensation;
(iii) it prohibits right of the benamidar  to recover property held benami;
(iv) it provides that the  Initiating Officer, the Approving Authority and the
Administrator shall be the authorities for the purposes of the Bill;
 ( v) it provides that the Adjudicating Authority and the Appellate Tribunal
established under the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 shall respectively
be the Adjudicating Authority and the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of the Bill
and any person aggrieved by an order of Adjudicating Authority may prefer an appeal
to the Appellate Tribunal;
(vi)  it provides that any  party aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate
Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court  on any question of law;
(vii) it enables the Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of
the High Court , to designate one or more Courts of Session as  Special Court or Special
Courts for the purpose of the Bill;
14

15
(viii)  it provides penalty for entering into prohibited benami transactions  and
for furnishing any false documents in any proceeding under the Bill;
(ix) it provides for transfer of any suit or proceeding in respect of a benami
transaction pending in any Court (other than High Court)  or Tribunal or before any
authority   to the Appellate Tribunal as provided  in the Bill;
 (x) it also proposes  to make consequential amendments in the Prevention of
Money-Laundering  Act, 2002.
5. The Notes on clauses explain in detail various provisions in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE.
The 3rd August, 2011.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.—This Clause, inter alia, seeks to extend the provisions of the Bill to the
whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Clause 2.—This clause defines various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3 .—This clause  contains provisions relating to prohibition of benami
transactions. Sub-clause (1) of this clause  provides that no person shall, on and after the
commencement of this Act, enter into any benami transaction. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said
clause provides that nothing contained in sub-clause (1) shall apply to a benami transaction
entered into by any person, being an individual, in the name of his spouse, brother or sister
or any lineal ascendant or descendant.
  Clause 4.—This clause provides that any property, which is subject matter of benami
transaction, not being a benami transaction referred to in sub-clause (2) of clause 3, shall be
liable to be confiscated by the Central Government.
  Clause 5.— This clause contains provisions relating to prohibition of right to recover
property held benami. Sub-clause (1) of this clause  provides that  no suit, claim or action to
enforce any right in respect of any property held benami against the person in whose name
the property is held or against any other person shall lie by, or, on behalf of, a person claiming
to be the real owner of such property. Sub-clause (2) of said clause provides that no defence
based on any right in respect of any property held benami, whether against the person in
whose name the property is held, or, against any other person, shall be allowed in any suit,
claim or action by or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner of such property.
Clause 6.—This clause provides that no person, being benamidar shall re-transfer
the benami property held by him to the beneficial owner or any other person acting on his
behalf.
 Clause 7.—This clause provides the initiating officer, the Approving Authority and
the Administrator as the Authorities for the purposes of this legislation.
Clause 8.—This clause relates to the jurisdiction of authorities. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that the authorities shall exercise all or any of the powers and perform all or
any of the functions conferred on, or, assigned, as the case may be, to it under this Act or the
rules framed thereunder in accordance with such directions as the Central Government may
issue for the exercise of powers and performance of the functions by all or any of the
authorities. Sub-clause (2) of said clause
 provides that in issuing the directions or orders
referred to in sub-section (1), the Central Government may have regard to any one or more
of —(a) territorial area;  ( b) classes of persons; ( c) classes of cases; and ( d) any other
criterion specified by the Central Government in this behalf.
Clause 9 .—This clause deals with the powers of authorities regarding summons,
production of documents and to give evidence, etc. Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides
that the authorities shall, for the purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in
a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of ( a)
discovery and inspection; (b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on
oath; (c) compelling the production of books of account and other documents; ( d) issuing
commissions; (e) receiving evidence on affidavits; and  (f) any other matter which may be
prescribed. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that any authority under this Act may
requisition the service of any police officer or of any officer of the Central Government or
State Government or of both to assist him for all or any of the purposes specified in sub-
clause (1), and it shall be the duty of every such officer to comply with such requisition or
direction.
16

17
Clause 10.—This clause relates to  power to call for information. It seeks to provide
that the Initiating Officer or the Approving  Authority or the Adjudicating Authority shall
have power to require any officer or authority of the Central Government or State Government
or a local authority or any person or authority who is responsible for registering and maintaining
books of account and other documents containing a record of any transaction relating to
any property  or any other person  to furnish such information in relation to such persons,
points or matters as in his opinion will be useful for or relevant to the purposes of this Act.
Clause 11.—This clause relates to  the power of authority to impound documents.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where any books of account or other documents
are produced before the authority in any proceedings under this Act and the authority in this
behalf has reason to believe that any of such books of account or other documents are
required to be impounded and retained for any inquiry under this Act, it may impound and
retain such books of account or other documents for a period not exceeding three months
from the date of attachment made by the Adjudicating Authority under Sub-clause  (3) of
clause15. Sub-clause (2) of said clause provides that the person, from whom the books of
account and other documents were impounded, shall be entitled to obtain copies of the
books of account or other documents impounded under sub-clause ( 1). Sub-clause (3) of
this clause provides that on the expiry of the period specified under sub-clause  (1), the
books of account and other documents shall be returned to the person from whom such
books of account or other documents were impounded unless the Approving Authority or
the Adjudicating Authority permits retention of such books of account and other documents
beyond the said period.
Clause 12.—This clause contains provisions relating to power of Authority to require
certain officers to exercise certain powers. It provides that the Initiating Officer, after obtaining
prior approval of the Approving Authority, shall have power to cause to be conducted any
inquiry or investigation in respect of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books
of account or any other relevant matters and it shall be competent upon him to exercise the
powers conferred under sub-clause (1) of clause 9.
Clause 13.—This clause relates to notice and attachment of property involved in
prohibited benami transaction. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where the Initiating
Officer, on the basis of material in his possession, has reason to believe that any person, not
being a person referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 3,  is a benamidar in respect of a
property, he may, after recording reasons in writing, issue a notice to such person to  show
cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such property should not be
treated as benami property. Sub-clause (2) of said clause provides that where a notice under
sub-section (1) specifies any property as being held by a benamidar referred to in that sub-
section, a copy of the notice shall also be served upon such other person who is a beneficial
owner. Sub-clause (3) of said clause  provides that where the Initiating officer is of the
opinion that the person in possession of the property held benami may alienate such property
during the period specified in the notice, he may, with the previous approval of the Approving
Authority, by order in writing, attach provisionally such property in the manner as may be
prescribed. Sub-clause (4) of this clause 
provides that  the Initiating Officer, after making
such inquires and calling for such reports or evidence as he deems fit  and taking into
account  all relevant materials, shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of issue of
notice under sub-section (1)(a) where the provisional attachment has been made under sub-
section (3)(i) pass an order continuing the provisional attachment of the property with the
prior approval of the Approving Authority, till  the date of  the order  made by the Adjudicating
Authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 15; or  (ii) revoke the provisional attachment of the
property with the prior approval of the Approving Authority; (b) where provisional attachment
has not been made under sub-clause (3) (i) pass an order provisionally attaching the property
till the date of order  made by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 15;
or  (ii) decide not to attach the property as specified in the notice, with the prior approval of
the Approving Authority. Sub-clause (5) of said clause  provides that where the Initiating

18
Officer passes an order continuing the provisional attachment of the property under sub-
clause (i) of clause ( a) or passes an order provisionally attaching the property under sub-
clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-clause (4), he shall, within fifteen days from such attachment,
draw up a statement of the case and refer it to the Adjudicating Authority.
 Clause 14.—This clause relates to manner of service of notice. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that a notice under sub-section (1) of clause 13 may be served on the person
named therein either by post or as if it were a summons issued by a Court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that any notice referred to in
sub-clause (1) may be addressed—
(i) in case of an individual, to such individual;
(ii) in the case of a firm, to the managing partner or the manager of the firm;
(iii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, to karta or  any member of such family;
(iv) in the case of a company, to the principal officer thereof;
(v) in the case of any other association or body of individuals, to the principal officer
or any member thereof;
(vi)  in the case of any other person (not being an individual), to the person who
manages or controls his affairs.
Clause 15.—This clause deals with the adjudication of benami property.  Sub-clause (1)
of this clause provides that  on receipt of a reference under sub-section (5) of section 13, the
Adjudicating  Authority shall serve notices, to furnish such documents, particulars or
evidence as is considered necessary on a date to be specified therein, on—( a) the person
specified as a benamidar therein; (b) any person referred to as the beneficial owner therein
or identified as such; (c) any interested party, including a banking company; (d) any person
who has made a claim in respect of the property. Sub-clause (2) of said clause provides that
where such property is held jointly by more than one person, such notice shall be served to
all persons holding such property. Sub-clause (3) provides that  the Adjudicating Authority
shall, after ( a) considering  the reply, if any, to the notice issued under sub-clause  (1);
(b) making or causing  to be made such inquiries and calling  for such reports or evidence as
it deems fit; and ( c) taking  into account all relevant materials, provide an opportunity of
being heard to the person specified as a benamidar therein, the Initiating Officer, and any
other person who claims to be the owner of such property, and, thereafter, pass an order-
(i) holding the property not to be a benami property and revoking the attachment order; or
(ii) holding the property to be a benami property and confirming the attachment order. Sub-
clause (4) of said Clause states that where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that some
part of the properties in respect of which reference has been made to him is benami property,
but is not able to specifically identify such part, he shall record a finding to the best of his
judgment as to which part or properties is held benami.  Sub-clause  (5) of this clause
provides that where in the course of proceedings before it, the Adjudicating Authority has
reason to believe that a property, other than a property referred to him by the Initiating
Officer is benami property, it shall provisionally attach such property and such property
shall be deemed to be a property referred to it on the date of receipt of the reference under
Sub-clause (5) of clause 13. Sub-clause ( 6) of this clause provides that the Adjudicating
Authority may, at any stage of the proceedings, either on the application of any party, or suo
motu, strike out the name of any party improperly joined or add the name of any person
whose presence before the Adjudicating Authority may be necessary to enable him to
adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the reference. Sub-clause (7) of this
clause provides that no order under sub-section (3) shall be passed after the expiry of one
year from the end of the month in which the reference under clause13 was received.
Clause 16.—This clause relates to confiscation and vesting of benami property.  Sub-
clause (1) of this clause provides that where any property is attached under sub-section (3)
of section 15, the Adjudicating Authority shall, after giving an opportunity of  being heard to
the person concerned, make an order confiscating the property held to be a benami property.

19
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that nothing in sub-clause (1) shall apply to a property
held or acquired by a person from the benamidar for adequate consideration, without his
having knowledge of the benami transaction. Sub-clause (3) of this clause  provides that
where an order of confiscation has been made under sub-section (1), all the rights and title in
such property shall vest absolutely in the Central Government free of all encumbrances and
no compensation shall be payable in respect of such confiscation. Sub-clause  (4) of this
clause provides that any right of any third person created in such property with a view to
defeat the purposes of this Act shall be null and void. Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides
that where no order of confiscation is made upon the proceedings under this Act attaining
finality, no claim shall lie against the Government.
 Clause 17.— This clause deals with the management of properties confiscated under
this Act. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Administrator shall have the power
to receive and manage the property, in relation to which an order of confiscation under sub-
clause (1) of clause 16 has been made, in such manner and subject to such conditions, as
may be prescribed. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Central Government
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, notify as many of its officers as it thinks fit, to
perform the functions of an Administrator. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the
Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may direct, to
dispose of the property which is vested in the Central Government under clause 16.
 Clause 18.—This clause relates to  the possession of the property. Sub-clause (1) of
this clause provides that where an order of confiscation in respect of a property under sub-
clause (1) of clause 16 has been made, the Administrator shall proceed to take the possession
of such property. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Administrator shall,—
(a) by notice in writing, order within seven days of the date of the service of
notice any person,  who may be in possession of the benami property,  to surrender or
deliver possession thereof to him or any other person duly authorised in writing by
him in this behalf;
(b) in the event of non-compliance of the order referred to in clause
 (a), or if in his
opinion, taking over of immediate possession is warranted, for the purpose of forcibly
taking over possession, requisition the service of any police officer to assist him and
it shall be the duty such officer to comply with such requisition.
Clause 19.— This clause relates to  the establishment of Appellate Tribunal. It provides
that subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal established under section
25 of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 shall be the Appellate Tribunal for the
purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the powers conferred on
it by or under this Act.
Clause 20 .—This clause  contains provisions relating to the Appeals to Appellate
Tribunal. Sub-clause (1) of this clause  provides that any person aggrieved by an order of
Adjudicating Authority   may prefer an appeal in such form and along with such fee, as may
be prescribed, to the Appellate Tribunal against the order passed by the Adjudicating
Authority under clause 15 within forty-five days from the date of such order. Sub-clause (2)
of the said clause  provides that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the
said period of forty-five days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the appeal in time. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that on receipt of
an appeal under sub-clause (1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit. Sub-clause (4)
of this clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal, as far as possible, may hear and decide
such appeal within a period of two years from the last date of the month in which the appeal
is filed.
Clause 21.—This clause relates to the powers of Appellate Tribunal. It provides that
an Appellate Tribunal shall have the power; (a) to determine a case finally, where the evidence
on record is sufficient; (b) to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken

20
by the Adjudicating Authority, where the Adjudicating Authority has refused to admit
evidence, which ought to have been admitted; (c)  to  require any document to be produced
or any witness to be examined for the purposes of  proceeding  before it; (d)  to frame issues
which appear to the Appellate Tribunal essential for adjudication of the case  and refer them
to the Adjudicating Authority for determination; (e) to pass final order and affirm, vary or
reverse an order of adjudication passed by the Adjudicating Authority  and pass such order
as may be necessary to meet the ends of justice.
Clause 22.—This clause deals with the  rectification of mistakes. Sub-Clause ( 1) of
this clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal or the Adjudicating Authority, or as the case
may be, the Adjudicating Officer, in order to rectify any mistake apparent on the face of the
record, amend any order made by it, within a period of one year from the end of the month in
which the order was passed. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that no amendment
shall be made under sub-clause  (1) if such amendment is likely to affect any person
prejudicially,  unless he has been given notice of the  intention to do so and has been allowed
an opportunity of being heard.
Clause 23 .—This clause  relates to right to representation. Sub-clause ( 1) of this
clause provides that a person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under this Act
may either appear in person or take the assistance of an authorised representative of his
choice to present his case before the Appellate Tribunal. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the Central Government may authorise one or more authorised representatives
or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every person so authorised may
present the case with respect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
 Clause 24.—This clause contains provisions relating to the appeals to High Court.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any party aggrieved by any decision or order of
the Appellate Tribunal may  file an appeal to the High Court  within one hundred and twenty
days from the date of communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him
on any question of law arising out of such order. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that
the High Court may entertain any appeal after the said period of one hundred and twenty
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal within the period specified in sub-clause (1). Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides
that where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any
case, it shall formulate that question.  Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause  provides that the
appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the respondents shall, at the
hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such question. Sub-
clause (5) of this clause provides that nothing in this sub-clause shall be deemed to take
away or abridge the power of the court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any
other substantial question of law not formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the case involves
such question. Sub-clause (6) of this clause  provides that the High Court shall decide the
question of law so formulated and deliver such judgment thereon containing the grounds on
which such decision is founded and may award such cost as it deems fit. Sub-clause (7) of
the said clause provides that the High Court may determine any issue which; ( a) has not
been determined by the Appellate Tribunal; or ( b) has been wrongly determined by the
Appellate Tribunal, by reason of a decision on such question of law as is referred to in Sub-
clause (1). Sub-clause (8) of this clause provides that save as otherwise provided in this Act,
the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,  relating to appeals to the High Court
shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals under this section.
  Clause 25.—This clause deals with the Special Courts. Sub-clause (1) of this clause
provides that the Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
Court, shall for trial of an offence punishable under this Act, by notification, designate one
or more Courts of Session as Special Court or Special Courts for such area or areas or for
such case or class or group of cases as may be specified in the notification. Sub-clause (2) of
the said clause provides that while trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also
try an offence other than an offence referred to in sub-clause  (1), with which the accused

21
may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same trial. Sub-clause (3)
of this clause  provides that the Special Court shall not take cognizance of any offence
punishable under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by (i) the authority; or (ii)
any officer of the Central Government or State Government authorised in writing in this
behalf by the Central Government by a general or special order made in this behalf by that
Government. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that every trial under this section shall
be conducted as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to conclude the
trial within six months from the date of filing of the complaint.
Clause 26.—This clause relates to  application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to
proceedings before Special Court. Sub clause (1) of this clause provides that save as otherwise
provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply to
the proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the
Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the persons conducting the
prosecution before the Special Court, shall be deemed to be a public prosecutor. However,
the Central Government may also appoint for any case or class or group of cases a Special
Public Prosecutor. Sub-clause  (2) of the said clause provides that a person shall not be
qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this
section unless he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, under
the Union or a State. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that every person appointed
as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be
a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of that Code shall have effect accordingly.
  Clause 27.—This clause deals with the penalty for benami transaction. Sub-clause
(1) of this clause provides that where any person enters into a benami transaction, not being
a person referred to in Sub clause(2) of clause 3,  in order to defeat the provisions of any law
or to avoid payment of statutory dues or to avoid payment to creditors, the beneficial owner,
benamidar and any other person who abets or induces any person to enter into such
benami transaction, shall be guilty of the offence of benami transaction. Sub-clause (2) of
the said clause provides that whoever is found guilty of the offence of benami transaction
referred to in Sub-clause (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than six months' but which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine
which may extend to twenty-five per cent. of the fair market value of the property.
Clause 28.—This clause deals with the penalty for false information. It provides that
any person who wilfully gives false information to any authority or furnishes any false
document in any proceeding under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years or with fine
which  may extend to ten per cent.  of the fair market value of the property.
Clause 29.—This clause provides that no prosecution shall be instituted against any
person in respect of any offence under clause  27 without the previous sanction of the
Approving Authority.
 Clause 30.—This clause relates to certain transfers to be null and void. It provides
that where, after the issue of a notice under clause  
13, any property referred to in the said
notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever, such transfer shall, for the purposes of the
proceedings under this Act, be ignored and if such property is subsequently confiscated by
the Central Government under section 16 then, the transfer of such property shall be deemed
to be null and void.
 Clause 31.—This clause relates to exemption. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides
that the Central Government may, by notification, exempt any property or class of properties
from the operation of this Act. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that every notification
issued under Sub-clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 32.—This clause deals with the  power of Central Government to issue directions,
etc. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Central Government may, from time to

22
time, issue such orders, instructions and directions to the authorities as it may deem fit for
the proper administration of this Act and such authorities and all other persons employed in
execution of this Act shall observe and follow such orders, instructions and directions of the
Central Government. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that no orders, instructions
or directions under sub-clause (1) shall be issued so as to (a) require any authority to decide
a particular case in a particular manner; or (b)  interfere with the discretion of the Adjudicating
Authority in exercise of his functions.
  Clause 33.—This clause provides that no finding of any officer or authority under
any other law shall be conclusive for the purposes of any proceedings under this Act.
Clause 34.—This clause relates to the application of other laws  not barred. It provides
that the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not, save as hereinafter expressly
provided, in derogation of any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 35.—This clause relates to bar of jurisdiction. It provides that save as otherwise
provided under this Act, no order passed or declaration made under this Act shall be appealable
except as provided therein and no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter
which the Appellate Tribunal or any Authority is empowered by or under this Act to determine,
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.
  Clause 36.—This clause relates to  offences to be non-cognizable. It provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an offence
under this Act shall be non-cognizable and bailable.
Clause 37.—This clause deals with the offences by companies. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions of
this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who,
at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company, for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that nothing contained in
Sub-clause (1), shall render any such person liable to punishment if he proves that the
contravention took place without his knowledge. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-clause (1), where a contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed
by a company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shal1 also
be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished  accordingly.
Clause 38.—This clause relates to notice, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds. It
provides that no notice, summons, order, document or other proceeding, furnished or made
or issued or taken or purported to have been furnished or made or issued or taken in pursuance
of any of the provisions of this Act shall be invalid, or shall be deemed to be invalid merely
by reason of any mistake, defect or omission in such notice, summons, order, document or
other proceeding if such notice, summons, order, document or other proceeding is in substance
and effect in conformity with or according to the intent and purpose of this Act.
Clause 39.—This clause relates to  protection of action taken in good faith.  It provides
that no prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie against the Government or any officer
of the Government or the Appellate Tribunal or the Adjudicating authority established under
this Act, for anything done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
  Clause 40.—This clause contains provisions relating to transfer of pending cases.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that every suit or proceeding in respect of a benami
transaction pending in any Court (other than High Court) or Tribunal or before any authority

23
on the date of the commencement of this Act shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal
or the Adjudicating Authority, as the case may be, referred to in this Act having jurisdiction
in the matter. Sub-clause  (2) of the said clause  provides that where any suit, or other
proceeding stands transferred from any court (other than High Court) or Tribunal or other
authority to the Appellate Tribunal under sub-clause ( 1)—(a) the court, Tribunal or other
authority shall, as soon as may be, after such transfer, forward the records of such suit, or
other proceeding to the Appellate Tribunal; ( b) the Appellate Tribunal may, on receipt of
such records,  proceed to deal with such suit, or other proceeding, so as may be, in the same
manner as in the case of a reference  made under sub-clause  (5) of clause 15, from the stage
which was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo as the Appellate
Tribunal may deem fit.
Clause 41.—This clause relates to  legal heir. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides
that where a person dies during the course of any proceeding under this Act, any proceeding
taken against the deceased before his death shall be deemed to have been taken against the
legal heir and may be continued against the legal heir from the stage at which it stood on the
date of the death of the deceased. Sub-clause  (2) of the said clause  provides that any
proceeding which could have been taken against the deceased if he had survived may be
taken against the legal heir and all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. Sub-
clause (3) of the said clause  provides that where any property of a person has been held
benami under clause 15, then it shall be lawful for the legal heir of such person to prefer an
appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, in place of such person and the provisions of clause  20
shall, so far as may be, apply, or continue to apply, to such appeal.
 Clause 42.—This clause provides that the provisions of this Bill shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
Clause 43.—This clause relates to power of the Central Government to make rules.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause
(2) of the said clause enumerates various matters in respect of which the Central Government
may make rules. These include (a) determination of the price where the price is not ascertainable
under sub-clause (j) of clause 2; (b) the powers and functions to be exercised by the authority
under section 8; ( c) any other matter under item ( f) of sub-clause ( 1) of clause  9; (d) the
manner of  provisional attachment of the property under sub-clause (3) of clause 13; (e
) the
manner to receive and manage property under sub-clause  (1) of clause17; ( f) the form in
which appeal shall be filed and the fee for filing the appeal under sub-clause (1) of clause 20.
  Clause 44.—This clause deals with the rules to be laid before Parliament. It provides
that every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Clause 45.—This clause relates to power to remove difficulties.  Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing
the difficulty. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that no order shall be made under
this section after the expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act. Sub-clause (3)
of this clause provides that every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.

24
Clause 46.—This clause contains provisions relating to repeal and saving. Sub-clause
(1) of this clause provides that the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 is hereby
repealed. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that notwithstanding such repeal, anything
done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken including any rule,
notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued or any appointment, confirmation or
declaration made or any licence, permission,  authorisation, exemption granted or any
document or instrument executed or any direction given under the Act hereby repealed shall,
in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been
done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act. Sub-clause  (3) of the said
clause provides that notwithstanding the repeal of section 281A of the Income-tax Act, 1961,
the operation of the said section shall continue in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Clause 47.—This clause provides that the enactment specified in the Schedule is
amended to the extent and manner as given in the Schedule.  The Schedule to this Bill
contains amendments to the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Initiating Officer, Approving Authority
and Administrator shall be the  authorities for the purposes of the proposed legislation.  The
Initiating Officer, the Approving Authority and the Administrator for the purposes of the Bill
would respectively be the Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax, the Joint Commissioner of
Income-tax and the  Income-tax Officer as defined under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
2. The Adjudicating Authority appointed under section 6 of the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002 and the Appellate Tribunal established under section 25 of the said Act
shall respectively be the Adjudicating Authority and the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes
of the proposed legislation.
3. Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to provide for Special Courts.  The Central Government
may designate one or more Courts of Session as Special Court or Special Courts.
4. As it is proposed to utilise the services of the serving officers or members under the
Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Prevention of the Money-Laundering Act, 2002, respectively,
and also to utilise the services of Courts of Sessions as Special Courts, for the purposes of
the proposed legislation, no additional expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring, from
the Consolidated Fund of India is likely to be involved.
25

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 43 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates
the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters  include ( a)
determination of the price where the price is not ascertainable under sub- clause (j) of clause
2; (b) the powers and functions to be exercised by the authorities under section 8; ( c) any
other matter under item ( f) of sub-clause ( 1) of clause 9; ( d) the manner of  provisional
attachment of the property under sub-clause (3) of clause 13; (e) the manner to receive and
manage property under sub-clause (1) of clause17; (f) the form in which appeal shall be filed
and the fee for filing the appeal under sub-clause (1) of clause 20.
 2. The rules made under the proposed legislation shall be required to be laid before
the Parliament.
 3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
26

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to benami transactions, prohibit holding
property in benami and restrict right to recover or transfer property held benami,
and  provide mechanism and procedure for confiscation of property held
benami and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance)
GMGIPMRND—1085LS—10.08.2011.