As BE INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON· 
11 SEP 1~6~ 
BIU No. 57 of 1"'9 
THE WEALTH-TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL 1964' 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Wealth-tax Act, 1957. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the 
Repuh'lic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wealth-tax (Amendment) Act, Short title 
1964. and com .. 
menee-S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govem- ment. 
ment may, by notification in the Offi':!ial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred Amend-
to as the principal Act) ,- meut of 
leet.ion 2-
(a) for clauses (b), (e) and (d), the following clauses shall 
10 be substituted, namely:-
• (b) "Appellate Tribunal" mesJl,s the Appellate Tribu-
nal constituted under section 252 of the Income-tax Act; 
(c) "assessee" means a person by whom wealth-tax or 
any other sum of money is payable under this Act, and in-
IS eludes-
(i) every person in respect of whom. any proceeding 
under this Act has been taken for the determination of 
wealth-tax payable by him or by any other person ar 
the amount of refund due to him or such other person; 
~o (it) ·every person who is deemed to be an assessee 
under this Act; 
928 (8) LS-l. 

2 
(iii) every person who is deemed to be an ...-.ee 
in default unde:r this Act: 
(ca) "assessment" includes re-assessment; 
(d) "assessment year" means the period of twelve 
months commencing on the 1st day of April every year;"; S 
(b) in clause (e) ,-
(i) in sub-clause (ii). for the words "or occupied", the 
words "and occupied" shall be substituted: 
(ti) in sub-clause (v), the worda "from the date the 
interest vests in the assessee" shall be inaerted at the end; 10 
(c) after clause (h). the followinJ¥ clauae shall b. iDNrted, 
namety:-
• (ha) "Director of Inspection" includes an Additlonal 
Director of Inspection. a Deputy Director of Inspection and 
an Assistant Director of Inspection;'; IS 
(d) for clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
• (j) "Income-tax Act" means the Income-tax Act, 1961 ;'; 41 of 1961. 
(e) after dause (l), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
~ely:-- ao 
'(14) "Inspector of Wealth-tax" means an Inspector of 
Income-tax empowered to work as an Inspector of Wealth-
tax under section llA;'; , 
(lb) "legal representative" has the meaning assigned to . 
it in clause (11) of section 2 of the Code of Civil Proeedure, 25 ~ of 1908. 
1908;'; 
(f) iD' c1au.e (m), in sub-clause (U). fOlf the warda "any 
uset in respect of which wealth-tax is not payable", the words 
"aDY pr.operty m retpeet of whieh wealth-tBiS aot chargeable" 
shall be substituted; 30 
(g) after clause (0), the following clauses shall be inIerted. 
namer,:-
• (~) "public servam" haa the I8ID8 III ••• ., a. in sec- 40 of 1860 
tioa 21 of the Indian Pe:aal Code; . 
Cob) "regular 1888881leDt" m .... the. aueament made 35 
under section 16;'; 

to 
r5 
(h.) iDclause (q),-
(i) for the words, brackets and figures uclause (11) of 
aec:tion2", the word and ftp..re "section S" .shall be subsU-
·tutecl; 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
IUbstituted, namely:-
"Provided that-
(i) where in the case of an assessee there are 
cW!erent previous yeara under the Income-tax Act 
for difterent sources of income, the valuation date 
for the purposes of this Act shall be the last day of 
the last of the previous years aforesafd; 
(ii) in the case of a person who is not an asses-
. see within the meaning of the Income-tax Act, the 
valuation date far the purposes of this Act shall be 
the 31st 'day of March immediately preceding the 
AII8IIDleI1t year; 
(iii) where an assessment is made in pursuance 
of section 19A, the valuation date shall be the same 
valuation date as would have beea aciQpted in respect 
of the net wealth of the deceased if he were alive."; 
ti) in clause (a). for the . word and tilW'e uiec:tion 8", the 
Words·· "thia Mt" aball be substituted. 
3..In section 3 of the principal Act, for the worda ufiDancialyear", Amend-
2S the words "assessment year" shan be substituted. mentCII 
sectionS. 
t. In section 4 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(0) in sub-8ection (1), for the Words beginning with "In me:: ~ 
computing the net wealth of an iDdividual" aDd ending with "for sec 
the benefit of the individual, or his wife or miDor child, or", the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"In computing the net wealth of an individual, there 
shall be included as belonging to that individueI-
(a) the value of assets which on the valuation date 
are held-
(i) by the spouse of such individual to whom 
such assets have been transferred by the individual, 
directly or 1ndtreetly, otherwise than for adequate 
conaideration or in connection with an agreement to 
live apart, 01' 

J\meDd.. 
mentof 
sect.loDD. 
4 
(ii) by a minor child, not being a married 
daughter, of such individual, to whom such assets 
have been transferred by the individual, directly or 
indirectly, otherwise than for adequate consIdera-
tion, or 
(iii) by a person or association of persons to 
whom such assets have been transferred by the in-
dividual otherwise than for adequate consideration 
for the immediate or deferred benefit of the indivi-
dual, his or her spouse ar minor child (not being a 10 
married daughter) or both, or"; 
(b) for the Explanation, the following sub-section and Ez.. 
planation shall be substituted, namely:-
• (6) For the purposes of this Act, the holder of aD lm-
partible estate shall be deemed to be the individual OWDer IS 
of all the properties comprised in the estate. 
ExpZanation.-For the purpoaes of this .ection,-
(a) the expression "transfer" includes any disposi-
tion, settlement, trust, covenant, agreement or arrange-
ment, and ao. 
(b) the expression "irrevocable transfer" in-
cludes a transfer of assets which, by the terms of the 
instrument effecting it, is not ll'evocab1e for a period ex-
ceeding six years or during the life-time of the trans-
feree, and under which the transferor derives no direet 25 
or indirect benefit, but does not include a transfer of 
assets if such instrument-
(i) contains any provision for the re-transfer, 
directly or indirectly. of the whole or any part of 
the assets or income therefrom to the transferor, or 30 
(ii) in any way gives the transferor a right to 
re-assume power, directly or indirectly. over the 
whole or any part of the assets or income there-
from.'. 
5. In section 5 of the principal Act,- 3S~ 
(a) in sub-section (1), in clause (xvii). for the word, figures 
and letter "Chapter lXA". the words, brackets and figures 
"clause (38) of section 2" shall be substitut~; 

10 
IS 
20 
2S 
(b) in sub-section (3),-
(i) for the words, brackets and figures IIclauae (=). 
clause (xx) ", the words, brackets and figures lIand clause 
(xix)" shaH be substituted; 
(ii) in the proviso, for the words "financial yeM", the _ 
words "assessment year" shall be substituted. 
6. In section 6 of the principal Act, in clause (ii) , for the Amend-
words, brackets and figures "sub-section (3) of section 4", the word men:t of 
and figures "section 10" shall be substituted. ' section 8, 
7. In section 7 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words liThe value", the words ~ec~~~7. 
IISubject to any rules made in this behalf, the value" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in clause (a) of sub-section (2), for the words "the cir-
cumstances of the case may require;". the words "may be pres-
cribed;" shall be substituted. 
8. In section 8 of the principal Act, the following £:rplanation Amend-
shall be inserted at the end. namely:- ment of 
section 
SA. 
"Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the Income-
tax Officer having jurisdiction in relation to a person who is not 
an assessee within the meaning of the Income-tax Act means the 
Income-tax Officer of the area in which that person resides.". 
9. After section 8 of the principal Act. the following section shall Insertion 
be inserted, namely: - of new 
section 
8A. 
'8A. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in section 8, Power to 
the Commissioner may, after giving the assessee a reasonable transfer 
opportunity of being heard in the matter. wherever it is possible cases. 
to do so, and after reco.rding his reasons for doing so, transfer 
any case from one Wealth-tax Officer subordinate to him to an-
other also subordinate to him, and the Board may similarly 
transfer any case from one Wealth-tax Oftlcer to another: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to 
require any such opportunity to be given where the transfer is 
from one Wealth-tax Ofticer to another whose offtces are situated 
in the same city, locality or place. 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
lOA 
Directors 
of Inspec-
tion. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tionsfor 
section 12. 
Inspector 
of Wealth-
tax. 
Control of 
Wealth-
taxautho-
rities. 
6 
(2) The transfer of a case under sub-section (1) may be 
made at any stage of the proceedings, and shall not render neces-
sary the re-issue of any notice already issued by the Wealth-tax 
OfRcer from whom the case is transferred. 
Explanation.-In this section, the word "case", in relation to 5 
any person whose name is specified in any order issued there-
under, meana all proceeding,; under this Act in respect of any 
year which may be pending on the date of such order, or which 
may have been completed on or before such date, and includes 
also all proceedings under this Act which may be commenced 10 
after the date of such order in respect of any year.'. 
10. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
section 
"lOA. (1) Th::: Board may empower 8S many peraons as it 
thinks fit to exercise under this Act the functions of a Director 15 
of Inspection. 
(2) A Director of Inspection .bail perform such functions 
of any other Wealth-tax authority as may be assigned to him by 
the Board.". 
11. For section 12 of the principal Act, 
6hall be substituted, namely:-
the foRowing eections 20 
"UA. A Commissioner of Wealth-tax may empower any 
Inspector of Income-tax within the meaning of the Income-tax 
Act to work as an Inspector of Wealth-tax under any Wealth-
tax authority, and when he is so empowered, he shall perform 25 
such functions in the execution of this Act as are assigned to 
him by the said Wealth-tax authority." 
12. (1) Inspecting Assistant Comrnisaioners shall be sub-
ordinate to the Commissioner within whose ju.risd.ietion they 
perform their functions and also to the Director of InapectiOil. 30 
(2) Wealth-tax Officers shall. be subordinate to the Com-
missioner and the Inspecting Assistant Colnlnillio1'ter within 
whose jurisdiction they perform their functions and al80 to the 
,..Director of lnipectiPn. 

10 
IS 
7 
(3) Inspectore of Wealth-tax shall be subordinatE! to the 
Wealth-tax Oftlcer or other Wealth-tax authority under whom 
they are empowered to work and to any other Wealth-tax au-
thority to whom the said offtcer or other authority is subordi-
nate. 
Explaniaion.-For the purposes of sub.section (1). "Director 
of Inspection" does not include a Deputy Director of Inspection 
or an Assistant Director of Inspection; and for the purposes of 
sub-seclion (2) of this· section and sub-section (2) of section 13, 
"Director of Inspection" does not include an AAtttant Director 
of Inspection.'. 
12. Section 13 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- Amend-
section (1) therecf and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the m~t Of 8 
f 11 · b . h 1.1 b' rt d I seehoa 1 . a owmg su -sectIon s au e mse e , name y:-
"(2) Every Wealth-tax Officer employed in the execution of 
thia Act shall observe and follow such instructions as may be 
issued to him for his guidance by the Director of Inspection or 
by the Commissioner or by the Inspecting Assistant Commis-
sioner within whose jurisdiction he perfonns his functions .... 
30 13. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion 
shall be inserted in Chapter III. namely: - of new 
30 
3S 
~ection 
13A, 
"13A. The Director of Inspection, the Commissioner of Powers of 
Wealth-tax and the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Director 
Wealth-tax shall be competent to make any enquiry under this o~ lnspec-
Act, and for this purpose shail have all the powers that a t1~n,. Com-. mlSSloner Wealth-tax Officer has under thIS Act in relation to the making and In&-
of enquiries.", pecting 
Assistant 
Commis-
sioner to 
make en-
quiries. 
14. In section 14 of the principal Act,- Amend-
mental 
(a) for sub-6ection (1), the following sub-section shall be section 14. 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) Every person, jf his net wealth or the net wealth of 
any other person in respect of which he is assessable under 
this Act on the valuation date WMI of such an amount as to 
render him liable to wealth-tax under this Act, shall, before 
the 80th day of June of the corresponding assessment 
rear, furnish to the Wealth-tax Offtcer a return in the pres-

Insertion 
of. new 
sections 
15A to 
15C. 
Return "-3' 
whom to 
be signed. 
Self u-
sesament 
cribed form and verified in the prescribed manner setting 
forth the net wealth as on that valuation date."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "the net wealth of any 
person is of such an amount as to render him liable to wealth-
tax under this Act,". the following shall be substituted, name1y:- S 
"any person is assessable under this Act, whether in respect 
of his net wealth or the net wealth of any other person,". 
15. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following section~ 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"15A. The return made under section 14 or section 15 shall 10 
be signed and verifted-
(n) in the case of an individual, by the individual him-
self; where the individual is absent from India, by the in-
dividual concerned or by $Orne person duly authorised by 
him in this beh£llf; where the individual is mentally incapa- IS 
citated from attending to his affairs, by his guardian or any 
other person competent to act on his behalf; and where for 
any other reason it is impossible for the individual to sign, 
the return, by any person competent to act on his behalf; 
(b) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, by the ao 
kana. and, where the karta is absent from India ox: is men-
tally incapacita: ed from attending to his affairs, by any 
other adult member of such family; and 
(c) in the case of a company, by the prinCipal officer 
thereof. 
15B. (I) Where a return has been furnished under section 
14 or section 15 and the tax payable on the basis of that return 
exceeds five hundred rupees, the assessee shall pay the tax ao 
payable within thirty days of furnishing the return. 
(2) After a provisional assessment under section 15C or 8 ,0 
regular assessment under section 16 has been made, any amount 
paid under sub-section (I) shall be deemed to have been paid 
towards the provisional assessment or regular assessment, as the 
case may be. 
(3) If any assessee fails to pay the tax or any part thereof in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall, un- 35 
less 8 provisional assessment under section 15C or a regular 
assessment under section 16 has been made before the expiry of 
thirty days referred to in that sub-section; be . liable, by way of 

9 
penalty, to pay such amount as the Wealth-tax Oftlcer may 
direct, so, however, that the amount of penalty does not exceed 
fifty per cent. of the amount of such tax or part, as the case may 
be: 
S Provided that before levying any such penalty, the assessee 
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
15C. (1) The Wealth-tax Officer may, ateny time after the Provision.. 
receipt of a return made under section 14 or section 15, proceed al assess· 
to make, in a summary manner, a provisional assessment of the ment. 
10 tax payable by the assessee, on the basis of his return and the 
accounts and documents, if any, accompanying it. 
(2) After a regular assessment has been made, any amount 
paid towards the provisional assessment made under sub-section 
(1), shall be deemed to have been paid towards the regular 
IS assessment; and where the amount paid towards the provisional 
assessment exceeds the amount payable under the regular 
assessment, the excess shall be refunded to the assesSee. 
( 3) Nothing done or suffered by reason or in consequence 
of any pl'Ovisiona1 assessment made under this section shall 
20 prejudice the determination, on the merits, of any issue which 
may arise in the course of the regular assessmellt .. 
(4) There shall be no right of appeal against a provisional 
assessment made un!ier sub-section .(1). 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the 
25 provisions of section 31 excepting sub-section (6) thereof, and 
section 32 shall apply in relation to any tax payable in pursuance 
of a provisional assessment made under this section as if it were 
3S 
a regular assessment under section 16.". . 
18; In section 16 of the principal Act,-. 
(a) in sub-section (1)-
(i) for the words and figures "seetion 14 is complete", 
the words and figures ,ca:ectton 14 or section 15 is correct and 
complete" shall be substituted; . 
(ii) for the words "and determine" the amount payable 
by him as wealth-tax", the words "and determine the amount 
of wealth-tax payable by' him or'the' amount refundable to 
him on the "basis of such return·' shan" be irub'stituted: 
9a6(B)LS-z 
Amend. 
mental 
section 16. 

.. '''or" -~~- .... ~- .. 
10 
(b) insub-eection (3)-
,(i) after the words "any apeclAed points", the words 
"and after taking into aecount all relevant material which 
the Wealth-tax Officer hae gathered" shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words "and determine the amount payable 5 
by him as wealth-tax", the words "and determine the amount 
of wealth-tax -Payable by him or the amount refundable to 
,him ,on. the baa1s of such assessment" shall be substituted; 
(e) in lub-seeUon (4), after the words, brackets and figure 
"under .su1r.aection (2) of that section", the words and fig\1res 10 
"or who baa made a return under section IS" shall be inserted; 
(d)m:'aub-tection (5), for the words "shall make the assess-
ment to the beet of hi8 judgment and determine the amount 
payable ,by Ute penon as wealth-tax on the basis of such assess-
ment",the.wOlds "after taking into account all relevant material IS 
wbiclt . .he 'hal ,athered, shall estimate the net wealth to the 
best of his judgment and determine the amount of wealth-tax 
payable by the perlOn or the amount refundable to him on the 
basts of such assessment" shall be substituted . 
.Amend- 17. Seetion 17 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- 30 
l'De'Dtot,1edion (I) thereof, and-
eection 1'1. 
(4) in sub-section (1) as &0 re-numbered,-
(i) for clause (4). the following clause shall be sub-
stituted, aamely:-
II (4) baa reason to believe that by reason of the a5 
omluton or failure on the p~rt of any person to make 
a return under section 14 of his net wealth or the net 
wealth of any other person in respect of which he is 
useuable under this Act for 8llY. assessment year or to 
diaelose fully and truly all material facts necessary for 30 
... .mentofhil·netwealth or the net wealth of such 
other penon fortftat year, the net wealth char~eable to 
tax has escaped UIetIIRlent· for that year, whether by 
reason of UDder-aaseument or assessment at too low a 
rate· or otherwlM; or": 3S 
. Cii) for' the word. "serve on tlie usesaee". the word!'! 
'f...-ve(ODlUCbpenontt,ha11 be substttuted: 

10 
35 
H 
(b) after sub-lection (1) as ~ J'e-nWllbered, the following 
IUb-section ahall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Nothing contained in thia section limiting the time 
within which any proceeding. for useument or r~_' 
ment may be commenced, shall apply to an assessment or 
re-aueum~nt to be made on auch person in CODNquence of 
or to give effect to any finding {)or direction contained In an 
order under section 23, 24, 25, 27 or 29: 
Provided that the provisions of this aub-section shall 
not apply in any case where any such assessment· or re.-
assessment rel.ates to an assessment year in respect of which 
an assessment or re-assessment could not have been made at 
the time the order which was the subject matter of the 
appeal, reference or revision, as the case may be, was made 
by reason of any provision limiting the time within which 
any action for asaessment or re-Mleument may be tabD.". 
18. For section 18 of the principal Act, thefollowin, secticm shall SubsUtu-
be substituted, namely: _ tion of 
newaee· 
tiontor 
.ectioft 18-
"18. (1) If the Wealth-tax Ofticer, Appellate Assistant Penalty 
Commissioner, Commissioner or AppeBate Tribunal in the eourae torfail~ 
of any proceedings under this ~ is satiafted that any person- !:t= 
(4) has without reasonable cauae faUed to furnish the :ly 
return which he is required to fumilb under-notice. 
sub-section (1) of section 14 or by notice liV'en UDder. and con-
sub-section (2) of section 14 or section 17, or has without cealJnent 
reasonable cause failed to furniab it witllin tba time of iDeoIM, 
allowed and in the manner required by .ub-seellon (J) of etc:. 
section 14 or by sueh notice, as the cue may: be; or 
(bt ~ without reasonable cause faDed to comply 
with a notice under sUb-section (2) or sub-seetion (4) of 
section 16; or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of any uaets or fur-
nished inaccurate particular. of any usN or debtl; 
he or it may, by order in writing. direct that .uch person shall 
pay by way of penalty-
(i) in the cases referred to in clauae (4), in addition 
to the amount of WeaIth·tax, if any, payable, by him, a sum 
equal to two percent. of the tax for every l1lOlltb duri.ng 

b 
which. the default continued, but not exceeding in the aggre-
gate fifty per cent. of the tax; 
(ii) in the cases referred to in clause (b), in addition 
to the amount of wealth-tax payable by him, a swn which 
shall not be less than ten per cent. but which shall not exceed S 
fifty per cent. of the amount of the tax, if any, which would 
have been avoided if the net wealth as returned by such 
person had been accepted as the correct net wealth; 
(ii'>' in the cases referred to in clause (c), in addition 
to any wealth-tax payable by him, a sum which shall not 10 
,be less than twenty per cent. but which shall not exceed 
one and a ·half times the amount of the tax, if any, which 
would have been avoided if the net wealth as returned by 
such person had been accepted as the correct net wealth. 
Ezpla1l4tim..-Where the net wealth returned by any per- 15 
son is less than eighty per cent. of the net wealth (hereinafter 
in this Explanation referred to as the correct wealth) as assessed 
under section 16 or section 17, such person shall, unless he 
proves that the failure to return the correct wealth did not arise 
from any fraud or any gross or wilful neglect on his part, be 20 
deemed to have concealed the particulars of assets or fur-
niShed inaccurate particulars of assets or debts for the pur-
poses of clause (c) of this sub-section. 
(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) unless 
·the person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity 2S 
of being heard.' 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (iii) of 
sub-section (1), if ina case falling under clause (c) of that 
sub-section, the minimum penalty imposable exceeds a sum of 
rupees one thousand, the Wealth-tax Officer shall re~r the 0 
case to the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner who shall, for 3 
the purpose, have all the powers conferred under this section 
for the imposition of penalty. 
, . ' 
(4) An Appellate A.ssistant Commilsioner, a CommJssioner 
or the Appellate Tribunal on making an order under this section 35 
impoeing a penalty, shall forthwith send a copy of the same 
to the Wealth-tax Officer, 
~, (5) No order imposing a penalty under this section shall 
b(~,Q9ged after the expiration of two years .fro.m the date of the 
'L~ , - . 

completion of the proceedings in the course of which the prO" 
ceedmgs for the imposition of penalty have been commenced. 
Expl4Mticm.-ln computing the period of limitation for the 
purposes of this section, the time taken in giving an opportunity 
to the assessee to be re-heard under the proviso to section 39 and 
any period during which a proceeding under this section fol' the 
levy of penalty is stayed by an order or injunction of any court 
shall be excluded.... . 
19. After section 19 of the principal Act, the following 
10 spall be inserted, namely:-
section Insertion 
of new 
section 
leA. 
'19A. (1) Subject as hereinafter provided, the net wealth of Aaseu-
the estate of a deceased person shall be chargeable to tax . in ment in the cue 01. the hands of the executor or executors. 
(2) The executor or executors shall for the purposes of this 
IS Act be treated as an individual. 
(3) The status of the executor or executors shall for the 
purposes of this Act as regards residence and citizenship be the 
same as that of the deceased on the valuation date immediately 
preceding his death. 
20 (4) The assessment of an executor under this section shall 
3S 
be mac;le separately from any assessment that may be made on 
., him in reipect of his own net wealth or on the net wealth of the 
deceased under section 19. 
(5) Separate assessments shall be made under this section 
in respect of the net wealth as on each valUation date as is 
included in the period from the date of the death of the deceased 
to the date of complete distribution to the beneficiaries of the 
estate. according to their several interests. 
(6) In computing the net wealth on any valuation date 
undfar this section, any assets of the estate. distributed to, or 
applied to the benefit of, any specific legatee of the estate prior 
to that· valuation dateahall be excluded, but the assets 80 ex-
cluded shall, to ihe extent such assets are held by the 1ela18e 
on any valuation date, be included in the net wealth of such 
speci1ic legatee on that valuation date: 
Explanatiott.---In this section, "executor" includes an admi-
matrator or other person administering the estate of a deceased 
pe~.":' ," .. . " .... 
executors. 
.. 
,", 

14 
te, In section 21 of the principal Ac\.-
(4) in sub-sections (1), (2) and (4), for the w .. ···OD 
whose behalf", wherever they OCCUl', theworda .. OD' ..... lbebalf 
or for whose benefit" shall be substitutedi 
(b) in sub-se~tion (3) ,- s 
(i) the brackets and words • (all of which perIODS are 
hereinafter in this sub-section included in tlw 'erm "bene-
ficiary") , shall be omitted; 
<ii> for the words "on behalf of such- beDeftdary:\ the· 
shall be substituted; 10 
words "on behalf Or for the benefit of such beneficiary ,ft 
(c) in sub-section (4), after the words "were an indivi-
dual'i, the words "who is a citizea of India, and reaideBt in 
India" shan be inserted; I 
(d) after sub-section (4), the follOwing sUb-section and" 
£~R4tion shall be inserted, namely:-
• (5) Any person who pays any sum by virtue of the 
provisions of this section in respect of the net -wealth of 
any benefioiary, shall be entitled to recover the.awn 10 paid 
from such beneficiary, and may retain out of Ul¥ usets 20 
that he may hold on behalf or for the beneAt of IUch 
beneficiary, an amount equal to the sum 10 paid. 
E%Pla'n4W>n.-In this section, the term "bene1lctary" 
means any person including a minor, lunatie or idiot on as 
whole behalf or for whose beneftt' aaetJ are held by allY 
other person.'. 
ZL In. section. 22. of the principle Act,-
(4) the proviso to sub-section (2) shall be omitted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the fon&Winr.ulHec:tioDI-1htI1l 30 
be inaerted. namely: 'I 
.. (3) No person shall be deemed to ,be the agent of 
any person residing outside -India unle. he. w had __ an 
opportunity of being heard by the Wealth-tax Oftker u to 
,-\ his being treated as such. . 
(4) Any agent, who, as such, paye any sum under- thtI 3S 
~t, shall be entitled to recover the awn 10 paid from the 
" .• son on whose behalf it is paid or to retain .out of .aDJ 
.-aeys that may be in hu. poueuIon or may COIU"to-JWa 

, 
10 
20 
30 
I~ 
In'htl· capacity as.such al8Ot, an amount equal to the IUID 
10 ptfd. I i 
(5) Any agent, or any person who apprehends that he 
may be assessed as an agent, may retain out of any money 
,payable by him to the person residing outside India on 
whose behalf he is liable to pay tax (hereinafter in tlrlI 
section referred to as the principal), a sum equal to his 
. fttimated HabWty under this section, and in the event of 
any disagreement between the principal and such. agent or 
person, as to the amount to be so retrained, such agent or per-
.on may secure from the Wealth-tax Ofticer a certificate 
stating the amount to be so retained pending final settle-
ment of the liability, and the certificate so obtained shan 
be his warrant for retaining that amount. 
(6) The amount recoverable from such .agent or per • 
.on at the time of final settlement shall not exceed the 
amount specified in such certificate, except to the extent to 
which BUch agent or person may at such time have in hta 
hands additional assets of the principal. 
(1) No.twithstanding anything contained in this sec-
tiOD, any arrean' of tax due from a person reatdiJq' outside 
lndia . may . be recovered also in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act from any assets of such person which 
are or may at any time come within India.". 
Ala. seetton. 23 of· the. .principal Act,-
(cz) in sub-Beetion (1),-
. (i) in clause (a), for the words "his net wealth", the 
word. IInet wealth" .hall be substituted; 
:(:U)'in elaue (d), after the word "under", the wordt, 
figures and letter "section 15B or"shall be lBserted; 
~) 'in clawre (I), for the words, brackets and figureI 
·~ton' (1) of-section46", the word-and Agures "section 
mit. man ·be . sublnituted, and the word "or" shall be tn. 
sefted~at·;the -.nd; 
Ameftd· 
mmtOf 
section •. 
." (iv) after clause <f>, the following clauses shall be 
inserted, nameIY:-J 
~I(g). obejcting to any order made by the Wealth-
tax' OfBeer under section 22 treating him as the afeDt 
of a 'penon residing outside India; or 

Ame~ 
mentof 
aection14." 
16 
(h) objecting to &.OJ order of the Wealth-tax 
Ofticer under section 35 having the eftect of enhancing 
the assessment or reducing a refund or refusing to al-
low the claim made by the assessee under the said sec-
tion; olj 5 
(i) objecting to an order of the Wealth-tax Ofticer 
imposing a fine under sub-section (2) of section 37;"; 
(b) efter sub-section (5), the following sub-seetions shall be 
inserted, namely: --l I 
"(SA) In disposing of an appeal, the Appellate Assis- 10 
tant Commissioner IllQy consider and decide· any matter 
ariSing out of the proceedings in which the order appealed 
against was passed, notwithstanding that such matter was 
not raised before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner by 
the appellant. f IS 
(SB) The order of the Appellate Assistant Commis-
sioner disposing of the appeal shall be in writing and shall 
state the points for determination, the decision thereon and 
the reasons for the decision.". . 
D. In section 24 of the principal Act,- 20 
.'. 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-: 
"(1) An assessee objecting to an order passed by the 
Appelltlte Assistant Commissioner under section 18 or section 
23 or sub-section (2) of section 37 or to an order passed by 2S 
the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner under sub-section 
(3) of "section 18, may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
within sixty days of the date on which the order is com-
municated to him."; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 30 
inIerted, namely:-
"(2A) The Wealth-tax OfftQer or the assessee, as the 
ease may be, on receipt of noUce that an appeal aaainst the 
order of the AppeUlte Assistant CommisSioner has been pre-
ferred under sub-section (1) or sub-section' (2) by the 3S 
other party, may, notwithstanding that he may not have 
appealed a~inst such order or any part . thereof, within 
thirty days of the receipt of the notice. file a memorandum 
Of cross objections, verified in the prescribed manner, against 
any· part of the order of the Appellate Assistant Commis- 40 
!iIioner and such memorandum shall be disposed of by the 

5 
10 
20 
17 
Appellate Tribunal as if it were an appeal presented within 
the time specified in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) ."; 
(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an eppeal or 
permit the filing of a memorandum of cross objections after 
the expiry of the relevant period referred to in sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A), if it is satisfied 
that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within 
that period."; 
(d) for sub-sections (6), (7) and (8), the following sub-
$ections shall be substituted. namely:-
"(6) (a) Where the appellant objects to the valuation 
of any property, the Appellate Tribunel may, and if the 
appellant so requires, shall, refer the question of the dis· 
puted value to the arbitration of two valuers, one of whom 
shall be nominated by the appellant and the other by the 
reapondent, and the Tribunal shall. 10 far as that question 
Is concerned, pass its orders under sub-section (5) conform-
ably to the decision of the valuers: 
. Provided that-i 
(i) where the appellant or the respondent does not 
nominate any valuer within the time specified by the 
Appellate Tdbunal or within such further time as the 
Appellate Tribunal may allow, the Appellate Tribunal 
may nominate a valuer on his behalf; 
(U) if there is a difference of opinion between the 
two valuers. the matter shall be referred to '3 third 
valuer nominated by agreement. or failing agreement, 
-
30 by the Appellate Tribunal, and the decision of that 
valuer on the question of valuation shall be final; 
(iii) where any person has at any time expressed 
any opinion on the valuation of eny property to which 
the proviSions of this clause apply, such person shall not 
3S be nominated as a valuer in relation to that property. 
(b) The valuers to whom a reference under clause (a) 
has been made by the Appellate Tribunal shall communi· 
rote their decision to the Appellate Tribunal within six 
926 (B) ~. 

18 
months of the date of such reference or within such further 
time as the Tribunal may allow: 
Provided that if the decision of the valuers is not 
communicated within the period aforesaid, the Appellate 
Tribunal may order that the reference made under thil:i S 
sub-section shall be deemed to be withdrown and proceed 
to dispose of the case on the evidence before it, including the 
report of either of the valuers if any such report has been 
submitted. 
(7) The extent to which the costs of arbitration pro- 10 
ceedings (including a case where a reference is deemed to 
be withdrawn) under sub-section (6) shall be borne by the 
appellant or the respondent shall be at the discretion of 
the Appellate Tribunal. 
(8) The valuers may, in disposing of any matter re- IS 
ferred to them for arbitration under this seetion, hold or 
cause to be held such enquiry as they think fit and after 
giving the appellant and the respondent an opportunity of 
being heard,make such decision as they think fit and shall 
communicate such decision in writing to the Appellate 20 
I'ribunal. ! 
(8A) The valuers appointed under this section, while 
acting as such, shall have ell powers of a Civil Court while 
trying a suit uhder the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in 
respect of the following matters, namely:-
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of 
any person and examining him on oath; 
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of 
documents; 
50f 1908. 
25 
(iii) receiving evidence on affidavit; and 30 
(iv) issuing commission for examination of wit-
nesses or documents. 
(8B) Nothing in the Arbitration Act. 1940 shall apply 10 of 1940. 
to arbitrations under this section."; 
(e) in sub-section (11), for the words. brackets, figures and 3S 
letter "sub-sections (5), (7) and (8) of section SA", the words, 
brackets and figures "sub-sections (1), (4) and (5) of section 
~5" shall be substituted. 

10 
19 
U. In section 25 01 the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the Amend-
following sub-sections and Explanation shall be inserted, namely: _ mecte~t of ... 8 Ion MI. 
"(3) No order shall be made under sub-section (2) after 
the expiry of two years from the date of the order sought to 
be revised. I 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(3), an order in revision under sub-section (2) may be passed 
at any time in the case of an order which has been passed in 
consequence of, or to give effect to, any finding OIl' direction con· 
tained in an order of the Appellate Tribunal, the High Court or 
the Supreme Court. ! 
ExpZanation.-In computing the period of limitation for 
the purposes of sub-section (3), the time taken in giving an 
opportunity to the assessee to be reheard under the prcwlso to 
section 39 and any period during which any proceeding 
under this section is stayed by an order or injunction of any 
court shall be excluded.". 
25. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amend-
words and figures "an order of enhancement made by the Com- ment of 
20 missioner under section 25", the words, figures and brackets "an section 26. 
order passed by the Commissioner under section 18 or sub-section 
30 
35 
(2) of section 25" shall be substituted. 
26. In section 27 of the principal Act,- !Amend-
(a) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections =~~~27. 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(1) The assessee or the Commissioner may, within 
sixty days of the date upon which he is served with notice 
of an OIl'der under section 24 or section 26, by application 
1n the prescribed form, accompanied, where the application 
is made by the assessee, by a fee of rupees one hundred, re-
quire the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court any 
question of law arising out of such order and, subject to the 
other provisions contained in this section, the Appellate 
Tribunal shall, within one hundred and twenty days of the 
receipt of such application, draw up a statement of the case 
and refer it to the High Court. 
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that 
the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from pre-
senting the a'pplication within the period specifted in sub-
section (1), allow it to be presented within a further period 
not exceeding thirty days." ; 

Insertian 
of new 
sections 
29Aand. 
29B. 
Tax to be 
paid not-
with-
standing 
reference, 
etc. 
DefInition 
of High 
Court. 
20 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "three months", the 
words "ninety days" shall be substituted; 
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:--
"(3A) If, on an application inade under this section the 5 
Appellate Tribunal is of the opinion that, on account of a 
conflict in the decision (,r the High Courts in respect of any 
particular· question of law, it is expedient that a reference 
should be made direct to the Supreme Court, the Appellate 
Tribunal may draw up a statement of the case and refer it 10 
through its President direct to the Supreme Court."; 
(d) in sub-sections (4), (5) and (6), after the words "High 
Court", the words "or the Supreme Court" shall be inserted; 
(e) for sub-sections (7), (8) and (9) the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:- 15 
Court or "(7) The costs of any reference to the High 
the Supreme Court which shall not include the 
making the reference, shall be in the discretion 
Court.". 
fee for 
of the. 
27. After section 29 o~ the principal Act, the following sections 20 
shall be inserted in Chapter VI, namely:--
'29A. Notwithstanding that a reference has been made to 
the High Court or the Supreme Court, or an appeal has been 
preferred to the Supreme Court, wealth-tax shall be 4)ayable in 
accordance with the assessment made in the case. 2S 
29B. In this Chapter, "High Court" means-
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court of that 
State; 
(ii) in relation to the Union territories of Delhi 
Himachal Pradesh, the High Court of Punjab; 
and 
(iii) in relation to the Union territories of Manipur and 
Tripura, the High Court of Assam; 
(iv) in relation to the Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands, the High CoW't at Calcutta; 
30 
(v) in relation to the Union territory of Laccadive, 3S 
Minicoy and Amindivi Islands, the High Court of Kerala; 

11 
(vi) in relation to the Union territories of Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli and Goa, Daman and Diu, the High Court at 
Bombay; 
(vii) in relation to the Union territory of Pondicherry, 
S the High Co~rt at Madras.'. 
10 
15 
20 
30 
3S 
28. For sections 30, 31 and 32 of the principal Act, the following Substitu-
sections shall be substituted, namely:- tion of 
new sec-
tions for 
sections 
30,31 and 
32. 
"30. When any tax, inter ~st, penalty, fine or any other sum Notice of 
is payable in consequence of any order passed under this Act, demand. 
the Wealth-tax Officer shall serve upon the assessee a notice of 
demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum so payable. 
31. (1) Any amount specified as payable in a notice of When tax, 
demand under section 30 shall be paid within thirty-five days of etc. pay-
the service of the notice at the place and to the person men- able and 
tioned in the notice: . when assessee 
Provided that, where the Wealth-tax Officer has any reason deemed 
to believe that it will be .detrimental to revenue if the full period ~n ~e­
of thirty-five days aforesaid is allowed, -he may, with the pre- au t. 
vious approval of the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, direct 
that the sum specified in the notice of demand shall be paid 
within such period being a period less than the period of thirty-
five days aforesaid, as may be specified by him in the notice of 
demand. 
(2) If the amount specified in any notice of demand under 
section 30 is not paid within the period limited under sub-
section (l), the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at 
four per cent. per annum from the day commencing after the 
end of the period mentioned in sub-section (1): 
Provided that where as a result of an order under section 23, 
or section 24, or section 25, or section 26, or section 27, or section 
29, or seotion 35, the amount on which interest was payable 
under this section had been reduced, the interest shall 
be reduced accordingly and the excess interest paid, if any, 
shall be refunded. 
(3) Wttilout prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-
section (2), on an application made by the assessee before the 
expiry of the due date und~ sub-section (1) I the Wealth-tax 

Mode of 
recovery. 
Oftic:er may extend the time for payment or allow payment by 
instalments, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to 
impose in the circwnstances of the case. 
(4) If the amount is not paid within the time limited under 
sub-section (1) or extended under sub-section (3), as the case 5 
may be, at the place and to the person mentioned in the said 
notice, the assessee shall be deemed to be in default. 
(5) If in a case where payment by instalments is allowed 
under sub-section (3), the assessee commits default in paying any 
one of the instalments within the time fixed under that sub- 10 
section, the assessee shall be deemed to be in default as to the 
whole of the amount then outstanding, and the other instalment 
or instalments shall be deemed to have been due on the same 
date as the instalment actually in default. 
(6) Where an assessee has presented an appeal under IS 
section 23, the Wealth-tax Officer may, in his discretion, and 
subject to such conditions, as he may think fit to impose in 
the circumstances o~ the case, treat the assessee as not being in 
default in respect of the amount in dispute in the appeal, even 
though the time for payment has expired, as long as such appeal 20 
remains undisposed of. 
(7) Where an assessee has been assessed in respect of 
assets located in a country outside India, the laws of 
which prohibit or restrict the remittance of money to 
India, the Wealth-tax Officer shall not treat the assessee as 2 S 
in default in respect of that part of the tax which is attributable 
to those assets, and shall continue to treat the assessee as not in 
default in respect of that part of the tax until the prohibition 
or restriction of remittance is removed. 
32. The provisions contained in sections 221 to 227, 229, 231 30 
and 232 of the Income-tax Act and the Second and Third 
Schedules to that Act and any rules made thereunder shall, SO 
far as may be, apply as if the said provisions were provisions 
of this Act and referred to wealth-tax and sums imposed by 
way of penalty, fine and interest under this Act instead of to 3S 
income-tax and sums imposed by way of penalty, fine and in-
terest under .~ Act and to Wealth-tax Officer and Com-
missioner oi;.alth-tax instead of to Income-tax Officer and 
Commissioner of Income-tax. 
Explanation I.-Any reference to section 173 and sub-section 40 
(2) or sub-section (6) or sub-section (7) of section 220 of the 
Income-tax Act in the said provisions of that Act or the rules 
made thereunder shall be construed as references to sub-section 

23 
(1) of section 22 and sub-section (2) or sub-section (6) or sub-
section (7) of section 31 of this Act respectively. 
Explanation H.-The Tax Recovery Officer and the Tax Re-
covery Commissioner referred to in the Income-tax Act or the 
S rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be the Tax Recovery 
Officer and the Tax Recovery Commissioner for the purposes of 
recovery of wealth-tax and sums imposed by way of penalty, 
fine and interes,t under this Act.". 
29. Section 34 shall be omitted. 
10 36. After Chapter VII of the principal Act, the following Chapter 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"CHAPTER VIlA 
REFUNDS 
Omlsaion 
of seQUO!) 
M, 
fnllertiQtl 
of new 
Cnapttf 
VIlA. 
34A. (1) Where, as a result of any order passed in appeal or RefunQi. 
other proceeding (including a reetiftcation proeeedin«) under 
20 
2S 
30 
35 
this Act, refund of any amount becomes due to the UBeRee, the 
Wealth-tax Officer shall, except as otherwise provided in this 
Act, refund the amount to the useasee without hi' hlvin, to 
make any claim in that behalf. 
(2) Where an order giving rise to a l'efund is the subject 
matter of an appeai or further proceeding or where any other 
proceeding under this Act is pending and the Wealth-tax Ofticer 
is of the opinion that the grant of the refund is likely to adverse-
ly affect the revenue, the Wealth-tax Officer may, with the pre-
vious approval of the CommisSioner, withhold the refund till 
such time as the Commissioner may determine. 
(.1) Where a refund is due to the assessee in pursuance of an 
order referred to in sub-section (I) and the Wealth-tax Officer 
does not grant the refund within a period of six months from the 
date of such order, the Central Government shall pay to the 
assessee simple interest at four per cent. per annum on the 
amount of refund due from the date immediately following the 
expiry of the period of six months aforesaid to the date on which 
the refund is granted. 
(4) Where a refund is withheld under the provisions of sub-
section (2), the Central Government shall pay interest at the 
aforesaid rate on the amount of refund ultimately determined to 
be due as a result of the appeal or further proceeding for the 
. period commencing after the expiry of six months from the date 

Insertion 
of new 
section 
34B. 
Transfers 
to defraud 
revenue 
voig. 
24 
of the order refered to in that sub-section to the date the refund 
is granted. 
(5) Where under any of the provisions of this Act, a refund 
is found to be due to any perSon, the Wealth-tax Officer, Appel-
late Assistant Commissioner or Commissioner, as the case may 5 
be, may, in lieu of payment of the refund, set oft the amount to 
be refunded or any part of that amount, against the sum, if any, 
remaining payable under this Act by the person to whom the 
refund is due, after giving an intimation in writing to such per-
son of the action proposed to be taken under this section!'. 10 
31. In Chapter VIII of the principal Act. the following section 
shall be inserted before section 35, namely:-
"34B. Where, during the pendency of any proceeding under 
this Act, any assessee creates a charge on or parts with the 
possession by way of sale, mortgage, exchange or any ather IS 
mode of transfer whatsoever, of any of his assets in favour of 
any other person with the intention to defraud the revenue, such 
charge or transfer shall be void as against any c'laim in respect 
of any tax or any ather sum payable by the assessee as a result 
of the completion of the said proceeding: 20 
Provided that such charge or transfer shall not be void if 
made for valuab'le consideration and without notice of the pend-
ency of the proceeding under this Act.". 
Substitu- 32. For section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
tiOD of be substituted, namely: - 25 new sec-
tion for 
section 35. 
Rectifica-
tion of 
mistakes. 
"35. (1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent 
from the cecord-
(a) the Wealth-tax Officer may amend any order of 
assessment or of refund or any other order passed by him; 
(b) .tlw Appellate Assistant Commissioner may amend 30 
any order passed by him under section 18 or under section 
23; 
(c} the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner may amend 
any order passed by him under section 18; 
(d) the Commissioner may amend any order passed by 35 
him under section 18 or under section 25; 

' .. 
5 
10 
..... ~ .. 25 
(e) the Appellate Tribunal may amend any order pall-
ed by it under section 18 or under section 24. 
(2) Where the amount of tax, penalty or interest determin-
ed as a result of the first appeal or revision against the order re-
ferred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (m) of section 2 is paid 
within six months of the date of the order p888ed in such appeal 
or revision, the Wealth-tax Ofticer may, notwithstanding any-
thing to the contrary in this Act, rectify the assessment by 
allowing a deduction to the extent the tax, penalty or interest 80 
paid stood disallowed therein as if such rectification were recti-
fication of a mistake apparent from the record. 
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the au-
thority concemed-
(a) may make an amendment under sub-section (1) or 
IS sub-6eCtion (2) of its own motion; and 
(b) shall make such amendment for rectifying any such 
mistake which has been brought to its notice by the assessee, 
and where the authority concerned is the Appellate Assist-
ant Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal, by the Weaith-
20 tax Offtcer also. 
(4) An amendment, which has the effect of enhancing an 
assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the 
liability of the assessee, shall not be made under this section 
unless the authority concerned has given notice to the assessee 
25 of its intention so to do and has allowed the assessee a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
(5) Where an amendment is made under this section, an 
order shall be passed in writing by the Wealth-tax authority 
concerned or the Tribunal, as the case may be. 
30 (6) Where any such amendment has the effect of enhancing 
the as,sessment or reducing a refund already made, the Wealth-
tax Officer shan serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the 
prescribed form specifying the sum payable, and such notice of 
demand shall be deemed to be issued under section 30 and the 
3S provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. 
(7) No amendment under this section shall be made after 
the. expiry of four years-
(a) in the case of an amendment under sub-section (2), 
from the date of the order passed in the first appeal or revi-
40 sion as referred to in that sub-section; and 
(Ib) in any other case, from the date of the order sought 
to be amended. 
926 (B) LS-4. , P' I~"''' 1 v ; 

Amend-
mentof 
.ectionS6. 
26 
(8) Where any matter has. been con~idered and decided in a 
plIOOeedins by way of an appeal Of revision lI"elating to an order 
referred to in sub-section (1), the authority passing such order 
m.Yi notwithstanding anything· Clontflined in any other law for 
the time being in force, amend the order under this section in 5 
rebltiOll to any matter other than the matter which has been &0 
cQNidereci and decided. ". 
33. In section 36 of the principal Act,-
(4) in SU'b-section (1). the words "on conviction before a 
mal1strate," shan be omitted; 10 
(b) in sUP-lSection (2), for the worda "punishable with sim-
ple imprisonment which may extend to one year. ~ with ftne 
which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both", the 
following words and proviso shall, be sllbstituted. namely:-
"punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a tenn which IS 
may extend to two years: 
Provided 'that in the absence of speciJ,1 and adequate rea-
sons to the contrary to be recorded in the jw:\gment of the 
court, such imprisonment shall not be for less than six 
month •. "; 20 
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section and pro-
viso shall be inserted, nam~ly:-
«(2A) If a person abets or induces in any manner an-
other person to make and deliver an account, statement or 
decJaratton relating to the particulars of any rtet wealth 2S 
chargeable to tax which is false and which he either knows 
to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punish-
able with rigorous impril;onment for a term which may ex· 
tend to two years: 
Provided that in the abseBce of special and adequate 30 
reasons to the contrary to be recor.ded in the judgment of 
the Court, such imprisonment shall not be for lees than six 
months."; 
(d) for th~ Explana.tion, the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, nam~ly:- 3S 
"(5) No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate 
or a magistrate of the first class shan try any offence under 
W. Act .. •. 

5 
45 of 1860, 10 
IS 
1.1 
34. After section 36 of the rincipal Act, the foilowing section Inseniod 
shall be inserted, nam~:- of new 
aectioIl 
3IIA. 
"36A. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of opinion power to 
(the reasons for such opinion being recorded in w1i'tini) that tender 
with a view to obtaining the evidence of any penon appeariDa immunitY 
to have been directly Qr indirectly concerned in or privy to the ::::.-
concealment of particulars of net wealth or to the evuion o~ 
payment of tax on net wealth, it is neeeasary or expedieiit so to 
do, tender to such perlOll immanity from proeeclltion for' any 
ofte'tiee under this Act or under the 'Indian Penal ,Code' 01' 'UtiCler 
any other Central Act for the time being in force and also ftOin 
the lfuposition of any penalty under this Act' on condition of 'his 
making a full and true discloIiIu.re Of the wholecittumstances re-
latttng to the concealment of particWiln of net wealth or '(!yaslan 
of payment of tax on net wealth. 
(2) A tender of immunity-made to, and accepted by, the per-
son concerned, shall, to the extent to which the inwrmnity ex-
tends, render him immune from prosecution for any oftence in 
respeCt of which the tender was made or from the irIiposition of 
any penalty under this Act. 
(3) If it appears to the Central Govermnent that'any perIOD 
to whom immunity has been tendered under this section has not 
complied. with the coDlCiition on which the tender Was made or it 
wilfully conceaUna a~thillg 0.1' is giving false evidence, the 
25 Central Government may record a finding to that .ect, and 
1herl!upon the ltnmunity shall be d~ to have been with· 
draWn, and any such person may be tried fOI' the ,0«-. in res-
~ -of which th~ tender of immunity was made or for any,dther 
offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection 
with thesam.e .. ttIer and -shan alliO 'become 'liable to t'he impHi-
ti0X:-lo{ any peaalty uncier ltIis Act to whith he would. otherwise 
have been liable!'. 
of 1908. 
35. For section 37 of 'the principal Act, the following section shall Substltu· 
be substituted, namely:- 'tion at 
nt!'W sec· 
tionfor 
sectionS'l. 
"37. (1) The Wealth~tu: 0Iicel", Appellate A.tstant Com- Powerto 
missioner, Commissioner aDd the Appellate Tribunal shall, for tdBke evi-ence on 
the pvrp0ee8 of thisA.et, ha'ft 'the satne powers as are vested in oath, etc. 
a eourt IiRder iheCode of CiVil Procedure, 1908, when trying a 
suit in respect of the following matters, namely:-

Insertion 
of new 
section 
37A. 
Power 01 
search and 
aeizure. 
(a) discovery and inspection; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including 
any officer of a banking company and examining him on 
oath; 
(c) compelling the production of books of account and 5 
other documents; and 
(d) issuing commissions. 
(2) Witho\lt prejudice to the provisions of any other law for 
the time being in force, where a person to whom a summons is 
issued either ~o attend to give evidence or produce books of ac- fO 
cou~t or other documents at a certain place and time, intention-
ally omits to attend or produce the books of account or docu-
ments at the place or time, the authority empowered to isiu. 
such summons may impose upon him such fine not exceeding five 
hundred rupees, as it thinks fit,and the fine 80 levied may be IS 
recovered in the manner provided in Chapter VII of this Act. 
(3) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any authority 
referred to in sub-section (1) may impound and retain in its cus-
tody for such period as it thinks fit any books of account or other 
documents produced before it in any proceeding under this Act: 20 
Provided that a Wealth-tax Officer shall not-
(a) ~pound any books of account or other documents 
withou t recording his reasons for so doing, or 
(b) retain in his custody any such books or documt1Jlts 
. for a period exceeding fifteen days (exclusive of holidays) 2S 
without obtaining the approval of the Commissioner there-
for. 
(4) Any proceeding under this Act ,before a wealth-tax 
authority or the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial pro-
ceed!ngwithin the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the 30 
purposes of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code.". 
36. After section 37 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, n~mely:-
"37A. (1) Where the Commissioner, in consequence of infor-
mation in his possession, has reason to believe that- 3S 
"\ (a) any person to whom a notice under sub-section (4) 
of section 16 or a summons under section 37 was issued to 
415 of 1880. 

s 
10 
15 
20 
30 
35 
29 
produce, or cause to be produced, any books of account OIl' 
other documents, has omitted or failed to produce, or cause 
to be produced, such books of account or other documents as 
required by such notice or summons, OIl' 
(b) any person to, whom a notice or summons as afore--
said has been or might be issued will not, or would not, pro-
duce or cause to be produced any books of account or other 
documents wl;lich wiN be useful for, or relevant to, any pro-
ceeding under this Act, or 
(c) any person is in po~sion.of any articles or things 
including money disproportionate to his known assets, parti-
culars of which will be useful for, or relevant to, any proceed-
ing under this Act, 
he may authorise any Inspecting Assistant Commissioner or any 
Wealth-tax Officer to enter and search, with such assistance as he 
may deem necessary, any building or place where he has reason 
to suspect that such books of account, other documents, articles 
or things including money are kept and if as a result of the 
search such books of account, other documents. articles or things 
including money are found, the Inspecting Assistant Commission-
er or the Wealth-tax Officer, as the case may be, may-
(i) seize any such books of account or other documents; 
(ii) place marks of identification on any such books of 
account or other documents or make or cause to be made 
extracts or copies therefrom; 
(iii) make a note or an inventory of any articles or 
things including money found which, in his opinion, will be 
useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act. 
(2) The books of account or other documents seized under 
sub-section (1) shall not be retained by the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner or the Wealth-tax Officer for a,period exceeding 
one hundred and eighty days from the date of the seizure unless 
the reasons for retaining the same are recorded by him in writing 
and the approval of the Commissioner for such retention is 
obtained: 
Provided that the Commissioner shall not authorise the reten-
tion of the books of account and other documents for a period 
exceeding thirty days after all the proceedings under this Act in 
respect of the years for which the books of account or other docu-
ments are relevant are completed. 

Amend-
ment ot 
!f'Ction 39. 
30 
(3) The:person from whoae eustody any books of aceount or 
other documents are seized under' sub-section (1) may make 
copies thereof, or tak-e extracts therefrom, in the p~ of the 
Wealth-tax Officer or any other person authorised by him, at such 
place and ti~ as the Wea1tb-'ax~~r may appoint in this be- 5 
half. 
(4) "If a person legally entitled to the books of account or 
other documents seized under sub-section (1) objects 'for any 
reason to the approval given by the Commissioner under sub-
II!tftlon ('), 'U may make an applktatlOD to the Board stating 10 
therein the retIIODs for such objeetion and requestiDg 'for the 
r«urn of the booD of a~'lmt or documents. 
(5) On receipt of the application under sub-section (4), the 
Board may, after gi\o'ibg the applk:UJt ail opportUntty of }JeiBg 
Reard, pus aueh orders ,as it thlna fit. 15 
(6) The provisioIHI of the Code of Crimi&al Procedure, 1898 
relating to searchel shall apply, 80 far as may be, to SEIal'Ches 
under sub-section (1) of this aection. 
(1) The Board may make rules'm reiltion to'SYrcl!es under 
this section.". 
~. To sectton 98 of the principal Act, the fallowing ptoViso shall 
be added, namely: -
20 
"Provided that the assessee concerned may demand that be-
fore the proceeding is so continued the previous proceeding or 
uypal"t thenof be re-opened'or 'that befere afty or~ bI. assess- 25 
meat is .pauedapinat him, he bel1!-heet'd.". 
Amend- 38. In section 41 of the principal Act, after sub-1lection (2), the 
ment of following sub--secUon _11 be inserted, namely:-section 41. 
co (3) After a finding of total partition has been recorded by 
the Wealth.tax Officer under section 20 in respect of aay Hindu 30 
family, notices under this Act in respect of the net wealthot the 
Hindu family shall be served on the person who was tbe last 
manager of the Hindu family, or, if such person is dead, then 00 
all surviving adults who were members of the Hindu family 
immediately befOl'e tbepartition.". 3S 
Substitu- 39. 'For sectiOn 44 of the principa'l Act, the follOWing section. shaU 
tion of be substituted, natnely:-
new sec-
tions for 
section,". 
5 of 1891. 

11 of 1922. 
34 of 1953. 
28 of 1957. 
18 of 1958. 
31 
'M. (1) Any asse$See who is enti,tled to or required to attend Appear. 
before any Wealth-iax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in anee 
conne<:tion with any proceeding upder this Act, except where he before 
is.. re.q"ir~ UJlder this Act to attend in ~non. may attend by a =Il'lth-
S person who would be entitled to repre~nt him before any income·. ritie~Ub~o­
tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal under section 288 of the authorised 
Income-.tax Act. repre-
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1)-
(0 no person who has been convicted of an ofhl'lce con-
10 nected with any wealth-tax prooeeding or on whom a penalty 
has been imposed under this Act other than a penalty im-
posed on him under clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-section 
(1) of section 18 shall be qualified to represent an assellee 
under sub-section (1) for such time as the Commissioner may 
15 by order determine; 
(.if) if any person who is not a legal practitiQller or a 
chartered accountant, is found guilty of misconduct in con-
nection with any wealth-tIlx pr-oceeding by the prescribed 
authority. the prescribed, authority may direct that he shall 
20 thenceforth be disqualified· to represent· an asaeu8e under 
sub-section (1); 
2S 
30 
(iii) ·no person not qualifted to represent an assessee 
under the Indian Inflorne.tax Act, 1.922. the Estate Duty Act, 
1953, the Expenditure-tax. Ad, 1.957, or the Gift-We Act, 1958, 
shall be entitled to appear on behalf of any assessee under 
this Act: 
Provided that any order or direction under sub-elause (i) or 
sub-clause (U) .hall be subject to the following conditions:-
(a) no such order or direction snaIl be made in respect 
of any person unleas he has been given a reasonab'le opportu-
nity of being heard; 
(ob) anlY' person against whom any such order or direc-
tiem is made may, within one month of the making of the 
order or. dir.eetion, 8ppe41 to the Board to haV& the order or 
direction cancelled; and 
(c-) no such order or direction shall take effect until the 
expiration of one month from the making thereof, or, where 
an appeal has been preferred, until the disposal of the appeal. 
sentative ... 

Agree-
mentfor 
avoidance 
or relief 
of double 
taxation 
with res-
pect to 
wealth-
tax. 
Countries 
with 
which no 
agreement 
f'xists. 
32-
44A. The Central Government may enter into any agreement 
with the Government of any reciprocating country for the avoid-
ance or relief of double taxation with respect to wealth-tax pay-
able under this Act and under the corresponding law in, force in 
the reciprocating country and may, by notification in the Official 5 
Gazette, make such provision as may be necessary for implement-
ing the agreement. 
Expla.nation.-The expression C4 reciprocating country" for the 
purposes of this Act means any country which the Central Gov-
ernment may, by notification in the Offtcial Gazette, declare to be 10 
a reciprocating country. 
44B. Where the -net wealth of any assessee includes any 
foreign wealth and he proves that, in respect of such foreign 
wealth, he has paid in any country, with which there is no 
reciprocal arrangement under section 44A for the relief or avoid- 15 
ance of double taxation, a tax in respect of wealth, under the law 
in force in that country, he shall be entitled to the deduction from 
the Indian wealth-tax payable by him of a sum calculated on 
such douMy taxed foreign wealth at the Indian rate of tax or the 
rate of tax of the said country, whichever is the lower, or at the 20 
Indian rate of tax if both the rates are equal.. 
E;rplanation.-In this section-
(1) the expression C4Indian wealth-tax" means wealth-
tax charged in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 
(2) the expression "Indian rate of tax" means the rate 25 
determined by dividing the amount of Indian wealth-tax 
after deduction of any relief due under the provisions of this 
Act but before the deduction of any relief due under this sec-
tion by the net wealth; 
(3) the expression "rate of tax of the said country" 30 
means any tax in respect of wealth, actually paid in the said 
country, in accordance with the corresponding laws in force 
in the said country after deduction of all relief due, but 
before deduction of any relief due in the said country in res-
pect of double taxation, divided by the whdle amount of the 35 
wealth assessed in the said country; 
(4) the expression "foreign wealth" in relation to any 
assessee means the value of all his assets located in any 
country outside India as reduced by the value of his debts in 
~~~~~ .. ~ 

33 
to. In section 46 of the principal Act, for sub-section (4), the .Amend-
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- =~t48. 
" (4) The Centtal Government shall cause every ruie made 
under this Act to be laid as soon as may be after it is made before 
5 each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session OJ'. two 
successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the .afoo in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
10 Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be, 80 however; that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule.". 
I ~ 41. In Part II of the Schedule to the principal Act, for the words, Amend-
figures. brackets and letters 4Csections 8, 9, 10 and 12 of the Income- ~en~ _ 
tax Act but without deducting the allowances referred to in paragraph d~e. e 
(b) of the proviso to clause (vi) of sub-section (2) of section 10, sub-
clause (t1ia) and sub-clause (vib) of sub-section (2) of section 10", 
:ao the words, figures, letters and brackets "Chapter IV of the Income-
tax Act other than the provisions under heads of income 'A-Salaries 
and cE-Capital Gains' thereof, but without deducting the allowances 
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 32, section 33 and section 3'" 
shall be substituted. 
926 LS-6. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
,,' 
The Income-tax law has been re-codifted in the Income-tax Act, 
1981. As the basic pattern of the Wealth-tax law is the same as that 
of the Income-tax law, it has become necessary to bring the provi-
sione of the We'alth':tax Act, 1957 in line with the scheme of the 
lneome:..taxAct, 1961. 
Opportunity has been taken to implement the recommendations 
of the Direct Taxes Administration Enquiry Committee, relating to 
the Wealth-tax law. which have been accepted by Government, and 
also to make amendments to the Wealth-tax Act which have been 
found necessary in the light of the experience gained in the opera-
tion of the Act. 
The Notes on clauses explain the various prOvisions of the Bill. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DJ:uu; 
The 3rd September~ 1964. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1/27/64-W.T., da.ted the 6th September, 19tH 
from Shri Bali Ram B1uJgat, Mini8ter of Planning to the Secre-
ta.ry, Lok Sabha.] 
The President heving been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill to amend the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 has recommended 
under article 117 (1) of the Constitution the introduction of the Bill 
in Lok Sabha, and under article 117 (3) of the Constitution its consi-
deration by the Lok Sabha. 
34 

Notes on dauSes 
Clause 2(a) substitutes the existing clauses (b), (c) and (d) of 
section 2by new clauses: 
(i) New clause (b) brinis the deftnition of "Appellate 
Tdbunal" in line with the definition of the term in· section 2 (4) 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
(ii) New clause (c) corresponds to section 2(c) of the 
existing Act but the definition of "assessee" has been made more 
comprehensive on the lines of section 2 (7) of the Income-tax 
Act, -1961 so as to include all possible categories e.g., persons who 
are liable to pay wealth-tax on their own net wealth, persons 
liable to .pay wealth-tax on the net wealth of other. persons, and 
persons deemed to be assessees or RSSessees in d~fault· under cer-
tain sections of the Act. 
(iii) A deftnition of "assessment" bas been inserted by new 
clause (ca) on the lines of sect.ion 2 (8) of the Income-tax Act, 
1961. 
(iv) New clause (d) brings the deftn1tion of "assessment 
year" in line with its deftnition in section 2 (9) of the Income-
tax Act, 1961. 
".' ...• 
Clause 2(b) -eftec;ts amendments-
(1) in section 2 (e) (ii) to clarify that only a building owned 
and occupied by a cultivator would be excluded from the defini-
tion of the· term 'assets', and 
(ll) in section 2(e) (v) to clarify that the period of six ye~r' 
is to be computed from the date the interest vests in the assessee. 
AZ '. 
Clause 2 (c) .-TIle Director of Inspection is not one of the autho-
rities under the existing Act. The amendment makes the Director 
of Inspection an authority under the Act and clarifies that the term 
includes his deputies and assistants also. This is in line with section 
2 (21) of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 2 (d) substitutes in section 2 (j), the reference to the 
'Income-tax Act, 1922' by reference to the 'Income-tax Act, 1961'. 
..... ~ . 35 

6 . .3 .. j 
Clause 2 (e) effects two amendments-
(i) under section 2 (la) a definition of "Inspector of Wealth-
tax" has been introduced, as he has been made one of th~ auth·;-
dties under the Wealth-tax Act, 
(ii) the term 'legal representatives' has been defined on 
the lines of section 2 (29) of the Income-tax Act, 1861 as in the 
existing Act there is no definition of the term although it is 
UJed in the Act. i 
elause 2 (I) seeks to clarify that under section 2 (m) (ii) debts, 
which are secured. on or relate to any property which is exempt from 
wealth-tax are not to be deducted in computing the net wealth. 
Clause 2 (Q) introduces-
(i) a definition of 'public servant', as the term has to be 
defined for the purposes of the Act; and. 
(ii) a definition of "regular assessment", to distinguish such 
an assessment from a self-assessment and provisional asessment 
regarding which provisions are being introduced in the Act. 
These are in line with sub-sections (37) and (40) of section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 2(h)makes the following amendments in section 2(q):-
(i) The reference to section 2 (11) of the Income-tax Act, 
1922 has been substituted by the reference to section 3 of the 
Income-tax Act. 1961, and 
(ii) The existing proviso has been replaced by a new proviso 
which expressly stipulates the valuation date to be adopted i't 
the case of a person who is not an assessee under the Income-
tax Act, 1961 as also the valuation date in a case where an assess-
ment is to be made on an executor. 
Clause 2(i) introduces an amendment in section 2(s) which is 
consequential to the amendment proposed in clause 9 of the Bill. 
elame 3.-Since the term "assessment year" has been defifled !n 
the Act the words "financial year" have been replaced by the wortls 
"assessment year" to clarify the intention. This brings the provis' c:. 
in line with section 4 ilf the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 4(a) amends section 4(1) to make the provisions appli-
cable to either spouse and also clarifies that section 4 (1) (a) (U) 
applies to indirect transfers, and that the provisions of section 
4(1) (a) (iii) would apply to transfers for the deferred benefit of the 
individual or his or her spouse or minor child. This brings the pro-
visions in line with clauses (iii), (iv) and (v) of section 64 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961. 

\. 
37 
Ctause 4 (b) effects the following two amendments: 0-
(i) It introduces section 4 (6) which deems the nOldet oi IIr • 
... mpartible estate to be the owner of all the properties comprised 
in the estate. This is in line with section 27 (ii) of the Income-
tax Act in 80 far as immovable properties are concerned. 
(ii) It substitutes a new Explanation for the existing E3:Pla-
nation clarifying the types of transfers which would be deemed 
to be irrevocable. 
Clause 5 (a) substitutes the reference to "Chapter IXN' of the 
Income-tax Act, 1922 by reference to section 2 (38) of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961. Other amendments proposed in clause 5 (b) are of a con-
sequential nature. 
Clause 6 substitutes the reference to lection 4 (3) of the Income-
tax Act, 1922 by reference to section 10 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 7 (a) clarifies that the matket value of an asset for the 
purposes of section 7 (1) of the Act has to be estimated by the Wealth-
tax Officer subject to any rules that may be framed. 
Clau.s8 7 (b) provides that the adjustments contemplated under 
section 7 (2) of the Act would be prescribed under the rules. 
Clause 8 inserts an Explanation to section 8 of the Act which 
clarifles that the jurisdiction for wealth-tax purposes in respect of a 
person who is liable to wealth-tax but is not an assessee within the 
meaning of the Income-tax Act, will be determined with reference to 
the area in which that person resides. 
Clau.se 9 introduces new section SA conferring on the Central 
Board of Direct Taxes and the Commiuioners the power to transfer 
cases from one Wealth-tax Officer to another. This is in line with 
section 127 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 10 introduces a new section which authorises the Board to 
empower persons to exercise the functions of a Director of Inspection 
and defines those functions. 
Clau.se 11 makes the following changes:-
(i) A new section has been inserted which makes an Inspec. 
tor of Wealth-tax an authority under the Act; and 
(ii) The existing provision in relation to the control of 
wealth-tax authorities has been recast on the lines ot'section 118 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 

Clause 12 introduces a new provision on the lines of section 
119 (2) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 making it obligatory on the 
Wealth-tax Officer to follow the instructions issued by the Director 
of Inspection, Commissioner and Inspecting Assistant Commissioner 
within whose jurisdiction he performs his functions. 
Clause 13 introduces. a new section 13A which specifies the 
powers of the Director of Inspection, the Commissioner and the Ins-
pecting Assistant Commissioner in relation to the ,makUlg of enquiries 
under the Act. This is in line with section 135 of the Income-tax Act, 
1961. 
Clause 14 substitutes a new sub-section for the existing section 
14(1) to make it clear that a person who is liable to tax in respect 
of the net wealth of any other person has also to file a return of net 
wealth. This is in line with section 139 (1) of the Income-tax Act, 
1961. The amendment proposed in section 14(2) is consequential to 
the one proposed in section 14 (1) . 
Clause 15 introduces--
(i) a new section modelled on section 140 of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961 which states the position as regards the persons who 
should sign and verify the returns of net wealth in respect of 
different kinds of assessees; 
(ii) 8 new section in line with section 140A of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961, to provide for an assessee paying tax on the basis of a 
leIf-assessment made by him where the tax payable 'on the basIs 
of the return exceeds Rs. 500; and 
(iii) a new section 15C on the lines of section 141 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, to provide for the making of a pr~isional 
assessment of the tax payable by an assessee on the basis of the 
return filed by him and the accounts and documents, if any, ac-
companying the return. 
Clause l6.-Sub-clause (a) makes certain drafting changes in 
section 16 (1) of the Act to eMure that the amount of refund, if any, 
due to the assessee is specified in the asses.sment order passed' on the 
basis of a return found to be correct and complete. 
Sub-clauses (b) and (d) amend sub-sections (3) and (5) of sec-
tion 16 to clarify that the Wea'lth-tax Officer shall in framing an a8Bess-
mem consider any material which he might have gathered indepen-
dently. This is in line with ~ctioDS 143 (3) and 144 of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961. 

39 
Sub.clause (c) makes good an omission by introducing a refe-
rence to returns flIed under section 15. 
Clause 17.-Sub.clause (a). The amendment proposed is conse-
quential to the amendment proposed in section 14. 
Swb-clause (b) introduces a new SUb-section to clarify that the 
time limit for initiating proceedings for assessment or re-assessment 
would not apply to an assessment or re-assessment which is to be 
made in consequence of or to give effect to any finding or direction 
contained in an appellate order, or an order passed in reference or 
revision etc. This provision is in line with section 150 of the lDeome-
tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 18 replaces the existing section 18 by a new section to 
bring its provisions in line with the corresponding provisions in see-
tions 271, 274 and 275 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The changes pro-
posed are:""": 
(I) In the existing section 18 only a maximum penalty is 
specified. The new section lays down both the minimum and 
maximum penalties for various offences. 
(il) The existing section requires that the Wealth-tax Offieer 
should nave the previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner for all penalty orders passed by him. Under the 
new provisions the Wealth-tax Officer himself will pass orders In 
cases f8'lling under section, 18 (1) (c) (concealment of particulars 
of assets or furnishing inaccurate particulars. of assets or debts) 
where the minimum penalty exceeds Rs. 1,000. The need for 
obtaining the previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant Com-
missioner wllere a penalty order Is to be passed by the Wealth-
tax Officer is dispensed with. 
(i~i) A presumption is drawn as under the Income-tax Act 
of wilful concealment (which can be rebutted by the assessee) 
where the net wealth returned by a person is less than 80 per 
cent. of the net wealth assessed. 
-(Iv) Orders imposing a penalty normally will have to be 
passed before the expiration of two years ft:om the date of the 
COMpletion of the proceedings in the course of which the pro-
ceedings for the imposition of the penalty have been com-
menced. 
Clause 19 introduces a new section providing for specific machi-
nery for the assessment of executors in respect of the estate of a 
deceased person for a period from the date of the death of the dec~s­
ed till -the completion of the administration of the estate. The new 
section is on the lines of section 168 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 

.- 40 
Clause 20.-Sub-claust$ (a) and (b) make certain drafting changes 
to clarify that the provisions of section 21 apply where any assets 
are held either on behalf of the beneficiary or for the benefit of a 
beneficiary . 
Sub-clause (e) clarifies that the individual referred to in sec-
tion 21 (4) should be a citizen of India and resident in India. 
Sub-clause (d) adds a new sub-section which enables the 
person paying any amount under the provisions of section 21 in 
respect of the net wealth of any beneficiary to recover the sum so 
paid from such beneficiary. This is on the lines of section 162 (1) 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
C'Zauae 21.-The amendments effected by this clause bring the 
provisions for the :recovery of wealth-tax from a person residing out- ' 
side India on a line with those of sections 162 and 173 of the Income-
tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 22.-Sub-clause (a) seeks to make the following amend-
ments:-
(i) The word uhis" has been omitted from section 23 (1) (a) 
to entitle a person who is assessable in respect of the net wealth 
of. any other person also to file an appeal where an assessment 
is made on him. 
(Ii) A right of appeal has been provided against penalties 
imposed for non-payment of tax due in respect of a self-assess-
ment which is required to be made under section 15B. 
(iii) The reference to section 46(1) of the Income-tax Act, 
1922, is substituted by reference to section 221 of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961. 
(Iv) Additional rights of appeal have been provided against 
an order of the Wealth-tax Officer treating a person as an agent 
rA. a penon residing outside India, an order rectifying' a mistake 
under section 35 having the eftec.t of enhancing the tax or reduc-
ing a refund orrefusing to admit an assessee's claim under the 
said section. and against an order of the Wealth-tax Oftlcer 
imposing a flne for non-com?liance of a summons issued under 
section 37. This provision is on the linea ,of section 246 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961. 
SUlb.elaUle (b) introduces two new sub-sections (5A) and (5B) 
in section 23. 'rhe new sub-section (SA) is in line with the txplana-
tion to section 251 and the new sub-section (5B) is in line with sec-
tion 250(6) of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The latter sub-section 
makes an ex;isting practice a requirement under the law. 

41 ' 
Cla'UBe23."-Sub .... clame (a) substitutes sub--section (1) of section 
24 by a new sub-section which cohfen on the a-ssessee additional 
rights of app'&al against ~ order p~ by the Appellate Assistant 
Commission,er imposj,ng a penalty -under section 18 or a fine under 
section 37, _ ~d· against an ofcWr p;.ls.>ed by the IIlSpecting Assistant 
CoIllIDissioner impo~ng a penalty under section 18 of the Act. 
Su.l>-olau8e (b) ,~troduces a new ~ovis~QIl corresponding to sec-
tion 253 (4) of the Inco,me-tax Act, 1961 enabling the assessee or tbe 
Wealth-tax Officer to file a me1n9l'a1l<ium of ~081 objections in' an 
appe~ filed before the Tribunal by the other party. 
Sub-clattse (c) confer8 on the Tribuna! powers to COftdone c!ela7 
in the filing of a memorandum of cross objections. This pow.r hi 
simi1u to the existing power of the Tribunal to COQdone delay in fil-
ing of appeals ang is 'in line with section 253 (~) of the Inoome;.tax 
Act, 1961. . 
Sub-clause (d) substitutes new sub-section (6) to (SB) for the 
existing Bub4eCtions 6, t() 8 in order to bring the provisions relating 
to va1uers ih line with theeorresponding provision in section 253 (lA) 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Thus, for instance if the appellant or. the J;espondent does not 
nominate any valuer as required by the Act within the time allowed 
by the Tribunal, the Tribunal will be enlptYNeJ'i!d to nominate a 
valuer on their behalf; and a person whO, at 'any :ttme, has eXpressed 
an)" opinion on the valuation of any property would be debarred from 
bei~ nOminated as a valuer 1n relation to that property by either of 
the parties. 
As under the Income-1iex Act, valuation proceedings under the 
Wealth-tax .Act will 'Il»etaken out of the purview of the Arbitration 
Act, 1940. The valuers to whom a reference has been made will have 
to communicate their decision to the Tribunal within 6 months of the 
date of refierence or Within' the further periodot time, allowed by the 
tribunal; and where the valuerS cief.a.wt in making the report, tlle 
tribunal can order that the reference made to them shall be <ieemed 
,to be withdrawn and can proceed to dispose of the case on the evi-
.~ before them incl\ldingthe report of either, of the. valuers if 
such a report h.8s been su~ii.ted.· .' . . '. ." 
. ' t 
I, , ;.. • '~ " " . : I , :' .: . . r '. ~ 
SuO-cltwSe {e}.-ln aUD-IIeJction(U) .. , the ' ·\t'efareMe , : W i~ 
sections (5), (7) and (8) of section SA of the In~~:~c\rl}9~ 
926(B) LS-8. 

43. 
haa been substituted by r~fer~ce to sub-section (1), (4) and (5) 
of section ,255 of the l;ncome-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 24 introduces two new sub-eections in section 25 to pro-
vide that the Commissioner cannot pass an order in revision pre-
judicial 10 the assessee • after the expiry of two years from the date 
of the onier sought to be revised except where such order is passed 
in consequence of or to give effect to any finding or direction con-
tained iII an order of the Appellate Tribunal, the High Court or 
the' Supreme Court. This is in line with sub-section (2) and (3) 
of seetio) I 263 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 25 seeks to amend section 26 whereby an order imposing a 
penalty passed by the Commissioner under section 18 is made appeal-
able to 'the ,Tribunal. 
Clause 26.-Sub-clause (a) substitutes the existing sub-sections 
(1) and (2) of section 27 by new sub-sections. The following 
changes have been made to bring the provisions in line with those 
of section 256 of the Income-tax Act, 1961:-
(a) The time within which an application should be made 
to the Tri,bunal to refer a question of law to the High Court 
has been reduced from 90 days to 60 days; 
(b) The Tribunal has been required to dispose of the appli-
ca~ion within 120 days; and 
(c) The Tribunal's power to condone delay in entertaining 
a reference application has been restricted to 30 days. 
Sub-clause (b) makes a drafting change of a procedural nature 
substituting the words '90 days' for '3 months' in section 27 (3). 
Sub-clause (c) introduces a new provision enabling the Tribunal 
to refer a question of law direct to the Supreme Court if there is 
conflict in the decisions of High Courts on that question. This is 
in line with section 257 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Sub-clause (d) applies the procedural provisions of sub-sections 
(4), (5) and (6) of section 27 to direct reference to the Supreme 
Court also. 
Sub-clause (e) .-Sub-sections (7) and (8) of section 27 have 
been sub'stituted by a new sub-section, ~odened on section 260(2) 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961 to provide that the cost of a reference 
to the Supreme Court excluding the fee for making the reference 
shall be in the diJcretlon of that court as in the cue of a reference 
to the High Court. 

43 
The existing sub-section (7) is deleted from seetion 2'1 as . sepa-
rate provision is made for refunds in the new Cbapter VIIA. 
Su~ion (9) having become redundant has been deleted. 
Clause 27 introduces two new sections 29A and 29B. 
The new section 29A provides that tax will be payable accord-
ing to the assessment made notwithstanding that a reference has 
been made to the High Court or Supreme Court or an appeal pre-
ferred to the Supreme Court. This is in line with section B of 
the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
The new section 29B specifies in jurisdiction of High Courts in 
respect of the various States as well as Union. territories. This pro-
vision is in line with section 289 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clau.se 28.-This clause substitutes the existing sections 30, 31 
and 32 by new sections. 
(i) In section 30, interest, fine or any other sum payable under 
the Act has also been mentioned. The reference to the time 
within which the amount due is to be paid has been omitted as the 
time for payment is prescribed under section 31. The new section 
is based on section 156 of the Income-tax Act, 1981. 
(ii) Section 31 has been redrafted to bring its provisions in line 
with those of section 220 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The changea 
made are:-
(a) For the sake of uniformity the time limit for payment 
has been specified as 35 days in normal cues. As a measure 
of safeguard it has been }mWided. that this period may be 
reduced in cases where it will -be detrimental to revenue to 
allow'1o much time. 
('b) It has been provided that the Ul!lSee abal1 be liable 
to pay simple interest at 4: per cent. per annum from the date of 
expiry of the time speclfled in the notice of demand. If the 
amount on. which the interest is payable fa reducecl in appeal, 
etc., the amount of the interest would alao be proportIoDately 
reduced. 
(c) A speci& provision has been made authorising the 
Wealth-tax Oftlcer to extend the time for payment or allow pay-
ment by instalments subject to conditions which he may Impose. 
(iU) Section. n baa been redrafted to apply the provisions of 
HCtlons 221 to 227, 229, 231 and 232 of the Income-tax Act and the 
Second and Third Schedules to that Act aDd the Rules framed 

tb.ere\Ulder ·far -1!j!C&Vfij" : of, any: lUAU due, ,~~ ~ Act. ,tlnder 
the neW section.a uaifDrm 'Pnx:edure for effecting, recovery wiU be 
followep..in all the. Sta~es. 
I • - ,-;-' ... .. .• , 
Clause 29 omits section 34 as a comprehensive provision in this 
regard is being introduced in the Inconie-tax Aet: ' ' 
C14US~'i3if,-hit~~eei'-a' ri~w p%Visfoil '00 the lineS of Chapter 
XIx of the IncOme-tax Act, 1961 requiring that 'if a refund ,becciInes 
'diieto 'an a:sses$-ee 'in 3.ppeal, etc;, 'the Wealth-tax ~eerWinrefund 
'the amount withOut ihe assessee having to make 'a' claim 'for it. 
The Wealth-tax Officer has been empowered to withhold refUnds 
'Or set 11 oft' -against any. lUDOunt due from the .8itiS_ '4n qttl'tain 
,circumstances. P~iaioa,'hai, ,alao ~ made £or,jJ~~t,Qt·~te-
rest st.'the Qt~of 4 per :ce.-t per NlIlum to the 8s~,if a relund 
~s not granted within the prescribed period or wit~e~d in !!.ertain 
circUmstances. ' , ' 
, ' CWWfe 31 introduces a new section whereby if any assesSee 
" cr,at~~ a Chafgeon or transfers any Qf his ~s to any ~on .with 
,~b.e in~tipn t9, defraud. the, feyenue, s1i~h, ~~e. ~t t.f~er, would 
'.' be _yoid.~ ~gainst thefeVfm~~ ~c~pt, ~h~~~ the, ch~~e or ~r,ansfer 
has been made.~ val}1able ~QDSid,ration aJ)d withput notice of the 
pendency of the' wealth-tax proCeeding. The proVlsionis "on the 
'1in~ of seC1:iOl'l ISl of the Income..tax' AM, 1961. ' 
t"" '..... ' " .:;, "r If;;. ~ ,_ . . • 
. .. Cla.Use 32 'substitutes a new section for' the existj!lf!~ ~ction 35 
of the Wealth-tax Act and brings the provisions in line with the 
'. ~et)tt~rt4ihg ·prOVisions-of section 154 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
, ,A:. 'fpeclfie "'ProviSiOn is made; whereby the 8Jn()unt bf, tax, ~nalty 
, r ot·iDteteltdeW1'inintd ag a result ·,ofthe first e~ or revision 
against' the oMM' refmed to in section.' 2 (in)(ill~ " ii- paid 'Within 
six months of the date of the appeal orrevislCWl ordet '~d be 
IlllOvy~·fUl·JI. ,d~uctioQ to the extent such tax, ~ty ,or interest 
~' ~~w.~.in ~~ the . assessment by, ~tiprl. of suC'h 
~SlD~!lt • ~, the rectification was recijtication. of ;~ lPistake 
ap~r~t: ~ "the records. . " . '" "(, 
. r~'II . .a.;,l;'~.z~· ",(a) 'omite ftmri 'seeti6ft' 18(1Jthe words 
'on conviction before a magistrate'. This is in line with ~on 276 
of .the Inoom-~tf.x, Act" 1961. 
Sub'~tau~e(~j ~t.ibs~Hutes'for the ~XiSt1ng ptrltiAlunenf ~p.~vided 
in seCtion '38(2) of'simple imprisonment up to one y_ ora fine of 
Rs. '1,000 or botP,a·~vjW.~-r·.r~.tlllPJ~tfor a'ftrlnimum 
",term of,~ ~nt~ ,(\II1leH ther~ate aciequate-'rl!QOrur to'the cCm~rary 
·.t,!9,be recerde4!in .. ~ j~cigm~t),· 8nda·mu~uur.nn of fWo."ears. 
'!'hi!; is in line with section 277 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 

45 
S1Lb~laus~ (c) iI?-tr~duces a new provision making. a,betmet.lt of 
evaSion of \ivealth-iax an OfteilCe'" piuifShable 'with 'rigo~ iMprison-
.. ment fo; a mfriunuii periodof'siX monthS (Unless there are adequate 
reasOns to the:cotitr~i-y recorded in the judgment) and a maximum 
. term of two years. \. This proVision is on the 1~ of seetion 2"18 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961. .' . 
Sub-oaw,e (d) suhatitutesa new suMection (5) for the existing 
~latiatiOO. . . . 
Under the existing provisions, Presidency Magistrates, Magis-
trates of the 1st Class and Magistrates of the Second Class specially 
e~po~~red .~IW ~ w~ce 9f offen~ unt;ie;r the .Act. The 
amendm~t' ,propo~~,a . i~. ,tbi$ . s\ib-,cl~U$e. oIPlts t:l~ial1y empowered 
Ma~trat~ Q~ t~ J:mconc;l. Cl~~. , . " , .,-. ' .. 
· The '. changes'propOsed Wili' b'img' th~ .provisionsin line with sec-
tions 278 and 292 of the Income-tax Act; 1!H)1>-' ~". . .. , 
· czaus~ 34 hltJ"oduces ~. newseetion36A empowering the Central 
· Gove'riuru,intwitha'view t6 obtaining 'eVidence of any pers~n con-
necteCl' with concealment of particulars of net wealth or evasion of 
payment of tax on the net wealth, to tender ~o such .pepon iJnmunity 
from prosecution for 'any offence as also from the impOsition of any 
· penalty under thiaAat. 'BietlDcler·of iJMluoity t*l be withdrawn 
if it appears to th'e CentItll'Government th8t "the person to whom the 
'bTimtfRlty 'WuteDlileld :t.: DOt oeinpUed witll the conditions on 
.... whicb<'Iuch hrmuaity Wal'cNnted 'Gl' fa ,WUtully ooneealiDg· anything 
OIl' giving tfalle evidence.- ~s Is in line with section 291 of the 
liacom&4ax,-Act, 1181. ~ ", . 
• A .i 
, ' !'; 
· ~. 95 substitute. a new section f.or the existing section. 37 and 
~ .' vesta,'additional. powers In. the Wltalth-tax Ofticer, Appellate. Assis-
. ·t8ll,t ~n",; Commillioa.el' ancl:tbe AppeHate~ TribUiial to 
. ~.ihepf¢~OJ):of ~·of··.atc01lD.ts-·tiKl.al;b ~.to these 
.a~~\i8e ijlQ:POW~ to.impound and. retain in tbcr1r'cUstody such 
· 'booG:-~ ~"'. ~ iP~d~ew.The authmttu· 'lIinpbwered 
< .:to~~ ~tJIf.lJave eleobeeD qested withthe-pbwen.to impose 
upon persons who deliberately default from complying wl~ the same 
a flne not exceeding, Rs.~. ~t is also provided that any proceeding 
wadllrthe:Aot Wftlre a·'\ftiIth-.taxwthoritj· or'theTrihunal.shall be 
4eeuied to be. fUdfetal proeeet:Urig'for the purpOS~ of sectton 196 of 
tile liKlta Peti"J'.COc:le." ., ,. -. " . - -. : " : .". 
· . f''', .~;," .... "\ ~~.,' ~ .~t II ., r: ( 
,. .'rbaI& provW~ !are- ia",&e«WithllMtiOni 1-'1 arid 1·36 of the 
. ,: lDc~tax ~A.ct,r" . ..- .. ' j' .' ;" . ' ;., .... 
. r,. . ':.' 
• -~ ,> • ,. 

46 
Clause 36. introduces a new section on the lines of section 132 of 
the Income-tax Act enabling the Commissioner of Wealth-
tax to authorise under certain circumstances the Inspect-
ing Assistant Commissioner or the Wealth-tax Ofticer to make 
a search for any such books of account or documents in any premises 
and seize them and also to make an inventory of the articles or things 
(including m')neys) so siezec:l. Provision is made for a person object-
ing to such seizure to make an application to the Board. It is also 
provided that the Board may make rules relating to searches under 
- this section. 
Clause 37 inserts a new proviso to section 39 providing that in 
the event of one wealth-tax authority being succeeded by another, 
the assessee mey demand that before the proeeed.iDgB are continued 
he may be heard again. The provision corresponds to section 129 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
ClauBe 38 introduces a new provision on the lines of section 283 
of the Income-tax Act. 1961 describing the procedure to be adopted 
for service of notice where Ii joint Hindu family is disrupted. 
Cl4u.se 39 effects the following amendments:-
(i) The propotednew section 44 prOvidet that every penon 
who would be entitled to represent an 8I8e8Iee before an 
income-tax authority or the TribUUl-UDder section 288 of the 
Income-tax Act ' would' ~" entitled to appear in wealth-tax 
cases also subject to certain exceptions. Those pel'IOna who 
have been convicted of an offence connected. with. any wea1th-
tax proceeding or on whom. a penalty under section 18(1) (c) 
has been imposed, and persons who are not qualifted to repre-
sent an I8Ie1'Bee under the Indian Income-tax Ad, 1922, the 
Eatate Duty Act, 1953, the Expenditure-tu Act, 1957 or the 
Gift..tax -Act, 1958 would mo be dfaqua1Jfled from appearing in 
wealth-tax cases. It is also provided that IUCh a perIOIl 11 not 
to· be dtlqualffted without being giveIl a reumable opportunity 
of befllg heard, and that he wlll have a right of appeal to the 
Bocri. 
\, 
(11) A ~ 8ect1on 44A is introdueed whlch empowen the 
Central ~mment to enter into an agreement with the ~ 
ernment of ·any reciplIocattng country for the avoidance or 
reUef of double taxation with r8pect to the wealth-to: payable 
under this Act andWlder the corre8pond:ing JAw in force 'in the 
reciprocating country. Th1l is in line with ~' 90 of 'the 
Income-tax Act, 1181. 

47 
(in) A new section 44B is introduced to provide for unila-
teral relief being allowed in respect of assessments made under 
this Act on the foreign wealth of an assessee which may have 
been doubly taxed ccmaequent to the levy of wealth-tax by a 
foreign country. ThiS is in line with section 91 of the Income-
tax Act, 1961. I 
Clause 40 seeks to modify the provisioDS of sub-section 4 of 
section 46 on the lines of section 296 ·of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 41 substitutes the references to sections 8, 9, 10, 12, 
paragraph (b) of the proviso to section 10 (2) (via) and 10 (2) 
(vib) to the corresponding provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 
namely Chapter IV other than the provisions under heads of income 
'A-Salaries and E-Capital gains' and sub-section (2) of section 33 
and section 34 respectively. 
I I 

FIN~CIAL MEMORANDUM 
. .. ~ .... .' ~ -' 
The officers who administer the Income-tax Aet':itiminlster the 
Wealth-tax Act also. This Bill is, therefore, not likely to involve any 
add!tionnl expenditurefot:- the present. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA'l'IO~ 
Clause 7 of the Bill empowen the Board by virtue of the existing 
powers under section 46 of the Act to frame rules regarding the 
valuation of assets for purposes of section 7 (1) and·to prescribe the 
adjUltments in the computation of net wealth made under the pro-
visions of section 7 (2) <a>. 
Clause 36 seeks to introduce a new section 37A vesting in wealth-
tax authorities certain powers relating to search and seizure, and it is 
proposed to vest the Board with the power to make rules in this 
regard. 
Clause 39 seeks to substitute inter alia a new section for section 
44; the new section 44 enables the Board to prescribe the authority 
for the purposes of clause (il) of sub-section (2) of that section. 
The matters in respect of which rules will be made are matters 
of procedure, form or detail. 
The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
49 
9Z6(B) LS-7. 

DeJlni-
tiona. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE WBALTH-TAX AcT, 1957 
(27 OF 1957) 
• • • • * • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • 
. (b) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal 
appointed under section 5A of the Income-tax Act; 
(c) "assessee" means a person by whom wealth-tax or any 
other sum of money is payable under this Act, and includes 
every person in respect of whom any proceedings under this 
Act, has been taken for the assessment of the value of his asse'ts; 
(d) "assessment year" means the year for which tax is 
chargeable under section 3; 
(e) "assets" includes property of every description, movable 
or immovable, but does not include-
• • • • • 
(ii) any building owned or occupied by a cultivator or 
receiver of rent or revenue out of agricultural land: 
• • • • • 
(v) any interest in property where the interest is avail-
able to an assessee for a period not exceeding six years; 
• • • • • 
(j) "Income-tax Act" means the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922; 11 of 1922 
• • • • • 
(m) "net wealth" means the amount by which the aggre-
gate value computed in accordance with the provisions of this 
.Act of all the assets, wherever located, belonging to the assessee 
on the valuation date, including assets required to be included in 
his net wealth as on that date under this Act, is in excess of 
the aggregate ~lue of all the debts ow.ed by the assessee on the 
valuation date other than,-
50 

51 
(i) debts which under section 6 are not to .be taken into 
account; 
(ii) debts which are secured on, or which have been 
incurred in relation to, any asset in respect of which wealth-
tax is not payable under this Act; and 
• • • • 
(q) "valuation date", in relation to any year for which an 
assessment Is to be made under this Act, means the last clay of 
the previous year as defined in clause (11) of section 2 of the 
Income-tax Act if an assessment were to be made under that Act 
for that year: 
Provided that where in the case of an assessee there are 
di1ferent previous years under the Income-tax Act for different 
sources of income, the valuation date for the purposes of this 
Act shall be the last day of the last of the previous years afore-
said; 
• • • • • • 
(8) "Wealth-tax Officer" means the Income-tax Officer 
authorised to perform the functions of a Wea1th.tax Ojcer under 
section 8. 
3. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, there Char1t'he of wea -shall be charged for every financial year commencing on and from t&x. 
the first day of April, 1957 a tax (hereinafter referred to as wealth-
tax) in respect of the net wealth on the corresponding valuation 
date of every individual, Hindu uAdivided family. ~nd company at 
the rate or rates ~pecifted in the Schedule. 
4. (1) in computing the net wealth of an individual, there shall Net •. w~fu~ 
be mcluded, as belongtng to him- include 
(a) the value of assets which on the valuation date are certain 
held- -. -~. uHtI. 
(i) by his wife to whom such assets have been tranS-
ferred by the individual, directly or iIidirectly, otherwise 
'than for adequete consideration or in connection with. an 
agreement to live separately, or 
(ii) by a minor chUd not being a married daullhter to 
whom such assets have been transferred by the individual 
otherwise than for adequate consideration. or 
(iii) by a person or association of persons to whom such 
assets have been transferred by the individual otherwise 
than for adequate consideration for the benefit of the fndi-
vidual or his wife or minor child, or' 

--bemp-
tiona in 
l'MPeCtOf 
c:ertaln 
assets. 
ExelUlion 
of ...... 
and .... 
outside 
India. 
.. .. .. .. 
Exp14n.ation..-For the purposes of this section the expression 
"transfer" includes any disposition, trust, covenant, agreement or 
ariangement, and "an irrevocable transfer" includes a transfer of 
assets which, by the terms of the instrument effecting it, is not 
revocable for a period exceeding six years or during the lifetime 
of the transferee. 
5. (1) Wealth-tax shall riot be payable by an aue.le in respect 
of the following 8811ets, and such assets shall not be includecl in the 
net wealth of the ... euee 
• • • • • • 
(~ii) the amount standillg to the credit ot en assessee, 
being a salaried employee, in any provident fund maiDtained 
by his employer to which the Provident Funds Act, 192:), appUes 19 of UJU. 
or which ia a recognised provideot fWld within the meaning of 
Chapter IXA of the Incom~tax Act; 
• • • • • 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
wealth-tax shall be .P.a.fab1e by an assessee in respect of the assets 
referred to in clause~.;(xvi), clause (m), clause (xx) of sub-aection 
(1) or in sub-section (2) for any assessment year unless the assets 
are held by hlm-
• • • • • 
Provided that for the purpose of making any assessment for the 
financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1963, the provi-
sions of clause (b) shall not apply to ten year defence deposit certi-
ficates and twelve year national defence certificates held by the 
assessee on the relevant valuation date. 
6. In computing the net wealth of an individual who is not a 
citizen of India or of an individual or a Hindu undivided family 
not resident in India or resident but not ordinarily resident in 
IDdia, at· of a Cf)mp8ny not resident in India during the year ending 
un the valuation date-
(i) the value of the assets and debts located outside India; and '.' ,. - ,. --~--.~ 
(ti) the value ·of the asiets in India represented by any 
'. .' low 0'1 debts owing to the assessee in eny case where the 
interest, if any, payable on sueh·loans or debt1I is not to be 
included in. the total income of the assessee under sub-section 
(3) of section 4 of. the Income-tax Act; 
shall not be taken into account . 
• • • • • 

53 
T. (1) The value of any asset, other than cash, for the purpoI8I Value of 
of this Act, shall be estimated to be the price which in the opinion Uleta 
of the Wealth-tax Officer it would fetch if sold in the open market how to 
on the valuation date. be deter_ . mined. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),-
(4.) where the assessee is carrying on a business for which 
accounts are maintained by him regularly, the Wealth-tax: 
Ofticer may, instead of determining separately the value of each 
asset held by the assessee in such business, determine the net 
value of the assets of the business as a whole having regard to 
the balance-sheet of such business IltI on the valuation date and 
making such adjustments therein as the circumstances of the 
case may require; 
• • • • .. 
8. Every Income-tax Officer having jurisdiclion or exercising Wealth-
powers as such under the Income-tax Act in respect of any indivi- tax 
dual, Hindu undivided family or company shall perform the func.. Otllcera. 
tiona of a Wealth-tax OtBcer under this Act in respect of such indi-
vidual, Hindu undivided family or company . 
• • • • • 
12. The Wealth-tax Officers shall be subordinate to the Commis- Wealth-
sioner of Wealth-ax and the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of tax ~be 
Wealth-tax within whose jurisdiction they perform their functions. :~~i­
nate to tbe 
Commis-
sioner of 
Wealth_ 
tax and 
the Ins-
pecting 
Aulatant 
Commis-
sioner of 
Wealth-
• • •. .. tas. 
14. (1) Every person whose net wealth on the valuation date was :ReturDvl 
. of such an amount as to render him liable to wealth-ax Under this wealtb. 
Act ehalI. before the thirtieth day of June of the corresponding 
assessment year, furirlsh to the Wealth-tax OftIcer a return in the 
pi'eserf.bed form end verifted in the prescribed manner setting forth 
his net wealth as on that valuation date: 
Provided that for the assessment year commencing on the flrst 
day of April, 19~7, the return may be made at limy time ·before the 
thirty-first day of December, 1957. 
(2) If the Wealth-tax Offtcer is of the opinion that the net wealth 
of any person is of such an amount as to render him liable to wealth. 
\ 

A5a~8-
ment. 
Wealth 
escapm, 
assaIl-
ment. 
54 
tax under ~ Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1). he may serve a notice upon such person requiring him 
to furnish within such period, not being less than thirty days, as 
may be specified in the notice, a return in the prescribed form and 
verified in the prescribed manner, setting forth (along with such 
other particulars as may be required by the notice). the net wealth 
of sueh person as on the valuation date mentioned in the notice . 
• • • • 
18. (1) If the Wealth-tax Officer is satisfied without requiring the 
presence of the assessee or production by him of any evidence thet 
a return made under section 14 is complete, he shall assess the net 
wealth of the assessee and detennine the amount payable by him 
as weelth-tax. 
• • • • • • 
(3) The Wealth-tax Officer, after hearing such evidence as the 
person may produce and such other evidence as he may require on 
any specified points, shaU, by order in writing, assess the net wealth 
of the assessee and determine the amount payable by him as wealth-
tax. 
(4) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act 
the Wealth-tax Officer may serve, on any person who has made a 
return under sub-section (1) of section 14 or upon whom a notice 
has been served under sub-section (2) of that section, a notice 
requiring him to produce or cause to be produced on a date specified 
in the notice such accounts, records or other documents as the 
Wealth-tax Officer may require. 
(5) If any person fails to make a return in response to any notice 
under sub-section (2) of section 14, or fails to comply with the 
tenns of any notice issued under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4), 
the Wealth-tax Officer shall make the assessment to the best of his 
judgment and determine the amount payable by the person as 
wealth-tax on the basis of such assessment. 
17. If the Wealth-tax Officer-
(a.) has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or 
: f.ailure on the part of the assessee to make a return of his net 
wealth under section 14 for any assessment year or to disclose 
fully and truly all material facts necessary for hi. assessment 
for that year, the net wealth chargeable to tax has escaped 
assessment for that year, whether by reason of under-assessment 
_ or ~sseS8ment at too Iowa rate or otherwise; or 
(b) has, in consequence of any information in his posses-
sion,reason to, believe, notwithstanding that there has been no 

55 
such omission or failure as is referred to in clause (a), that the 
net wealth chargeable to tax has escaped assessment for any 
year, whether by reason of under-assessment or assessment ~t 
too Iowa rate or otherwise; 
he mey, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time within eight 
years and in cases falling under clause (b) at any time within. four 
years of the end of that assessment year, serve on the assessee a 
notice containing all or any of the requirements which may be 
included in a notice under sub-section (2) of section 14, and may 
proceed to essess or reassess such net wealth, and the provisions of 
this Act shall, so far as may be, apply as if the notice had issued. 
under that sub-section. 
18. (1) If the Wealth-tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Commis- Penalty 
sioner, Commissioner or Appellate Tribunal in the course of any for con_ 
proceedings under this Act is satisfied that any person- cealment. 
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the 
return of his net wealth which he is required to furnish under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 14 or section 17 or 
has without reasonable ceuse failed to furnish it within the time 
allowed and in the manner reqUired; or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with a 
notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 16; or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of his assets or deliber-
ately furnished inaccurate particulars of his assets or debts; 
he or it may, by order in writing direct that such person shall pay 
by way of penalty-
(i) in the case referred to in clause (a), in addition to the 
amount of wealth-tax payable by him, a sum not exceeding 
one-and-a-half times the amount of such tax, and 
(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b) or clause (c), in 
addition to the amount of wealth-tax payable by him, a sum not 
exceeding one-and-a-half times the amount of the tax, if any, 
which would have been avoided if the net wealth returned. by 
such person had been accepted as correct. 
(2) ,No order shall be made under sub-section (1) unless the 
person aoncerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. 
(3) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be insti-
tuted in respect of the same facts in relation to which a penalty has 
been imposed under this section. 

56 
(4) The Wealth-tax oftlcer shan not impose arty penalty under 
this section without the previous approval of the Inspecting Assis-
tant Commiaianer of Weatth-tax. 
... ... ... ... ... 
AYess- n (1) In the case of assets chargeable to tax under this Act 
ment which are held by a court of wards or· an administrator-genera'! or 
when an ofRcial trustee or any receiver or manager or any other person, 
=~yare by whatever :aame called, appointed under any order of a court to 
courts of manage property on behalf of another, or any trustee appointed 
wards, ad- under a trust declared by a duly executed instrument in writing 
ministra- whether testamentary or otherwise (including a trustee under a 
torl-gene- valid deed of wakf), the wealth-tax shall be levied upon and 
rfal, etc. recoverable from the court of wards, administrator-general, oftlcial 
trustee, receiver, manager or trustee, as the case may be, in the like 
manner and to the same extent as it wo~d be leviable upon and 
recoverable from the person on whose behalf the assets are held, 
and the provisions of this Act shan apply accordingly. 
(2) Nothing contaiDed in 6Ub-section (1) shall prevent ·.ither 
the direct as&eIIsment at the penon on whose behalf the assets above 
referred. to are held, or- t!Ie'"2'8COvery from such pel"SOn of the tax 
payable in respect of such .... ts. 
(3) Where the guardian or trustee of any person being a minor, 
lunatic or idiot (all of which persons axe hereinafter in this sub-
~ section included in the term "beneficiary") holds any assets on 
lJ~half of such beneficiary, the tax under this Act shail be levied 
As.sess. ' " 
mento'" 
persona' , 
reaiclin& 
outalde. 
Indio ... 
~
n and recoverable from such guardian or trustee, as the case may 
be in the like manner and to the same extent as it would be leviable 
Do and recoverable from any such beneficiary If of full age or 
lOUD mind ad in direct ownership of such assets. 
(4)\ Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where 
the sh; ares of the persons on whose behalf any such assets are held 
are mct~etenntnate or unknown, the wealth-tax may be levied upon 
and rr-:.covered from the court of wards, administrator-general, 
oftleIJ.AI trustee, receiver, manager or other person aforesaid as if the 
pers.ons on whose behalf the assets are held were an individual for 
th~ purposes of thia Act. 
22. (1) ... ... • ... ... • • 
(2) Any person employed by or on behalf of a person referred 
to in sub-section (1) or through whom such person is in the receipt 
of any income, proflts or gains, or who is in poueuion or hal 
cUitodyof any- aqet of luch penon and upon whom the Wealth·tax 

57 
Officer has caused a notice to be served of his intention of treating 
him as the agent of such person shall. for the purposes of sub-section 
(1), be deemed to be the agent of such person: 
Provided that-
(1) no person shall be deemed to be the agent of another 
under this section unless he has had an opportunity of being 
heard by the Wealth-tax Officer as to his being treated as such; 
and 
(2) no agent shall be liable to pay any amount by way of 
wealth-tax under sub-section (1) in excess of the amount 
belonging to the person residing outside India and in the hands 
of the agent at the time the notice of demand is served on him . 
... ... ... ... ... • 
23. (1) Any person,-
(4) objecting to the amount of his net wealth determined 
under this Act; or 
... ... ... ... • ... 
(d) objecting to any penalty imposed . by the Wealth-tax 
Officer under section 18; or 
... ... ... ... ... ... 
(f) objecting to apy penalty imposed by the Wealth-tax 
Officer under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 46 of 
the Income-tax Act as applied under section 32 for the purposes 
of wealth-tax; 
may appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner against the 
assessment or order, as the case may be, in the prescribed form 
and verified in the prescribed manner . 
... ... ... ... ... ... 
Appeal to 
the Appel .. 
late Asais-
tantCom-
tr.issioner 
from 
older~ of 
Wealth-
tax 
Officers . 
24. (1) Any assessee objecting to an order passed by an Appel- Appeal to 
late Assistant Commissioner under section 23 may appeal to the the Ap-
Appellate Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which he is fe.!:al 
served with notice of such order. rl from 
... ... ... ... .. ... orders 
. 01 the (3) The Tribunal may admit an appeal after the explry of the Appellate 
sixty days referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) if it is satisfied Assistant 
that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within that Commis_ 
period. sioners . 
• ... • • ... ... 
926 LS-8, 

Appeal to 
the Appel-
late 
'rribunal 
from 
ord.erll.of 
.. nhllnce-
men~ by 
Commis-
~lon£r8. 
Reference 
to High 
Court. 
,58 
(6) Where the appellant objects to the valuation of any pr0-
perty, the Appellate Tribunal may, and if the appellant so requires 
shall, refer the question of the disputed value to the arbitration of 
~wo valuers, one of whom shall be nominated by the appellant and 
the other by the respondent, and the Tribunal shall, so far as that 
question is concerned. pass its orders under sub-section (5) con-
formably to the decision of the valuers: 
Provided that if there is a difference of opinion between the two 
valuers, the matter shall be referred to a third valuer nominated by 
agreement, or failing .agreement, by the Appellate Tribunal, and 
the decision of that valuer on the question of valuation shall be 
final. 
(7) The costs of any arbitration proceeding under sub-section 
(6) shall be borne by the Central Government or the assessee as 
the case may be, at whose instance the question was referred to 
the valuers: 
PIrovided that where the assessee has been wholly or pal'tially 
successful in any reference made at his instance, the extent to 
which the costs should be borne by the assessee shall be at the dis-
cretion of the Appellate Tribunal. 
(8) The valuers may, in dis~sing of any matter referred to 
them for arbitration under sub-section (6), hold or cause to be 
held such inquiry as they think fit, and after giving the appellant 
and the respondent an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders 
thereon as they think fit and shall send It copy of Nch order to 
the Appellate Tribunal. 
• • • • • • 
(11) The provisions of sub-sections (5). (7) and (8) of section 
SA of the Income-tax Act shall apply to the Appellate Tribun8! in 
the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in 
the discharge of its functions under the Income-tax Act. 
• • • • 
26. (1) Any assessee objecting to an order of enhancement made 
by the Commissioner under section 25 may appeal to the Appellate 
Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which the order is com-
municated to him. 
• • • • • • 
27. (1) Within ninety days of the date upon which he is served 
with an order under section 24 or section 26, the assessee or the 
Commissioner may present an application in the prescribed form 

'9 
and, where the application is by the assessee, accompanied by a fee 
of one hundred rupees to the Appellate Tribunal requiring the Appel-
late Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question of law arising 
out of such order, and the Appellate Tribunal shall, if in its opinion 
a question of law arises out of such order, state the case for the 
opinion of the High Court. 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) may be admitted after 
the expiry of the period of ninety days aforesaid if the Tribunal is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within 
the said period. 
(3) If, on an application made under sub-section (1), the Appel-
late Tribunal,-
(a) refuses to state a case on the ground that no question of 
law arises; or 
(b) rejects it on the ground that it is time barred; 
the applicant may, within these months from the date on which he 
is served with a notice of refusal or rejection, as the case may be, 
apply to the High Court, and the High Court may, if it is rwt satis-
fied with the correctness of the decision of the Appellate Tribunal, 
require the Appellate Tribunal to state the case to the High Court, 
and on receipt of such requisition the Appellate Tribunal shall state 
the case: 
Provided that, if in any case where the Appellate Tribunal has 
been required by an assessee to state a case the Appellate Tribunal 
refuses to do so on the ground that no question of law arises, the 
assessee may, within thirty days from the date on which he receives 
notice of refusal to state the case, withdraw his application, and if 
he does so, the fee paid by him under sub-section (1) shall be re-
funded to him. 
(4) The statement to the High Court shall set forth the facts, 
the determination of the Appellate Tribunal and the question of 
~aw which arises out of the case. 
(5) If the High Court is not satisfied that the case as stated is 
sufficient to enable it to determine the question of law raised, thereby, 
it may require the Appellate Tribunal to make such modifications 
therein as it may direct. . 
(6) The High Court, upon hearing any such case, shall decide 
the question of law raised therein, and in doing so, may, if it thinks 
fit, alter the form of the question of law and shall deliver judg-
ment thereon contai.ning the ground on which such decision is 

Notice of 
derr.a.nd. 
Recovery 
of tax and 
penalties. 
founded and shall send a copy of the judgment under the seal of 
the Court and the signature of the Registrar to the Appellate Tri-
bunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall pass such orders as are 
necessary to dispose of the case conformably to such judgment. 
(7) Where the amount Qf any assessment is reduced as a result 
of any reference to the High Court, the amount, if any, overpaid 
as wealth-tax shall be refunded with such interest as the Commis-
sioner may allow, unless the High Court, on intimaticm given by 
the Commissioner within thirty days of the receipt of the result of 
such reference that he intends to ask for leave to appeal to the 
Supreme Court makes an order authorising the Commissioner to 
postpone payment of such refund until the disposal of the appeal in 
the Supreme Court. 
(8) The costs of any reference to the High Court shall be in 
the discretion of the Court. 
(9) Section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, shall apply to 9 of 1908 . 
. an application to the High Court under this section . 
• • • • • • 
30. When any tax or penalty is due in consequence of any order 
passed under this Act, the Wealth-tax Officer shall serve upon the 
assessee or other person liable to pay such tax or penalty a notice 
of demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum so payable 
and the time within which it shall be payable. 
31. (1) Any amount specified as payable in a notice of demand 
issued under section 30 shall be paid within the time, at the place, 
and to the person mentioned in the notice, or if no time is so men-
tioned, then on or before the first day of the second month following 
the date of service of the notice, and any assessee failing so to pay 
shall be deemed to be in default. 
(2) Where an assessee has been assessed in respect of assets 
located in a country outside India, the laws of which prohibit or 
restrict the remittance of money to India, the Wealth-tax Of'ficer 
shall not treat the assessee as in default in respect of that part of 
the tax which is attributable to the assets in that country, and shall 
continue to treat the assessee as not in default in respect of that 
part of the tax until the prohibition or restriction of remittance is 
removed. 
(3) NotWithstanding anything contained in this section, where 
an assessee has presented an appeal under section 23, the Wealth-

16 of 1908. 
6r 
tax Oft\cer may in his discretion treat the assessee as not being in 
default as long as such appeal is undisposed of. 
32. The provisions of sub-sections (1), (1 A), (2), (3), (4), (5), Mode ot 
(SA), (6) and (7) of section 46 and section 47 of the Income-tax Act recovery. 
shall apply as if the said provisions were provisions of this Act and 
referred. to wealth-tax and sums imposed by way of penalty under 
this Act instead of to income-tax and sums imposed by way of 
penalty under that Act, and to Wealth-tax Oftlcer and Commissioner 
of Wealth-tax instead.of to Income-tax Officer and Commissioner of 
Income-tax. 
• • • • • • 
M. Where any document required to be registered under the Restrie-
provisions of clause (a), clause (b), clause (c) or clause (e) of sub- tionson 
section (1) of section 17 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, t=lllt;a-
purports to transfer, assign, limit or extinguish the right, title or \lans~~rs 
interest of any person to or in any property other than agricultural (·t immov_ 
land valued at more than one lakh of rupees, no registering officer able pro-
appointed under that Act shall register any such document, unless jjer1y.in 
the Wealth-tax Officer certifies that- ('ertam cases. 
(a) such person has either paid or made satisfactory provi-
sion for the payment of all existing liabilities under this Act. or 
(b) the registration of the document will not prejudicially 
affect the recovery of any existing liability under this Act. 
CHAPTER VUI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
35. At any time within four years from the date of any order Rtdlftea.. 
passed by him, or it, the Commissioner, the Wealth-tax Officer, the ti\)n of 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal may, ~lllstak ... 
on his, or its, own motion rectify any mistake apparent from the 
record and shall, within a like period, rectify any such mistake 
which has been brought to the notice of the Commissioner, the 
Wealth-tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Conunissioner or the 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, by an assessee: 
Provided that no such rectification shall be made which has the 
effect of enhancing the assessment unless the assessee has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
36. (1) If a person fails without reasonable cause- Prosecu-
(a) to furnish in due time any return mentioned in section ti.c"" 
14; 

Power to 
take evi_ 
dence on 
oath, etc. 
6~ 
(b) to produce, or cause to be produced. on or before the 
date mentioned in any notice under sub-section (2) or sub-
section (4) of section 16 such accounts, records and - documents 
as are referred to in the notice; 
(c) to furnish within the time specified any statement or 
information which such person is bound to furnish to the Wealth-
tax Officer under section 38; 
he shall, on conviction before a magistrate, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to ten rupees for every day during which the 
default continues. 
(2) If a person makes a statement in a verification mentioned in 
section 14 or section 23 or section 24 or section 26 which is false, and 
which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe 
to be true. he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both . 
• • • • 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section, "maptrate" 
means a presidency magistrate, a magistrate of the first class or a 
magistrate of the second clallll .specially empowered by the Central 
Government to try offences U1\der this Act. 
37. The Commissioner, the Wealth-tax Ofticer, the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in res- 5 of 1908. 
peet of the following matters, namely:-
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 
(ci) issuing commissions for the examination of witllesaes; 
and any proceeding before the Commissioner, the Wealth-tax Offl.cer, 
the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections la and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. 450i 1860 . 
• • • • • • 
meet of 39. Whenever in respect of any proceeding under this Act any 
transfer of wealth-tax authority ceases to exercise jurisdiction and is succeeded 
authorities. by another who has and exercises such jurisdiction, the authority 

la '.:.f 1941. 
so succeeding may continue the proceeding from the stage at which append-
the proceeding was left by his predecessor'. ing pro-
ceedings . 
• • • • • • 
44. Any assessee who is entitled to or required to attend before Appear-
any wealth-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in connection ance 
with any proceeding or inquiry L1 'lder this Act, except where he is ~::~ 
required under this Act to attend in person, may attend by a person tax nutho-
authorised by him in writing in this behalf, being a relative of, or a rities by 
person regularly employed by, the assessee or a legal practitioner authorised 
or a chartered accountant or any other person having such qualift- r~resen-
t ' b 'bed tatlves. ea Ions as may e prescrl , 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) the expression, "a person regularly employed by the 
asse8$ee" includes any officer of a Scheduled Bank with which 
the assessee maintains Il current account or has other regular 
dealings; 
(b) "chartered accountant" means a chartered accountant 
as defined in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 . 
• 
46. (1) • • • • 
• 
• 
• • • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
(4) All rules made under this Act shall be laid before each House 
of Parliament, as soon as may be, after they are made, and shall be 
subject to such modifications as Parliament may make during the 
session in which they are so laid or the session immediately fol-
lowing. ,; -', -! l'WP 
• • 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
RATES OF WEALTH-TAX 
• • 
PART II 
In the case of every company:-
• 
(i) on the first rupees five lakhs of net wealth 
• 
Nil 
(ii) on the balance of net wealth . ~ %: 
Provided that in the case of a company which has incurred a net 
Joss in any year computed in the manner hereinafter provided and 
which has not declared any dividend on its equity capital in respect 
of that year. the rate of tax for the relevant year shall be 'nil, 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

64 
The loss referred to in the above proviso shall be computed in 
accordance with the provisions of sections 8, 9, 10 and 12 -of the 
Income-tax Act but without deducting the allowances referred to in 
paragraph (b) of the proviso to clause (vi) of sub-section (2) of 
section 10, sub-clause (via) and sub-clause (mb) of sub-section (2) 
of section 10 of that Act or the allowance in respect of any losses 
brought forward from earlier years. 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Wealth-Tax Act, 19S7. 
(Shri T. T. K~, 
MUtiIt. of ~.) 