As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
, . 
~ '=. • . ,....1 ... :.. 
Bill No. 57 of 1983 
THE VEGETABLE OILS CESs BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the let'Y and collection of a cess on vegetable oils for the 
development oJ the oilseeds industry and the vegetable oil.s industry 
and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the .Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Vegetable Oils Cess Act, 1983. Short 
title, (2) It extends to the whole of India. extent 
and com-
5 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government mem:e_ 
10 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apPOint. ment. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Defini-
tion •. (a) "mill" means any premises in which or in any part of which, 
vegetable oil is produced, Or is ordinarily produced, with the aid of 
power. 
Explanation.-"Power" means electrical energy or any other 
form of energy, which is mechanically transmitted 'Bnd is not generat-
ed by human or animal agency; 
(b) "occupier", in relation to any ·mill, means the person Who 
has the ultimate control over the affairs of the mm, or the owner of 
the mill in case he is not the occupier; 
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 

Levy aIld 
collection 
01 cess 
on vege-
table oils. 
Crediting 
pr'OCeeds 
of duty to 
Consoli-
dated 
Fund of 
Jndia. 
Powet· to 
call for 
report.'! 
and 
returns. 
Power to 
make 
tulea. 
2 
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and de1iDed 
in the National Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board Act, 1983, 
shall ha~ the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected by way of cess for the pur-
poses of the National Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board 5 
Act, 1983, 8 duey of ext'ise on vegetable oils produced in any mill in India 
&It such rate npt exceeding five rupees per quintal of vegetable oil, as the 
Central Govcnnnent may, from time to time, specify by notification in 
the Official (;azettc: 
Provided that until such rate is specified by the Central Gover1lment, 10 
the duty of excise shall be levied and collected at the rate of lone rupee 
per quintal of vegetable oil. 
(2) The dllt~, of ('xcise levied under sub-section (1) shall be in addition 
to the duty of exds~ leviable on vCJCetable oils under the Central Excises 
and Salt Ad. 1944. m' any other law for the time being in force. 15 1 of 1944. 
(3) The duty of exc.'ise levied under flub-section (1) shall be payable 
by Ute occuJlier of the mill in which the vegetable oil is produced. 
(4) The pro\'isions of the Central Excises and Salt Act. 1944, and the 1 of 1944. 
ruleR made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemp-
tions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in relntion to the levy and 20 
collection of the said du~ of excise as they applv in r.~latlon to the levy and 
collection of the duty of \"xci .. e 011 vegetable oils under that Act. 
4. The proceeds of the duty of exciS(a levied under sub-section (1) of 
section 3 "hall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the 
~entral Government rna, .. if Parliam«-nt. by appropriation made by law in 25 
this behalf, so provides, pay to the Board. from time to time, from out of 
liIuch prot't'edR (after dedut'ting the cost of rollection) such liIums of money 
as it may 'think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the National 
Oilseeds and Vegetnblr Oils Development Board Art, t!MI3. 
S. The Central Government may require an occupier of a mill to 30 
furnish. for the purposes of this Act, such statisti('Oal and other information 
in such form and within such period a'S may be prescribed. 
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette. make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the gener3lity of th~ fore- 35 
~oing power. such rules may provide for the form in which and the 
period within which statistiC'al and other information may be furnished 
under section 5. 
(3) Every rule made under this section 'Shall be laid. as soon as may 
be 'after it is' made, before each House of Parliament. while it is in session, 40 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions. and ; f. befor~ the expiry of the 
!less ion immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore-
said, both Houses agree in makjn~ any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made. the rule shan thereafter 45 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be: so. however. that any such modiflcation or annulment shall be 

5 
3 
Without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule. 
7. In the Produce Cess Act, 1966,-
«(I) in section 2,-
, .I.·.ij 
(i) sub-clause (ii) of clause '(g) and the Explanation thereto 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) clau:;e (i) shall be omitted; 
(b) section 6 shall be omitted; 
(c) in the Second Schedule, S. No.3 and the entries relating 
10 thereto in columns 2, 3 and 4 shan be omitted. 
Amend. 
mertt of 
Act 15 
of 1966. 

· STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
ThE Bill is complementary to the National Oilseeds and Vegetable 
Oils Development Board Bill, 1983. 
2. The National Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board Bill, 
1983 seeks to provide for the development under the control of the Union 
of the oilseeds industry and vegetable oils industry. For this purpose, 
that Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of a Board to be called 
the National Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board. In order 
to ensure that the said Board has the necessary resources to discharge 
its functions, this Bill seeks to provide for the imposition of a cess in 
the nature of a duty of excise on vegetable oils produced in any mill in 
India. At present, the cess on vegetable oils is being levied under the 
Produce Cess Act, ,1966 (15 of 1966) at the rate of Re. 1 per quintal of 
oil. The Bin empowers the Central Government to levy cess on vege-
table oils at a maximum rate of Rs. 5/- per qUintal of oil. Consequently, 
the cess on oils extracted from oilseeds crushed in any mill in India is 
proposed to be excluded from the Produce Cess Act, 1966 and the Bill 
includes necessary provisions for amending that Act. The intention is 
to make over, after due appropriation by Parliament, by law, such 
amount DS the Central Government may deem fit, to the National Oil-
seeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board, so as to enable it to dis-
charge its functions effectively. 
:i, The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; RAO BIRENDRA SINGH 
The 19th April, 1983. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 25-2/82-C.A. II-ODB (ii), dated the 23rd April, 1983 
from Rao Birendra Singh, Minister of Agriculture to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the supject matter of the 
Vegetable Oil Cess Bill. 1983~ recommends under cla'Use (1) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha 
and also recommends under clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution 
of India the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
With a view to ensuring that the National Oilseeds and Vegetable 
Oils Development Board established under the National Oilseeds and 
Vegetable Oils Development Board Bill, 1983 has the necessary re-
sources to discharge its functions, the Bill seeks ~ provide for the levy 
of a cess on vegetable oils, in the nature of a duty of excise, at such 
rate not exceeding Rs. 5/- per quintal of oil as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, .f'pecifY. 
2. The proceeds of the afore-mentioned cess will be paid into the 
Consolidated Fund of India. Under clause 4 of the Bill, the Central 
Government may, if Parliament, by appropriation made by law in this 
behalf, so provides, pay to the said Board from time to time, out of such 
proceeds, after deducting the expenses of collection, such sums of money 
as that Government may think fit. 
3. The collection of the afore-mentioned cess will involve some 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible, 
at this stage, to estimate precisely the amount of such expenditure. 
However, it is tentatively estimated that the cost of collection of the 
cess would be about 4 per cent, of the proceeds of the collection. The 
total collection from this cess would be about Rs. 6 crores per annum. 
The expenses on collection would on this basis come to about Rs .. 24 
lakhs. As only the balance of the proceeds, after deducting the cost of 
collection, would be utilised for making payments to the National 
Oil seeds and Vegetable Oils Development Board, there will, in effect, 
be no net out-go from the Consolidated Fund of India. The expenditure 
on the collection of the cess will be of a recurring nature. 
4. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure whether of a 
~ecurring or non-recurring nature. ' 

i\1~MORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. The 
matters with respect to which rules may be made relate to the fonn in 
which and the period within which statistical and other information 
may be called for and other matters of detail. 
~. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. ' 
• 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PRODUCE CESS ACT, 1966 
(15 OF 1966) 
• • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • 
(g) "Dll'U" means,-
• • • • 
• 
• 
• 
(ii) in relation to oil-seed and oil, any premises in which 
or in any part of which, oil-seed is crushed. or is ordinarily 
crushed, with the aid of power for the extra<;tion of oil. 
Ezplanation.-"Power" means electrical energy or any other 
form of energy, which is mechanically transmitted and is not 
generated by human or animal agency, 
• • • • • 
(i) "oU-seed" does not include copra; 
• • • • • 
6. There shall be refunded from out of the proceeds of cess levied 
and collected under this Act, on such conditions as may be prescribed. 
all sums collected as cess on the quantity of oils exported from India, 
if such oils have been extracted from oil-seed crushed in a mill in 
India, irrespecti~ of whether the oil-seed is produced in, or imported 
into, India. 
• • • • 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 3 (2) ] 
• 
S.No. Name of tile prndllce The maximum ratr at whkh ' Actual rate at which dllty of 
• 
duty o(""d ... may be I'nllected exci.e is to be collected 
until a dift'erent rate i~ 
specified by the Cent rII I 
Government 
• • 
3 Oih extracled (rom oil. Oneruperperquinllllnf"iJ. 
seed crushed in any mill I 
in India. 
7 
• 
Sixty pai.e per quintal of oil, 
Deftni-
tlons. 
Refund 
of cess 
onoila 
elg)Ortec:i 
from 
India. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on vegetable oils for the 
development of the oilseeds industry and the vegetable oils industry 
and for matters connected therewith. 
(Rao Birendra Singh, Minister of Agriculture). 