LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDUM 
to 
TIm JUDGES (INQUJRY) BILL, 1968 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabba) 
1. Page 6, line 11,-
!2.!: "REI'tfOMl'ENDia ION" ~ IIRroDr1r"fh-..D1£.T ION" 
NEW DELHI; 
July 19, 1268 
'~adha 28, 1890 (Sakal 

I ': 
As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA ON 
2 2 JUL J~8 
RUI No. 57 01 1968 
-.----
THE JUDGES (n'~QUIRY) BiLL' 1958 
A 
BILL 
to regul.a.te the procedure for the investigation and proof of the mis-
behaviour o~ incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a 
High Court and fOT the presentation .. of an address by ParUam.ent 
to the Prestdenf and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act maybe called the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968. Short title 
and com-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- mencement. 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Detin.ltions. 
(a) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Council of 
StateSj 

~. --
(b) "Committee" means a Committee constituted under sec. 
tion 3; 
(c) "Judge" means a Judge of the Supreme C'Ourt or of a 
High Court and includes the Chief Justice of India and the Chief 
Justice of a High Court; , 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(e) "Speaker" means the Speaker of tlie House of the People. 
Jnveati,a- 3. (1) If notice is given of a motion f'Or presenting an address to 
tion into the President praying for the removal 'Of a Judge signeci,- 10 
miBbeha-
viouror 
incapacity 
ef Jud,eby 
Committee. 
(a) in the case of a n'Otice given in the House of the People, 
by not less than one hundred members of that House; 
(b) in the case of a noftce given in the Council of States, by 
not less than fifty members of that Council, 
then, the :Speaker 'Or, as the case may be, the Chainnan may, aiter 15 
cOl'lSulting such persons, if any, as he thinks fit and after considering 
such materials, if any, as may be available to him, either admit the 
motion 'Or refuse to admit the same. 
(2) If the motion referred to in sub-section (1) is admitted, the 
Speaker or, as the case may be, the Cbainnan shall keep the 1D10tion 20 
pending and constitute, as soon. as may be, for the purpose of makin, 
an investigation into the J'l'OWld~ on which the removal of a Judge is 
p~yed for, a Committee consisting of /three members of whom-
(a) one shall be chosen from among the Chief Justice and 
other Judges of the Supreme Court; 
(b) one shall be chosen from ~ the Chief Justices of 
th~ High Courts; and 
(c) one shall be a person. who is, in the opiaion of the Speak. 
er 01',85 theca!le may be, the Chai.nnaD, a distinguished jurist: 
Provided that where notices of a motion referred to in sub-section 
(1) are given on the same day in bot'h Houses of Parliament, no Como: 30 
mlttee shall be constituted unless the motion has been admitted in 
batll Houses and where such motion has been admitted in ·bet. 

liou88l, the Committee shall be conatituted. jointly by the Speaket 
and the Chainnan: , , 
~ --.' 
Provided further that where notices of a motion as aforesaid are 
given in the Houses of Parliament on different dates, the notice which 
S is given later shall stand rejected. 
(3) The Committee shall frame definite charges against the Judge 
on the basis of which the investigation is proposed to be held. 
(4) Such charges together with a statement of the grounds on 
which each such charge is based shall be communicated to the Judge 
10 and he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a written 
'1atement of defence within such time as may be specified in this be-
halt by the Committee. 
(5) Where it is alleged. that the Judge is unable to dischllrle the 
duties of his office efficiently due to any ;physical 011 mental incapaeity 
IS and the allegation is denied, the, Committee may arrange for the medi-
cal examination of the Judge by such Medical Board as may be ap. 
poiated for the purpose by the Speaker or, as the ,case \Olay be, the 
Chairman or, where the Committee is constituted jointly by the 
Speaker and the Chairman, by both of them, for the pm-pose and the 
20 Judge shall subm1t himseU to such medical examination within the 
time specified in this behalf by the Committee, 
(6) The Medical Board shall undertake such medical examination 
of the Jude'e as may be considered necessary and submit a report to 
the Committee stating therein whether the incapacity is such as to 
2S render the Judge unfit to continue in office. 
(7) If the Judge refuses to undergo medical examination conside-
red necessary by the Medical Board, the Board shall submit a report 
to the Committee stating therein the examination which the Judge 
has refused to undergo, and the Committee may, on receipt of such 
30 report, presume that the Judge suffers from such physical or mental 
incapacity as is alleged in the motion referred to in sub-section (1). 
(8) The Committee may, after considering the written statement 
of the Judge and the medical report, if any, amend the charges fram-
ed under sub-section (3) and in such a case, the Judge shall be given 
'lS a reasonable opportunity of presenting a fresh written statement of 
" '1 
defence., I.: , ',~... , ! 
(9) The Central Government may, if required by the Speaker or 
the Chairman, or both, as. the ease may be, appoint an advocate to 
conduct the case spinst the Judge. :). 

Reportot 
Committee 4. (1) Subject to any rules that may De made in thill behalf, the 
Committee shall have power to regulate its own procedure in rna.king 
the investigation and shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Judge 
of cross-examining witnesses, adducing evidence and of being heard 
in his defence. s 
(2) At the conclusion of the investigation, the Committee shall 
submit ita report to the Speaker or, as the case may be, to the Chair-
man, or where the Committee has been constituted jointly by the 
Speaker and the Chairman, to both of them, stating therein its find-
ings on each of the charges separately with such observations on the 10 
whole case as it thinks fit. 
(3) The Speaker or the Chairman, or, where the Committee has 
been constituted jointly by the Speaker and the Chairman, both of 
them, sh:a:ll cause the report submitted under sub-section (2) to be 
laid, as soon as may be, respectively before the House of the People IS 
and the Council of States. 
Powers of 5. For the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, the 
Committee. Committee shall have the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit, 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following 5 of 1908. 
matters. namely: - 20 
(a) summoning and enforcing the att.endance of any person 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) rece~ving evidence on oath; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 2S 
documents' 
(e) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
Consider- 6. (1) If the report of the Committee contains a finding that the 
ation of Judge- is not guilty of any misbehaviour or does not suffer from any 
report and incapacity. then, no further steps shall be taken in either House of ;; 
ro~=. Parliament in relation to the report and the motion pending in the 
tation of a House or the Houses of Parliament shall stand rejected. 
addreas 
forre-
movalof 
Judge. 
(2) If the report of the Committee contains a finding that the 
Judge is 'guilty of any misbehaviour or suffers from any incapacity. 
then, the motion referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3 shall, to- 3S 
gether with the report of the Committee, be taken up for con_deration 
by the House or Houses of Parliament in which it Is pending. 

5 
(J) if &be motion is adopted by each House of Parliament 1D aceot. 
dance with the provisions of clause (4) of article 124 or. as the case 
may be, in accordance with that clause read with article 218 of the 
Constitution, then, the misbehaviour or incapacity of the Judge shall 
S be deemed to have been proved and an address praying for the remo-
val of the Judge shall be presented in the preSlCribed manner to the 
President by each House of Parliament in the same lleSSion in which 
the motion has been adopted. 
7. (.1) TJaere shall be constituted a Joint Committee of both Powerto 
10 Houses of Parliament in accordance with the provisions hereinafter make rule •• 
contained for the purpose of making rules to carry out the purposes 
of this Act. 
(2) 'i'he Joint Committee shall consist of fifteen members of whom 
ten shall be nominated by the Speaker and five shall be nominated by 
IS the Chainnan. 
(3) The Joint Committee shall elect its own Chairman and shall 
have power to regulate its own procedure. 
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the Joint Commilttee may make rules to provide for the 
20 follOwing among other matters, namely:-
2S 
30 
(a) the manner of transmission of a motion adopted in one 
House to the other House of Parliament; 
(b) the manner of presentatioo. of an address to the Presi-
dent for the removal of a Judge; 
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to the mem-
bers of the Committee and the witnesses who may be required 
to attend such Committee; 
(d) the facilities which may be accorded to the Judge for 
defending himself; 
(e) any other matter which has to be, or may be, provided 
for by rules or in respect of which provision ii, in the opinion of 
the Joint Committee, necessary. 
(5) Any rules made under this section shall not take effect until 
they are approved and confirmed both by the Speaker and the Chair-
35 man and are published in the Offi.cial Gazette, and such publication 
of the rules shall be conclusive proof that they have been duly made, 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
UDder the Constitution, a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court may be removed from office on the ground of proved: misbehavi-
our or incapacity of the Judge after an address has been presented to 
the President for such removal by each House of Parliament. This 
Bill seeks to regulate the procedure for the investigation and proof 
of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge and for presentation of 
an address to the President. 
NEW DELHI; Y. B. CHAVAN. 
The 6th June, 1968. 
PRESIDENT'S REMOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
(Copy of letter No. 161 341 66-Judl. IIIn(ii), dated the 11th July,. 
1968 from Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secre-
tary, Lok Sabha). 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of 
the J':ldges (Inquiry) Bill, 1968, recommends under article 117 (3) of 
the Constitution the consideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha . 
• 

FINANCIAL MEYORANDUM 
The Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 1968, if enacted, would involve expen-
diture out of the Consolidated Fund of India only when a motion, 
referred to in clause 3(1) of the Bill, is admitted in 'either House of 
Parliament. When such a motion is admitted, a Committee is requir-
ed to be constituted for making an investigation into the grounds on 
which the removal of. the Judge has been prayed for. When such a 
Committee is constituted, expenditure will have to be incurred. on 
the following items, namely:-
(i) payment to the membe1'5 of the committee, their salaries, 
allowances and travelling expenditure and payment of salaries, 
ete., to the secretarial and other staff attached to the members 
and to the Committee; 
(ii) medical examination of the Judge where it is neeeM8l'y 
.to determine whether the Judge i! suttering from any pliysical 
or mental incapacity; 
(iii) payment to the Advocate appointed by the Central Gov-
ernment to conduct the case against the Judge; 
(tv) the facilities to be accorded to the Judge for defending 
himself: 
(v) 'summoning or examining witnesses or fdr discovery 
or production of documents or receiving other evidence, etc. 
2. Since the investigation contemplated by the Bill is not likely 
to be a regula!' feature, there is no likelihood of a regular recurring 
or non-recurring expenditure COD.!equent on the enactment of the 
Bill. It i. not, therefore, possible to estimate accurately at this stage 
what will be the total recurring or non-recurring expenditure conse-
quent on the enactment of the Bill. Such expenditure will depend 
on the composition of the committee, the duration of the inquiry, the 
nature of the charges to be investigated into and other matters refer-
red to above. If a committee is constituted for anyone inquiry with 
~ Judge of the Supreme Court, a Chief Justic:e of a High Court pnd ~ 
7 

8 
jurist drawing emoluments equal to that of a Chief Justice of a lllgh 
Court, and that committee works Whole-time for a period of three 
months, the estimated expenditure will come to about rupees one 
lakh. In such a case no non-recurring expenditure is likely to be 
involved, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Joint Committee of the two 
Houses of Parliament to make rules to carry out the purposes of the 
Bill, when enacted. The matters in respect of which such rules may 
be made relate to the ma·nner of transmission of a motion adopted in 
one House to the other ~ouse of Parliament, presentation of addrees 
to the President for the removal of a Judge, and grant of travelling 
and other allowances payable to the members of the Committee cons-
tituted under clause 3 of the Bill, etc. These are matters of detail 
and the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to regulate the procedure for the investigation and proof of 
the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme 
Court or of a High Court and for the presentation of an 
address by Parliament to the President and for matters 
connected therewith. 
(Shri Y. B. Chavan, 
Minister of HOfM AJlairs.) 