As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON
BillNo. 57 of 1984,
THE BENGAL IMMUNITY COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISI'TION AND
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) _ BILL, 1984
ARRANGEME!NT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and 'commencement.
2.Definitions.
. f
CHAPTER II
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, Central Government of the under-
takings of the Company.
4. General effect of vesting.
f).Central Government or existing, or new, Government company,
not to be liablefor certain prior liabilities.
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the under-
takings of the Company in an existing Government company.
7.Transfer of the undertakings of the Company from an existing
Government company to a new Government company.
CHAPTER III
PAYM~T OF AMOUNTS
8.Payment of amount.
9.Payment of further amount.
CHAPTER IV
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY
10.Management, etc.,of the undertakings of the Company.
11.Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings of
the Company to deliverallassets, etc.
12.Accoun ts to be rendered by the Company or any other person.
CHAPTER V
PROVISIONS HELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY
13. Employment of certain employees to continue.
14.Provident fund and other funds.
J l 9


MISCELLANEOUS
(ii)
CHAPTER VI
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS
CLAUSES
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.
16·.Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner.
17.Certain powers of Central Government or existing, or new,
Government company.
13. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.
19.Priority of claims.
20. Examination of claims.
21.Admission or rejection of claims.
22. Disbursement of money by Commissioner to claimants.
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company and possession of
certain machinery, equipment, etc. .
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the' general
revenue account.
CHAPTER VII
25. Act to have overriding effect.
26·.Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central
Government or existing, or new, Government company.
'2.7.Penalties.
28.Offencesby companies.
29,.Protection of action taken in good faith.
30. Delegation of powers.
31. Power to make rules.
32..Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE.


OJRR IGEI{oA
to
IHHUNITY CDHpAJTI LIAD:'ED (h.CQUISITION AND TRANSFER
OF m~DER'ffiKINCS) BILL, 1984
(:::'0be/As in tro duced in lQk Sa bha)
page 6, line 8,-
for "unde takings II re2.d "undertakings 11
P 6 l' 1"age , lne ,.::.,-
for "Fo!" read "For "
page 7, Ln the marginal-heading to clause 11,-
for "mano goment " read "mana gomen t "
page 1'0, line 35,-
fu..t.!Ien sur e II "enure II
Page 12,-
fo:rline 21, read-
"( b)' the discovery and production of any
do cum en to!' 0 tn er "
pa ge '16, line 12, -'
ror "p er Lo ds " read "period"
Page 18, line 3 from bottom,-
fo:c "recommn ed s " read flr-ecommends"
NEW DElliI;
Sa ka )


BillNo, 5'1 of 1984
THE BENGAL IMMUNITY COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BiLL, 19M
.'.J I
A
BILL
to provide forr.the' 'acqu.isit:iJon.an:d trans~r1 in the publicinterest, of the
underta.kings of Messrs Bengal Immunity Company Limited~ a.nd for
matters connected therewith or inculenial.thereto.
WHEREAS Messrs Bengal Immunity Company Limited were engaged ill
the production and distribution of articles specified in the First Schedule
to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, namely,
chemicals (other than fertilizers),drugs aria. pharmaceuticals which are
5 essential to the needs of the general public;
AND WHEREAS the Central Government, being of opmion, after an
investigation into the affairs of the Company, that the affairs of the
Company have been managed. in a manner highly detrimental to the
publicinterest, had authorised, under section 18A of the Industries
10 (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, a body-of persons to take over
the management of the Company;
AND WHElIEAS for the purpose of reconstructing and rehabilitating the
undertakings owned by the Company so as to subserve the interests of
the general publicbythe augmentation of production and distrlbntienof
l5 differentvarieties of chemicals (other than fertilizers)! drugs and


Short title
and com-
mencement. _
Defini-
tions.
Transfer
to, and
vesting in,
Central
Govern-
ment of
the under-
takings of
the Com-
pany.
2
pharmaceuticals. which are essential to the needs of the general public
and to secure the continued supply thereof, it is necessary to acquire the
undertakings of the' Company;
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:- 5
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be calledthe Bengal Immunity Company Limited
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 19M.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the' Central Govermnent 10
may, by notification, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date of commencement of this
Act;
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 15
appointed under section 15;
(c) "Company" means the Bengal Immunity Company LImited,
being a company as defined in the Companies Act, 1900,and having 1 Ii
its registered officeat 153, Lenin Saranee, Calcutta-700013;
<d) "existing Government company" means a Government corn-20
pany which is carrying on business on the appointed day;
(e),"new Government company" means a Government company
formed and registered on or after the appointed day;
<f) "notification" means a notification published in
Gazette;
the Official
25
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed byrulesmade' under this Act;
(h) "specified date" means such date as the Central Government
may, for the purpose of any of the provisions of this Act', by noti-
fication, specify, and different dates may be specified for different
provisions of this Act; 30
'(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but
'defined in the Companies Act, 1956, have the meanings, respectively,
assigned to them in that Act.
101
CHAPTER II
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 35
:3. On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the
right~ title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings,
shall,by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central
Government.


3
4. (1) The undertakings' of the Company shall be deemed to include
allassets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all
property,movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, offices,
factories,_workshops, stores, instruments, plants, machinery and equip-
S ment, installations, laboratories, officefurniture.stationery and equipment,
vehicles,patents, trade marks, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve funds,
Investments, book debts and aU other rights and interests in, or arising
out of,such property as were immediately before the appointed day in
the ownership, possession, power or control of the Company, whether
10 within or outside India, and allbooks of account, registers and allother
documents of whatever nature relating thereto.
General
effect of
vesting.
(2) All properties and assets as aforesaid which have vested in the
CentralGovernment under section 3 shall,by force of such vesting, be
freed and discharged. from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien
15 and allother incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunc-
tion, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority restricting
the use of such properties or assets in any manner or appointing any
receiverin respect of the whole or any part of such properties or assets
shallbe deemed to have been withdrawn.
20 (3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested, under this
Act, in the Central Government and every person holding any charge,
lienor other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give,
within such time and in such manner as may 'be prescribed, an intimation
to the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.
25 (4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort-
gagee of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other person
holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such
property shall 'be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and
interests. payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in
30 part, out of the amount specified in section 8,and also out of the amounts
determined. under section 9 but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other
interest shall be enforceable against any property which has vested in
the Central Government.
(5) Any licence or other instrument g-ranted to the Company in
3;relation to anv undertaking which has vested in the Central Govern-
ment under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in force
immediately before the appointed day shall continue to be in force on
and after such day in accordance with its tenor in relation- to and for
the purposes of such undertaking, and, on and from the date of vesting
40 of such undertaking under section 6. in an existing Government com-
nanv. or under.section 7 in a new Government company. the existing, or
new, Government. company. as the case mav be.shall be deemed to be
substituted-in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other
instrument had bee'1 granted 1:.9such existing, or new, Government
15 company and such existinQ',or new, Government comnanv shall hold it
for the remainder of the period for which the Company would have held
itunder the terms thereof.
(6) If.on the anpointed dav, any suit, appeal Orother proceedinz, of
whatever nature. in relation to any property or asset which has vested
50 in the Central Government under 'section a.instituted or preferred by, . . .•.


:::entral
Govern-
ment or
sxisting,
)1" new
30vern-
ment com-
pany, flot
to be
liablefor
certain
prior liabi-
ities.
4
or against the Company is pending, .the same shall not abate, be dis-
continued or be,in any way, prejudicially·affected by reason of the
transfer of the underta kings of the Company or of anything contained
in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued,
prosecuted or enforced by or against the Central Government, .orwhere 5
the undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6 to vest
in an existing Government company, or become transferred by virtue of
the provisions of section 7 to a new Government company, by or against
such Government company.
5. (1) Everyliabilityof the Company in respect of any period prior 10
to the 1st day of April, 1983,shall be the liabilityof the Company and
shall be enforceable against it and not against the Central Government,
or,where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6,
to vest in an existing Government company, or become transferred· by
virtue of the provisions of section 7,'to a new Government company, 15
against such Government company.
(2) Any liabilityincurred by,or arising against, the Company on or
after the 1st day of April, 1983,including the Iiabil.ityto repay loans
advanced to the Company by the Central Government on or after that
day, together with the interest due thereon, shall be the liability,- 20
(a) where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under
section 6, to vest in an existing Government company, of that existing
Government company; or
(b) where the undertakings of the Company become transferred
by virtue of the' provisions of section 7, to a new Government 25
company, of that new Government company,
and shall be discharged by such Government company as and when the
discharge of such liabilitybecomes due.
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared thatr-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this .Act, no Iiability30
of the Company in relation to its undertakings in respect of any
period prior to the 1st day of April, 1983,shallbe'enforceableagainst
the Central Government, or, where the undertaking, of the Company
are directed, under section 6, to vest in an existing Government
company, or become transferred by virtue of the provisions of3.1
section 7. to a new Government company, against such Government
company;
(b) no award,· decree or order of any court, tribunal or other
authority in relation to the undertakings of the Company, passed on
or after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or dispute,40
which arose before the 1st day of April, 19100"shall be enforceable
against the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the
Company are directed, under section 0, to vest in an existing Gov-
ernment company, or become transferred, by virtue of the pro'visions
of se~tion 7',to a new Government company. against such Government 45
company;


5
(c) no liabilityincurred by the Company before the 1st day of
April, 1983,for the contravention of any provision of law for the
.time being-in force,shall be enforceable against the Central Govern-
ment, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed,
under section 6, 1,0 vest in an existing Government company, or
become transferred, by virtue of the provisions of section 7,to a
new Government company, against such Government company.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 11,and
subjectto the provisions of section 7, the Central Government may,
10 if it IS satistisd that an existing Government company is willing to
comply,or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that
Government may Hunk tit to impose, direct by notification, that the
undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the
company in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Cen-
15tralGovernment under section 3, shall,instead of continuing to vest in
the Central Government, vest in that existing Government company
erther on the date of publication of the notification or on such earlier or
laterdate (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be
specified m the notification.
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation20
to its undertakings vest, under sub-section (1), in an existing Govern-
ment company,. that Government company shall,on and from the date
or such vesting be deemed to have become, and until the transfer of the
undertakings by virtue of the provisions of section 7 to a new Govern-
ment company, be deemed to be,the owner in relation to 'such under-
25 takings and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in
relation to such undertakings shall,on and from the date of such vesting,
bedeemed to have become, and until the date of such transfer be
deemed to be, the rights and liabilities,respectively, of that existing
Government company.30 .
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, where
the undertakings of the Company have been directed, under.sub-section
(1) of sectiono, to vest in an existing Government company, the Central
Government may, if it is satisfied that a new Government company is
35 willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as
that Government may think fit to impose, declare, by notification, that
the undertakings of the Company be transferred to that new Govern-
ment company, and on the issue of such declaration, the right, title and
interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings which had been
directed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to vest in that existing
40 Government company, shall,instead of continuing to vest in that existing
Government company, vest in that new Government company with effect
from the date on which such declaration is made.
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the existing Government
~company in relation to the undertakings of the Company vest under sub-
4~section (1) in a new Government company, that new Government com-
pany shall,on and from the date of such vesting" be deemed to have he-
come the owner in relation to such undertakings and allthe rights and
liabilitiesof the existing Government company in relation to such under-
Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
direct vest-
ing of the
undertak-
ings of the
Company
in an exist-
ing Gov-
ernment
company.
Transfer
of the
undertak-
ings of the
Company
from an
existing
Govern-
ment com-
pany to a
new Gov-
ernment
company.


Payment
of
amount.
Payment
of further
amount.
Manage-
ment, etc.,
of the
undertak-
ings of the
Company.
6
takings shall,on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have
become the rights and liabilities,respectively,of that new Government
company.
CHAPTEH III
PAYMEN1' OF AMOUNTS
8. For the transfer to, and vesting tn, t.hc Central Government, unden
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, titleand
interest of the Company in relation to its unclet3lki.'l1g!l,there shall be
given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, and in the
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees seven hundred and [0
sixty-six Iakhs and ninety thousand.
5
9. (1) Fof the deprivation of the Company of the management of
its undertakings, there shall be given to the Company by the Central
Government an amount calculated, at the rate of two thousand rupees
per mont1h for the period commmcncing on the date 0.11 which the manage- [j
ment of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by the persons
authorised by the Central Goverament under section 18A of the Indus-
tries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and ending on the ap-
pointed day.
6
(2) The amount specified in section 8, and the amount determined 20
under sub-section (1) shall carry simple interest at the rate of four per
cent per annum for the period commencing on the apposnted day and'
ending on the date on which payment of such amounts is made byflhe
Central Govermnent to the Commissioner. .
(3). The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of25
sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be given by the Central Government to
the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 8.
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities
of the Company in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the
Central Government under section 3 shall be discharged from the amount 30
referred to in section 8, and also from the amounts determined under
sub-sections (1) and (2), in accordance with the rights and interests of
the creditors of the Company.
CHAPTER IV
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY
35
10. The general superintendence, direction, control and management
of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, the
right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central
Government under section 3, shall,-
(a) where a direction has been given by the Central Govern-40
ment under sub-section (1) of section 6, vest, on and from the date
specified in such direction, in the existing Government company
specified therein; or
(b) where a declaration has been made under sub-section
of section 7, vest, on and from the date of such declaration, in
new Government company specified therein,
(1)
the
4·5


7
and thereupon the existing, or new, Government company so specified,
shall'be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion of allother persons, allsuch
powers and do allsuch things as the Company is authorised to exercise
and do in relation to its undertakings.
5 11. (1) On the vesting of' the m~nagement of the undertakings of the
Company in an existing, or a new, Government company, allpersons in
charge of the management of the undertakings of the. Company imme-
diatelybefore such vesting shall be bound to deliver to such. Govern-
ment company, allassets, books of account, registers and other documents
10 in their custody relating to the undertakings.
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may
deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the existing, or new,
Government company and such Government company may also, if it
is considered necessary so to do, apply to the Central Government at
[5 any time for instructions a's to the manner in which the management of
the undertakings of the Company shall be conducted or in relation to
any other matter arising in the course of such management.
, (.3) Any person, who on the appointed day has in his possession or
under his control any books, documents or other papers relating to the
20 undertakings of the Company which have vested in the Central Govern-
, ment 0.1' in any existing, or new, Government company and which belong
to the Company, or would have so belonged if the undertakings of the
Company had not vested in the Central Government or the existing, or
new, Government company, shall be liableto account for the said books,
25 documents Orother papers to the Central Government or the existing,
or new, Government company, as the case may be,and shall deliver
them up to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Govern-
ment company or to such person or body of persons as the Central
Government ior such Government company may specify in this behalf.
30 (4) The Central Government or the existing, or new, Government
company may take, or cause' to be taken, allnecessary steps for securing
possession of allundertakings which have vested in the Central Govern-
ment or the existing, or new, Government company under this Act.
(5) The Company shall, within such period as 1;heCentral Govern-
35 ment may allow in this behalf,furnish to that Government a complete
inventory of allits properties and assets, as on the appointed day, per-
taining to the undertakings which have vested in the Centrai Govern-
ment under section 3, and, for this purpose, the Central Government or
the existing, or new, Government compapy shall afford to the Company
40 allreasonable facilities.
12. (1) Where, in· pursuance of any decree, order or injunction of
any court Orotherwise-
(a) the authorised persons were, after the date on which the
management of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by
them under section 18A of the Industries (Develo~ment and Regu-
lation) Act, 195-1and before the appointed day; or,45
Duty of
persons
in charge
of manege-
ment of
under-
takings of
the Com-
pany to
deliver
all assets,
etc.
Accounts
to be
rend red.
by the
Company
or any
other
Person.


(3) Ifno account is rendered by the Company or such other person 30
in respect of the undertakings or any part thereof within the period
referred to in sub-section (1) or if the Central Government Orthe exist-
ing, or new, Government company, as the case may be,has any reason
to believethat the account rendered by the Company or such other
person is incorrect or false in any material particular," the Central35
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case
may be,may refer the matter to the Commissioner and thereupon the
Commissioner shall determine the income derived by the Company or
such other person from such undertakings or any part thereof during
the period referred to in sub-section (1) arid take steps to recover the 40
said income or other monies from the Company or such other person
and from the amount payable to the Company under this Act, as if the
debt due to the Central Government or the existing, or-new, Govern-
ment company, as the case may be,on this account were an unsecured
debt. 45
8
(b) the Central Government or the existing or new, Govern-
ment company, as the case may be,is, on or after the appointed day,
prevented from taking over the management of any part of the under-
takings of the Company, the Company, or any other person in posses-
sion, custody or control of such part, shall, in relation to .the period 5
commencing on the date of such taking over and ending on the date on
which such part was or is handed over to the authorised persons or, as
the case may be,the Central Government or the existing, or new,
Government company, render, within a period of sixty days from the
appointed day or where such part was so handed over after the appointed 1Q
day, within a period of sixty days from the date of such handing over,
accounts with regard to the-
(i) assets and stores of the undertakings Orany part thereof,
acquired, utilised or sold during the said period; and
(ii.)income derived by the Company or any other persons from 15
the undertakings or any part thereof during the said period,
to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government com-
pany, as the case may be.
(2) If, on examination of the accounts referred to in sub-section
(1), any income or other monies is or are found to have been derived 20
by the Company or any other person from such undertakings or any
part thereof during the period referred to in that SUb-section, or any
other monies. are found to be payable to the Company, such income or
other monies shall be recoverable by the Centra] Government or the
existing, or new, Government company from the Company or such 25
other person, as the case may be,and from the amount payable under
this Act to the Company and the debt due to the Central Government or
the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be,on this
aceounf shall rank as an unsecured debt.
(4) No mortgage, charge, lien or other incumbrance in relation to
the undertakings of the Company or any part thereof shall be binding


9
on the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government com-
pany, as the case may be,if such mortgage, charge, lien or other incum-
brance was created, at any time during the period in which the authoris-
ed persons were and the Central Government or the existing, or new,
5 Government company, as the case may be,is. prevented, by any decree,
order or injunction of any court or otherwise" from taking over the
management of such undertakings or any part thereof.
C'NAPTEH V
PROVISIONS RELATING 1'0 THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY
10 13. (1) Everyperson who has been, immediately before the appoint-
ed day, employed in any of the undertakings of the Company shall
become,- /
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central
Government; and
(b) where the undertakings of the Company are directed,
under sub-section (1) of section 6, to vest in an existing Govern-
ment company, or are transferred by virtue of the provisions of
section 7,to a new Government company, an employee of such
Government company on and from the date of such vesting or
transfer,
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the
existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, with the.
same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as
would have been admissible to him if.there had been no such vesting
25 or transfer and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment
under the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government
company. as the case may be,is dulyterminated or untilhis remuneration
and other conditions of service are dulyaltered by the Central Govern-
ment or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be.
30' (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes
947 Act. 1947,or in any other, law for the time being in force, the transfer
of the services of any officer or other person employed in the under-
takinas of the Company to the_Central Government or the existing, or
new. Government company, as the cas-e may be,shall not entitle such
35 officeror other employee to any compensation under this Act or under
anv other law for.the time being in force and no such claim shall be
entertained by any- court, tribunal Orother authority.
14 (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund,
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other. fund for the benefit of the
40 persons employed in the undertakings of the Company, the monies
relatableto the emoloyees. whose services have become transferred by
or under this Act to the Central Government or the existing, or new,
Government company, as the case may be, shall, out of -the monies
standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident" superan-
45 nuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and shall vest in,
the Central Government or the a,ostlng; or new, Government company I
as the case may be, ..
. I
Employ-
ment of
certain
employe es
to con-
tinue.
Provident
fund and
other
funds. ,I


Appoint-
ment of
Commis-
sioner of
Pay.,
merits.
Payment
by cen-
tral Gov-
ernment
to the
Cornmis-
eioner.
Certain
powers
of Cen-
tral
Govern-
ment Or
- existing,
or new,
Govern;
ment
company.
10
(2) Tlie monies which stand transferred under sub-section (1) .. to
the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company,
as the case may be,shall be dealt with bythat Government or the exist-
ing, or new, Government company in such manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VI 5
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS
15. (1) 'l'he Ce.nftraJGovernment shall, flo:rlthe purpose of disbursing
the amounts' payable under sections 8 ·and 9, by notlficatlon, appoint a Com-
missioner of Pay'me~s.
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may 10
think fitto assist the Commissioner and thereupon the Comenlssloner may
autborise one or more of such persons also to exercise allor anv of the
powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be autho-
rised to exercise different powers.
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any -of15
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers
in the same manner and with th-,same effect as if they have been con-
ferred on that person directlyby this Act and not by-way of authorisa-
tion.
(4) The ~alaries and allowances of the Commlss'on-r anrl other nersons 20
appointed under this section shall be defrayed out of t e Consolidated Fund
of India,
16. (1) The Central Government ~l-J.al1.within thi.rty days from the
specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the
Company- 25
(a) an amount equal to-the amount' specified in section 8; and
(b) an amount equal to the amounts payable to the Company
under section 9.
(2) A deposit account shall .be opened by the Central Government
in favour of the Commissioner, in the PublicAccount of India, and 30
every amount paid under this Act to the .Commissioner shall be deposit-
ed by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit
account shall b~ operated by the -Commissioner. .
. (3) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the
deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall ensure to the said 35
account.
17. (1) The Central.Government or the exh;ting, or new, Government
comoanv, as the case. may be,shall bel'entitled to receive up to the
specified date, to the exclusion of allother persons, anv monev due to
the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the 40
Central Government or the existing, or new. Government company, as
the case mav be.and realised after the appointed (iqv,notwitbstandinz
that the realisation pertains' to a period prior to the appointed day.
(2) The Central Government orthe existing, Or new, Government
company, as the case may be"may mak- a claim to the Com.mi:'jstoner45


11
with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day for
discharging any liabilityof the Company, in relation to any period prior
to the 1st day of April, 1983;and every such claim shall have priority
in accordance with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter
5 in relation. to which such liabilityhas been discharged by the Central
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, a'S the case
may be.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the
Company in respect of any transaction prior to the 1st day of April,
10 1983 which have not been discharged on or before the specified date,
shall.be the liabilitiesof the Company.
18. Every person having a claim against the Company shall prefer
such' claim before the Commissioner wi thin thirty days from the speci-
fied date:
15 Proj-ided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within the said
period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further
period of thirty days and not thereafter.
19. The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule
20 shallhave priorities in accordance with the following principles:-
(a) Category I shall have precedence over allother categories
and Category IIshall have precedence over Category III,and so on;
(b) the claim'S specified in each of the categories shall rank
equallyand be paid in full,but if the amount is insufficient to meet
25 such claims in full,they shall abate in equal proportions and' be
paid accordingly;
(c) the question of discharging any liabilitywith regard to a
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplus is
left after meeting allthe liabilities specified in the immediately
30 higher category.. ,
20. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18,the Commis-
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in
the Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order of
priorities.
35 (2) If,on examination of the claims the Commissioner is of the
opinion thai the' amount paid to him under this Act is not sufficient to
meet ~the liabilities specified in' any lower category, he shall not be re-
quired to examine any claim in respect of such lower category.
21. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the priorities
40 set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before
.which every claimant shall filethe proof of his claims, failing which he
shall b9excluded from the benefit of the disbursements made by the
Commissioner.
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be
45 given by advertisement in such issue of any daily newspaper in the
English language and in s h issue of daily newspaper in such regional
Claims
to be
made to
the Com-
missioner.
Priority
Of claims.
Examina-
tion of
claims.
Admis-
sion or
rejec-
tion of
claims.


12
language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such
notice shall callupon the, claimant to filethe proof of his claim with
the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.
(3) Everyclaimant who fails to filethe proof of his claim within the
time specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the dis- 5
bursements made by the Commissioner. '
(4) The Commissioner shall,after such investigation as may, in nIS
opinion, be necessary and after giving the Company an opportunity of
refuting the clairn and after giving the claimant a reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard; by order in writing, admit or reject th~ claim in 10
whole or in part.
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to 'regulate 11,i8own pro-
cedure in allmatters arising out of the discharge of his functions, in-
cluding the place or places at which he willhold his sittings und shall,
for the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the 15
same powers as are vested in a civilcourt under the C'ode of CivilPro-
cedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters,
namely:-
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any wit-
ness and examining him on oath; QO
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of wit-
material object producibleas evidence;
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;
,
(d) the issuing o~ any commission for the examination of wit-
.nesses. 25
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 22& of
the Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a
civilcourt for the purposes of section 1951and Chapter XXVI of the
Code ofCdmin~l Procedure, 19,73.
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner may prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal
civilcourt of original jurisdiction within the locallimits of whose juris-
diction the registered office of the Company is 'situated:
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High ~ourt is ap- 35
pointed to be the Commissioner, the appeal shall liete the IDgh e6lirt
at Calcutta and 'Such appeal shall,be heardl and disposed of by not less
than two Judges of that High Court.
Disburse-
ment of
money by
Commis-
sionen to
claimants.
22.• fter admitting a claim under this Act, the amount dUQ in respect
of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the pers n ofpersons {O
to whom such amount is due, and, on ':'Ili.chpayment, the liabilitysf the
Company'in respect of such claim shall stand discharged,


23. (1) If,out of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertak-
ings of the Company, there is a balance leftafter meeting the liabilities
in accordance with the priorities specified in the Schedule, the COmmis-
sioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.
5 (2)-Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other pro-
perty has vested in the Central Government or the existing, or new,
Government company under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or
other property does not belong to. the Company, it shall be lawful for
the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as
10 the case may be,to continue to possess such machinery, equipment and.
other property on the same terms and conditions under which they
were possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day.
2·1.Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed
or unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which the
15 officeof the Commissioner is finallywound up shall be transferred by
the Commissioner to the general revenue account of the Central Govern-
ment; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the
Central Government by the persons entitled to such payment and shall
be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made and the order, if
20. any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for the refund
of the revenue.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
25. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
25 thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or
other authority.
2#i.Everycontract entered into by the Company in relation to its
30 undertakings for any service, sale or supply,and in force immediately
before the appointed day, shall,on and from the expiry of one hundred
and eighty days from that day, cease to have effectunless such contract
is, before the expiry of the said period, ratified in writing bythe Central
Government or, as the case may be,the existing, or new, Government
35 company, and in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or,
as the case may be,the existing, or new, Government company m~y
make such alterations or modifications therein as it may think fit:
Provided that the Central Government or, as the case may be,. the
existing, or new, Government company shall not omit to. ratify a con-
40 tract and shall not make any alteration or modification therein->
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous
or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests
of the Central Government or, as the case may be,such Govern-
ment company; and
45 (b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable
opportunity of being heard and except after recording in writing its
reasons for its refusal to ratify the contract or for making any
alteration or modification therein.
Disburse,
ment of
amounts
tothe
Company
and pos-
jsession of
certain
machi-
nery,
equip;
ment. etc.
Undis-
bursed or
unclaimed
amount to
be depo-
sited to
the
general
revenus
account.
Act to
have over
riding
effect.
Contracts
to cease
to have
effect
unlesn
ratified
by the
Central
Govern-
ment or
existing,
or new,
Govern-
ment
company.


Penalties.
Offences
by
companies.
14
,27.A person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property
forming part of the undertakings of the Company, wrongfullywith-
holds such property from the Central Government or the existing,
or new, Government company, as the case may be,or any person or 5
body of persons authorised by/that Government or existing, or new.
Government company; or
(b) . wrongfullyobtains possession of, or retains, any property
forming part of any undertaking of the Company; or
(c) wilfullywithholds. Orfails to furnish to the Central Govern- 10
ment or, as the case may be,the existing, or new, Government com-
pany or any .person Orbody of persons authorised by that Govern-
ment or Government company, any document relating to such
undertakings which may be in his possession, custody or control;or
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or, as the case 15
may be,the existing, or new, Government company Orany' person :
or body of persons authorised by that Government or existing, or
new, Government company, any assets, books 'Ofaccount, registers or
other documents in his possession, custody or control relating to the
undertakings of the Company; or 20
(e) wrongfullyremoves or destroys any property forming part
of the undertakings of the Company or prefers any claim under this
Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believeto be false
or grossly inaccurate,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 25
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or
with both.
28. (1) Where' an offence under this Act has been committed by'a
company. every person who, at the time the offence was committed,
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 30
of the business of the company, as wellas the company, shall be deemed
.to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable'to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
any such person liableto any punishment, if he proves that the offence35
was committed without his knowledge Orthat he had exercised alldue
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(~) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni- ,0vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director,
manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liableto be proceeded against and punished accord-
ingly; 45
.Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm
or other association of individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.


15
29. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lieagainst
the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company
or any officer or other employee of that Government or Government
company or any officer or other person authorised by that Government
5 or Government company for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act. -
(2) No suit Orother legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or the existing, or new, Government company or any
officeror other employee of that Government or Government company
10 or any officeror other person authorised by that Government or Govern-
ment company for any damage caused or likely.to be caused by any-
thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this. Act"
30. (1) The Central Government may, by'notification, direct that all
or any of the powers- exercisable by it under this Act, other than the
15 power conferred by this section or section 31 or section 82,may als6 be
exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notifica-
tion.
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section (1),
the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under the
20 direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules-for
carrying out Hie provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to 'the generality of the
foregoing power, such rulesmay provide for allor any of the following
25 matters, namely:- -
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an inti-
mation referred to in sub-section (3) of section 4 shall be given;
(b) the manner in which monies in any provident fund or other
fund referred to-in- section 14 shall be dealt with;
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
prescribed.
(3) Everyrulemade by the Central Government under this Act shall
belaid, as soon as may 'be,after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may
35 be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and
if,before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the ruleor both Houses agree that the ruleshould not be
made, the ruleshall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
40 or b~of no effect,as the case ma~ be;so, however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any-
thing previously done under that rule.
32.Ifany difficultyarises in giving effectto the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the pro- I
45 visions of this Act, remove the difficulty;
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a
period of two years 'from the appointed day.
Protection
of action
taken- in
good
faith.
Delega.
tion of
powers.
. Power to
raake
rules.
Power to
remove
difficul-
ties


16
THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 19,20, 21 and 23)
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF THE LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY
Part A.-Post-take-over and pre-take-over periods
Category I~
Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company for
the post-take-over period as wellas arrears in relation to wages, salaries,
provident fund and other dues of the employees for the pre-take-over
period, including the contribution to be made to the Employees' state
Insurance Fund and additional dearness allowance payable to 10
employees.
Part B.-Post-take-over periods
Category 1I-
(a) Loans advanced by the Central Government
due thereon.
and interest
15
(b) Loans, advanced by banks and financial institutions,
guaranteed by the Central Government and interest due thereon.
(c) Other loans.
Category III-
Credit availed of for purposes of trade or manufacturing operations. 20
Category IV-
(u) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to the Central
Government or a State Government.
(b) Any other dues.
Part Cs-s-Pre-tcke-over period
Category V-
Principal amount of loans advanced by banks and financial insti-
tutions and interest due thereon up to and including 18th May, 1978,
that is to say, the date on which the notified order under section 18A
of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 19511,was 3065
published in the OfficialGazette.\-
Category VI-
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues payable to the
Central Government or a State Government or a localauthority.
Cutegor)J V II- 35
Amounts due by way of interest on loans referred to in category
V after 18th May, 1978up to the date preceding the appointed day,
CategOTY VIII-
(a) Any other credit
facturing operations.
availed of for purposes of trade or manu-
(b) Any other dues.
5


STATEMENTOFOBJECTSANDREASONS
Messrs Bengal Immunity Company Limited, Calcutta, were engaged
in the manufacture of chemicals (other than fertilizers), drugs and
pharmaceuticals which were essential to the needs of the country. Due
to labour problems and lack of proper resource management and long
term planning, the Company went into serious financial and other diffi-
culties resulting in the management applying to the Court for the
closureof the Company. The Company was also being mismanaged.
After investigation into the affairs of the Company through an Investi-
gation Committee, the management of the undertakings of the Company
was taken over on the 18th May, 1978by the Central Government under
section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.
A Board of Management was appointed. It is necessary to acquire the
undertakings of the Company for the purpose of reconstructing and
rehabilitating the same so as to subserve the interests of the general
publicby the augmentation of production and distribution of different
varieties of chemicals, drugs and pharmaceuticals which are essential to
.the needs of the general public.
2. The Billseeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW DELHI;
The J7'bJ!,July, 1984.
V ASANT SATHE.
17


/
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117
OF THE CONS'rITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. L-35-(3) f81-D. V, dated the 21st July,1984;from
Shri Vasant Sathe, Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizersto the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha.]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the
proposed Billto provide for the acquisition and transfer, in the public
interest, of the undertakings of Messrs Bengal Immunity' Company
Limited, Calcutta, and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto, recommneds, under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of the
Constitution of India, the introduction and consideration of the Billin
Lok Sabha,
J
18


FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the payment in cash and in the
manner specified in Chapter VI of an amount of Rs. 766.90 lakhs (Rupees
seven hundred and sixty-six lakhs and ninety thousand only) for vesting
in the Central Government the right, title and interest of the Company
in relation to the undertakings owned by it.
2. Sub-clause (1) 0'£clause 9 provides for payment of a further
amount in cash, in consideration for the deprivation of the Company of
the management of its undertakings, calculated at the rate of Rs. 2,000
(Rupees two thousand only) per month for the period commencing on
the date on which the management of the undertakings of the Company
was taken bver by the persons authorised by the Central Government
under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act,
~951and ending on the appointed day. It is estimated that this amount
willbe of the order of Rs. 1,54,000' (Rupees one lakh and fifty-fourI
thousand only).
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 provides for payment of simple interest
on the amounts specified in clause 8 and sub-clause (1) of clause g'at
the rate of 4 per cent; per annum for the period commencing on the
appointed day and ending with the day on which the payment of these
amounts is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner of
Payments. The interest payment in terms of the provisions of the sub-
clause is of the order of Rs. 2,56,000 (Rupees two lakhs and fifty-six.
thousand only). --:-<-., -.;;..-.......:;..;,
4. Clause 15 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Com-
missioner of Payments by the Central Government with adequate staff
to assist him for the purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the
Company, the salary and allowances of the Commissioner of Payments
and his staff and expenditure on officeand establishment willbe defray-
ed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The-estimated expenditure on
this account is likelyto.....be of the order of Rs. 20,000 per month.
5,.The post-take-over liabilities of the Industrial' Reconstruction
Corporation of India and the United Bank of India relating to principal
amounts of' loan amounting to Rs, 150.25 lakhs which were guaranteed
by the Government willnot be discharged by the Commissioner of
Payments out of the amount paid to him under clause 8 of the, Bill. In
the interest of the Company and its continued functioning, it is proposed
that the Central Government may provide in, the budget for its pay-
ment. ,I!
6. Funds willalso have to be provided to the Company for moderni-
sation and expansion. The expenditure on this account is necessary to I
make the Company financially viable. A sum of Rs. 50 lakhs will be
provided in the budget of-1984-85 towards non-plan loans for working
capital for this Company and may have to be disbursed to the Company
during the year. I
7. The Bill,if enacted, is not likelyto involve any other recurring or ;
non-recurring expenditure.
r
I ,. 19
/


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 31 of the Billempowers the Central Government to make
rules to carry out the provisions of -the Bill. The matters in respect
of which rulesmay be made, inter aHa, relate to the time within which,
and the manner in which, intimation regarding any mortgage, charge,
lien,etc.,on the properties which have vested in the Central Govern-
ment may be given to the Commissioner of Payments and the manner
in which the monies in any provident fund, superannuation, welfare or
other fund maintained by the Company shall be dealt with by the
Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company.
2. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are
matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
2Q


LOK SABHA
(Shri VaSla,nt Sathe,
Minister of Chemicals and
Fertilizers.)
A
BILL
to provide for the acquisition and transfer, in the publicinterest, of the
undertakings of Messrs Bengal Immunity Company Limited, and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
