am No. 57 of 1"1 
THE SUGAR (REGULATION OF 
PRODUCTION) BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lol{ SABRA 
ON 20TH NOVEMBEll, 1961) 

30 of '958. 
8W No. 57 011"1 
THE SUGAR (REGULATION OF PRODUCTION) 
BILL,I9<>1 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of production of sugar in the intnests 
of the general public and for the levy and collection of a special 
e:rcise duty on sugar produced by a factory in e:rceBB of the 
quota fixed for the purpose. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sugar (Regulation of Produc- Short title 
tion) Act 1961. . exteDl .Dl 
, COIIIIDeIlOe-
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu ment. 
Ie 
15 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day 
of November,.l961. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- De4nidOD" 
(a) "Central Excises Act" means the Central Excises and 
Salt Act, 1944. 
(b) "factory" means any premises (including the precincts 
thereof), wherein or in any part of which sugar is being manu-
factured by the vacuum pan process, or, wherein or in any part 
of which, any manufacturing process connected with the pro-
duction of sugar by the vacuum pan process is being carried on 
or is ordinarily carried on; 
(c) "owner" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the 
Sugar Export Promotion Act, 1958; 

FWtioDof 
pcrm1Ieible 
quota. 
2 
(d) "permissible quota" means the quota referred to in 
section 3; 
r (e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
f 
this Act; 
(f) "sugar" means any form of sugar, whether wholly or S 
partially manufactured, but does not include-
(i) khandsari sugar, that is to say, sugar in the manu-
facture of which neither a vacuum pan nor a vacuum eva-
porator is employed; or 
(ii) palmyra sugar, that is to say, sugar manufactured 10 
from jaggery obtained by boiling the juice of the palmyra 
palm; 
(g) "year" means the year beginning on the first day of 
November and ending on the thirty-first day of October in the 
following year. IS 
3. (1) The Central Government may, by order in writing, fix 
from time to time, in accordance with the prescribed formula, the 
quantity of sugar which may be produced in a factory during any 
year. 
(2) In prescribing the formula referred to in sub-section (1), the 20 
Central Government shall have regard t~ 
(a) the quantity of sugar available at the commencement 
of the year in the territories to which this Act extends, 
(b) the quantity of sugar which, in its opinion, would be 
reasonably required for consumption during the year in the 2S 
territories to which this Act extends, 
(c) the quantity of sugar which, in its opinion, is likely to 
be required for export during the year, 
(d) the working capacity of the factory during the relevant 
period, 30 
(e) the number of days on which the factory actually 
worked during the relevant period, 
(f) the quantity of sugar produced expressed as percentage 
of the sugarcane crushed during the relevant period, and 
(g) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(3) The order referred to in sub-section (1) shall be communi-
cated to the owner of each factory aDd the quantity fixed under the 
35 

3 
order for any year shall be deemed to be the permissible quota in 
respect of the factory for that year. 
4. (1) Where the quantity of sugar produced in a factory during Levy .... 
ahnYllyebarleX~eeds the permissible quota fixe? for it for that year, there =.crOD u~ 
5 s a e eVled and collected on the quantIty of sugar which is pro- ciM ciut)'. 
duced in excess of the permissible quota a special duty of excise at 
the rate at which the duty of excise is chargeable on sugar under the 
Central Excises Act for the time being in force. 
(2) The special duty of excise referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
10 be in addition to the duty of excise chargeable on sugar under the 
Central Excises Act or any other law for the time being in force and 
shall ,be paid by the owner to such authority as may be specified in 
the notice demanding the payment of duty and within such period 
not exceeding ninety days as may be specifit;¥i in such notice. 
15 (3) If any such owner does not pay the whole or any part of the 
duty payable by him within the period referred to in sub-section (2), 
he shall be liable to pay in respect of every period of thirty days or 
part thereof during which the default continues a penalty which may 
extend to ten per cent. of the duty outstanding from time to time, the 
20 penalty being adjudged in the same manner as the penalty to which 
a person is liable under the rules made under the Central Excises 
Act, is adjudged. 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules made 
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from 
25 duty shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and collec-
tion of the special duty of excise or any other sum referred to in this 
section 9S they apply in relation to the levy and collection of duty 
on sugar or other sums of money payable to the Central Government 
under that Act or the rules made thereunder: 
30 Provided that no refund of the special excise duty or other sum 
shall be granted, if the whole or any part of the sugar in respect of 
which such duty or sum is payable under this section, is exported out 
of India . • 
5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official DelepdoD 
Gazette direct that any power conferred on it by this Act shall, of powen. 
3S subject 'to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notifica-
tion be exercisable also by such officer or authority subordinate to 
'he 'Central Government as may be specified in the notification. 
6. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against ~tecdon of 
the Central Government or any of its officers for or in r~spect of :=~ J:!:a 
40 anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done In pursu-
ance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 

4 
=rru~~. . 1 .. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Ot!cial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 
t .::. 
J j .. I 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
., foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fol- , 
lowing matters, namely:-
(a) the formula for fixing the quota under section 3, and 
the relevant period referred. to in clauses (d), (e) and (f), and 
the matters referred to in clause (g) of sub-section (2) of that 
section; 10 
(b) the submission by owners to such authority as may be 
specified in this behalf, of returns or reports or other information 
relating to the manufacture and stocks of sugar; 
(c) the manner in which the accounts of the factory in res-
pect of th~ manufacture of sugar may be maintained; IS 
(d) the inspection of records and registers of factories: 
(e) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed 
under this Act. . 
(3) In making a rule under this section, the Central Government 
may direct that a breach thereof shall be punisha·ble with fine which 20 
may extend to five thousand rupees. 
(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made before each House af Parliament while it is in 
.8eBlion for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 25 
of the sesssion in which it is so laid or the session immediately 
foHowing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification 30 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. • 
8. (1) The Sugar (Regulation of Production) Ordinance, 1961, is 3 of 1961. 
hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 3' 
taken in exercise of any of the powers conferred by or under the 
said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken in exer-
c1se of the powers conferred 'by or under this Act as if this Act 
were in force on the day on which such thing was done or action 
was taken. 40 ..., 

STA,TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Due to large increases in production of sugar in , 1959-60 and 
1960-61, there has been a heavy accumulation of stocks in. the 
factories, resulting in considerable storage and financial difRculties 
during the 1960-61 working season. On Jl review of the entk'e 
sugar situation and considering the likely demand for internal 
consumption and exports, it is found necessary, in the intersts ei 
the sugar industry as well as the cane growers, to regtdRte futul'e 
production of sugar. It is, therefore, proposed-
(a) to empower the Central Government to fix the quantity 
of sugar which may be produced in a factory during a year, and 
(b) to levy a special duty of excise on sugar produce(j in 
excess of the quantity so fixed. 
In order to achieve these objects, the Sugar (Regulation of 
Production) Ordinance, 1961, was promulgated on the 29th Septem-
ber, 1961. This Bill merely seeks to replace that Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 30th October, 1961. S. K. PATIL. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-elause (1) of. clause 7 empowers the Central Government to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this law and sub-clause 
(2) thereof enumerates the various matters in respect of which 
rules may be made. These matters relate to the formula for fixing 
the quantity of sugar which may be produced in a factory durini 
any year, the submission by owners to a specified authority of 
returns, reports or other information relating to the manufacture and 
stocks of sugar, the manner in which the accounts of a factory in 
respect of the manufacture of sugar may be maintained and the 
inspection of records and registers of factories. These are matters 
which can best be regulated by rules. The delegation of powers is 
of • normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of production of sugar in the 
interests of the general public and for the levy and 
collection of a special excise duty on sugar produced 
by a factory in excess of the quota fixed for the purpose. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117 
and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India, recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction of 
the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri S. K. Patil, 
Minister of Food 
and Agriculture.) 