AS INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABHA.

Bill No. 57 of 1998

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
Surt K.C. Konpaian, MP.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

This act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998.

In article 171 of the Constitution —

in clause (3), for sub-clause (c), the following sub-clause and Explanation thereto
substituted, namely:—

“(c) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorate consisting
persons who have been for at least three years engaged in teaching in any recognised
tional institution within the State,

lanation:— In this sub-clause, the Expression “recognised educational institution”

educational institution which is recognised by the Union Government or the
lent of a State.”;

Short title

Amendmentof
article 171


2

(8) for clause (5), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-—

“(5) The members to be nominated by the Gover sor under sub-clause
of clause (3) shall consist of persons who have :cndered social service or
persons having special knowledge or practical = perience for a period not less.
than ten years in respect of such matters ay ie following, namely:—

Education, medicine, law, art, cinema, Co-operative movement, science
and culture.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

At present only those teachers who have been teaching in secondary schools and
are eligible to vote in the elections to the Legislative Council from the teachers”
lency. The main object of making representation of teachers in the Legislative Council

e that the problems of all categories of teachers could be effectively redressed in
islative forum.

‘The Governor nominates to the Legislative Council of a State such Persons who are
ng special Knowledge or practical experience in respect of literature, science, art, co-

ive movement and social service. It is propesed to ensure that persons who have
ered social service or associated themselves in various fields like education, medicine,
inema and culture are aiso nominated to the Legislative Council.

Accordingly, it is proposed to amend article 171 of the Constitution with a view to

wide representation of teachers and nomination of persons belonging to different
s in the Legisiative Council of a State,

K.C. KONDAIAH



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * *

171. Composition of the Legislative Councils—(1) The total number of members:
in the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council shall not exceed'[one-third] of
the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly of that State:

Provided that the total number of members in the Legislative Council of a State
shall in no case be less than forty:

(2) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the composition of the Legislative
Council of a State shall be as provided in clause (3).

(3) Of the total number of members of the Legislative Council of a State—

(a) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by electorates consisting of
members of municipalities, district boards and such other local authorities in the
State as Parliament may by law specify;

(b) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by clectorates consisting
of persons residing in the State who have been for at least three years graduates of
any university in the territory of India or have been for at Ieast three years in possession
of qualifications prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament as equivalent
to that of a graduate of any such university;

(c) as nearly as may be, one-twelfih shall be elected by electorates consisting of
persons who have been for at least three years engaged in teaching in such educational
institutions within the State, not lower in standards than that of a secondary school,
as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament;

(d) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by the members of the
Legislative Assembly of the State from amongst persons who are not members of
the Assembly:

(e) the remainder shall be nominated by the Governor in accordance with the
provisions of clause (5).

(4) The members to be elected under sub-clauses (a), (b) and (¢) of clause (3) shall
be chosen in such territorial constituencies as may be prescribed by or under any law made
by Parliament, and the elections under the said sub-clauses and under sub-clause (व of the
said clause shall be held in accordance. with the system of proportional representation by
means of the single transferable vote.

(5) The members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause (९) of clause (3)
shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of
such matiers as the following, namely:—

Literature, science, art, co-operative movement and social service.

* + *


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri K. C. Kondaiah, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—750L S—18.6.1998.