As INTRODUCED IN LOtt SABRA ON 
-; b AP~ .w .-
Bill No. 57 of 19.79 
THE INTER-STATE # MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 19'79 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I. 
PRELIMINARY 
cutias 
1. Short title, extent, commen<:ement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
,. 
RIIlGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS EMPLOYING INTER-STATE MI9RAlft 
WORKMEN 
3. Appointment of registering officers. • I 
4. Registration of certain establishments. 
5. Revocation of registration in certain cases. ...• ; " .' . 
6. Prohibition against employment ot inter-State mlgr'ant workmen 
without registration. 
CHAPTER III 
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS 
7. Appointment of licensing officers. 
8. Licensing of contractors. 
9. Grant of licences. 
10. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences. 
11. Appeal. 
CHAPTER IV 
DUTIES AND OBLIGATI!ONS OF CONTRAr.TORS 
12. Duties ot contractors. 
CHAPTER V 
WAGES, WELFARE AND OTHER FACILITIES '110 BE PROVIDED TO INTER-STATE 
MIGRANT WORKMEN 
13. Wage rates and other conditions of service of inter-State migrant 
workmen. 
14. Displacement allowance. 
15. Journey allowance, etc. 
16. Other facilities. 
17. Responsibility for payment of wages. 
18. Liability of principlt1 ~mployer in e.~rtain, case~. 
19. Past liabilities. 

CLAUSES 
20. Inspectors. 
( ii ) 
CHAPTER VI 
INSPECTING STAFF 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
, ., 
" ,. 
21. Inter-State migrant workmen to be deemed to be in employ-
ment from date of recruitment for the purposes of certain 
enactments. 
22. Provisions regarding industrial disputes in relation to inter-State 
migrant workmen. 
23. Registers and other records to be maintaIned" 
24. Obstructions. 
25. Contravention o~ provisions regarding employment of inter-State 
migrant workmen. 
26. Other offences. 
27. Offences by companies. 
28. Cognizance of offences. 
29. Limitation of prosecutions. 
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act. 
31. Power to exempt in special cases. 
32. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
33. Power to give directions. 
34. Power to remove difficulties. 
35. Power to make rules. 
36. Repeals and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE 
'. 

Bill No. 57 of 1979 
M 
THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
to regulate the employment of inter. State migrant workmen and to provide 
for their conditions of service and for matters connected tJherewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regu-
lation of Employment and Conditions of Serviee) Act, 1979. 
Shori 
title, ex-
tent, com-
(2) It extends to the whole of India. menee-
meat and 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government appUca-
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: tion. 
10 Provided that if the Central Government considers it necessary or 
expedient so to do in the public interest, it may postpone or relax, to 
such extent as may be specified in such notification, the operation of all 
or any 011 the provisions of this Act in any State or States for such period 
not extending beyond one year from the date on which this Act comes 
IS into force. 
(4) It applies-
(a) to every establishment in which five or more inter-State 
migrant workmen (whether or not in addition to other workmen) 
are employed or who were employed on any day of the preceding 
twelve months; 

De1lnl. 
tiona. 
2 
(b) to every contractor who employs or who employed five or 
more inter-State migrant workmen (whether or not in addition to 
other workmen) on any clay of the preceding twelve months. 
2. (1) In this Act~ unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appropriate Government" means,- S 
(i) in relation to-
(1) any establishment pertaining to any industry carried 
on by or under the authority of the Central Government or 
pertaining to any such controlled industry as may be specified 
in this behalf by the Central Government; or 10 
(2) any establishment of any railway, Cantonment Board, 
major port, mine or oil-field; or 
(3) any establishment of a banking or insurance company, 
the Central Government; 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Government IS 
of the State in which that other establishment is situated; 
(b) "contractor", in relation to an establishment, means a person 
who undertakes (whether as an independent contractor, agent, em-
ployee or otherwise) to produce a given result for the establishment, 
othwtaan a mere supply of goods or articles of manufacture to such 20 
establishment, by the employment of w:>rkmen or to supply workmen 
to the establishment, and inclUdes a sub.c<)ntractor, Khatadaf', S'MdaT, 
agent 'or any other person, by wha~name called, who recruits or 
employs workmen; 
(c) "controlled industry" means any industry the control of which 25 
by the Union has been declared b'y any Central Act to be expedient in 
the'"public interest; 
i ' , J \' 
(d) "establishment" means-
(It) any office or department' of the Government or a local 
authority; or . 30 
(ii) any place where any industry, trade, business, manufac-
ture or occupation is carried on; , 
(e) "inter-State migrant workman" means any person who is 
recruited by or through a contractor in one ,State under an agreement 
or other arrangement for employment in 8lIestablisbmentln another 3S 
State, whether with or witho1:1t the knowle4ge o~ the principal em-
ployer in relation to such establlshment; , 
(1) "prescribed" means prescribe<:! by rules made undet this Act; 
(g) "prindpal employer" means-
t 
(i) in relation to any office or~epanncnt of the GovtWDUlent 40 
or a local authority, the head of that office, department or a~tbo­
rity C:>r such. other officer as the Government or the local autho-
rity,,;88 the case may be, mar specifiy in this behalf; 
'(ii) in relation to a factory, the owner or occupier "'qfAille ".( 
factory and where a person has been named as the manager of 45 
the factory under the "Factories Act, 1948, the persOh so harned; 83 ot 194 8. 
(iii) in relation to a mine, the owner or agent of the mine 
and where a persOn has been named as the manager of the mine, 
the person so named; 

85 of 
1952. 
i of 1936. 
5 
10 
20 
(iv) in relation to any other establishment, any person res-
ponsible for the supervision and control o~ the establishment. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of sub-clause (iii) of this 
clause, the expressions "mine", "owner" and "agent;' shall have 
the meanings respectively ass~gned to them in clauSe (j), clause 
(l) and clause (c) of sub-:section (1) of ~tion-2 of the Mines Act, 
1952; 
(h.) "recruitment" includes entering into any agreement or 
arrangement for recruitment and- all its.grammatical variations and 
cognate expressions -shall be construed accordingly; 
(i) "wages" shall have the meaIiing assigned to it in clauSe (vi) 
of section 2 o~ the Payment of Wages Act, 1936; . 
(j) "workman" means any person employed in or in connection 
with the work of any establishment to ., any skilled, semi-skilled, or 
un~killed, manual, supervisory, technical ·or 'clerieal work for hire or 
reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied,but 
does not include any such person-
(i) who is employed mainly in a managerIal or administra-
tive capacity; or 
(ii) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, dl'8WS 
wages exceeding five hundred rupee1i per m~em, or e~rcises, 
either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by 
reason of the powers vested in him, functions mamly -of a mana-
gerial nature. 
25 (2) Any rei1erencein this Act to any law which is not in force in any 
30 
35 
. area shall, in relation to that area, be construed as' a . reference to the cor-
responding law, ·if any, in force -in that area. 
CHAPl'ER II 
REGISTRATION OF ESTABIelSBMEN'Dl DIl"LOYING Di'1'D-STM'E IiIICRAlft 
W()R1D(EN 
3. The appropriate Government may, by order notified in the 
Official Gazette,- ' 
(a) appoint ,such pel'SODS, beioc oftl~ers of GoverDlDBllt, .. it 
thinks fit to be rePiterinc ofticers for tile purpo188 of thia Qulpter; 
and 
(b) define the limits, within which a registerillg office~ shall 
exercise the powers conferred on him by or under this,Act. 
4. (1) Every principal employer of an establishment to which this Act 
applies shall, within such period as the appropriate Government may, by 
40 notification in the Official Gazette, fix, in this behalf with respect to estab-
lishments generally or with respect to any class of them, make an appli-
cation to the registering officer, ixnuch tonn and manner and on payment 
o~ such fees as may be prescribed, for the registration of the establish-
ment: 
4S Provided that the registering .officer may eDte~n any such applica-
tion for registration after the expiry of the period fixed in that ,behalf, If 
the registering officer is satisfied that the appUcant w.as prevented by 
'ufticient cause from making the application in time. 
(2) Within one month after the receipt of an application for registra-
50 tion under sub-section (1), the registering officer shall,-
(4) if the application is complete in aU respecte, register the 

Revoca-
tion of re-
atstration 
In certain 
eues. 
Prohibi. 
tion 
against 
employ-
ment of 
inter-
State 
migrant 
workmen 
without 
reeiJtra-
tion. 
Appoint-
mentol 
ncenaing 
oJ!k:ers. 
4 
establishment and issue to the principal employer ool the establish-
ment a certificate of registration in the prescribed form; and 
(b) if the appLcation is not so complete, return the application 
to the princ1pal employer of· the establishment. 
(3) Where within a period of one month after the receipt of an appli- 5 
cation for reglStration o£ an establishment under sub-section (1), the re-
gistering officer does not grant under clause (a) of sub-section (2) the 
certiticate of registration applied for and does not return the application 
under clause (b) of that sub-section, me registering officer shall, within 
fifteen days of the receipt of an application in this behalf, Hom the prin- 10 
cipal employer, register the establishment and issue to the principal em-
ployer a certificate of registration in the prescribed form. 
5. If the registering officer is satisfied, either on a reference made to 
him in this behalf or otherwise, that the registration of any establishment 
bas been obtained by misrepresentation or suppression oj llIl¥ material IS 
fact or that for any other reason, the registration has become useless or 
ine1fecti ve and, therefore, requires to be revoked, the registeriDg I)fficer 
may, a£ter giving an apportunity to the pr.ncipal employer ot the estab-
lishment to be heard and with the previous approval of the appropriate 
Government, revoke by order in writing the registration and communi- 20 
cate the order to the principal employer: 
Provided that where the registering om.cer considers it necessary so 
to do for any special reasons, he may, pending such revocation, by order 
suspend the operation of the certificate of registration for such period as 
may be specified in the order and serve, by registered post, such order 25 
along with a statement of the reaaons on the principal employer and such 
order shall take effect on the date on which such service 1S effected. 
6. No principal employer of an establishment to which this Act 
applies shall employ inter-State migrant workmen in the establishment 
unless a certificate of registration in respect of such establishment issued 30 
under this Act is in force: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any establishment 
in respect of which an application for registration made within the period 
fixed, whether originally or on extension under sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 4 is pending before a registering officer and for the purposes of this 35 
l-roviso, an application to which the provisions ofi sub-section (3) of 
section 4 apply shall be deemed to be pending before the registering 
officer concerned till the certificate of registration is issued in accordance 
with the provisiOns of that sub-section. 
CHA.PTl!m. TIl 
LIcl:NSING OF CONTRACTORS 
7. The appropriate Government may, by order notified in the 
Official Gazette,-
(a) appoint such persons, being ot1icers of Government, as it 
thinks fit to be licensing oIlcers for the purposes of this Chapter; and 4S 
(b) define the limits, within which a licensing oftlcer shall 
exercise the jUrisdiction and powers conferred on licensing offtcers 
by or under this Act. 

5 
10 
20 
25 
8. (1) With effect from such date as the appropriate Government Licenainc 
ml'lY, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, no contractor to ot con-
whom this Act applies I!Ihall,- tractors. 
(a) recruit any person in a State for the purpose of employing 
him in any establishment situated in another State, except under 
and in accordance with a licence issued in that behalf,-
(i) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in 
sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2, by 
the licensing officer appointed by the Central Government who 
has jurisdicti'on in relation to the area wherein the recruitment 
is made; 
(ii) if such establishment is an establishment referred to 
hl sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2, 
by the licensing officer appointed by the State Government 
who has jurisdiction in relation to the erea wherein the recruit-
ment is made; 
(b) employ as workmen for the execution of any work in any 
establishment in any State, persons from another State (whether 
or n'Ot in addition to other workmen) except under and in accord-
ance with a licence iSSUed in that behalf,-
(i) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in 
sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2, by 
the licensing officer appointed by tbe Central Government who 
has jurisdiction in relation to the area wherein the establisb-
men t is situated; 
(ii) if such establishment is an establishment referred to 
in sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2. 
by the licensing officer appointed by the State Government who 
has jurisdiction in relati'on to the area wherein the establish-
ment is situated. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a licence under sub-section 
(1) may contain such conditions including, in particular, the terms and 
conditions of the agreement or arrangement under which the workmen 
wf11 be recruited, the remuneration payable, hours of work, fixation of 
3S wages and other essential amenities in res~t of the inter-State migrant 
workmen, as the appropriate Government may d€'em fit to impose in 
accordance with the rules, if any, made under section 35 and shall be 
issued on payment of such fees as may be prescribed: 
Provided that if for any special reasons, the licensin~ officer is satis-
40 fled that it is necessary to require any person who has applied for, or 
who has been issued. a licence to furnish any security for the due per-
formance of the conditions of the licence, he may, after communicatin~ 
such reasons to such person and giving him an Oppol"tunity to represent 
his case, determine in accordance with the rules made in this behalf the 
4S security which shall b£' furnished bv such person for obtaining or, as 
the case may be, for continuing to hold the licence. 
(3) The security which may be required to be furnished under th(' 
proviso to suh-section (2) shall be reasonable and the rules for the pur-
pO!'1es ot the said proviso shall, on the basis of the number of w~rkmen 
So employed, the wages payable to them, the facilities v,hich shall be affor-
ded to them and other relevant factors provide for the n'rms with re· 
'r-r~qc~ ~ which suc~ security may ~ d~~~rmtned. 

Orant(1f 
licences. 
Revoca.. 
tiOlD.1UB-
pension 
aDd 
aJDeDd-
mentot 
licences. 
Appeal. 
Duties of 
contrac-
tors. 
6 
8. (1) Every application for the grant of a licence under sub-section 
(1) of section 8 shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain 
the particulars regarding the location of the establishment, the nature 
of process, operation or work ftor which inter-8tate migrant workmen 
are to be employed and such other particulars as may be prescribed. 5 
(2) The licensing officer may make such investigation in respect ot 
the application received under sub-sectbn (1) and in making any such 
investigation, the licensing officer shall follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) A licence granted under this Chapter shall be valid for the period 10 
specified therein and may be renewed from time to time for such period 
and on payment 'of such fees and on such conditions as may be prescribed 
to. (1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, either on a reference made 
to him in this behalf or otherwise, that-
(a) a licence granted under section 8 has been obtained by IS 
misrepresentation or suppression of any material fact, or 
(bI) the holder of a licence -has, without reasonable cause, failed 
to c()ftlply with the conditions subject to which the licence has been 
graatedOl" has contravened any o£tbe provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder, 20 
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the 
licel'lce' may be liable under this Act, the licensing officer may, after 
giving the holder of the licence an opportunity to be heard, by order in 
writing, revoke the licence or forfeit the security furnished by him 
under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 8 or nny part thereof and 25 
communicate the order to the holder of the licence: 
Provided that where the licensing officer considers it necessary so to 
do lor any special Teasons, he may, pending such revocation or forfeiture, 
by order, suspend the operation of the licence f:>r such period as may be 
specified in the order antI servE', by registered post, such order along 30 
with a statemeRt of the reasons on the holder of the licence and such 
urder shall take effect on the date :>n which such service is effected. 
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behaU, the 
licensingoftlcer may vary or aT:'l')nd a licence granted under section 8. 
11. (1) Any person aggrieved " by an order made under section 4, 35 
section 5, section 8 or sectbn 10 may, within thirty days from the date 
on which the order is communicated to him, pt'efer an appeal to an 
appellate officer who shall be a person nominated in this behalf by the 
appropriate Government: 
Provided that the appellate officer may entet'tain the appeal a1ter 40 
the expiry 01 the said period of thirty days, if be iSm1tisfied that the" 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause" from "fUing the appeal in 
tiIrie. " 
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the appellate offtcer 
shaD, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, disp'lBe 45 
of the appeal as expeditiously as pOssible. . 
CHAPTER IV 
DuTIEs AND OBUGA'J'IONS OF 'CONTRACTORS 
12: " (1) . It shall be the duty of -every contractor-
. (4) to furnim stlcnparticulars and -in ·3uch form as may be 50 
prescr~~ to the ~d au~ority in the Sta~ ft'Qm whi.;n .an 

11 of 1948. 
5 
)0 
20 
7 
inter-State migrant workman is recruited and in the State in which 
such workman is employed, within fifteen days from the date ot 
recruitment, or, as the case may be, the date ot employment, and 
where any change occurs in any of the particulars 80 furnished, 
sueh change shall be notified to the specified authorities at both the 
States; 
(b) to issue to every inter-State migrant workman, a pass book 
affixed with a passport size photograph of the workman and indi-
cating in Hindi and English languages, and where the language of 
the workman is not Hindi 'or English. also in the language of the 
workman,-
(i) the name and place of the establishment wherein the 
workman is employed; 
(ii) the period of employment; 
(iii) the proposed rates and modes of payment of wages; 
(iv) the displacement allowance payable; 
(v) the return fare payable to the workman on the expiry 
of the period of. employment and in such contingencies as may 
be 'prescribed and in such other contingencies as may be speeUied 
in the contract of employment; 
(vi) deductions made; and 
(vii) such other particulars as may be prescribed; 
(c) to furnish in respect of every inter-State migrant workman 
who ceases to be employed, a return in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed. to the specified authority in the State 
from which he is recruited and in the State in which he is employed, 
which shall include a declaration that all the wages and other dues 
payable to the workman and the fare for the return journey back 
to his State have been paid, 
30 (2) The contractor shall maintain the pass book referred to in 'Ub-
section (1) up-to-date and cause it to be retained with the inter-Btate 
migrant workman concerned. 
Explanation.-For the purposes 'Of this section and section 18 "speci-
fied authority" means such authority as may be specified by the appro-
35 prlate Government in this behalf. 
CHAPTER V 
WAGES, WELFARE AND OTHER FACILITIES TO BE PROVIDED TO INTER-STATE 
MLGRANT WORKMEN 
13. (1) The wage rates, holidays, hours of work and other conditf'OllS 
40 of service of an inter-State migrant workman shall,-
45 
(a) in a case where such workman performs in any establish-
ment, the 'Same or similar kind of work as is being performed by 
any other workman in that establishment, be the same as those 
applicable to such other worlanan; and 
(b) in any other case, be such as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government: 
Provided that an inter-State mfgra;nt workman shall in no ease be 
paid less than the wages fixed under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948. 
Wage 
rates 
and 
other 
condition. 
ofser-
vice 'of 
inter-
State 
migrant 
workman. 

Displace- . 
ment 
allo-
wance. 
Journey 
allowance, 
etc. 
Other 
facilities. 
Responsi-
bility 
for 
payment 
of wages. 
8 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, wages payable to an inter-State migrant workman 
under this section shall be paid in cash. 
14. (1) There shall be paid by the contractor to every inter-Sta'te 
migrant workman at the time of recruitment, a displacement allowance 5 
equal to fifty per cent. of. the monthly wages payable to him or seventy-
five rupees, whichever is higher. , 
(2) The amount paid to a workman as displacement. allowance 
under sub-section (1) shall not be refundable and shall be in addition 
10 
to the wages or other amounts payable to him. 
15. A journey allowance of a sum not less than the fare from the 
place of residence of the inter-State migrant workman in his State to 
the place of work in the other State shaU be payable by the contractor 
to the worker both for the outward and return journeys and such work-
man shall be entitled to payment of wages during the period of sueh IS 
journeys as If he were on duty. 
16. It shall be the duty of every contractor employing inter-State 
migrant workmen in connection with the work (If an establishment to 
which this Act applies,-
(a) to ensure regular payment of wages to such workmen; 20 
(b) to ensure suitable conditions of work to such workmen 
having regard to the fact that they are requtr£'d to work in a State 
different from their own State; 
(e) to provide and maintain suitable residential accommoda-
tion to such workmen during the period of their employment: 2S 
(d) td provide the prescribed medical facilities to the workmen, 
free of charge; 
(e) to provide such protective clothing t·') the workmen as may 
be prescribed; and 
(f) in case of fatal accident or serious bodily injury to any 30 
such workman, to report to the specified authorities of both the 
States and also the next of kin of the workman. 
1'7. (1) A contractor shall be responsible far payment of wa~es ttl 
each inter-State miwant workm~n employed by him and such wages 
shall be paid before the expiry of such period as mav be prescribed. 35 
(2) Every principal employer shall nominate a representative duly 
authorised by him to be present at the time of ift~burs"'"'1ent of wa~es 
by the contractor and it shall be the duty of such representative to 
c('rtify the amounts paid as wages in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the contractor to ensure the disburse- 40 
mf"nt of wages in the presence 'Of the authorised representative of the 
principal employer. 
(4) In case the contractor fans to make payment of wages within 
the prescribed period or makes short payment, then the principal em~ 
ployer shall be liable to make payment of the wages in full or the 45 
unpaid balance due, as the case may he, to the inter-State migrant work-
man employed by the contractor and recover the amount so paid from 
the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the 
contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor. 

LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
TO 
THE INTE~STATE lUlU~!1J.~L .~vJ.~\.AEh (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND CJNDITION S OF SERVICE) BILL, 1979 
I-To be/As intrOduced in Ink Sabha / 
1. Page 3, line 5,-
!Q.r. "ass gned" .rw "assigned" 
2. Page 3, line 8,-
after "or" inllrt "other" 
3. Page 5, line 33,-
after "or" inser) "other II 
4. Page 6, line 10,-
for "this Chapter" .ntaJl "section 8 " 
5. ?age 7, line 18,-
6. 
af..:!&.r. '¥e rio d 0 f" in s e r t "hi s " 
Page 7, in the marginal hending to cl~~e 13,-
!21:. "workmnn" ~ I1 wo rkmen II rlJ;;, liJr 
7. Page 8, line 14,-
!su: "wo rke r " ~ "we rkm an " 
8. Page 8, line 17,-
!.Q.t. "con r~ctor" ~ !leon tracto r" 
9. Page 9, line 32,-
f9..r. "appoin ted to" ua!! lIappoin ted, " 
10. Page 10, in the marginal heading to clause 21,-
~ !2£ "wo rkman 11 ~. 11"10 rkmen " 
11. Page 11, line 6,-
;(QL lIatuhori tiee" ~. "authori tie s" 

2 
12. Page 11, line 46,-
.for "proceedings" ~ "proceeding" 
13. Page 12, line 32,-
,after "rule 5 11 in 5ert "made II 
14. Page 14, line 45,-
fQ.r. "garn t 11 nad "gr~n t II 
NEW DELHI; 
April 23, 1979. 
Vaisakha 3, 1901 (Saka) 
• 
• 

18. (1) If any allowance required to be paid under section 14 or 
section 15 to an inter-State migrant workman employed in an establish-
ment to which this Act applies is not paid by the contractor or if any 
facility specified in secti'on 16 is not provided for the benefit of such 
S workman, such allowance shall be paid, or, as the case may be the 
facility shall be provided, by the principal employer within such time 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) All the allowances paid by the principal employer or all the 
expenses incurred by him in providing the facility referred to in sub-
10 section (1) may be recovered by him from the contractor either by de-
duction from any amount payable to the contractor under any contract or 
as a debt payable by the contractor. 
19. It shall be the duty of every contractor and every princIpal em-
ployer to ensure that any loan given by such contractor or principal em-
IS ployer to any inter-State migrant workman does not remain outstanding 
aiter the completion of the period of employment of such workman under 
the said contractor or, a'S the case may be, in the establishment of such 
principal employer and accordingly every obligation of an inter-State 
migrant workman to re-pay any debt obtained by him during the period 
20 of his employment from the contractor or the principal employer and 
remaining unsatisfied before the completion of such period shall, on such 
completion, be deemed to have been extinguished and no suit or other 
proceeding shal1lie in any court or bef()re any authority for the recovery 
of such debt Or any part thereof. 
CHAPTER VI 
INSPECTING STAFF 
20. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be inspectors for the pur-
poses of tlUs Act, and define the local limits within which they shaD 
30 exercise their powers under 'this Act. 
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, within the local limits for 
which he is appointed to an inspector may-
(a) if he has reason to believe that any inter-State migrant work-
men are employed in any premises or place, enter, at all reasonable 
35 hours, with such assistants (if any), being persons in the service of 
the Government or any local or other public authority as he thinks 
fit, such premises or place for the purpose of-
(i) satisfying himself whether the provisions of this Act in 
relation to the payment 'Of wages, conditions of service, or 
40 facilities to be provided to such workmen are being complied 
with; 
45 
So 
ss 
(ii) exam:ning any register or record or notices required to 
be kept or exhibited by the pr~visions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder, and requiring the production thereof for 
inspection; 
(b) examine any person found in any such premises or place 
for the purpose of determining whether such person is an inter-
. State migrant workman; 
(c) require any person giving out work to any workman, to 
give any information, which is in his power to give, with respect 
to the names and addresses of the persons to, for and from whom 
the work is given out or received, and with respect to the payments 
to be made for the work; 
(d) seize or take copies of such register, record of wages, or 
notices or portions thereof as he may consider relevant in respect 
lJ.ability 
otprinci. 
pal em-
ployer in 
certain 
cases. 
Past lia-
bilities. 
Inspec-
tors. 

Inter-State 
migrant 
workman 
to be dee.. 
med to be 
in employ 
ment 
from date 
otrecnrlt-
ment for 
the pur-
poses of 
certain 
enact.. 
ments. 
Provi-
sionare-
garding 
industria} 
disputes 
in rela-
tion to 
inter-
State 
migrant 
workmen. 
10 
of an o1fence under this Act which he ha$ reason to believe hu 
been committed by a principal employer or contractor; and 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 
(3) . Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and 
(2), it a State Government considers it necessary for the purpose of 5. 
satisfying itself that the provisions of this Act are being complied with 
in respect of any workmen belonging to that State and employed in 
an establishment situated in another State, it may, by order in writing, 
uppoint such persons, being persons in the service of that Government, 
for the exercise of such of the powers mentioned in ilub-section (2), as 10 
may be specified in that order:' 
Provided that no such order shall be issued without the concurrence 
of the Government at the State in which such workmen are employed 
Clr where the establishment is an establishment referred to in sub-
clause (i) of. clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2, without the 15 
concurrence of the Central Government. 
(4) Any person required to produce any document Qr thing, Qr to glve 
any information required, by an inspector under sub-section (2), or by a 
person appointed under sub-section (3), shall be deemed to be legally 
bound to do so within the meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the 20 45 of 1860. 
Indian Penal Code. 
(5) The provisions of the Code of Criminal P.rocedure, 1973, shall" so :1 of197ol 
far as may be, apply to any 'Search or seizure under this section as they 
apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant 
issued under section 94 of the said Code. 25 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
21. For the purposes of the enactments specified in the 'Schedule, an 
inter-State migrant workman shall, on and from the date of his recruit· 
ment, be deemed to be employed and actually worked in the establish- 30 
ment or, as the case may be, the first establishment in connection with 
the work of which he is employed. 
22. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
/ 
Act, 1947, any dispute or difference in connection with the employment 14 of 1947. 
or non-empl-oyment or the terms of employment or the conditiQlls of 35 
labour, of an inter-State migrant workman (hereafter in this section refer-
red to as the industrial dispute), may,- . 
(a) if the industrial dispute is relatable to an establislunent refer-
red to in sub-clause (i) of cla'USe (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2, be 
referred under the' provisions of the said Act, by the Central Govern- 40 
ment to any of the authorities referred to in Chapter II of that Act 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the said authorities) ,_ 
(i) in the State wherein the establishment is situated; or 
(ii) in the State wherein the recruitment of suCh wwkman 
was made if he makes an application in that behalf to that Gov~ 4S 
ernment 9n the ground that he has returned to that State after 
the completion of his employment; 

5 
II 
,." 
(b) if the industrial dispute is relatable to an establishment ref-
erred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of S'Ub-sectiQIl (1) of section 
2,-
(i) be referred under the provisions of the said Act, by the 
Government of the State wherein the establishment is situated, 
to any of the said atuhorities in that State; or 
10 
(ii) be referred under the provisions of the said Act, by the 
Government of the State wherein the recruitment of such work-
man was made to any of the said authorities in that State, if 
he makes an application in that behalf to that Government on 
the ground that he hus returned to that State after the com-
pletion of his employment: 
IS 
20 
Provided that-
(a) no application referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause 
(a) or sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) shall be entertained after the 
expiry of a period of six months from the date of his return to th'! 
State wherein the recruitment was made after the completion of his 
employment, unless the Government concerned is satisfied that the 
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the appli-
cation within that period; 
(b) no reference under the said sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) 
shall be made except after obtaining the concurrence of the Govern-
ment of the State wherein the establishment concerned is situated. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 33B of the Indus-
25 trial Disputes Act, 1947, where during the pendency of any proceeding 
in respect of an industrial dispute under that Act before any of the ~id 
authorities in the State wherein the establishment is situated, an appli-
cation is made to that· authority by an inter-State migrant workman for ]of of 1947. 
the transfer of such proceeding to a corresponding authority in the State 
30 wherein his recruitment was made on the ground that he has returned 
tp that State after the completion of his employment, that authority shall 
forward the application to the Central Government, or, as the case may 
be, to the Government ot the State wherein such recruitment was made 
and transfer such proceeding in the prescribed manner to such authority 
3S as may be specified in this behalf by that Government: 
Provided that in a case where no authority has been specified by the 
Government concerned within the prescribed period, the authority before 
which the proceeding is pending shall, on a request being made by the 
inter-State migrant workman and after obtaining the previous approval 
40 of the Government which referred the dispute to that authority, forward 
such proceeding to the Government concerned for reference of such dis-
pute to an authority in the State wherein such recruitment was made. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), if the 
Central Government is satisfied that it is expedient in the interests of 
justice so to do, it may, by order in writing and for reasons to be stated 
4S therein, withdraw any proceedings in respect of any industr1al dispute 
relating to an inter-State migrant workman pend:ng before an authority 
in the State in which the establishment concerned is situated and transfer 
the same to such authority in the State wherein the recruitment of such 
50 workman was made as may be specified in the order. 

Rcgist~rs 
and 
other 
recnrds 
to be 
main-
tuin€'.l. 
Obstruc-
tions. 
Contra-
vention of 
Provi-
sions 
regarding 
employ-
ment of 
inter-
State 
migrant 
workmen. 
Other 
offenet's, 
OlfenCCR 
by com-
panies. 
12 
(4) The authority to which any proceeding is itransferred under this 
:::<:dlOn may prm:t.:ed eJ tiwr de nUi!O or from 1.he stage at which it was so 
transferred. 
2~ (l) Every principal employer and every contractor shall main-
tain such rcg;s,e~'s and recolds giving such parli('..lbrs of the in1.(T-Statc 5 
migrant \vorkmcn cmplnycd, the nature llf work performed by such 
workmen, the rates of wages paid to the workmen and such other 
particulars in suclJ form as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every pr;n('ip~ll employer and every contractor shall keep exhi-
bited in such m:lIlI1er as may bc' prescribed withll1 the premises of the 10 
establishment where the inter-State migrant workmen are employed, 
notices in the prescribed form containing particulars abOll t the huurs 
of work, nature rJf duty and such oLher information as may be pres-
cribed. 
-24. (l) Whoever obstructs an inSlled.or or a person appoint;.:d under 15 
sub-section (3) (;f sec.ion- 20 (hereinafter referred to as the authorised 
person) in the disch:.nge of his dutIes under this Act or refuses or wilfully 
neglects to afford the inspectuf or authorised person any reasonable 
facility for making any inspection, examination, inquiry or investigation 
authorised by or under this Act in relation to an establishment to 20 
wbicb, or a contractor to whom, this Act applies, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine which may extend tu two thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Whoever wilfu.lly refuses to produce <)n the demand of any mspec-
tor ot' authorised person any register or other document kept in pursu- 25 
ance of this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or d"Jes anything which 
he has reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from appearing 
before or being examined by any illspector or authorised person acting in 
pllrsuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with imprison-
ment for H term which may extend to two years, Or with fine which may 30 
extend to two thousand rupees, or with 
25. Whoever contravenes any p 
thereunder regulating the .employment of in 
or contravenes any condition of a licence granted under 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and 
in the case of a continuing contravention, with an additi"Jnal fine which 
may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such con-
travention continues after conviction for the first such contravention. 
26. If any person contravenes any of the prOVISIOns of this Act or of 40 
any ru.les made thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere pro-
vided, he shall be punish;)ble with imprisonment Jor a term which may 
exlend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousanl 
rupees, or with both. 
27. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 45 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge of, and W:1S responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
the business of the cempan.v, as well as the comp1ny, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the ofl'ence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 50 

Provided that nothing cont;::ned in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishm~nt, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowlc,lge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commLsion of such offence. 
5 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),. where 
:my offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conniv-
ance of, or is attrihutable to any neglet"t on the part of, any director, 
manager, secrebry or other officer of the company, such director, 
10 manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accord-
ingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or 
15 other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
28. No court shall take cognizance of any "ffence under this Act except 
on a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, an 
inspect.r)r or autho.rised person and no court inferior to that of a Metro-
20 po1itan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act. 
29. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act unless the complaint thereof is made within three mO'11ths from the 
date on which the alleged commission of the offence came to the know-
25 ledge of the inspector or authorised perron concerned: 
Provided th1t where the offence consists of disobeying a written order 
made by an inspector or authorised person. complaint thereof may be 
made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to 
have been committed. 
of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
other law or in the 
any standin~ orders 
or after the com-
eontract of service 
employed in the es-
tablishment': lire entitled to beneflts in respect of any matter which are 
more favourable to them than those to which they wouJd he entitJed 
under this Act, the inter-State migrant workmen shall continue to be 
40 entitled to the more favourable beneflts in respect of that matter. not-
withstanding that they receive benefits in respect of other matters under 
this Act. 
(2) Nothinq contained in this Act shall be constroed as precJudin~ any 
Inter-State mim'ant workmen from enterinq into an ~.t!Teem('nt with the 
45 principal employer or the contractor, as the case ml'ly he, forl!Tanting 
them rights or privileqes in rec;pect of any matter which Arc more favour-
able to them than those to which thev ""f)uId be entitled under this Act. 
3L; The appropriate Govemmfflt mflV. by notification in the Official 
Gazette and S'Ubjcct to S'Uch conditions and restrictions. if any, anci for 
S0 such period or periods as may be specified in the notification, direct that 
all or 'any of the provfsions of thjs Act or the rules made thereunder MaU 
Cogni-
zance Qf 
offences. 
Limita-
tion of 
prose-
cutions. 
Effect of 
laws and 
agree-
ments 
inconsis-
tent with 
the Act. 
Powel' to 
exempt 
in special 
cases. 

Protec_ 
tion of 
action 
taken 
under 
the Act. 
Power to 
give 
direc-
tions. 
Power to 
remove 
dift\-
culties. 
14 
not apply to or in relation to any establishment or class of establishments 
or any contractor or class of contractors or any inter-~tate migrant work-
men in such establishment or class of such workmen, If that Government 
is satisfied that it is just and proper so to do having regard to the methods 
of recruitment and the oonditions of employment in such establishment S 
or class of establishments and all other relevant circumstances. 
3%. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any registering officer, licensing officer .01' any other employee 'Of the Gov-
ernment for anything which is in gQOd faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of this Act or any rule or ()rder made thereunder. 10 
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government 
for any damage caul'ed or likely to be caused by anything which is in 
good faith done or intended t() be done in pursuance of this Act or any 
rule or notification or order made 01' issued thereunder. 
33. The Central Government may give directions to Ithe Gove'mment IS 
of any State as to the caITying into executio,n in the State of the provi-
sions contained in this Act. 
34. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this 20 
Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two 
years from the date on which this Act comes into force. 
(2) Every order made under this sectian shall, as soon as may be after 2S 
it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. .. 
Power to 35~ (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of 
make previous publication, make rules fqr carrying out the purposes of this 
rules. Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore- 30 
gtling power, such rules may provide for all or any ~ the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the form and manner in which. an applicatiQfl, 'for the registra-
tion of an establishment may be made under section 4, the fees pay-
able thereon and the form of a certificate of registration issued under 35 
that section; 
(b) the form in which an application for the grant Qr renewal of 
a licence may be made under section 9 and the particulars it may 
contain; 
(c) the manner in which an investigation is to be made in respect 40 
of an application for the grant of a licence and the matters to be 
taken into accC1U1lt in granting Ql' refusing a licence; 
(d) the form of a licence which may be granted or tenewed under 
this Act, the conditions subject \to which the licence may be granted 
or renewed, the fees payable for the 'gamt or renewal of a licence 4S 
and the security, if any, required to be furnished for the due per-
fonnance of the conditions of 'the licence; 
(e) the circumstanccl' under which llCE!'llCCs may be varied or 
amended under section 10; 
(1) the fonn and the manner in which' appeals may be filed under So 
section 11 and the procedure to be follQwed by appellateofficens in -" 
disposing 01 the appeals; I 

Orils a 
Act 42 
of 1975. 
8 of 1923. 
.. of 1936. 
14 of 1947. 
5 
10 
IS 
(g) the wage rates, holidays, hours of work and other conditions 
of service which an inter-State migrant workman is entitled under 
section 13; 
(h) the period witbbl which wages payable to inter-State mfarant 
workmen should be paid by the contractor under sub-section (1) of 
section 17 and the manner of certi1ication of such payment under 
su.b-section (2) thereof; 
(i) the time within which allowances or facilities required by 
this Act to be provided and maintained may be so provided by the 
contractor and in case of default on the part of the contractor, by the 
principal employer under section 18; 
(j) the powers that may be exercised by inspectors under section 
20· , 
(k) the form of registers and records to be maintained, and 
15 the particulars and information to be contained in notices to ~ 
exhibited, by the principal employers and contractors under section 
23; 
(1) the manner of submission of returns, and the forms in which, 
and the authorities to whim, such returns may be sUbmitted; 
20 (m) IepI aid to iater-&ate micnmt workmea; 
(,,~ any o~ matter which is required to be, 01' may be, 
prescribed under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made by ~ Central Government IllUder this Act shall 
be Wd, as SIDOn as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
25 while it is in sesSlon :f.or a total period of thirty days whioh may ,be corn· 
prised in one session or in t~ or more successive sessions and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in ~ any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule Shan 
30 thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or ~nuJment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously dane under that 
rule. 
36. (1) The Orissa nadan Labour (Control and Regulation) Act, 1975 
35 and any law corresponding to this Act, in force in any State, shall stand 
repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the provisiOns of the Act or law 10 repealed shall, in so far as such 
thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions OIf·fuis Act, be deem-
40 ed to have been dane or taken under the provisions of this Act as it the 
said provisions .were,in force w~~ suchfuing was dQne or such action was 
takpo and shall continue to be in' force accordingly until superseded by 
u.ything done or any action taken under this Act. 
THE SCHEDULE 
45 (See section 21) 
1. The Workmen's C~tion Act, 1923. 
2. The Payment:of Wages Act, 1936. 
3. The Industrial Disputes Act, .1947 . 
"- The EmployW· 'State Insurance Act, 1948. 
34 of 1948. 50 
19 of 1952. 
5. The Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1952. 
53 of 1961. 6. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961. 
Repeals 
andsav-
in,. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The system of employment of inter-State migrant labour (known in 
Orissa as Dadan Labour) is an exploitative system prevalent in Oris~a 
and in some other States. In Orissa, Dadan Labou.r is recruited from 
various parts of the State through contractors or agents called ScrrdaT8/ 
KhatadaT8 for work outside the State in large constructionprojecls; This 
system lends itself to various abUses. Though theSardars· pronlise at the 
time of recruitment that wages calculated ~n piece-rate basis woUld be 
settled every month, the promise is not 'Usually kept. Once the worker 
comes under the clutches Of the contractor, he takes him to afa'r-oft place 
on payment of railway fare only.': No working hours are ftxed for these 
workers and they have to work on alt'the days in a week under' extremely 
bad working conditions. The -proyisiorts of 'the various labour 'laws are 
not being observed in their case and they are subjected to' various 
malpractices.' , , 
2. The'l'wenty-eighth Session of thee ~bour Ministers' Conference 
(New' De!hj, O~ober ,2fh1976l· whklil QO,xm.d~red tlle question pf ,protec-
tionand wed.fale-'ofDadan LlAbl)ur,r~mmended t.e setting· up of a 
small Compact Committee to go into the whole question and to suggest 
measures for eilmin'ting theabu~s,prev.alent jn thi,· $ystem. , The inter-
State mignrl!l.t -workmen are gelleraUy illiterate, unorganised :and have 
normally to work~ctDdtrextro~ adMIrse,RQIlditiam lag,Q in view of 
these hardships, some admjnistratwe' and If!'8islative alT~gements both 
in the State from where they are recruited,.nd: ,~SCiI- j.D; . the ,State where 
they are engaged for work are necessary .to S~Cl,lre effective protection 
against their exp'Iaitation. Th.e C?mpact 'Committee which was consti-
t~ted !n February,' t'9T7,thet!e,fore: reconimendeci ~e enactment of a 
separate Central ~egislation ·t? r~gulatetheeml11bylnent of blter-State 
migrant workmen as'it was felt tnat , the provisions 6f the Contract Labour 
(Regulation ,and Aboliti~n). Act" IITTO~.even· a~ ,nec~ary amendments \ 
would not adequately take care of the variety of malpractices indUleed 
in by the contractors/SardarslK.h4tada,TB, etc., and the facilities required 
to be provided to these workmen in 'view of the pecUliar circumstances 
in which they have to work. ' , , 
, , 
3. The recommendations of the Compact Committee have been exa-
mined in consultation with the State Governments and tQ~ Ministries 
of the Governm~nt of India and the suggestions made by thetn have been 
taken into account in formulating the propoSals for legislatron~ 'The main 
features of the Bill are as follows:-
(i) The proposed legislation will apply to ;every establishment 
in which five or more inter-State :migrant worltIneh are employed or 
, were employed on any day of the pioeceding twelVe months. It will 
, ~lso apply to every contractor whb employs or employed five or more 
inter~State migrant workmen on·· aliy day of . the preceding twelve 
months. 
(ii) The establish~~nt pro~ing, .~ employ inter-State migrant 
worlanen will be required to be registered with registering oftlcers 
appointpd under the Central Government or the State Governments, 
as the case may be, d~ending on whether the' 'establishment falls 
under the Central sphere or Sate sphere. Likem.se. f!VerY contractor 
who proposps to recruit or elritJtly inter-8tate· inill'atn workmen· will 
be required to obtah\a licence frotnthe spectfted authoritybotb of 
• "I', ' 
16 

11 • 
the State to which the workman belongs (home State) and the State 
in which he is proposed to be employed (host State). 
(iii) 'l"he contractor will be required to furnish particulars re-
garding the workmen in the form to be prescribed by rules to the 
specified authority of both the home State and, the host State. The 
contractor will also be required to issue to every workman employed 
by him, '. pan book containing the details of the employm.eat. 
(w> Spec!ftcguic!elines have been indicated regarding the 
wag. payable to Inter-State migrant workman and he is required 
to be ~id,wages .£rem the date of his recruitment. 
(v) The 11\1er-Sta te migrant workman will be entitled to a' dis-
placement' allowance and a journey allowance in '~ddition to, his ..... I.' ' . 
-'wages." 
(vi) The, ~:Ili~e, • ,that are required to be provided to the 
workmen would incl,ude provision of suitable residential accommocia-
tion.-ad~quat, medi~l: fad/lilies, protective clotilingto suit vary~ 
J,-rP~c, ConcptioDS, ( ~>, sl,Jitable ~d;.tions of work taking il},to 
account that, they .have ruigrated from another State.. 
,(vii) Inspectors wiH be appointed by the appropriate Govern-
ment to see that the pt'ovisil1ns of the legislation are belng complied 
-with. :Cn additiOR;power ,has been-given to the State Government 
of the home State~ to .appclnt; -after, consultation 'with the Govern-
ment'of; the ,hoStState,mspec1ot'S :for visiting. the ·establishments 
wherein workmen from the formerStat~ are employed to see whe-
ther'the provisioll8 of tfie lEgisl~tiOh are being complied with iD: the 
. 'Cas/:! 'Of such workmen. 
(viii) The inter-State migrant workman may raise an tndustrftl 
dispute arising out o'hiJ emplQ)'1I1ent either in the host State or in 
tile home State ·after bis r~turn ,to that State after the cOl))pletion 
of the contl'act of emplQyment. He will also be per.mitted to apply 
-for the transfer of proceedinp in relation to an industrial dispute 
.' pending before@.EI\1thorjty in . the host State to the corresponding 
authority in ~t:n.hpm4t, S~e pn the,grQ:und that he has returned to 
:J.het;'Statc aftu the completion ;ofhis ,oontrac:t~ 
';; (b:) Deterrent punt!llhmf!nts have i:been ,proposed, for the: eon-
tra"O'ention :trf the pratiitibnB' of the legislatiOl1.:. -, 
NEW J:>ELHI; RAVlNDRA VAl\MA. 
The 1st MCU'ch, 1979 . . .... ;, ',-. . . 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 1.t1 
,',' , OP' THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• [C,oPM;f)fletter,No. S-l6025(2C),n-LW. dated the 3rd March;'l979 fro~ 
Shri B.avindrai'Y:~' Minister' ofPBrllamentarY ~alri Il1'1d LabOur to 
the Sec&-etIIry, ;Lok,Sabba.] 
The President, having been iaformed of the subj~ matter qf the 
proposed Inter-State Migrant Workmen (ReJ{Ulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Seriice) -BiD'" 19'1O, recommends the consideration 01 the 
Bill under article 117 (3) of the Constitution by Lok Sebha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Cla~ 3 of the Bill enables the appropriate Government to appoint 
officers of Government to be reltistering officell for the purpose of exer-
cising the powers conferred on registering officers under the provisions 
of the Bill. Clause 7 0' the 3ill empowers the appropriate Government' 
to appoint offi.cers of Government to be licensing officers for the purpose 
of exercising the jurisdiction and powers conferred on licensing oftl.cers 
under the provisions of the Bill. Under the above provisions, the ex-
penditure tc·wards the appOintment of registering officers in relation to 
establishments in ft'Sp<'ct cf which the Central Government is the appro-
priate Government and the expenditure tcwards the appointment of 
registering. officers in the Union territories of Delhi, the Andaman and 
NiCobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep 
in relation to e!"tablishments in respect of which the State Government 
is the appropriate Gov(lrnment will be met from out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India. LlKe'wise, the expenditure towards the appointment of 
licensing officers in relation to Central establishments in the whole of 
India and in relation to establishments in the State .phere in the said 
Union territories will be met from out of the ConaoUdated Fund of India. 
Clause 20 enables the appropriate Government to appoint inspectors f.or 
the purposes of the Bill. Clause 35(2) (m) of the Bill enables the appro-
priate Government to make rules to provide legal aid to inter-State 
migra.t\t workmen. 
2.' It is proposed to entrust the Central industrial relations maehinery 
with the powers and functions of the registering affteers, licensing oflcers 
and inspectors under the provisions of the Bill in relation to establish-
ments in respect of wnich the Central Gove11lment is the appropriate 
Government. It is estimated that the additional work that may devolve 
on the oftlce of the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) will involve 
a recurring expenditure of about Rs. 1,31,000 per annum. The total 
non-recurring expenditure likely to be incurred will be about RI. 33,000. 
In relation to establishments in the State spbere in the said Union. terri-
tories, the powers and functions of registering officers, licensing ofticers 
and inspectors Ul'lde!' the provisions of the Bill will be entrusted to the 
existing enforcement machinery in those Union territories and noaddi-
tional expenditure 4s likely to be incurred on this account. The expendi-
ture which may be incurred with respect to legal aid to inter-State 
migrant workmen under the rules which may be made in this behalf 
will depend upon tbe t}1te of aid Vlhicn maybe provided for in such rules, 
the number of in~tate migrant workmen ltmplo,ed from time to 
time iD,Central establishments ~ over India and establishments in the 
States' ~eres in ~~ said Union territories and other tirctunltances 
which it is not possible to visualise at this stage. In ''riew thereof, it iI 
not possible to estimate the expenditure that is likely to be incurred on 
this account with any degree of accuracy. . . , 
. 3. The provisions of this Bill.do not lnvolVIiI any other -expenditure of 
a recurring or non.,;recurring nat\a"e. 
18 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DgLEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make 
rules for carrying out tbe purposes (If the Bill. Sub-clause ,(2) of that 
clause specifies the matt'~rs in respect of which rules may be made under 
this clause. These include, among other things, the form and manner in 
which an applicat'on for the registration of an establishment may be 
made for the employment of inter-State migrant workmen, the form in 
which an application may be made for the grant or renewal of a licence 
by a contractor before he recruits or employs inter-State migrant work-
men, the period within which wageR payable to inter-State migrant 
workmen should be paid by the contractor, the time Within which 
allowances or facilities required by the provisions of the Bill to be pro-
vided and maintained may be so provided by the contractor, the powers 
that may be exercised by inspectors, the form of registers and recorUs to 
be maintained by the principal employers and contractors, the manner at 
submission of returns to the authorities under the provisions of the Bill 
and the provision of leg~l aid to inter-State migrant workmen. 
2. The matters witn respect to which rules may be made are matters 
of administrative procedure or detail and it may not be possible to 
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of the legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
19 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
. 
to regulate the employment of inter-State migrant workmen and to pro-
vide for their conditions of service and for matters connected therewith. 
Wtn-" -'k .... 
-, ''\' , 
(Shri. Ravindra Varm4~ 
Ministe?- of Parlia.mentary 
Affairs and Labour.) 