cu.US1E 
To BE INTRODUCED IN LoK r ·~fA 
Bill No. 57 .1 1_ 
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) BILL, 1986 
ARRANGEMENT OF ~LAUSES 
CHAPl'ER I 
PRl:LIMINAlty 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Deftni.tions. 
CHAPTER II 
GBNJ:RAL PO\VDS OF THE CD1'1'RAL GOVBRNMlI:NT 
3. Power of Central Government to take measures to protect aad 
improve environment. 
4. Appointment of oft1cers and their powers and functions. 
5. Power to give directions. 
6. Rules to regulate environmental pollution. 
CHAPTER III 
PREVENTION, C'ON'l'ROL AND ABATEMENT OF ENVIRONl4'&N'1'oW POUUTlON 
7. Persons carrying on industry, operation, etc., not to allow 
emission or discharge of environmental pollutants in excess 
of the standards. 
8. Persons handling hazardous substances to comply with proce-
dural safeguards. 
9. Furnishing of information to authorities and agencies in certain 
cues. 
10. Powers of entry and inspection. 
11. Power to take sample and procedure to be followed in connec-
tion therewith. 
12. Environmental laboratories.. 
13. Government Analysts. 
14. Reports of Government Analysts. 
15. Penalty for contravention of the provisions of the Act and the 
rules. orders and directions. 

,. ' ... (ii) 
" 
CLAUSE 
16. Offences by companies. 
17. Offences by Government Departments. 
CHAPTER IV 
18. Protection o~ acticm taken in good fai·th. 
19. Cognizance of offences. 
20. Information, reporis or returns. 
21. Memben. of6.cers and employees of the authority constituted 
under section 3 to be public servants. 
22. Bar of jurisdiction. 
23. Power to delegate. 
24. Eftect of other laws. 
25. Power to make nlles. 
26. Rules made under this Act'to be laid before Parliament. 

Bill No. 51 oJ 1986 
-
THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
to pro~de for the protection and improvement of environment and for 
matters connected therewith 
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on 
the Human Environment he~d 'at Stockholm in June, 197~ in whi~h 
India participated, to take appropriate steps for the pro~tion and .im-
provement of human environment; . 
AND WHERl!OAS it is considered necessary further to implement the de-. 
cisions aforesaid in so f(lr as they relate to the protection and improve-
ment of environment and the prevention of hazards to human liIeinp. 
other living creatures. plants and property; . 
BE it ~ by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India. asfollows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Environinent (Protection) Act, 19a6. Shorl 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may. by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and di1fet'ent dates 
may be appointe4 for cUft'erent provisions of this Act and for different 
10 areas. 
litle, ex-
tent and 
com-
mcnee· 
menl. 

DoIW· 
tiou. 
Power 
ofCen-
tral-Go-
vern-
mentto 
take mea-
lureato 
protect 
andim-
prove en-
viron-
ment. 
2. In' this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "environment" includes water, air and land and the inter-
relationship which exists among and etween water, air and land, 
and human beings, other living creatures, plants.. micro organism and 
property; 5 
(b) "environmental pollutant" means any solid. liquid or gaseous 
substance present in such concentration as may be or tend to be 
injurious to envi·ronment; 
(c) "environmental pollution" means the presence in the environ-
ment of environmental pollutions; 10 
(d) "handling", in relation to any substance, means the manufac-
ture, processing, treatment, package, storage, transportation, use. 
collection, destruction, conversion, 'offering f~r sale, transfer or the 
like of such substance; 
(e) "hazardous substance" means any substance or preparation 15 
which, by reason of its chemical or physico-chemical properties' or 
handling, is liable to cause harm to human beings, other living 
creatures, plants, micro-organism. property or the environment; 
(1) "occupier", in relation to any factory or premises, means a 
person who has control over the affairs of the factory or the pre- 20 
mises and includes, in relation to any substance, the person in posses-
sion of the substance; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
CHAPTER II 
GBNDAL POWERs OF THE CENTRAL GOV!'.RNMENT 
3. (1) Subject to the proviSiOns of this Act, the Central Government 
shall have the power to take all such measures as it deems necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of protecting and improving the quality of 
the environment and preventing, controlling and abating environmental 30 
pollution. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the JleDerality of the pro-
visions of sub-seetion (1), sueh m_1IntI may include measdreB wits. 
respect to all or auy of the followinc matters, 1I8IIIelr.- . 
(i) co-ordination of actions by the State Governments officers 
and other authorities-' . 35 
(a) under this Act, or the rules made thereunder; or 
(b) under any other law for the time being in' force which 
is relatable to the objects of this A~; 
(ii) planning and execution of a nation-wide· programme foi' 40 
the prevention, .control and abatement of en~mestal pollution; 
(iii) laying don' itulanls for the quIHy of .rirOldllellt in 
its various aspeets; 

5 
10 
20 
~5 
3 
(iv) laying down standards for emiss!on or diseharre. of envi-
rOlUllental pollutants from various 8O'lU'eeS whatsoever not being • 
ship or an aireraft: -
Provided that different standards for emission or discharge may 
be laid down under this clause from different sources having regard 
to the quality or composition of the emission or discharge of environ-
mental pollutants from such sources; 
(v) restriction of areas in which any industries, operations or 
proces¥fl or class of industries, operations or processes shaH 
not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to certain s~e­
guards; 
(vi) laying down procedures and safeguards for the prevention 
of accidents which may cause environmental pollution and remedial 
measures for such accidents; 
(vii) laying down procedures and safeguards for the handling 
of hazardous substances; 
(tnii) examination of such manufacturing processes, materials 
and substances a'S nre likely to cause environmental pollution; 
(ix) caTl'ying ont and sponsor:ng investigations and research re-
1atiDac to problems of environmental pollution; 
(x) inspection of any premises, plant, equipment" machinery, 
manufacturing or other processes. materials or substances and giving, 
by order, of such directions to such authorities, officers or persons as 
it may 'Consider necessary to take steps for the prevention, control and 
abatement of environmental pollution; 
(xi) establishment or recognition of environmental laboratories 
and institutes to carry out the functions entrusted to such environ-
mental laboratories and institutes under this Act; 
(.rii) collection and dissem:nation of information in respect of 
matters relating to environmental pollution; 
(xiii) preparation of manuals codes or guides relating to the pre-
vention, control and abatement of environmental ppllution; 
(xiv) such other matters as the Central Government deems 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of securing the effective 
implementation of the provi9ions of this Act. 
(3) The Central Government may, if it. cODSiclers it necetsar)' or 
expedient so to do for the purposes of this Ad, by ·order, published Ia 
the Olicial Gazette, ~onstitute an authority or authorities by such 
40 Dame or name, as may be specified. in the order for the purpose ofaxer-
eisiDg and performing such of the powers and functions (including the 
power to Issue directions under section 5) of the Central Government 
under this Act and for taking measures wr!tb respect to such of the mat-
ters referred to in sub-sections (2) and (3) as may be meneoned in the 
45 order aad 8ubjeet to the supervision and control of 'the Central Govern-
ment and the provisions of flueh order, . such authority or authorities may 
exercise the powers or perform 'the functions or take the measures so 
mentioned In the order as if sueh authority or. authorifes had beeD 
empowered by this Act to exercise those powers or rperiorm those fune-
50 tions or take sUl'h measures. 
, 

Appoint-
mentof 
oftlcen 
and their 
powers 
and func-
tions 
Power 
toaive l 
direc-
tions. 
Rules 
torelU-
late en-
viron-
mental 
pollu-
tion. 
4-
4. (1) Without prejudiee to the PrQVisiCllllS, of . su~-&eC~ (3). of sec-
tiQD. 3, the Central Gover ... t 1Il&J, appoint oftleen with IUC~ ;,~a­
tioDs as it thinks fit (or the pu.rpoaes of tWs Act aad may ~ to 
them such of the powe)'s and fuDetions under tbis Ad as it may deem fit. 
(2) The officers appointed under sub-section (1) shall be subject to 5 
the general control and direction of the Central Government or, if so' 
directed by that Government, also of ~ authority or authorities, if any, 
constituted under sub-section (3) of section 3 or of any other authority ot 
omcer. 
• 
5. Notwithstanding a~ything contained in any other law but subject to 10 
the provisions of this Act, the Central Government, in the exercise of its 
powers and performance of its functions under this Act, may issue direc-
tions in writing to any person, officer or any authority and such person, 
officer, or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions. 
E.1!planation.-For the avoidance of doubts" it is hereby declared that 15 
the power to issue directions under this section includes the power to 
direct.-
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, ope-
ration or process; or 
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity Or water 20 
or any other service. 
6. (1) The Central Government may. by notification in the Official 
Gazette. make rule:; in resp~ct of all or any of the matters referred to in 
section ). 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide' for all or any of the following 25 
matters, namely:-
(a) the standards of quality of air, water or soil for various 
areas and purposes; 
(b) the maximum allowable limits of concentration of various 
environmental pollutants (including noise) for different a:reu; 30 
(~) ~.proc~u.res and saf.,guards for the handling of hazardous 
~bstpn~;· . . 
. . , . 
. (d) the prohibition and restrictions on the handling of haz~r­
dous substances in different area'S' , 
. (e) the prohibition and restrictions on the location of indus .. 35 
tnes and the carrying on of processes and operations in di1ferent aTeas; 
<I) the procedures and safeguards for the prevention of aCci~ts 
~JU~h may cause environmental pollution and for pr~vidingfoJ' re.~ 
~,dlal measures for such accidents, . 
• 

5 
CHAPTER TIl 
PREVENTION, CONTROL AND ABATEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION 
1 
7. No person carrying on any industry, operation or proCeu shall 
discharge or emit or pennit to be discharged or emitted any environ-
5 mental pollutant in excess of such standards as may be prescribed. 
8. No person shall handle or cause to be handled any hazardous sub-
stance except in accordance with su-:h procedure and after complying 
with such safeguards as may be prescribed. 
9. (1) Where the discharge of any environmental pollutant in excess 
10 of the prescribed standards occurs or is apprehended to occur due to 
nny accident or other unforeseen act or event; the person responsible for 
such discharge and the person in charge of the place at which such dis-
charge occurs or is apprehended to occur shall be bound to prevent or 
mitigate the environmental pollution caused as a result of such discharge 
J 5 and shall also forthwith-
20 
(a) intimate the fact 'Of such occurrence or apprehension of such 
occurrence; and 
(b) be bound. if called upon, to render all assistance, 
to such authorities or agencies as may be prescribed. 
(2) On recei.pt of ftinfonnation with respect to the fact or appreh~n-
sion· of any occurrence of the nature referred to in sub-section (1) , 
whether through intimation under that sub-section or otherwise, the 
authorities or agencies referred to in sub-section (1) shall, as early as 
practicable, cause such remedial measures to be taken as are necessary 
25 to prevent or mitigate the environmental pollution. 
(3) The expenses, it any, incurred by any authority or agency with 
respect to the remedial measures referred to in sub-section (2), together 
with interest (at such'reasonable-rate as the Government may, by order, 
fix) from the date when a demahd for the expenses is made till it is 
30 paid.· may be recovered by such authority or agency from the person 
concerned as arrears of land revenue or of public demand, 
Persons 
carrylnl 
on 
industry, 
opera-
tion,etc. 
not to 
allow 
em1aalon 
orclil-
cbarpo! 
environ-
mental 
pollu-
tants in 
excels 
oftbe 
stan-
dards. 
PerlOna 
handling 
hazar-
dous 
substan-
celto 
comply 
with ., 
proce-
dural 
safe-
guards. 
Furnish-
ingot 
informa-
tion to 
authori-
ties and 
agencies 
in certain 
cases. 

Powers 
of entry 
adlD8-
paction. 
powertc 
tUe sample 
and proce-
dure to be 
followed in 
ooone.c:t ion 
..... alb. 
6 
10. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person empower-
ed by the Central Government in this behalf shall have a right to enter 
at ;all. reasonable times with such assistance as he considers nec:eesary, 
, any pla~ 
J 
(4) for the purpose of performing any of the functions c1f the 5 
Central Government entrusted to him; 
(b) for the purpose of determining whether and if so in what 
manner, any such functions arEt to be performed or whether any 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any notice, 
order. direction or authorisation served, made, given or granted under 10 
this Act is being or has been. complied with; 
(c) for the purpose of exam,ining and testing any equipment. 
industrial plant, record. register, document or any other material 
object or for conducting a search afany buildings in which he has 
reason to believe that an offence 1,lIlder this Act or the rules made 15 
thereunder has been or is being or is about to be committed and for 
seizing any such equipment, industrial plant, record, register, docu-
ment or other material object if he has reasons to believe that it 
may furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable 
under this Act or the rules made thereunder or that such seizure is 20 
necessary to prevent or mitigate environmental pollution. 
(2) Every person carrying on any industry, operation or process or 
handling any hazardous substance shall be bound to render all,assistance 
to the person empowered by the Central Government under sub-scction 
(1) for carrYing out the functions-under that sub-section and if he falls 25 
to do so without any reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be guilty of 
an offence under this Act. 
(3) If any person wilfully delays or obstructs any person empowered 
by the Central Government under sub-section (1) in the performance 
of his functions. he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act. 30 
. ' • 2011974. 
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or, in 
relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, or any area in which that 
Code is not in force, the provisions of any corresponding law in force in 
that State or area shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure 
under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under 35 
the authority·of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code or, 
as the case may be, under the corresponding provision of the lt8id la~. 
11. (1) The Central Government or any offi.cer emppwered by it in 
this behalf, shall have power to take, for the purpose of analysis,sam-
pIes of air, water, soil or other substance from any factory, premises or 40 
other place, in such manner as may be prescribed. . 
(Z) The result of any analysis of a sample taken under sub-sectlon 
(1) shall not be admissible in evidence in any legal proceeding unless 
. the provisions of sub-sectlons (3) and (4) are complied with. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the person taking 45 
the sample. under sub.-section (1) shall-, 
(4) serve on·the occupier or his agent cir person in charge of ·tlie 
place. a notice, then and there, ~ aich form as may be prescribed, 
of :his intention to have it so 'analysed; 
" . (b) in the p~ee C)f the' occupier or bts .• ,.t ~r ~ 50 
collect a sampl~ fo~~ .. iY8is; 

5 
7 
, (e) cause ,the s~ple to be pl4ced in a container or contalnen 
which shaH be mark~ and s~aled and shall a~ be siped both 
by the person taking the sample arid the occupier or his agent or 
other person; 
(d) send without del,ay, the container or the containers to the 
laboratory established or recognised by the Central Government 
under section 12. 
(4) When a sample is taken for analysis under sub-section (1) and 
the person taking the sample serves on the occupier or his agent or person, 
JO a notice under clause (a) of sub-section (3), then,-
(a) in a case where the occupier, his agent or person wil-
fully absents himself, the penon taking the sample shall collect the 
sample for analysis to be placed in a container or containers which 
shall be marked and sealed and shall also' be signed ,by th,e. pers~n 
15 taking the sample, and 
(b) in a case where the occupier or his agent or person present at 
the time of taking the sample refuses to sign the marked and sealed 
container or containers of the sample as required under clause (e) 
of sub-section (3), the marlted and sealed container or containers 
20 shall be signed by the person taking the samples, 
and the container or containers shall be sent without delay by the 
person taking the sample for analysis to the laboratory established or 
recQgnised under section 12 and such person shall inform the Government 
Analyst appointed or recognised under section 13 in writing, about the 
25 wilful absenre of the occupier or his agent or person, or, as the case may 
b~, his refusal to sign the container or containers. 
1Z. (1) The Centr.al Government may, by Dotifleation in the Q8leia1 Environ-
Gazette,- • mental 
30 
35 
(0) establish one or more .virooJnentailaboratori .. ; 
(b) reeoanise one or ...... e laboratories or institute. al _viron-
mantal laboratories to carry oat . the fanC"ODS . entrue*-! to an 
en\'ironmental laboratory under this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazet.te, make rules specifying-
(a) the functions of the environmental laboratory: 
(b) the procedure for the submission to the said laboratory of 
samples of air, water, soil or other substance for analysis or tests, 
tqe form of the laboratory repor:t thereo~ and the fees ,pay:~ble for 
such report; 
40 (c) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to 
enable that laboratory to carry out its functions. 
13. The Central Government ma" by notifteatioD ill tbe QfIi.cial 
Gautte, appoint or recognise lueb 1 perIOD . as it thiDkI fit an. having 
the prescribed qualiftcatlonll to be Goveni ...... t AD..,.' for the pu .... 
45 pose of analysis of samples of all, wa*-" soU 01'\ 0*_ ...... ce ~t 
~aD~fs" to .." enviro~~taJ "lI~~tqq'; ~~~I~~ ~r ~~ised 
~~ .~:~~~ (~) "" J,ction U .. : 
laborulo-
ries. 
Govern-
ment 
Analysts. 

Report. Of 
Govern-
ment 
Analysts. 
Penalty for 
contraven-
tion of the 
provisions 
0( the Act 
and tbe 
rules. orders 
and 
directions. 
Offences by 
compaaies. 
OIences by 
Government 
Depart· 
ments. 
8 
14. Any doeumel)t pu~orting, to ~'a report signed by a Govern-
ment Analyst Inay be Used' as evidence' of the fact's stated therein in 
any ptoceeding under this Act. ' , 
15. (1) Whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the 
proVisions of this Act. or the' rules' made or bTders or directions issued 5 
thereunder. shall, in respeet of each such failure Or contravention, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term. which may extend to five 
year~ ~ or w.ith fine w~ich may. extend to one lakh rupees, or with both, 
and in case the failure or contravention continu~s, with additional fine 
which may extend to five thou~nd rupees for every day during wpich J 0 
such failure or contravention continues after the conviction for the first 
liuch failure or contravention. 
(2) If the failure 01' contravention ~ferred to in sub-tJection (1) 
continues beyond a period of one year'after the date of conviction. the 
offender shall be puniShable with imprisonment for a term which may J 5 
extend to seven years. 
16. (1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a 
co~pany, every person who, at the time the offence was committed. was 
dir~ctly in charge of, and wu responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of the business of the company. as well as the company. shall 20 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 'shall be liable to be pro· 
eeeded against and punished accordingly: 
Prov'jded that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
~'ly such perSon liable to any punishment provided ,in this Act, if he 
proves that the off:ence was committed without his knowledge or that 25 
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1). where 
anoffenbe anderthis';Act has 'beell committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
nivance of. Qr).s atu;b~table to ~~y neglect on the .part of, any direc- 30 
for, manager, secretary or other oMcer of the company. such director, 
manager, &eltretary or other ofIlc:er shall also be deemed to be guilty of 
that otJence'.and shall, be l~bleto be proceeded againit and punished 
accordingly. 
Explana.tion.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corpOt'Bte, and includes a finn 
or other association of indiViduals;· and 
(b) "director", in relation to a finn, means a partner in the 
fum. r 
35 
17. (1) Wbere an offence under this Act has been committed by any 40 
Department of Government, the Head of the Department shall be deem-
ed to be guilty of tl!ettffence and shall be liable to be proceeded agai.,st 
and punished accordingly: . l 
;iProvided that nOthing adntained in this section shall render such 
Head ,of the DepartmeDt liable to any· punishment if he proves that the 45 
off_ was commftted· without his, )moY/1edge or that -he exercised all 
dUe: ~ce to prevent :'the commiS8ion of lUeh offeDce. 
: (2); Notwithstanding anYthing contained in sub-sectton(l), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed 'by a Department of' Gov-

.. 
45 ot 1860. 
~ 
e~fnt and it is proved that the offence luis been committed With the 
COlll8nt or eopDiY-.ce of, 01' is' attributable to any n,eglect on the part 
o~,any oftlcer,othei' than the Head of ' 'the Department, such 01Beer' shall 
also be deemed'to be guilty of that offence and ihall be liable to be 
5 proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
CHAPTER tv 
I, 
18. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against, 
loth. Government or any officer or' :othet· emPloyee' of the GoverAment or 
any authority constituted under this Act or any member, dlBcer or other 
employee of such authority in respect of anything which is done or tn-
tended to be done in good faith in.pursuanco of t};1i8 Act or the. roles. 
made or orders or directions issued thereunder. . 
19. No ,court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act eK-15 cept on a complaint made by-
20 
(a) the Central Government or any authority or officer autho-
rised in this behalf by that. Government; or 
(b) any person who has given notice of not less than sixty dayliJ 
in the manner prescribed of the alteged offence and of his inten~ 
tion to make a complaint to the Central Government Or the autho-
rity or officer authorised as aforesaid: 
Provided that cognizance of an offence shan not be taken under 
clause (b) where, during the said period of sixty days, the Central GoV-
ernment or the authority or officer, as aforesaid haS itself or himself 
25 made a complaint to the court of competent Jurisdiciion of the alleged 
Protection 
of action 
labnin 
JOOd faith. 
Cogniz_ 
anceot ~:, 
offences. 
oO'ence or has >communicated to the said person of its or his refusal'to Informa_ 
make such a complaint. . • tions. 
28. The Central Government may, in relation to its functions under 
this Act, from time to time, require any person. officer, State Govern-
30 ment or other authority to furnish to it or any p1'eScribed authority or 
oftlcer any reports, returns, .tatistics, accOunts' and other tnformati<M 
and such person, oftl~, State Government or other authority abaH be 
bound to do so. ,,' . 
81. All thfe membersr -of the' author'ity.constUuted, if any; under 
35 section:'i and all oftlcers and other. employees of such authority 
when acting or purporting to aet in pursuance of any provi-
sions df this Act or the rules made or ol'ders or directions issued there-
under shall be deemed to be public servants within the 'meanin~ of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
40 28. No: ciVil court shall have jurisdiction' tQ entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of anything doDe,actioniak-en or order or direc-
tion issued by the Central Government or any other authority or . officer 
tn pur$U&nce of, any power conferred by ot in ,relation to its or his 
functions under thjs Act. 
45 23. Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3) of aeetioJ1, 
3. the CentJ:al Government ,may~ QY notification jn. theQ~cial G~,ette, 
delegate. subject to such conditions and limita~ions as ,may be specified 
reports or 
returns. 
Members. 
officers lind 
employees 
Of the 
autho-
rity con-
stituted 
under 
section 3 
to be public 
servants. 
Rarol 
jurlsdic-
tlon. 
Powrlo 
dele,ate. 

Effect 
of other 
1&,". 
Power to 
make 
a .... 
in the notification. such of its poWers and functions under this' Ad. 
[excep* the power to constitute an' a1itboritY under BUb-siction (3) of 
section 3 and to make rules under section 25] 81 it may deem necessary 
or ~dient. to any oftlcer. State Government or other authority. 
H. (1) Save as otherwise provlded by or under the Atomic En~ 5 
Act, 1962 in relation to radio-active. air poll~tion and subject to the 33 of 1962. 
provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions' of this Act and the rules 
or orders made therein shall ·have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith con~ined 'in any enactment other than this Act. 
(2) Where any act or omission constitutes on offence punishable uDder 10 
this Act aadal80 under any other Act then the often~er found guilty 
of such offence shall be liable to be punilJhed under the other Act and 
not unc:k!r this Act. 
!S. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the. Oftlcial 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. ' 15 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
loing power, such rules m£y provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(a.) ~he standards in excess of which environmental pollutants 
shall not be discharged or emitted under section 7; 20 
(b) the procedure in accordance with and the safeguards in 
compliance with which hazardous substances shall be handled or 
cause to be handled under section 8; 
(c) the authorities OJ' agencies to which intimation of the fact 
of occurrence or apprehension of occurrence of the discharge of anY!l5 
environmental pollutant in excess of the prescribed standards shall 
be liven to whom an assistance shall be bound to be rendered under 
sub-section (1) of section 9; 
(d) the manner in which samples of air, water, soil or other suhs-
tance for the purpose of analysis shall be taken under sub-section (1) 30 
of section 11; 
(e) the form in which Il9tice of intention to have a sample 
analysed shall be served under clAluse (a) of sub-section (3) of 
aection 11; 
. (f) the functio~of the environmental l.aboratories, the prace- 35 
dure for the submissIon to such laboratories of samples of· air, 
water, soil and other substances for aaalysil or test; the form of 
Jaboratory report; the fees ~yable for such repert and other matters 
to enable such laboratories to cany out their functions under lIub-
section (2) of .ection 12; 
40 
(g) the qualiftcations of Government Analyst appoin~d or re-
cognised for the purpose of analysis of .amples of air, water, soil or 
other substances under section 13; 
(h) the manner'in which notice of the oftenae and of the inten .. 
tionto make a complabat to the Central Govemment shall be given 45. 
under clause (b) of lIKltlon 19; 
(i) the authority br offtcer to whom any reports, returns, staUIr-
tics. accounb! and other information shall be furnished under sec-
tioli 20; 
(j) any other matter whieh Is required to be or maybe presCi1bed. 50 

H 
.. ~ ~ery rUle made under this A'Ct Shall be latcl, II sOOn· as may be, 
after· it is made, before eaicl1. HOule of Par*~\ wtuIe it is b1 iiitWOii, 
for a· tOtal peri(1d of thirty days which may' be eotnpri~· in O~BeIst6n 
or in two or more stteCeSsive se~ions, and if, before the expiry of ih'e 
5 session immediately following the session or the sUecesSive sessions 
afore8'aid, both Houses agree in making any mo4iftcation in .tPJ;e. rote or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall ~­
after have effect only in such modlfted form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, ihat any such modification or annulment 
10 "hllU be without prejUdice to the validity of anythm, previously doni 
lmder that rule. 
auiei 
made 
under 
this Act 
lobe 
laiel 
before 
Parlia-
meat. 

STATEMENT OF, OBJECTS AND REASoHs 
Co~ over tbe state of ~nvirODment baa grow~. ,the world _ 
since, the sixties. The dec~ in environmental q~ty bas been evi· 
d~ced bY inerealliug piOUution,loss of ,·.eial . cover and biological 
di~ty. excessive concentratiOns of harmf1ll chemicals in the ambient 
atplpsphere and.in food, chains, growing risks of environmental accidep.ts 
uid' t~reats. to li~e $UPP9rt, ~ys~ms. The world co~unity's resoive 
to Rrote~tand enhance the e~~ironmental quality found expression in 
the decislons, taken at the United ~ations Conference on the Human 
Environment held in Stockholm in June 1972. Government of India 
participHted in the. Conf~ence and' strongly voiced the environmental 
concerns. While several measures have ~ taken for environmental 
protection both before and after the Conference, the need for a gene-
ral legil'iation further to implement the decisions of the Conference h~s 
become increasin~ly evident. 
2. Although there are existing laws dealing directly or 'indirectly 
with several environmental matters, it is necessary to have a general 
legislation for environmental 'protection. Existing laws generally focus 
on specific types of pollution or on specific categories of hazardous 
substances. Some major areas of environmental hazards are not covered. 
There also exist uncovered gaps in areas of major environmental 
hazards. There are inadequate linkages in handling matters of indus-
trial and environmental safety. Control mechanisms to guard against 
slow, insidious build up of hazardous substances, especially new chemi-
cals, in the environmen,t are weak. Because of a multiplicity of regu-
latory agencies, there is need for an authority which can assume the 
lead role for studying. planning and implementing long term require-
ments of environmental safety and to give direction to, and co-ordinate 
a system of speedy and adequate response to emergency situations 
threatening the environment. 
3. In view of what has been stated above, there is urgent need for 
the enactment of a general legislation on environmental protection 
which inteT AliA, should enable co-ordination of activities of the various 
regulatory agencies, creation. of an authority or authorities with ade-
quate powers for environmental protection, regulation of discharge of en-
vironmental pollutants and handling of hazardous substances, speedy 
response in the event of accidents threatening environment and deterrent 
punishment to those who endanger hUman environment, safety and 
health. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DEuu; Z. R. ANSARI. 
The 2nd MAY, 1986. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 1 (1) 18~PL, dated the 2nd May, 1986 from Shri 
Z. R. Ansari, Minister of state in the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
to the secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having beftn informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Environment (Protection) Bill, 1986 recommends the consideration 
of the Bill in Lok Sabha under article '117(~) of the Constitution. 
III . 
• 

.; 
Notes on cZaUSD 
. -
Clause 1 deals with the short title, extent and commencement of the 
legialation. The legislation. will ·C'OIlle into foree .011-the date notule«i by 
the ~entral Government and different dates maybe notified for different 
provisions and for different areas. 
Clause 2 detiaes the various words and expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 3 vests power in Ute Central Gov.ernment to take all such. mea-
sures as are necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and im-
proving the quality of environment and preventing, controlling or abatiog 
environmental ppllution. The clause also enumera~essome of such mea-
sures. This clause further empowers the Central Government to constitut. 
an authority or authorities for the purpose of the legislation. 
Clause 4 empowers the Central Government to appointofticers for the 
purpose of the legislation.' . 
Clause 5 empowers the Central Government, in exercise of its powers 
and performahce of its functions under the. legislation, to issue directions 
to any person, officer or authority. 
. Clause 6 empowers the Central Government to make rules· to carry olli 
the purpose of the legislation in relation to matters falUng withip. the 
purview of section 3. The clause also enumerate!! some of the mat~on 
which such rules may be made. 
Clause 7 prohibits carrying on of any industry. operation or process 
which discharges or .emits any environmental pollution in -ex.cess.'of the 
standards laid down under the rules. 
ClaUse 8 enjoins upon persons to ('omply with the procedures laid do~n 
and safeguards prescribed under the rules' in the hand1in~ of hazard01lA 
substances. 
Clause 9 enjoins upon the persons responsible to mitigate ellvironmen-
tal pollution and also to intimate the fact of any occurrence or apprehen-
sion of any occurrence relating to envirol.1mental polluti~n to the pr~s~ri~d 
authorities and further to assist those authorities in preventing or miti~t­
in~ environmental pollution. The expenses. if any, inC'urred with respect 
to remedial measures shall be recoverable from the persons responSible. 
. . \' 
Clause 10 4;!nables the officers empowered by the Cp.ntr,l Government 
tn enter ;md inspect any place for the purpose of performing~ny f~n~­
tion-; entrusted under the leqislation. This clause also enjoins upon the 
persons carrying on any i ocl' tstry.· opqration or process or handling' any 
hazardous subo;tanre to render all assistance to the Central Government 
and its officers and any failure or wilful delay or obstruction on. the part 
of any such person s~al1 be punishable under the legislation. 
,. .;., ,.., 

Clau.e 11 deal. with the 1)pwer of the Central Government and its om-
cera to take samples of air, water, soU or substances and the procedure 
for taking ()f such samples. 
Clause 12 empowers the Central Gove~ment to establish environmen-
tal laboratories or recognise 'any laboratory or institute as an environmen-
ta,l laboratoI?". 
Clause 13 empowers the Central Gevernment to appoint or recognise 
Government Analysts for the purpose of analysil of samples of air, water 
soil or any other substance. 
ClaUie 14 lays down that any document purporting to be a report sign-
ed by the Government Analysts may be used as evidence of the facts 
~ta~ therein in any proceeding under the legislation. 
C,laUle 13 provides for the penalty for contravention of any provisions 
of the legislation or any rules made or orders or directions issued ther&in. 
The p,uniabment provided for the first offence may extend to five years 
imprisonment or fine of one lakh rupees or both and in case of continuing 
contr8ven~~n additional fine of TUP,88S five tho~and for every d~y and 
an enhanced sentence of imprismunent for a term whic~ may extend to 
seven years where contravention continued beyond a period of one year 
af~ thE'! date of conviction. 
Clause 16 fixes criminal liability also on the directors and principal 
officers of a company where an offence is committed by a company. 
ClaUse 17 fixes criminal liability also on the heads of the Department 
of Gowrnmeni where an offence is committed by the concerned Depart-
ment arid the head of the DePartment is not able to prove that the offence 
was committed without his knowledge or that he had exerCised all due 
dilip'nce to pr,event Ule commission Glf such offence. 
Clause 18 protects the ofticera and the employees of the Government 
from prosecution or other legal p.roee!edings for the acts done or intended 
to be done in go~ flli~ ",~der the legts1~ti()D or the rules made ~r ,orders 
or directions i~sued thereunder, 
Clause 19 lays down that no court shall take cognizance of any offence 
und~r the legislation except on a co~'pla~nt made by t~e Central Govern-
ment or anyaut'1iority or officers authOr;i~ec;lin th~s 1?e~aU or by any person 
who has given notic,e of not less, than sixty clays of his ~ntenti~t:1 tc? make 
a co~plaint, if within those ~xty d;aylS th~ ~overnment o'r officer has 
itself or himseH not made the complablt and has n9,t communicated to ,such 
pe#~n its or 'his refu~itomake's':lch' a cOD\p1a.int. ' 
ClaUse 2Q empow,ers tJ:te~e.ntra,lGovermpe~t to require a,ny p.~rson, 
"mcer, State Government or other authority to furniflh information repor,ts 
or'returns.. etc, ", . ' 
Cl4usr. 21 lays down that the members of the authority under section 
3 and all officers and employees of the Govemment or sueh authority shall 
be public sf!r.v8nts. ,.' . ' , ' 
ClAure 22 bars the jurisdiction of civil courts to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of anything done, actIon taken or order or directioD 

"5 
issued by the Central Government or any other authOrity or 'OfIlcer I. 
pursuaIIlce of any power conferred by or in relation to its or his funo. 
tionB under the legislation. 
Clause 23 ~powers the' central' Government to delegate all or any of 
its powers under tpe legislation to any amcer, State Government or .u-
thorUy. 
ClaUse 24deala with the effect of the proposed legislation on other laws. 
Clause 25 empowers the Central Governm~t to make rules for carry-
ing out the purposes of the proposed legislation. 
Clau.re 26 requires the rules to be laid before Parliament. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The broad scheime of the Bill is mainly to achieve co-ordiDatiOIl. of 
activities and functions of the existing statutory and other agencies In 
the ~d of environmental protection at the Central and State levels. 
Clause 3 (2) provides for the following: 
(i) Laying down standards for the quality of environment in 
various aspects. [Sub.clause (iii) ] 
(ii) Laying down standards for emission or discharge of en-
vironmental pollutants from various sources whatsoever not being 
a ship or an aircraft. [Sub-clause (iv)] 
(iii) Carrying out and sponsoring investigations and research 
relating to problems of environmental pollution. [Sub-clause (ix) ] 
(iv) Collection and dissemination of information in respect of 
matters relating to environmental pollution. [Sub-clause (xii)] 
(v) Preparation of manuals, codes and guides relating to pre-
vention, control and abatement of environmental pollUtion. [Sub-
clause (xiii)] 
It is, however, not possible to visualise at this stage the actual ex-
penditure which may be involved on this account. After the proposed 
authority becomes fully operational, the recurring annual expenditure 
on the above items is likely to be of the order of rupees 10 lakhs. 
Clause 3 (3) of the Bill contains a provision under which the CentrRl 
Government may, by order, if it considers necessary or expedient so to 
do, constitute an authority or authorities for the purpose 
of exercising ~h of the powers and functions of the Central Govertn.ment 
as may be mentioned in the order. This is an enabling provision. The 
decision when to constitute an authority or authorities and, if so, what 
should be the composition of such authority or authorities, will have to 
be taken after considering the relevant factors. In the circumstances, 
it is not possible at this stage to exactly visualise the nature and quantum 
of the expenditure which may be involved in constituting such authority 
or authorities under this sub.clause. However, as and when the autho-
rity is set up, secretarial assistance will be provided by the Department of 
Environment, Forests and WildHfe. As the authority's activities will 
grow in a phased manner, the annual'recurring expenditure, payment of 
salaries, fee-. allowances (including travelling allowances) is expected 
to be of the order of RI. 51akhs initially and will stabilise around a level 
of 12lakhs. 
Clause 4(1) of the Bill also contains an enabling provision. To begin 
with, oftleers already wor1d.ng in statutory or other agencies, should be 
entruited with the additional powers and functions under the proposed 
16 

17 
leglslation and, therefore, no additional expenses will be involved under 
thiS cluase. 
Clause 12(1) provides that the Central Government may, by notifi-
cation- in the Official Gazette, (a) establish one or more environmental 
laboratories or (b) recognise one or more laboratories or institutes as en-. 
vironmentallaboratories to carry out the function entrusted to the environ-
mental laboratories under the legislation. It is not possible at this staseto 
visualise the number of envirOnlnentallaboratories that will be estabUshed 
or recognised or the eqUipment or personnel needed. The existing labora-
tory, facilities available in different parts of the country will have to be 
examined before tAking any final decisions. Efforts will have to be made 
to fully utilise existing facilities and avoid needless duplication. HGwever, 
it is necessary to establish or recognise one main laboratory and four l"!-
gional laboratories. The non-recurring expenditure on lands and build-
ings for the five laboratories is likely to be around rupees 300 lakhs. For 
fully equipping the laboratories the non-recurring expenditure will be 
of the order of rupees 500 lakhs. The above expenditure is likely to be 
spread over a period of five years. The above expenditure will be in-
curred if all the five laboratories are to be established without utilising 
the existing facilities. 
The annual recurring expenditure on each laborlltory is likely to be 
around rupees 5 lakhs in the initial phases and rupees 12 00- 15 lakhs after 
full development. It may, in fact, be necessary to establish only one or 
two 'Such -laboratories and recognise existing, laboratories (as environ-
mental laboratories) after suitable strengthening. In such an even-
tuality, expenditure involved will be correspondingly reduced. 
Clause 13 provides for the appointment of Government analysts. The 
expenditure on the Government analysts is included in the above re-
curring expenditure for environmental laboratories. 
The authority to be constituted under section 3 may cause contingency 
plans to be formulated by various agencies or authorities for meeting any 
emergency situations. These may involve provision of certain equipment 
and facilities. It is, however, not possible at this stage to quantify such 
likely expenditure. 
. No other recurring or non-recurring expenditure is involved. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 3(3) empowers the Central Government to constitute an autho-
rity or' authorities for th, purposes of exercising such of the 
powers or functions of the Central Government un4er the legislation as 
that Government may deem necessary or expedient. Clause 6 empowers 
the Central Government to make rules to carry. out the purposes of the 
le8ia1ation in respect of the matters falling within the purview of clause 
3(1). Clause 6(2) enumerates some of such matters. Clause 7 empowers 
the Central GoverDJX1eIlt to lay' down, by rules, the standards in excess of 
which oviromnental pollutants shall n,ot be discharged or emitted. 
2. Oause 8 empowers the Central Gov~ent to make rules to lay 
down p.rocedures and prescribe safeguards in accordance with which 
hazardous substances shall be handled. Clause 9 empowers the Central 
Government to prescribe, by rules, authorities or agencies which shall be 
bound to prevent or mitigate environmental pollution and to whom the 
intimation of the fact of an occurrence or apprehension of an occurrence 
relating to environmental pollution shall be given. Clause 11(1) empow-
ers the Central Government to prescribe, by rules, the manDer in which 
samples of air, water, soil or any substance shall be taken. Clause 11 (3) 
empowers the Central Government to prescribe, by rules, the form in 
whk:h a notice of intention to have a sample analysed shall be given. 
ClbU8e 1~(2) empowers the Centl'al Government to make rules prescrib-
ing the functions of the environmental laboratories; the procedure for the 
submission to such laboratories of samples of air, water or soU or any 
other substlliDCe' for analysis or test; the form of laboratory report; the 
fee payable for 'such report; other matters enabling such laboratories to 
carry out their' functions and the quaUflcatioDS cjf Government analyst 
appointed or recognised. Clause 19 (b) empowers the Central Govern-
ment trl prescribe, by rules, the numner in which the notice of intention 
to make a complaint shall be given. Clause 20 empowers the Central 
Government to prescribe, by rules, the authority ·or oftlcer to whom any 
reporta, returns, statistics, accounts and other infonnation: shall be 
furnishett 
3. The matters with respect to which the rules may be made under 
clauses 6, 7 and 8 are matters of highly technical and specialised. nature. 
In most of such matters, it would be possible to frame rules only after 
detailed study, research and investigation. It is, therefore, not practi-
cable to make provisions for the same in the Bill and the delegation of 
legislative power is thus necessary and unavoidable. The remaining mat-
ters with respect to which rules may be made are matters of adminis-
trative or p.rocedural det~t11 for which it is not practicable to make 
provisions in the Bm. The delegation of legislative' power in respect of 
these matters ls, therefore, of a normal character. 
18 

• '!' ~'.. ... 
LOX SABIIA 
a 
BILL 
-:.. ..... 
... ,....we .. tile prOtecttOll aDd improftIIaeM at e*'--d aDd :b' 
mattert CCIIlIleCW thelw'" 
(Shri Z. A. Ansari, 
M~ of St4te i. the Jliaf.st7'7l 
of EYI.~ I: ForeItI.) 