4 of 1938. 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
~i~No. 51 of ~.9$.1 
THE INSURANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABKA) 
BILL 
fu.rther to amend the Insu.rance Act, 1938. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insurance (Amendment) Act, Short titk 
1957. and com-mencement. 
(2) It shall come int'? force on the 1st day of September, 1957. 
Z. In section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred ~:~e~~ 
to as the principal Act), in clause (10), the words "being an 
individual" shall be omitted. 
3. In section 42 of the principal Act- Amendment 
(i) for sub-section (1), the following lub-section shall be O(lectiaD <Po 
lIubsUtuted, namely:-
"(1) The Controller or an ofBcer authorised by him in 
this behalf shall, in the prescribed manner and on payment 
of the prescribed fee which shall not be more than ten 
rupees, issue to any person making an application in the 
prescribed manner a licence to act as an insurance agent for 
the purpose of soliciting or procuring insurance bU5iness: 
Provided thai-
(a) in the case of an individual, he does not suffer 
from any of the disqualifications mentioned in sub-sec-
tion (4). and 

(b) in the case of a company or firm, any of its 
directors or partners does not suffer from any of the 
said disqualifications, and the company or firm was 
immediately before the 1st day of August, 1957, holding 
a certificate issued under section 42A entitling it to act 5 
as a principal agent for the purpose of procuring 
insurance business: 
Provided further that in the case of a company or firm, 
the licence under thls sub-section shall be issued only for 
the purpose of soliciting or procuring general insurance 10 
business." ; 
(u) in sub-section (3), for the words, letters, figure and 
brackets "if the applicant does not suffer from any of the dis-
qualifications mentioned in items (b) I (c) and (d) of sub-
section (4) ", the following shall be substituted, namely: - 15 
"if the applicant, being an individual does not, or being 
a company or firm any of its directors or partners does not, 
suffer from any of the disqualifications mentioned in clauses 
(b), (c) and (d) of sub-section (4) "; 
(iii) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 20 
substituted, namely:-
"(5) If it be found that an insurance agent being an 
individual is, or being a company or firm contains a director 
or partner who is, suffering from any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in sub-section (4), then, without prejudice to 
any other penalty to which he may be liable, the Controller 25 . 
shall, and if the insurance agent has knowingly contravened 
any of the provisions of this Act may, cancel the licence 
issued to the agent under this section."; 
(iv) after sub-section (6), the following sUb .. sections shall 30 
be inserted, namely:-
"(7) Any person who acts as an insurance agent with-
out holding a licence issued under this section to act as such 
. shall "be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees, and any insurer or any person acting on behalf of 35 
an insurer, who appoints as an insurance agent any person 
not licensed to act as such or transacts any insurance busi-
ness in India through any such person, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 
(8) Where the person contravening" sub-section (7) is 40 
a compaJ)Y, or a firm, then, without prejudice to any other 
procee<ifngs which may be taken against the company or 
firm, "every director, manager, secret.ary,:or other officer of" 

3 
the company, and every partner of the firm who is know-
ingly a party to such contravention shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.". 
4: In section 43 of the principal Act, sub-sections (2) and (3) 
5 shall be omitted. 
" 
16 of 1926• 10 
I 
19 of 1925. 
~ 
f 
I 15 
, I of 195'i. 
I 
20 
I 
l H of '.". 25 
~. 
30 
~~s of 1912, 35 
5. For section 118 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"118. Nothing in this Act shall apply-
(a) to any trade union regIstered under the Indian 
Tra~e Unions Act, 1926; or 
(b) to any provident fund to which the provisions of 
the P;ovident Funds Act, 1925, apply; or 
(c)' if the Central Government so orders in any case, 
and to such extent or subject to such conditions or modifica-
tions as may be specified in the order, to any insurance 
business carried on by the Centr~.l Government or a State 
Government or a Government company as defined in sec-
tion 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; or 
(d) if the Controller so orders in any case, and to such 
extent or subject to such conditions or modifications as may 
be specified in the order, to-
(i) any approved superannuation fund as defined 
in clause (a) of section58N of the Indian Income-tax 
Act, 1922; or 
(ii) any fund in existence and officially recognised 
by the Central Government before the 27th day of 
January, 1937, maintained by or on behalf of Govern-
ment servants or Government pensioners for the 
mutual benefit of contributors to the fund and of their 
dependants; or 
(iii) any mutual or provident insurance society 
composed wholly of Government servants or of railway 
servants which has been exempted from any or all of 
the provisions of the Provident Insurance Societies Act, 
1912.". . 
Amendment 
of section 43. 
Substitution 
of new ICC-
tion for sec-
tioD uB. 
Exemptions. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 42B of the Insurance Act, 1938, no insurer can 
appoint or transact any insurance business in India through a princi-
pal agent after the 31st August, 1957. Individuals who have been 
working 'as Principal Agents hitherto can, however, continue in 
business as ordinary insU!ance agents. The general insurance indus-
try has suggested that the knowledge and experience of the business 
acquired by the companies and firms Who were working as Principal 
Agents should not be lost to it.\ It is, therefore, prop'osed that princi-
pal agents at present in business may, if they so desire, continue to 
play their part in the industry by acting as ordinary' insurance 
agents. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend the Insurance Act for 
the purpose. 
Section 118 of the Insurance Act, which exempts certain catego-
ries of business' from the provisions of the Act, does not cover the 
case of a business carried on by a Government company as defined 
in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. Clause 5 of the Bill seeks 
to amend section 118 in this behalf. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW !>ELm; 
The 9th August, 1957. 
4 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSURANCE ACT, 1938 
(4 of 1938) 
• • • 
z. 
• • • 
(10) "insurance agent" means an insurance agent licensed 
under section 42 being an individual who receives or agrees to 
receive payment by way of commission or other remuneration 
in consideration of his soliciting or procuring insurance busi-
ness including business relating to the continuance, renewal 
or revival of policies of insurance; . 
• • • 
42. (1) The Controller or an officer authorised by him in this 
behalf shall, in the prescribed manner and on payment of the pres-
cribed fee which shall not be more than ten rupees, issue to any 
individual making an application in the prescribed manner and 
not suffering from any of the disqualifications hereinafter meJ?-
tioned a licence to act as an insurance agent for the purpose of 
soliciting or procuring insurance business. 
• • • 
(3) A licence issued under this section, after the commence-
47 of 1950. ment of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950, shall remain in 
force for a period of three years only from the date of issue, but 
shall, if ~he applicant does not suffer from any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in items (b), (c) and (d) of sub-section (4) and the 
application for renewal of the licence reaches the issuing authority 
at least thirty days before the date on which the licence ceases to 
remain in force, be renewed for a period of three years at anyone 
time on ·payment of the prescribed fee which shall not be more 
than ten rupees, and an additional fee of a prescribed amount, not 
exceeding t.hree rupees by way of penalty, if the application for 
renewal of the licence does n·ot reach the issuing authority at least 
_, ; thirty days before the date on. which the licence ceases to remain 
in force. I 
5 
Licensing of 
insurance 
agents. 

llePterof 
~ 
qeDtI. 
6 
• * * (5) If it be found that an insurance agent suffers from any of 
the foregoing disqualifications, without prejudice to any other 
penalty to which he may be liable, the Controller shall, and if the 
agent has knowingly contravened any provision of this Act may, 
cancel the licence issued to the agent under this section. 
• • * 
43. 
• * 
(2) Any individual not holding a licence issued under section 
42 who acts as an insurance agent shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to fifty rupees, and any insurer who, or any 
person acting on behalf of an insurer who, appoints as an insur-
ance agent any individual not so licensed, or transacts any insur-
ance business in India through any such individual, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall not take effect until 
the expiry of six months from the commencement of this Act. 
• * • 
Exemptiom. 118. Nothing in this Act shall apply to any Trade Union regis-
tered under the Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926, or to any provi- 16 of 1926. 
dent fund to which the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, 19 of 1925. 
apply, or, except to such extent as the Central Government may 
by order specify, to any insurance business carried on by the 
Central Government, or, if the Controller so orders in any case, and 
to such extent or subject to such conditions or modifications as he 
specifies in such order, ~ 
(a) any fund in existence and offiCially recognised by the 
Central Government before the 27th day of January, 1937, 
maintained by or on behalf of Government servants or Gov-
ernment pelUioners for the mutual benefit of contributors to 
the fund and of their dependants, or 
(b) any mutual or provident insurance· society composed 
wholly of Government servants or of railway servants which 
has been exempted from any or all of the provisions of the 
Provident Insurance Societies Act. 1912, or 5 of 1912. 
(c) any approved superannuation fund as defined in 
clause (a) of section 58N of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, 11 of 19%2. 
or, if the Central Government so orders in any case, and to 

7 
such extent or subject to such conditions or modifications as 
are specified in such order, to any insurance business carried 
on by a State Government or to any insurance c0¥1pany more 
than fifty-one per cent. of whose shares is held by a State 
Government. 

LOK SABHA 
• A 
BILL 
further to amend the Insurance Act, 1938. 
(Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Minister of Finance.) 