BIll Bo. 157 of 19152. 
THm INDIAN COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1952 
[As IN'DllODDCIQ) IN TIIB HaPBX OJ' TUB PBOPLB] 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Oompanie8 Act, 1913. 
B .. it. enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short tlUe.-This Act may be called the Indian Companies (Amend-
ment) Act, 1952. 
I. Amendment of .etlon 9lJl, Act. VII of 1913.-1n section 01B of 
the Indian Companies Aot, 1918, after sub-seotion (3), the following (, 
sub-section shRll be inserted, no.meJy:-
"(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the 
Ceutral Government may, if It is of opinion that in the case of 8 
publio company which is a subsidiary oompany of any other 
oompany (whether that other oompany is a company within the 10 
meaning of this Act or not) it would not be ill the public interest 
to" apply all or any of the prohibitions contained in Bub-section (1) 
to the subsidiary company in its relation with the holding company, 
direct, by notification in the Official Gazette, that this section shall 
not apply to any contract or arrangement made on behalf of the I!) 
subsidiary company with the holding company or shall apply thereto, 
subjeot to suoh exceptions, modifioations or conditions as may be 
specified in the notification." 

STATEMENT OIl' OBJE(}TSI AND REASONS 
The prohibitions contained in section 91B of the Indian Companies 
Act, 1913, have acted and are likely to act as 0. check on the format4on 
of public companies in Indio. by certain foreign companies in accordance 
with the agreements entered into by them with the Government of India, 
because it would have to be an euential feature in such cases that <'lose 
eOlluectioll is allowed to exist in the public interest between the directors 
of the Indian Companies to be so formed (most of whom are likely to be 
the nominees of the holding oompanies) and the holding companies 
thmsdves. It is, therefore, essentia.l that, wherever necessary, suitable 
exemptions should be granted from the prohibitions oontained in the said 
seotion so that directors of the Indian Companies are allowed . to exercise 
thsir powars efJectively. Hence this Bill. 
O. D. DEslDftTm. 
NEW DBLBI: 
The 11th June, 19S2. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
I 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Oompaniea Aot, 1913 
.. 
(SA,i O. D. DuAmukA, 
. .M ,,,isle, Jor Finance) 