1
THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Warehousing Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 5 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts mentioned in this section,
the shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be deemed to be included
among other securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and
also to be approved securities for the purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.".
Short title and
commencement.
Substitution of
new section
for section 5.
Certain shares
to be approved
securities.2 of 1882.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.
58 of  1962.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  57  of  2011
5
10

2
3. In section 27 of the principal Act, for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(4) The bonds and debentures of a State Warehousing Corporation may be
guaranteed by the appropriate Government as to the repayment of principal and the
payment of interest at such rate as may be fixed by the appropriate Government on the
recommendation of the board of directors of the State Warehousing Corporation at the
time the bonds or debentures are issued.".
4. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the proviso shall be omitted.
5. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (8), the proviso shall be omitted.
6. In section 39 of the principal Act, for the provisos, the following provisos shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Provided that, in the case of a State Warehousing Corporation, any sum paid
by the State Government under any guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section ( 4)
of section 27 shall not be treated as income, profits and gains of the State Warehousing
Corporation, and any interest on the debentures or bonds issued by that Corporation
out of such sums shall not be treated as expenditure incurred by it:
Provided further that in the case of any debenture-holder, such portion of an
interest as has been paid out of any such sum advanced by the State Government shall
be deemed to be his income from interest on securities declared to be income-tax free
within the meaning of section 86 of that Act or any corresponding provision of law for
the time being in force.".
Amendment of
section 27.
Amendment of
section 30.
Amendment of
section 31.
Amendment of
section 39.
5
10
15
20

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 was enacted to provide for the incorpora-
tion and regulation of corporation for the purpose of warehousing of agricultural produce
and certain other commodities as may be notified by the Central Government and for matters
connected therewith. The Central Warehousing Corporation established under the said Act
is a profit earning Public Sector Enterprise under the administrative control of the Depart-
ment of Food and Public Distribution and a Mini-Ratna Public Sector Enterprise as declared
by the Department of Public Enterprises. One of the essential criteria for award of Mini-Ratna
status to a Central Public Sector Enterprise is that no financial support or contingent liability
on the part of the Government should be involved in respect of that enterprise and that it
should also not depend upon any budgetary support or Government guarantee.
2. The Central Warehousing Corporation has consistently paid dividend to the
Government of India since 1957-58. The net worth of the Corporation has been positive from
2003 onwards. The Corporation has not taken any loan from the Central Government. It is
also not dependent upon budgetary support of the Government. Moreover, the Government
has so far given no other guarantee to the Corporation except for the payment of minimum
guaranteed dividend as required under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Warehousing
Corporations Act, 1962. Hence, the said section 5 of the Act is proposed to be suitably
revised with consequential changes in sections 27, 30, 31 and 39 thereof. The guarantee
referred to in the said sub-section (1) of section 5 would be withdrawn and the Central
Government would be absolved of its responsibility of being guarantor.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
K. V . THOMAS.
N
EW DELHI;
The 10th August, 2011.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section for section 5 of the Warehousing
Corporations Act, 1962 so as to do away with the existing provision relating to the shares of
the Central Warehousing Corporation being guaranteed by the Central Government as to the
repayment of the principal and the payment of annual dividend. Hence, the Bill does not
involve any financial implication. The new section does not envisage any expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India, either recurring or non-recurring.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE WAREHOUSING CORPORA TIONS ACT, 1962
(58 OF 1962)
* * * * *
5. (1) The shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be guaranteed by the
Central Government as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of the annual
dividend at such minimum rate as may be fixed by the Central Government, by notification
published in the Official Gazette, at the time of the issue of the shares.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts mentioned in this sub-section,
the shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be deemed to be included among
the securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and also to be approved
securities for the purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking Companies Act, 1949.
* * * * *
27. (1)* * * * *
(4) The bonds and debentures of a Warehousing Corporation may be guaranteed by
the appropriate Government as to the repayment of principal and the payment of interest at
such rate as may be fixed by the appropriate Government on the recommendation of the
board of directors of the Corporation at the time the bonds or debentures are issued.
* * * * *
30. (1)* * * * *
(2) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation on assets and all
other matters which are usually provided for by companies registered and incorporated
under the Companies Act, 1956, a Warehousing Corporation may, out of its net annual
profits, declare a dividend:
Provided that for so long as the reserve fund is less than the paid-up share capital of
the Central Warehousing Corporation and until there has been repaid to the Central
Government such sum, if any, as that Government may have paid under a guarantee given in
pursuance of sub-section (1) of section 5 or sub-section ( 4) of section 27, the rate of such
dividend, in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporations, shall not exceed the rate
granted by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 5.
31. (1) * * * * *
(8) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained in this section, the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India may, either of his own motion or on a request received in this
behalf from the appropriate Government, undertake in respect of a Warehousing Corporation
such audit and at such time as he may consider necessary:
Provided that where the Central Government is required to make any payment on
account of the guarantee given by it under sub-section (1) of section 5, such audit shall be
undertaken by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person authorised by him
in this behalf.
* * * * *
Shares to be
guaranteed by
Central
Government
and to be
trusted or
approved
securities.
Borrowing
powers of
Warehousing
Corporation.
Disposal of
profits.
Accounts and
audit of
Warehousing
Corporation.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.
1 of 1956.
5

6
39. For the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961, a Warehousing Corporation shall be
deemed to be a company within the meaning of that Act and shall be liable to income-tax and
super-tax accordingly on its income, profits and gains:
Provided that, in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporation, any sum paid by
the Central Government under the guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section (1) of section
5 or, in the case of a Warehousing Corporation, any sum paid by the Central or a State
Government under any guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 27 shall
not be treated as income, profits and gains of a Warehousing Corporation, and any interest
on the debentures or bonds issued by that Corporation out of such  sums shall  not be
treated as expenditure incurred by it:
Provided further that in the case of any shareholder or debenture-holder, such portion
of a dividend or interest as has been paid out of any such sum advanced by the Central
Government shall be deemed to be his income from interest on securities declared to be
income-tax-free within the meaning of section 86 of that Act.
Provisions
relating to
income-tax
and super-tax.
43 of 1961.
* * * * *

GMGIPMRND—1259LS(S3)—17-08-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962.
————
(Prof. K.V . Thomas, Minister of  State for Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution)