[As itropucen ॥४ Lok fA AUG 2007

Bill No. 57 of 2001

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

By
Suet PawAN Kumar BANSAL,
A

BILL

MP.

further to amend the Constitution of India
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2001. Short चहल,

2. In article 85 of the Constitution, after clause (/),
inserted, namely:-—

the following proviso shall be | Amendmentof
article 85.

“provided that each House shall sit and transact business for a minimum of

one hundred and twenty days in a calendar year.”

3. In article 174 of the Constitution, after clause (1),

inserted, namely:—

the following proviso shall be Amendment
of article 174.


2

“Provided that the House or each House of the Legislature of States, where the
Legislative Assembly consists of more than ninety members, shall sit and transact
business for a minimum of one hundred days and where the Legislative Assembly
consists of ninety or less than ninety members for a minimum of sixty days in a

calendar year.”
Insertion of 4, After article 240 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
newianicle namely:—
240A.
Session of the “940A. Where a Union territory has a Legislative Assembly, it shall sit and transact
Legislative business for a minimum of forty-five days in a calendar year.”.
Assembly of a

Union territory.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS *

Over the years there has been a steady decline in the number of sittings of the two
Houses of Parliament and that of the State Legislatures. While the first Lok Sabha sat for
135 days in a calendar year, this number has now fallen below one hundred.

The situation in the States in still worse. While most of the State Legislatures meet
on an average for between 45 to 55 days, the position in the case of others has been very
dismal with this number being as low as seven sittings a year.

This trend to curtail the sittings of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha and the State Legislatures
is alarming and quite destructive for the growth of a healthy democracy. The present
provisions of articles 85(1) and 174(1) of the Constitution only stipulate that six months
should not intervene between two successive sessions of the House, A pedantic interpretation
of these provisions has led to this fall in the number of sittings of the Houses and the
concomitant rise in the cynicism about their relevance and efficacy in the polity. These
provisions were perhaps intended to ensure that not more than six months elapsed between
the constitution of a House after fresh elections and not to provide for just three one-day
session in a year.

To restore the due place of Legislature in our political system and to ensure adequate
consideration of the agenda before them, it is imperative to provide for a minimum number
of sittings. For Parliament, it should be atleast 120 days, for bigger States 100 days, for
smaller States 60 days and for Union territories 45 days.

This Bill seeks to achieve this objective.

New Det; PAWAN KUMAR BANSAL
July 10, 2001.


Parliament,
prorogation and
dissolution.

Sessions of the
State Legisla-
ture, proroga-
tion and
dissolution

Power of Presi-
dent to make
regulations for
certain Union
territories.

ANNEXURE

* * * * * * *

85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each Session of House of
Parliament to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene
between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next
session.

* * * * et * *

174. (1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House of each of the
Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall
not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first
sitting in the next session.

* * * * * * *

240, (1) The President may make regulations for the peace, progress and good
government of the Union territory of —

(a) The Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
(b) Lakshadweep;

(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;

(d) Daman and Dii
(०) Pondicherry;

Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function as a Legislature
for the Union territory of Pondicherry, the President shall not make any regulation for the
peace, progress and good government of the Union territory with effect from the date
appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature;

Provided further that when ever the body functioning as Legislature for the Union
tetritory of Pondicherry is dissolved, or the functioning of that body as such Legislature
remains suspended on account of any action taken under any such law is referred to in
clause (1) of article 239A, the President may, during the period of such dissolution or
suspension, make regulations for the peace, progress and good government of that Union
territory.

* * * * * * *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—999LS—18-07-2001.