THE FOREIGN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS (REGULATION OF
ENTRY AND OPERATIONS) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to regulate entry and operation of foreign educational institutions imparting or intending
to impart higher education (including technical education and medical education
and award of degree, diploma and equivalent qualifications by such institutions)
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry
and Operations) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,¯
(a)  “accrediting agency”, in respect of a course of study offered in India by a
foreign educational institution,  means an agency or body approved, recognised or
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 57 of 2010
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
authorised by the Council for Higher Education Accreditation or University Quality
Agency or the Quality Assurance Authority, by whatever name called, established or
incorporated under a law in the country of origin of the foreign educational institution
or any other statutory authority in that country for the purpose of assessing, accrediting
or assuring quality and standards of educational institutions;
(b) “Advisory Board” means the Advisory Board constituted under sub-section
(2) of section 9;
(c)  “Commission” means the University Grants Commission established under
the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 or any other body or council or commission
established under any Central Act for the time being in force to regulate the entry and
operation of foreign educational institution;
(d)  “fee” means all fees including tuition fee and development charges, by
whatever name called, payable by the students enrolled for pursuing courses or
programmes of study;
(e)  “foreign educational institution” means¯
(i) an institution established or incorporated outside India which has been
offering educational services for at least twenty years in the country in which it
had been established or incorporated; and
(ii) which offers educational services in India or proposes to offer courses
leading to award of degree or diploma or certificate or any other award through
conventional method including classroom teaching method not including distant
mode in India independently or in collaboration, partnership or in a twinning
arrangement with any educational institution situated in India;
(f)  “foreign education provider” means a foreign educational institution notified
by the Central Government, as a foreign education provider, on the recommendation of
the Commission as an institution competent to impart education in India and to award
degree, diploma or any other equivalent qualification (other than in the distance mode)
at undergraduate, post-graduate, doctoral or post-doctoral level;
(g)  “national research professor” means a person, who is an academic of high
distinction, declared as such by the Central Government;
(h)  “National Educational Tribunal” means the National Educational  Tribunal
established under the Educational Tribunals Act, 2010;
(i)  “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be
construed accordingly;
(j)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(k)  “profession” means the profession of law, medicine and such other profession
as may be notified by the Central Government from time to time;
‘(l)  “Registrar” means the Secretary of the University Grants Commission or
any other officer of the Commission notified, by the Central Government, as Registrar
for the purposes of this Act;’
(m)  “regulations” means regulations made by the Commission;
(n)  “statutory authority”¯
(i) in relation to higher education or technical education or practice of any
profession means an authority established or incorporated under a Central Act
to regulate standards of such higher education or technical education or practice
of any profession;
3 of 1956.

3
(ii) in relation to medical education means the statutory authority
established under¯
(A) the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956; or
(B) the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973; or
(C) the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970; or
(D) the Dentists Act, 1948; or
(E) the Pharmacy Act, 1948; or
(F) the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947;
(iii) in relation to legal education means the Bar Council of India constituted
under section 4 of the Advocates Act, 1961;
(o)  “technical education” means the technical education as defined in the All
India Council of Technical Education Act, 1987;
(p)  “twinning programme” means a programme whereby students enrolled with
a foreign education provider complete their study partly in India and partly in any
other educational institution situated outside India.
CHAPTER II
F
OREIGN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
3. No foreign educational institution shall admit any person as a student, or collect any
fee from such person or its students in India for any course of study leading to the award of
a degree or a diploma, by whatever name called, unless such institution has been notified by
the Central Government as a foreign education provider under sub-section (8) of section 4.
4. (1) Any foreign educational institution which intents to impart education in India,
shall submit an application, for being recognised and notified as a foreign education provider
under this Act, to the Registrar and such application be duly endorsed by the concerned
Embassy or High Commission in India of the country in which such institution is established
or incorporated and has been offering educational services in that country:
Provided that a foreign educational institution providing educational services in India
before the commencement of this Act, shall apply under this sub-section within a period of
six months from the date of commencement of this Act and it shall cease to provide educational
services in accordance with the provisions of this Act if its application for recognition and
notifying as foreign education provider has been rejected.
(2) The form and manner in which an application under sub-section (1) shall be made
and the other particulars, including payment of fee, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by¯
(a) the documents to the effect that such foreign educational institution¯
(i)  has been established or incorporated and has been offering educational
services for at least twenty years under a law of the country in which such
institution is established or incorporated and registered along with the status of
its accreditation, wherever applicable, from the accrediting agency of that country;
and
(ii)  has adequate financial and other resources to conduct the course or
courses of study in India;
(b) an undertaking to maintain a corpus fund of not less than fifty crore rupees
or of such sum as may be notified, from time to time, by the Central Government in
consultation with the statutory authority .
102 of 1956.
59 of 1973.
48 of 1970.
16 of 1948.
8 of 1948.
48 of 1947.
25 of 1961.
52 of 1987.
Prohibition on
admission,
collection of
fees, etc.
Foreign
educational
institutions to
apply for
being notified
as foreign
education
providers.

4
(4) The Registrar shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), forward a
copy thereof to the statutory authority for obtaining its recommendation as to the fitness of
such institution to provide quality education in India:
Provided that the statutory authority shall make its recommendation to the Registrar
within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the copy of the application under
sub-section (4).
(5) The Registrar shall make such inquiries, in such manner, as may be specified by
regulations, to ensure that the foreign educational institution meets the requirements to
provide quality education in India, as laid down under any law for the time being in force.
(6) The Registrar shall, as early as possible, and preferably within a period of six
months from the date of receipt of the application under sub-section ( 1) by an foreign
educational institution, submit his report on the fitness of such institution to provide quality
education in India, along with such recommendations as may be made by the statutory
authority, to the Commission.
(7) The Commission shall consider the report of the Registrar and recommendations
of statutory authority, and recommend to the Central Government, within a period of thirty
days from the date of receipt of such report and recommendations, as to the fitness of such
institution proposed to be recognised and notified as a foreign education provider in
India:
Provided that if the Commission is of the opinion that it shall not be in the interest of
the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States, public order, decency or morality or sensitivity of location of the foreign
educational institution or any other such reason to permit a foreign educational institution to
operate in India, either independently or in collaboration or partnership or in twinning
arrangement with any educational institution situated in India, it shall submit a report to the
Central Government in this regard, and the decision of the Central Government thereon shall
be final.
(8) The Central Government may, having regard to the report of the Commission,
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such report, recognised and notify
such foreign educational institution as a foreign education provider for the purpose of
award of degree or diploma or both in India and immediately after such notification,
notwithstanding anything contrary or otherwise in the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956, the provisions of that Act shall apply to such institution as they apply to any
university in India:
Provided that the Central Government may reject the application of a foreign educational
institution for reasons to be recorded in writing and communicate the same to such institution
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of report of the Commission.
5. (1) A foreign education provider shall ensure that the course or programme of study
offered and imparted by it in India is, in conformity with the standards laid down by the
statutory authority, and is of quality comparable, as to the curriculum, methods of imparting
education and the faculty employed or engaged to impart education, to those offered by it to
students enrolled in its main campus in the country in which such institution is established
or incorporated.
(2) A foreign education provider shall, out of the income received from the corpus
fund, utilise not more than seventy-five per cent. of such income for the purposes of
development of its institution in India and the remaining of such unutilised income shall be
deposited into the corpus fund.
(3) No part of the surplus in revenue generated in India by such Foreign Education
Provider, after meeting all expenditure in regard to its operations in India, shall be invested
for any purpose other than for the growth and development of the educational institutions
established by it in India.
3 of 1956.
Quality of
programmes
offered in
India, use of
income from
corpus fund,
and
investment of
surplus in
generated
revenue.

5
6. (1) Every foreign education provider shall publish, before expiry of  sixty days prior
to the date of the commencement of admission to any  of its courses or programmes of study,
a prospectus containing the following for the purposes of informing those persons intending
to seek admission and the general public, namely:—
(i) each component of the fee, deposits and other charges payable by students
admitted to such institution for pursuing a course or programme of study, and the
other terms and conditions of such payment;
(ii) the percentage of tuition fee and other charges refundable to a student
admitted in such institution in case such student withdraws from such institution
before or after completion of course or programme of study and the time within, and
the manner in, which such refund shall be made to that student;
(iii) the number of seats approved by the statutory authority in respect of each
course or programme of study for the academic year for which admission is proposed
to be made;
(iv) the conditions of eligibility including the minimum and maximum age limit, if
any, of persons for admission as a student in a particular course or programme of
study, where so specified by the institution;
(v) the educational qualifications specified by the relevant statutory authority,
or by the institution, where no such qualifying standards have been specified by any
statutory authority;
(vi) the process of admission and selection of eligible candidates applying for
such admission, including all relevant information in regard to the details of  test or
examination, if any, for selecting such candidates for admission to each course or
programme of study and the amount of fee to be paid for the admission test;
(vii) details of the teaching faculty, including therein  the educational
qualifications and teaching experience of every member of its teaching faculty and
also indicating therein whether such members are on regular basis or as visiting member;
(viii) the minimum pay and other emoluments payable for each category of
teachers and other employees;
(ix) information in regard to physical and academic infrastructure and other
facilities including hostel accommodation, library and hospital or industry wherein the
practical training  to be imparted to the students and in particular the facilities accessible
by students on being admitted to the institution;
(x) broad outlines of the syllabus specified by the statutory authority or by the
institution, as the case may be, for every course or programme of study, including the
teaching hours, practical sessions and other assignments;
(xi) all relevant instructions in regard to maintaining the discipline by students
within or outside the campus of the institution, and, in particular such discipline
relating to the prohibition of ragging of any student or students and the consequences
thereof and for violating the provisions of any regulation in this behalf made under the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force;
(xii) any such other information which may be prescribed:
Provided that the foreign education provider shall publish information referred
to in items (i) to (xii) of this sub-section, on its website, and the attention of prospective
students and the general public shall be drawn to such publication on the website
through advertisements displayed prominently in the different newspapers and through
other media:
Mandatory
publication of
prospectus, its
contents and
its pricing.
3 of 1956.

6
Provided further that the foreign education provider may publish prospectus in
accordance with this section at any time before the period of sixty days specified
under this sub-section.
(2) Every foreign education provider shall fix the price of each printed copy of the
prospectus, being not more than the reasonable cost of its publication and distribution and
no profit be made out of the publication, distribution or sale of prospectus.
7. (1) If the Commission is satisfied that the foreign education provider has violated
any provision of this Act or the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 or any other law for
the time being in force or rules, regulations or orders made or notifications issued thereunder,
it may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the foreign education provider,
recommend to the Central Government for withdrawal or recognition and rescission of the
notification issued under sub-section (8) of section 4 in respect of such foreign education
provider.
(2)  Where the Central Government is satisfied that the recognition of the foreign
education provider, referred to in sub-section (1), is to be withdrawn and notification issued
under sub-section ( 8) of section 4 in respect of such foreign education provider to be
rescinded, it shall require the Commission to intimate¯
(i)  the management of the foreign education provider;
(ii)  the teachers employed by the foreign education provider; and
(iii)  the student council or any other body by whatever name called, and the
parents of the students enrolled by the foreign education provider,
by a notice, in such manner as may be prescribed, of the grounds for withdrawal of recognition
and rescission of the notification issued under sub-section (8) of section 4 in respect of such
foreign education provider.
(3) The management or teachers or students council or parents of students of such
foreign education provider may, within a period of thirty days from date of receipt of notice
under sub-section (2), represent to the Central Government against the proposed rescission
of the notification in respect of such foreign education provider.
(4) If the Central Government, after considering the representations, if any, received
under sub-section (3), is satisfied, it may withdraw the recognition and rescind the notification
issued under sub-section (8) of section 4 in respect of the foreign education provider referred
to in sub-section (1).
(5) On withdrawal of the recognition and rescission of the notification issued under
sub-section (8) of section 4 in respect of the foreign education provider, the foreign educational
institution shall cease to be a foreign education provider on and from the last date of the
academic session following the previous academic session in which the notice under sub-
section (2) was issued by the Commission.
(6) On withdrawal of recognition and rescission of the notification issued under sub-
section (8) of section 4 in respect of the foreign education provider, the Central Government
shall, as soon as may be, take such measures as may be necessary to provide alternative and
appropriate educational facilities for those students who were enrolled by such foreign
education provider.
(7) The Central Government may, in accordance with the relevant law for the time
being in force, attach the corpus fund and such other properties of the foreign education
provider referred to in sub-section ( 4), as it may deem fit to make payments to any
person employed in India by such foreign education provider, and for making
arrangements of appropriate educational facilities for students referred to in sub-
section ( 6).
Withdrawal
and rescission
of notification
of foreign
education
provider.
3 of 1956.

7
CHAPTER III
PENALTIES
8. (1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956, any person who, being associated with an educational institution or a foreign
educational institution not being a foreign education provider which has not been recognised
and notified under sub-section ( 8) of section 4 or whose recognition and notification has
been withdrawn¯
(a) offers or gives admission to any person as student or collects fee or awards
any degree, diploma or any other equivalent qualification in violation of the provisions
of section 3; or
(b) publishes or releases any advertisement which is misleading or gives wrongful
information in the print, electronic or any other  media  or  fails  to  publish disclosures
as required  under section 13,
shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but which may extend
to fifty lakh rupees in addition to refund of the fee, so collected, to the persons from whom it
was collected and confiscation of any gains made out of it.
(2) Any foreign education provider, which has been recognised and notified under
sub-section (8) of section 4, who contravenes any provision of section 5 or section 6 or any
provision of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, shall be liable to a penalty which
shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but which may extend to fifty lakh rupees and the
forfeiture of the corpus fund referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 4 in whole
or part thereof.
(3) All sums realised by way of penalties or the gains confiscated under this Chapter or
the amount of corpus fund forfieted shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
CHAPTER IV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may,
by notification, on the recommendation of the Advisory Board constituted under sub-section
(2), having regard to the reputation and international standing of foreign educational
institution and such other criteria as may be prescribed, exempt such institution from operation
of any of the foregoing provisions, other than sub-section (3) of section 5 and section 8.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, by notification,
constitute an Advisory Board consisting of—
(a) three distinguished persons from the field of academics, who are, or may
have been at any time, declared as a national research professor, one of whom shall be
designated as the Chairperson of the Advisory Board;
(b) Chairman of the Commission,   ex officio ;
(c) Chairman of one of the statutory authorities, other than the Commission, by
rotation.
(3) The Advisory Board shall meet at such times and places, and observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such
meeting) as may be prescribed.
10. (1)  Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Commission,
shall, in exercise of its powers or performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by
such directions on question of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it,
from time to time:
Provided that the Commission shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
3 of 1956.
Penalties.
3 of 1956.
Power of
Central
Government
to exempt.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.

8
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
11.  Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all the matters (including the penalties
leviable under this Act) shall be adjudicated by the National Educational Tribunal.
12. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a foreign educational institution
(not being a foreign education provider notified under section 4), which is imparting education
leading to award of certificate or any other qualification not being a degree or diploma or
equivalent qualifications, shall furnish a report to the Commission about its activities, in
such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The foreign educational institution referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall publish
information on its website and draw the attention of prospective students and the general
public to such publication on the website through advertisements displayed prominently in
the different newspapers and through other media, indicating, inter alia, the following,
namely:¯
(a) the details of course or programme of study leading to the award of certificate;
(b) the details of enrolment of students;
(c) the details of infrastructure available with it;
(d) details of the place wherefrom such institution is operating in India;
(e) whether operating on its own or through collaboration or partnership or
twinning arrangement with any Indian educational institution and the details thereof;
(f) such other information as may be considered necessary by the Commission.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:¯
(a) the form and manner in which an application may be made and other particulars
including payment of fee under sub-section (2) of section 4;
(b) the other information required to be published in the prospectus by a foreign
education provider under clause (xii) of sub-section (1) of section 6;
(c) the manner in which notice shall be given under sub-section (2) of section 7;
(d) the criteria for granting exemption to foreign educational institution under
sub-section (1) of section 9;
(e) the time and place at which the Advisory Board shall meet and rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at
such meeting) to be observed by it under sub-section ( 3) of section 9;
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of
which provision is to be made by rules by the Central Government.
15. (1) The Commission may, by notification, make regulations, consistent with this
Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2
)  In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:¯
(a) the inquiries and the manner of making such inquiries by the Registrar under
sub-section (5) of section 4;
Adjudication
of penalty.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Foreign
educational
institution
conducting
certificate
courses to
report its
activities to
Commission.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
make
regulations.

9
(b) the manner in which a foreign educational institution shall report of its
activities under sub-section (1) of section 13;
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations
or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
16. Every rule and every regulation made and every notification issued under  this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making
any modification in the rule or regulation or notification, or both Houses agree that the rule
or regulation or notification should not be made or issued,  the rule or regulation or notification
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification.
17. (1)  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary, for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Laying of
rules,
regulations
and
notifications.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A number of Foreign Educational Institutions have been operating in the country and
some of them may be resorting to various  malpractices to allure and attract  students. There
is no comprehensive and effective policy for regulation on the operations of all the foreign
educational institutions in the country. Due to lack of  policy or regulatory regime it has been
very difficult to make meaningful assessment of the operations of the foreign educational
institutions and absence of such meaningful assessment has given rise to chances of adoption
of various unfair practices besides commercialisation.
2. At present,  only the All India Council for  Technical Education has notified regulations
for entry  and operation of foreign universities  and institutions imparting  technical education
in India which apply only to  such institutions which are providing technical education
covered by the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987.
3. The enactment of a legislation regulating entry and operation of all the foreign
educational  institutions is necessary to maintain the  standards of higher education within
the country as well to protect the interest of the students and in public interest. The object
of the  proposed legislation is to regulate entry and  operation of foreign  educational
institutions imparting or intending to impart higher education or technical education or
practice of any profession in India (including award of  degree, diploma and equivalent
qualifications  by such institutions) and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
4. The Foreign Educational Institutions  (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill,
2010, inter alia,   provides—
(a) that the foreign educational institution shall,—
(i) not impart education  in India unless it is recognised and notified  by  the
Central Government  as a foreign education  provider under the proposed legislation;
(ii) offer and impart education which  is in conformity with the standards  laid
down by the statutory authority, and is of quality comparable, as to the  curriculum,
methods of imparting education  and the faculty employed or engaged to impart
education, to those offered by it to students enrolled in its  main campus  in the
country in which such institution is established or incorporated;
(iii) maintenance of the corpus fund of not less than fifty crore rupees or such
sum as  may be notified from time to time by the Central Government;
(b) that the Central Government  may,—
(i) refuse to recognise and notify a foreign educational institution as foreign
education provider if it is not  in the interest of sovereignty, integrity of India,  the
security  of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public  order, decency or
morality or sensitivity of location of the foreign educational institutions;
(ii) withdraw the recognition  and  rescind the notification  of a  foreign education
provider on the grounds of violation of the provisions of the proposed legislation or
the University Grants  Commission Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in
force and on such withdrawal or recession of  notification, the Central Government
shall make necessary alternative arrangements;
(c) that any person who, being associated with  an educational  institution or a foreign
educational instititution not being a foreign education provider which has not been recognised
and notified under the proposed legislation, offer or gives admission to any person as
student or collects fee  or awards any degree, diploma  or publishes or releases any
10

11
advertisement which is misleading or gives wrongful information or fails to publish disclosures
as required under the proposed  legislation shall be liable to a penalty of not less than ten
lakh rupees which may extend to fifty lakh rupees in addition to refund of the fee and
confiscation of any gains made out of it;
(d) that any foreign education provider, which has been recognised and notified under
the proposed legislation, who contravenes the provisions of clause  5 of the proposed
legislation relating to quality of programmes offered in India,  use of income from corpus
fund, and investment  of surplus in generated revenue  or the provisions of the University
Grants  Commission Act, 1956 shall be  liable  to a penalty of not less than ten lakh rupees
which may extend to fifty lakh rupees and the forfeiture of the corpus fund in whole or part
thereof;
(e) for adjudication of all matters (including penalties leviable) under  the proposed
legislation by the National Educational Tribunal to be established under the Educational
Tribunals Bill, 2010 proposed to be enacted.
5. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks  to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KAPIL SIBAL
The 19th April, 2010.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make, by notification in the
Official Gazette, rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters,
inter alia, include matters: (a) the form and manner in which an application may be made
and other particulars including payment of fee under sub-clause (2) of clause 4; (b) the
other information required to be published in the prospectus by a foreign education
provider under clause (xii) of sub-clause (1) of clause 6; (c) the manner in which notice shall
be given under sub- clause (2) of clause 7; (d) the criteria for granting exemption to foreign
educational institution under sub- clause (1) of clause 9; (e) the time and place at which the
Advisory Board shall meet and rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings (including quorum at such meeting) to be observed by it under sub-clause
(3) of clause 9; and (f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or in
respect of which provision is to be made by rules by the Central Government.
2. Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Commission (University Grants Commission) to
make, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulations for carrying out the provisions of
the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such
regulations may be made. These matters, inter alia, include: (a) the inquiries and the man-
ner of making such inquiries by the Registrar under sub-clause (5) of clause 4; (b) the
manner in which a foreign educational institution shall report of its activities under
sub-clause (1) of clause 13; and (c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified by regulations or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
3. The rules made by the Central Government under clause 14 and regulations made
by the Commission under clause 15 of the Bill, shall be laid, as soon as they are made, before
both House of Parliament under clause 16 of the Bill.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of normal character.
12

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate entry and operation of foreign educational institutions imparting or intending to
impart higher education (including technical education and medical education and
award of degree, diploma and equivalent qualifications by such institutions) and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development)
GMGIPMRND—1854LS—21.04.2010.