1
Short title
and com-
mencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2020
By
SHRI KODIKUNNIL SURESH,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 16 of the Constitution, for clauses (4) and (4A), the following clauses shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(4) The State shall make statutory provision for the reservation of appointments
or posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and any other backward class
of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the
services under the State.
Amendment
of article 16.
Bill  No. 57  of  2020
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(4A) The State shall make statutory provisions for reservation in promotion with
consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State
in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of
the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State.".

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present reservation in public sector available in favour of persons belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes is inadequate and even after the
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are able to secure
employment in the public sector, they face challenges in availing rightful promotions
due to various factors. The fact that the number of posts and appointments in
Government sector is shrinking, the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes find it very difficult to get Government service and further their career
progression due to several reasons.
The existing system gaps preventing the persons belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in ensuring employment and promotions in public
sector must be addressed. At present, mandatory provisions that direct the States to
provide reservation in employment and promotion in public sector to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes are absent. The lack of directional clarity in the
articles 16(4) and 16(4A) which has further compounded the matter.
The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to make it mandatory for the
Government to make statutory provisions for—
(i) reservation in appointments or posts for the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and backward class of citizens; and
(ii) reservation in promotion with consequential seniority, to any class or
classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the persons
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes,
which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the
services under the State.
Hence,  this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KODIKUNNIL SURESH
February 12, 2020.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*******
16.(1) * * * *
(2) * * * *
(3) * * * *
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens
which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under
the State.
(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for
reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class or classes
of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in
the services under the State.
*******
4
Equality of
opportunity
in matters of
public
employment.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kodikunnil Suresh, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5407LS(S3)—26-02-2020.