As IntropuceD In Lok SABHA

28 Jy, 40, '

Bill No. 57 ० 2006

THE CONSUMER GOODS (MANDATORY PRINTING OF COST OF
PRODUCTION AND MAXIMUM RETAIL PRICE) BILL, 2006
By
Surr Hansray GANGARAMII AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for printing of cost of production and maximum retail price of consumer
goods being sold in the market and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be’called the Consumer Goods (Mandatory Printing of Cost of
Production and Maximum Retail Price) Act, 2006.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall apply to all persons involved in marketing or manufacturing of goods
based on either indigenous or imported materials with the intention of offering it for sale in
the market:

Short title,
extent and
application.


Definitions.

Mandatory
printing of
cost of
production
and maximum
retail price on
packaging of
consumer
goods.

Provision of
complaint
against
selling of
consumer
goods for a
price more
than
maximum
retail price,
ete,

Act to be
given wide
publicity.

Act not in
derogation of
any other law.

Power to
make rules.

2,
2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —

(a) “appropriate Government” means the Central Government or a
State Government as the case may be;

(8) “consumer goods” mean all goods and items brought in the market for sale
and are meant for the use and consumption of the consumers;

(c) “cost of.production” means cost incurred directly or indirectly by the
manufacturer in the production of goods;

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(e) “printing” means printing of the cost of production and retail price at a
visible place on the product in Hindi and English and the local language of the place
it is sold; and

(“maximum retail price” means such price at which the product shall be sold in
retail and such price shall include all taxes levied on the product.

3. No person shall sell or cause to be sold any consumer goods without the cost of
production and maximum retail price of the product printed on such product after the expiry
of six months from the date of coming into force of this Act.

4. (1) any person may file a complaint with the appropriate Government in case a
consumer goods is sold at more than the maximum retail price printed on the product or is
sold without the cost of production of the product printed on it.

(2) The appropriate Government, on receipt of the complaint from any individual or
on its own, shall cause an enquiry made into the complaint.

(3) If, after the enquiry made under sub-section (2), it is found that the provisions of
the Act have been violated, the license of the organization responsible for manufacturing
the consumer goods as also of the organization selling the consumer goods shall be
cancelled forthwith and the person-in-charge of the organization shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and with a fine which
shall not be less than rupees one lakh.

5. The provision of this Act shall be given wide publicity by the appropriate Government
through such media as it may deem fit.

6. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of any other
law, for the time being in force, relating to matters provided in this Act.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

It is generally seen that the prices of consumer goods sold in the markets are determined
arbitrarily by the manufacturers. In this process, the manufacturers gain huge profit as the
actual manufacturing cost is very low. The consumers’ interests are compromised and they
are compelled to buy goods at much higher prices in comparison to actual manufacturing
cost of goods. Thus, consumers are subjected to economic exploitation.

For example, Potato chips, drinking water, soft drinks, automobiles, medicines, etc. are
being sold at a price much higher than their cost price. The manufacturers arbitrarily fix the
price and the consumers are compelled to purchase goods at higher costs. If it is made
mandatory for the manufacturers to print the actual cost of production of goods alongwith
their maximum retail price it will help to curb the greed of the manufacturers. Such a measure
will also help the consumers in making a decision regarding buying the product.

It is the duty of the Government to bring a legislation for protecting the interests of
consumers. In the wake of economic liberalisation, it has become essential that the consumers
are given the right to know the actual manufacturing cost of the goods they are going to

Purchase.

It is also in the public interest to make commodities and goods available at fair prices
to consumers. The interests of consumers can be protected against the vice of profiteering
by making the goods and commodities available to them at a reasonable price.

Hence the Bill.

New De tH; HANSRAJ GANGARAMII AHIR
April 27,2006.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides that appropriate Government shall give wide publicity to
the provisions of this Act.

The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. The State Governments will also incur expenditure from their respective Consolidated
Funds. An annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-five crore is likely to be
incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be incurred.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for printing of cost of production and maximum retail price of
consumer goods being sold in the market and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Hansraj Gangaramji Ahir. M.P.)

MGIPMRND—1144LS(S4)—12.07.2006.’