AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

6 7// .v05

*
Bill No. 57 of 2005
GOLEM RATE SUSE 2 Dene BN Ie SE
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
SHRI SUBODH Mouite, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005. Short title.
2. After article 24 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, Insertion of new
5 namely:— article 24A

"24A. Every citizen shall have the right to corruption free service in Right to corrup-
all offices and bodies under the State." tion free service,



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution represent two
important facts. The first is that they are an explicit and si gnificant articulation of
the basic rights that every citizen in the country must enjoy in order to ensure
that we have a meaningful democracy and the ideals articulated in the Preamble —
of the Constitution and realised in practice. The second important fact is that
they represent the rights which a citizen must enjoy if we want to have good
governance by removing social evils like untouchability. These rights have
evolved over generations. They represent the lessons the society has learnt
from the past experience when these rights were not available to the citizens and -
consequently there was suffering and misgovernance. For example, the protection
from double jeopardy must have arisen because there was a time when a person *
could be punished again and again for the same offence.

Fifty eight years of our existence as independent nation and 55 years of
working of the Constitution has resulted in one common experience of all Indian
citizens. They cannot go to any public organisation or office today and get the -
service which they are supposed to get without either paying bribe or bringing
influence by way of recommendations or references from VIPs. Today, the
situation is so bad that even a simple work, can be get done only after paying
necessary bribe or bringing influence. It is a shameful thing that our country has
been rated as one of the most corrupt countries in the world. Corruption cannot
go unchecked. It will kill initiative, industriousness and skill. It will rather develop -
a lack of sensibility and irresponsibility. Today, corruption is not only in
Government departments but is prevalent everywhere.

When we are talking about transparency in administration, freedom of
information, etc. it would be appropriate to talk about prevention of corruption
which all go together. Today, we are attracting maximum foreign investment. Our
computer engineers are making proud by their achievements to the nation. But
one single factor, corruption has downgraded our image to such an extent that
all our efforts have been nullified. Certain steps like—

(i) computerisation of all records:
(ii) immediate action in case of corruption;
(iii) complete and accurate transparency in administration; and

(19) severe punishment to the guilty
can be initiated immediately to tackle this menace.

With this in view, it is proposed to amend the Constitution to make
corruption free service as a fundamental right.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; SUBODH MOHITE
March 11,2005.



LOK SABHA

r
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—58LS—13-04-2005.