1
THE COMPULSORY BASIC FACILITIES FOR WIDOWS AND
ORPHANS BILL, 2016
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory basic facilities like housing, food, water, medicine and
security to widows and orphans and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Basic Facilities for Widows and Orphans
Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  57 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “orphan” means a child who is below fourteen years of age and has no living
parents or other relatives to take care of his minimum basic needs;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) “widow” means a legally married woman and whose husband has died and
does not have any means of livelihood.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months of
the Commencement of this Act, by notification, frame a National Policy for protection and
welfare of the widows and orphans.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish adequate number of residential
centres all over the country for the use of widows and orphans.
(2) Every residential centre shall have the capacity of minimum eighty and maximum
two hundred persons to live there at a time.
(3) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of staff in the residential
centres for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
staff of residential centres shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide to the widows and orphans—
(a) housing, food, water, medicine, security and the minimum resources
necessary to lead a balanced and healthy life in the residential centre; and
(b) employment opportunities by setting up domestic production in the
residential centre.
6. (1) Every residential centre shall be administered by a Managing Committee
consisting of—
(i) Chairperson of the local body— Chairperson;
(ii) Secretary, State Social Welfare Department— member;
(iii) One person representing widows from amongst widows
staying in the residential centre— member; and
(iv) One person representing social worker to be nominated
by the appropriate Government— member.
(2) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of staff to the Managing
Committee, as may be necessary, for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(3)  The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, members and staff of the Managing Committee shall be such as may be
prescribed.
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall establish in each State, the State Monitoring
Board to monitor, supervise and coordinate the residential centres operating in each district.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(i) Chairperson of State Women Commission — Chairperson;
(ii) Secretary, State Social Welfare Department — member; and
(iii
) An eminent social activist to be nominated by the — member.
appropriate Government
Definitions.
National
policy for
widows and
orphans.
Establishment
of residential
centres.
Residential
centres to
have proper
facilities for
the
beneficiaries.
Administration
of the
residential
centres.
State
Monitoring
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(3) The appropriate Government shall appoint such officers and staff to the Board for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the service
of the Chairperson, members and staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are large number of widows in the country who are not only discriminated in
their family but also in the entire society. In several cases, they are deprived of basic
support and assistance. The necessity today is to create a conducive environment climate
whereby these widows can live their remaining lives in a productive and happy manner.
There is also a large section of the population of orphan kids who are without any support
and who live a destitute life. Most of these kids are either subjected to child labour or they
are addicted to drugs or are involved in illegal organ trading.
The Bill provides integrated provisions to bring these two disadvantaged sections of
the society under one roof where they can use their mutual cooperating role. The need of
the hour is to bring together these sections of the society in a socially conducive manner.
Widow women should undertake the role of mother for orphan children. This would make a
family environment for all of them. Through these centres, along with basic facilities such
as food, shelter and clothing, an opportunity to live a more dignified life can be given to all
these sections of the society. It is also important that this arrangement should make their
lives happy by mutually independent and emotional bonding. In these centres, the neglected,
suffering and deprived classes of our society should be able to live a life where they should
be free from deprivation and many other problems.
The most important reason to establish these centres is to create a unified shelter for
both the needy sections instead of separate orphanage and widow ashram. Two distinctive
benefits that should arise from such arrangement are that on one hand there should be a
reduction in Government spending on infrastructure, human resources, etc. and on the
other hand, these disadvantaged groups should have an opportunity to take care of each
other and live a better life with emotion, protective and mental satisfaction.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
February 8, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the residential centres all over
the country for the welfare of widows and orphans. It also provides for appointment of staff
in the residential centres. Clause 5 provides that appropriate Government shall provide
basic facilities to the widows and orphans in the residential centres. Clause 6 provides for
administration of the residential centres by the Management Committee. Clause 7 provides
for establishment of the State Monitoring Board in each State. Clause 8 provides that
Central Government shall provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is not possible to quantify the expenditure at this juncture. However, it is estimated that
a sum of rupees one thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory basic facilities like housing, food, water, medicine and
security to widows and orphans and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4351LS(S3)—03-03-2016.