“TOE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

AN

Bill No. 57 of 2002.

THE PREVENTION OF DERELICTION OF DUTY BY PUBLIC
FUNCTIONARY OR PUBLIC SERVANT (IN COMMUNAL
RIOTS, OF CRIME OF GENOCIDE AND OF
CONTEMPTUOUS IMPUTATIONS) BILL, 2002.

By
Sin GM. Banta, MP
A
BILL
10 provide for prevention of, and for dealing with, dereliction of duty by public func-

tionary or public servant in communal riots, of the crime of genocide and of
‘contemptuous imputations and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Prevention of Dereliction of Duty by Public Short title and
Functionary or Public Servant (in Communal Riots, of crime of Genocide and of commence:

5  Contemptuous Imputations) Act, 2002. mast.
(2) It shall come into force at once.


2

Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(०) “appropriate Government” means,—

(0 in the case of a State specified in the First Schedule to the
Constitution, the State Government;

(ii) in the case of a Union Territory specified in the First Schedule to the
Constitution, the Central’ Government;

(0) “Code” means the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);

(©) “Convention” means the Convention on “The Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide’ approved and adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on 9 December, 1948;

(d) “genocide” means ‘genocide’ as defined in article 2 of the Convention;

(©) “public functionary” means a person who holds the office of a Minister in
the Union or a State and includes the Prime Minister and the Chief Minister;

(P “public servant” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 21 of the
Code;

(g) “words and expressions” used and not defined in the Act but defined in the

Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them therein.

Punishment 3. Whoever being a public functionary or 8 public servant,—
for dereliction
of 2395 ete. (@) aids, abets or assists in, or *

(b) allows or facilitates voluntarily or through negligence, inaction, illegal
‘omission or dereliction of duty, or

(c) conceals commitment of or design to commit, or
> @is guilty of complicity in the committing of, or
(€) is guilty of illegal omission or dereliction of duty in the investigation of and
due action on any criminal offence punishable under sections 3, 4 or 5 or under the
provisions of the Code or any other law in force,

he shall, where such offence is related to or is in the course of communal riots or
harm caused on religious, linguistic, racial or ethnical ground,—

(@ be liable to be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than seven years and such imprisonment shall not be concurrent
with any sentence of imprisonment under the Code or any other law in force
and shall be in addition or further to any sentence under the Code or any other al
Jaw in force, and :

(०) shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any Jaw in force, forfeit, 35
in the case of his being a public servant, his official position or, in the case of
his being a public functionary, vacate his seat in the House of the Parliament or
the Legislature of a State, as the case may be, and shall be disqualified for the

same at any point of time thereafter.
Punishment. “4. Whoever is guilty of committing genocide or any of the other acts enumerated in 40
for genocide. article 3 of the Convention shall be punished with death.
Punishment 5. Whoever by words, either spoken or written or by sign or by visible representation

for contemp- or otherwise makes or publishes contemptuous imputation against a religious, linguistic

एक sions. _ FHCial or ethnical minority, in whole or part, or against any category of its educational or


10

15

20

25

religious institutions collectively, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years,

Explanation,—Characterisation of a religious, linguistic, racial or ethnical minority
as anti-national or anti-social element or as anti-any-other-such group or as terrorist or 88
disloyal to India will amount to contemptuous imputation.

6. (1) Where a communal violence in any part of a State or Union Territory continues

+ for more than forty-eight hours, the appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the

Chief Justice of the State or Union Territory concemed, appoint a sitting High Court Judge
to inquire into and report whether there is any prima facie case against any public functionary
or public servant under section 3 and the appropriate Government shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in service rules or manual or in any law in force, also suspend the
highest police’ officer of the State or the Union Territory, as the case may be, and of the
district and the local area concerned.

(2) Where the report under sub-section (/) discloses or indicates committing of an
offence under section 3, the appropriate Government shall immediately and effectively
commence the required action including legal action or process and making of arrests.

(3) Every report under-section (1) received by the appropriate Government shall,
without delay, be laid before each House of the Parliament in the case of Union Territory,
and, in the case of a State, before the Legislature of the State concerned.

(4) The police officer suspended under sub-section (7) may be restored tc his position
in the light of the findings and recommendations contained in the report sub:vitted under
sub-section (/).

7. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 468 and 469 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure 1973 (2 of 1974) or in any other law or public service manual of the
Union, All-India or a State service, no action pursuant to sections 3, 4 and 5 shall be
vitiated by any consideration of the action being a delayed or belated action or action
being barred by lapse or expiry of the period of limitation.

Continuous
communal
violence for
more than
forty-eight
hours.

Limitation
period not to
apply.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

‘The destiny of India lies in communal peace, amity and harmony. The recent Gujarat
carnage has once again stirred up the entire nation.

An important aspect of communal violence and attempts to deal with them is the
frequent allegations of complicity and dereliction of duty on the part of public servants and
public functionaries. There is need to ensure greater accountability. The Bill accordingly
seeks to enhance criminal liability and impose severe punishment on whoever being a
public functionary or public servant aids, abcts, assists or allows or facilitates through
negligence, inaction, illegal omission or dereliction of duty, or conceals commitment of or
design to commit, or is guilty of complicity in committing or of illegal omission or dereliction
of duty in investigation and action on criminal offences related to or in course of communal

rioting or harm caused on religious, linguistic, racial or ethnical ground. The enhanced
liability includes;—

(@) punishment with rigorous imprisonment for not less than seven years in addition
to any punishment under the Indian Penal Code; and

(6) permanent loss of the official position in the case of a public servant and, in the
case of a public functionary (that is, any Minister including the Prime Minister
and the Chief Minister) loss of seat in the Parliament or Legislature and permanent
disqualification for the same.

In the unfortunate and devastating case of communal violence continuing for more
than 48 hours, the Bill provides for (i) suspension of the highest police officer of the State/
Union Territory and of the district and the local area concerned and (ii) requires the
appropriate Government to appoint a sitting High Court Judge to inquire into and report on
whether there are any instances of complicity in crime or dereliction of duty, etc., on the
part of any public functionary or public servant.

The Bill also responds to the United Nations Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide which cails upon States to provide effective penalties
for persons guilty of genocide and complicity in genocide. The Bill lays down punishment
with death.

The atmosphere of communal harmony is often vitiated by Mespite contemptuous
imputations against religious, linguistic, racial or ethnic minority. To protect society and
communal peace, the Bill provides for severe and deterrent punishment,

The Bill also removes the bar of period of limitation for taking cognizance of the
criminal offence to which the Bill addresses itself.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New Dax; G.M. BANATWALLA
July 1, 2002


LOKSABHA

A
BILL
to provide for prevention of, and for dealing with, dereliction of duty by public
functionary or public servant in communal riots, of the crime of genocide and of
contemptuous imputations and for matters connected therewith,

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla, M.B)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2085LS—18-07-2002.