1
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1)  This Act may be called the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2015.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Bill No. 57 of  2015
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the information Technology Act, 2000, in section 66A,—
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (b), the words ‘‘annoyance, inconvenience,’’ shall be omitted;
(iii) in clause ( c), the words ‘‘for the purpose of causing annoyance or
inconvenience or’’ shall be omitted; and
(iv) after clause (c), for the words ‘‘three years and with fine’’ the words ‘‘one
month or with fine’’ shall be substituted.
Amendment of
section 66A.
21 of 2000.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Right to Freedom of Speech and Expression is a fundamental principal for any vibrant
democracy. The founding fathers of Indian constitution undoubtedly considered free speech
as one of the most basic rights, essential for safeguarding and promoting other human
rights. While providing for Right to free speech under article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution,
certain reasonable restrictions under article 19(2) have been laid down. Therefore, free speech
can be restricted only on the grounds of reasonable restrictions as mentioned in article 19(2).
Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 in its current form is arbitrary and does
not adhere to the standards laid down by article 19(2) and the interpretation yardsticks laid
down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The phrases used in section 66A such as causing inconvenience, is of menacing
character and vague and have a tendency of being used arbitrarily, leading to chilling effects
on free speech and other rights of the citizens. It provides for criminal recourse for speech
that is grossly offensive and aims at merely causing "annoyance" or "inconvenience".
These phrases are very subjective and vague and not in conformity with the restrictions
mentioned under article 19(2) and thus create new offences hampering the online right to
freedom of expression.
In the last few years, there have been several instances of misuse of this provision
such as the arrests of cartoonists, university professors for posting caricatures for criticizing
the Government's ineffectiveness and even the arrest of teenagers for questioning shutdown
of a city on social networks like Facebook. These arbitrary arrests highlight the potential
abuse of this provision due to the subjective powers conferred on the police.
Moreover, section 127 of the United Kingdom Communications Act, 2003, from which
the phraseology of section 66A has been borrowed was also struck down by the House of
Lords in the case of Director of Public Prosecutions vs. Collins. It was held that Parliament
could not have intended to criminalize statements that one person may reasonably find to be
polite and acceptable and another may decide to be grossly offensive. However, section 66A
continues to provide punishment without any safeguard or judicially evolved checks and
balances guiding the interpretation regarding the ingredients of the offence warranting
invoking of the provision.
Section 66A of Information Technology Act provides punishment up to three years of
imprisonment and fine without any upper limit. The punishment prima-facie is disproportional
to the offence mentioned. There is no reasonable justification provided as to why punishment
for sending offensive messages through communication service should extend to three
years with a fine, particularly  when the punishment for criminal nuisance under the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 extends to a fine of rupees two thousand with no imprisonment. It is not
surprising that due to such provisions, India was ranked at 140th place out of 179 countries
in the Press Freedom Index, 2013. Therefore, the provisions in its current form is violative of
several human rights and in direct contravention of the principle of right to free speech and
expression and need to be amended.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JAGDAMBIKA  PAL
February 12, 2015
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, 2000
(21 OF 2000)
* * * * * *
66A. Any person who sends, by means of a computer resource or a communication
device,—
(a) any information that is grossly offensive or has menacing character; or
(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of causing
annoyance, inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal intimidation,,
enmity, hatred or ill will, persistently by making use of such computer resource or a
communication device; or
(c) any electronic mail or electronic mail message for the purpose of causing
annoyance or inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient
about the origin of such messages,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with
fine.
* * * * * *
Punishment
for sending
offensive
messages
through
communication
service, etc.
4

GMGIPMRND—4746LS(S3)—03-03-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
————
(Shri Jagdambika Pal, M.P .)