Bill No. 57 of 2008
THE COMPANIES BILL, 2008
_______
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
_______
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, commencement, extent and application.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
INCORPORATION OF COMPANIES
3. Formation of  company.
4. Formation of companies with charitable objects, etc.
5. Memorandum.
6. Articles.
7. Incorporation of companies.
8. Effect of registration.
9. Effect of memorandum and articles.
10. Commencement of business, etc.
11. Registered office of company.
12. Alteration of memorandum.
13. Alteration of articles.
14. Alteration of memorandum and articles to be noted in every copy.
15. Rectification of name of company.
16. Copies of memorandum, articles, etc., to be given to members.
17. Re-registration of companies already registered.
18. Subsidiary company not to hold shares in its holding company.
19. Service of documents.
20. Authentication of documents, proceedings and contracts.
21. Execution of bills of exchange, etc.
CHAPTER III
P
ROSPECTUS AND ALLOTMENT OF SECURITIES
22. Powers of Securities and Exchange Board to regulate issue and transfer of securities,
etc.
23. Matters to be stated in prospectus.
24. Offer or invitation for subscription of securities.
25. Advertisement of prospectus.
26. Shelf prospectus.
27. Red herring prospectus.
28. Issue of application forms for securities.
29. Criminal liability for mis-statements in prospectus.
30. Civil liability for mis-statements in prospectus.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
(i)

(ii)
31. Punishment for fraudulently inducing persons to invest money.
32. Action to be taken by affected  persons.
33. Punishment for personation for acquisition, etc., of securities.
34. Allotment of securities by company.
35. Securities to be dealt with in Stock Exchanges.
36. Global Depository Receipt.
CHAPTER IV
S
HARE CAPITAL AND DEBENTURES
37. Kinds of share capital.
38. Nature of shares or debentures.
39. Numbering of shares.
40. Certificate of shares.
41. V oting rights.
42. Variation of shareholders’ rights.
43. Calls on shares of same class to be made on uniform basis.
44. Company to accept unpaid share capital, although not called up.
45. Payment of dividend in proportion to amount paid-up.
46. Application of premiums received on issue of shares.
47. Prohibition on issue of shares at discount.
48. Issue of sweat equity shares.
49. Issue and redemption of preference  share.
50. Transfer and transmission of securities.
51. Punishment for personation of shareholder.
52. Refusal of registration and appeal against refusal.
53. Rectification of register of members.
54. Publication of authorised, subscribed and paid-up capital.
55. Power of limited company to alter its share capital.
56. Further issue of share capital.
57. Notice to be given to Registrar for alteration of share capital.
58. Unlimited company to provide for reserve share capital on re-registration.
59. Reduction of share capital.
60. Restrictions on purchase by company or giving of loans by it for purchase of its
shares.
61. Power of company to purchase its own securities.
62. Transfer of certain sums to Capital Redemption Reserve Account.
63. Prohibition for buy-back in certain circumstances.
64. Debentures.
65. Nomination of shares or  debentures.
CHAPTER V
A
CCEPTANCE OF DEPOSITS BY COMPANIES
66. Prohibition on acceptance of deposits from public.
67. Repayment of deposits, etc., accepted before commencement of Act.
68. Damages for fraud.
CHAPTER VI
R
EGISTRATION OF CHARGES
69. Duty to register charges, etc.
70. Application for registration of charge.
71. Section 69 to apply in certain matters.
C
LAUSES

(iii)
72. Date of notice of charge.
73. Register of charges to be kept by Registrar.
74. Company to report satisfaction of charge.
75. Intimation of appointment of receiver or manager.
76. Company’s register of charges.
77. Punishment for contravention.
CHAPTER VII
M
ANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRA TION
78. Register of members, etc.
79. Declaration in respect of beneficial interest in any share.
80. Investigation of beneficial ownership of shares in certain cases.
81. Power to close register of members or debenture holders or other security holders.
82. Annual return.
83. Place of keeping and inspection of registers, returns, etc.
84. Registers, etc., to be evidence.
85. Annual general meeting.
86. Power of Tribunal to call annual general meeting.
87. Power of Tribunal to  call meetings of members, etc.
88. Punishment for default in complying with provisions of sections 85 to 87.
89. Calling of extraordinary general meeting.
90. Notice of meeting.
91. Explanatory statement to be annexed with notice.
92. Quorum for meetings.
93. Chairman of meetings.
94. Proxies.
95. Restriction on voting rights.
96. V oting by show of hands.
97. V oting through electronic means.
98. Demand for poll.
99. Postal ballot.
100. Circulation of members’ resolution.
101. Representation of the President and Governors in meetings.
102. Representation of corporations at meeting of companies and of creditors.
103. Ordinary and special resolutions.
104. Resolutions requiring special notice.
105. Resolutions passed at adjourned meeting.
106. Resolutions and agreements to be filed.
107. Minutes of proceedings of general meeting, meeting of Board of Directors and other
meeting and resolutions passed by postal ballot.
108. Inspection of minute-books of general meeting.
109. Report on general meeting.
CHAPTER VIII
D
ECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND
110. Declaration of dividend.
111. Unpaid Dividend Account.
112. Investor Education and Protection Fund.
113. Amount lying in previous Fund to become part of Fund under this Act.
114. Right to dividend, rights shares and bonus shares to be held in abeyance pending
registration of transfer of shares.
115. Punishment for failure to distribute dividends within thirty days.
CHAPTER IX
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES
116. Books of accounts, etc., to be kept by company.
117. Financial statements.
CLAUSES

(iv)
118. Constitution of National Advisory Committee on Accounting and Auditing Standards.
119. Central Government to notify accounting standards.
120. Financial Statement, Board’s report, etc.
121. Right of member to copies of audited balance sheet.
122. Copy of financial statement to be filed with Registrar.
CHAPTER X
AUDIT AND AUDITORS
123. Appointment of auditors.
124. Eligibility, qualifications and disqualifications of auditors.
125. Remuneration of auditors.
126. Powers and duties of auditors and Auditing Standards.
127. Auditor not to render certain services.
128. Auditor to sign audit reports, etc.
129. Auditors to attend general meeting.
130. Punishment for contravention.
131. Central Government to specify audit of items of cost in respect of certain companies.
CHAPTER XI
APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF DIRECTORS
132. Company to have Board of Directors.
133. Appointment of Directors.
134. Application for allotment of Director Identification Number.
135. Allotment of Director Identification Number.
136. Prohibition to obtain more than one Director Identification Number.
137. Director to intimate Director Identification Number.
138. Company to inform Director Identification Number to Registrar.
139. Obligation to indicate Director Identification Number.
140. Punishment for contravention.
141. Right of persons other than retiring directors to stand for directorship.
142. Appointment of additional director, alternate director and nominee director.
143. Appointment of directors to be voted individually.
144. Option to adopt principle of proportional representation for appointment of directors.
145. Disqualifications for appointment of director.
146. Number of directorships.
147. Duties of directors.
148. V acation of office of director.
149. Resignation of director.
150. Removal of directors.
151. Register of directors and key managerial personnel and their shareholding.
152. Members’ right to inspect.
153. Punishment.
CHAPTER XII
MEETINGS OF BOARD AND ITS POWERS
154. Meetings of  Board.
155. Quorum for meetings of  Board.
156. Passing of resolution by  Board or committee.
157. Defects in  appointment of directors not to invalidate actions taken.
158. Committees of  Board.
159. Powers of  Board.
CLAUSES

(v)
160. Restrictions on powers of  Board.
161. Prohibitions and restrictions regarding political contributions.
162. Disclosure of interest by director.
163. Loan to directors, etc.
164. Loan and investment by company.
165. Investments of company to be held in its own name.
166. Related party transactions.
167. Register of contracts or arrangements in which directors are interested.
168. Contract of employment with managing or whole-time directors.
169. Payment to director for loss of office, etc., in connection with transfer of undertaking,
property or shares.
170. Restriction on non-cash transactions involving directors.
171. Contracts by One Person Companies.
172. Prohibition on forward dealings in securities of company by a key managerial
personnel.
173. Prohibition on  insider trading of securities.
CHAPTER XIII
APPOINTMENT AND REMUNERATION OF MANAGERIAL PERSONNEL
174. Appointment of managing director, whole-time director or manager.
175. Remuneration of managerial personnel.
176. Rem uneration payable to directors.
177. Compensation for loss of office of managing or whole-time director or manager.
178. Appointment of key managerial personnel.
CHAPTER XIV
INSPECTION, INQUIRY AND INVESTIGA TION
179. Power to call for information, inspect  books and conduct inquiries.
180. Conduct of inspection and inquiry.
181. Report on inspection made.
182. Search and seizure.
183. Investigation into affairs of company.
184. Investigation into company’s affairs in other cases.
185. Security for payment of costs and expenses of investigation.
186. Firm, body corporate or association not to be appointed as inspectors.
187. Investigation of ownership of company.
188. Procedure, powers, etc., of inspectors.
189. Power of inspectors to conduct investigation into affairs of related companies, etc.
190. Seizure of documents by inspector.
191. Freezing of assets on an inquiry and investigation of a company.
192. Imposition of restrictions upon securities.
193. Inspector’s report.
194. No suit or proceeding till submission of final report.
195. Actions to be taken in pursuance of inspector’s report.
196. Expenses of investigation.
197. V oluntary winding-up of company, etc., not to stop investigation proceedings.
198. Legal advisers and bankers not to disclose.
199. Investigation, etc., of foreign companies.
200. Penalty for furnishing false statement, mutilation, destruction of documents.
CLAUSES

(vi)
CHAPTER XV
COMPROMISES, ARRANGEMENTS AND AMALGAMATIONS
CLAUSES
201. Power to compromise or make arrangements with creditors and members.
202. Power of Tribunal to enforce compromise or arrangement.
203. Merger and amalgamation of companies.
204. Merger or amalgamation of certain companies.
205. Amalgamation by mutual agreement.
206. Power to acquire shares of shareholders dissenting from scheme or contract
approved by majority.
207. Purchase of minority shareholding.
208. Power of Central Government to provide for amalgamation of companies in public
interest.
209. Registration of offer of Schemes involving transfer of shares.
210. Preservation of books and papers of amalgamated companies.
211. Liability of the officers in respect of offences committed prior to amalgamation, trans-
fer, etc.
CHAPTER XVI
PREVENTION OF OPPRESSION AND MISMANAGEMENT
212. Application to Tribunal for relief in cases of oppression, etc.
213. Powers of Tribunal.
214. Consequence of termination or modifications of certain agreements.
215. Right to apply under section 212.
216. Class action.
217. Liability for making fraudulent application.
CHAPTER XVII
REGISTERED V ALUERS
218. V aluation by registered valuers.
219. Registration of valuers.
220. Appointment of committee of experts.
221. Practice as registered valuers.
222. Furnishing of pa rticulars in certain cases.
223. Removal and restoration of names of valuers from register.
CHAPTER XVIII
REMOV AL OF NAMES OF COMPANIES FROM THE REGISTER
224. Power of Registrar to remove name of a company from register.
225. No application under section 224 in certain situations.
226. Effect of a company notified as dissolved.
227. Fraudulent application for removal of name.
228. Appeal to  Tribunal.
CHAPTER XIX
REVIV AL AND REHABILITATION OF SICK COMPANIES
229. Determination of sickness.
230. Application for revival and rehabilitation.
231. A ppointment of interim administrator.

(vii)
232. Co mmittee of creditors.
233. Order of Tribunal.
234. Appointment of administrator.
235. Powers and duties of company administrator.
236. Scheme of revival and rehabilitation.
237. Sanction of scheme.
238. Scheme to be binding.
239. Implementation of the scheme.
240. W inding-up of company on report of company administrator.
241. Power of Tribunal to assess damages against delinquent directors, etc.
242. Punishment for certain offences.
243. Bar of jurisdiction.
244. Rehabilitation and Insolvency Fund.
CHAPTER XX
WINDINGUP
245. Modes of windingup.
Part I
Windingup by the Tribunal
246. Circumstances in which a company may be wound-up by Tribunal.
247. Petition for windingup.
248. Powers of Tribunal.
249. Directions for filing statement of affairs.
250. Company Liquidators and their appointments.
251. Removal and replacement of liquidator.
252. W inding-up order to be communicated to the Registrar.
253. Ef fect of windingup order.
254. S tay of suits, etc., on windingup order.
255. Jurisdiction of Tribunal.
256. Submission of report by Company Liquidator.
257. Directions of Tribunal on report of Company Liquidator.
258. Custody of company’s properties.
259. Directors, officers and employees to co-operate with Company Liquidator.
260. Settlement of list of contributories and application of assets.
261. Obligations of directors and managers.
262. Committee of inspection.
263. Submission of periodical reports to the Tribunal.
264. Power of Tribunal on application for stay of windingup.
265. Powers and duties of Company Liquidator.
266. Provision for professional assistance to Company Liquidator.
267. Exercise and control of Company Liquidator’s powers.
268. Books to be kept by Company Liquidator.
269. Audit of Company Liquidator’s accounts .
270. Payment of debts by contributory and extent of set-off.
271. Power of Tribunal to make calls.
272. Adjustment of rights of contributories.
273. Power to order costs.
274. Power to summon persons suspected of having property of company, etc.
275. Power to order examination of promoters, directors, etc.
276. Arrest of person trying to quit India or abscond.
277. Dissolution of company by Tribunal.
278. Appeals from orders made before commencement of Act.
Part II
Voluntary Windingup
279. Circumstances in which company may be wound up voluntarily.
280. Declaration of solvency in case of proposal to wind-up voluntarily.
CLAUSES

(viii)
281. Meeting of creditors.
282. Publication of resolution to windup voluntarily.
283. Commencement of voluntary windingup.
284. Effect of voluntary winding up.
285. Appointment of Company Liquidator.
286. Power to remove and fill vacancy of Company Liquidator.
287. Notice of appointment of Company Liquidator to be given to Registrar.
288. Ce sser of Board’s powers on appointment of Company Liquidator.
289. Powers and duties of Company Liquidator in voluntary windingup.
290. Appointment of committees.
291. Company Liquidator to submit report on progress of windingup.
292. Report of Company Liquidator to Tribunal for examination of persons.
293. Final meeting of dissolution of company.
294. Power of Company Liquidator to accept shares, etc., as consideration for sale of
property of company.
295. Distribution of property of company.
296. Arrangement when binding on company and creditors.
297. Power to apply to Tribunal to have questions determined, etc.
298. Costs of voluntary windingup.
Part III
Provisions applicable to every made of windingup
299. Debts of all descriptions to be admitted to proof.
300. Application of insolvency rules in winding-up of insolvent companies. 
301. Overriding preferential payments.
302. Preferential payments.
303. Fraudulent preference.
304. Transfers not in good faith to be void.
305. Certain transfers to be void.
306. Liabilities and rights of certain persons fraudulently preferred.
307. Effect of floating charge.
308. Disclaimer of onerous property.
309. Transfers, etc., after commencement of winding-up to be void.
310. Certain attachments, executions, etc., in winding-up by Tribunal to be void.
311. Offences by officers of companies in liquidation.
312. Penalty for frauds by officers.
313. Liability where proper accounts not kept.
314. Liability for fraudulent conduct of business.
315. Power of Tribunal to assess damages against delinquent directors, etc.
316. Liability under sections 314 and 315 to extend to partners or directors in firms or
companies.
317. Prosecution of delinquent officers and members of company .
318. Company Liquidator to exercise certain powers subject to sanction.
319. Statement that a company is in liquidation.
320. Books and papers of company to be evidence.
321. Inspection of books and papers by creditors and contributories.
322. Disposal of books and papers of company.
323. Information as to pending liquidations.
324. Official Liquidator to make payments into public account of India.
325. Company Liquidator to deposit into Scheduled Bank.
326. Liquidator not to deposit monies into private banking account.
327. Company Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account.
328. Liquidator to make returns, etc.
329. Meetings to ascertain wishes of creditors or contributories.
CLAUSES

(ix)
330. Court, tribunal or person, etc., before whom affidavit may be sworn.
331. Powers of Tribunal to declare dissolution of company void.
332. Commencement of windingup by Tribunal.
333. Exclusion of certain time in computing period of limitation.
Part IV
Official Liquidator
334. Appointment of Official Liquidator.
335. Powers and functions of Official Liquidator.
336. Summary procedure for liquidation.
337. Sale of assets and recovery of debts due to company.
338. Settlement of claims of creditors by Official Liquidator.
339. Appeal by creditor.
340. Order of dissolution of company.
CHAPTER XXI
COMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA
341. Application of Act to foreign companies.
342. Documents, etc., to be delivered to Registrar by foreign companies.
343. Accounts of foreign company.
344. Display of name, etc., of foreign company.
345. Service on foreign company.
346. Debentures, annual return, registration of charges, books of accounts  and their in-
spection.
347. Fee for registration of documents.
348. Interpretation.
349. Dating of prospectus and particulars to be contained therein.
350. Prov isions as to expert’s consent and allotment.
351. Registration of prospectus.
352. Offer of Indian Depository Receipts.
353. Application of sections 29 to 31 and Chapter XX.
354. Punishment for contravention.
355. Company’s failure to comply with  provisions of this Chapter not to affect validity of
contracts, etc.
CHAPTER XXII
GOVERNMENT COMP ANIES
356. Annual reports on Government companies.
357. Power to modify Act in its application to Government companies.
CHAPTER XXIII
REGISTRATION OFFICES AND FEES
358. Registration Offices.
359. Admissibility of certain documents as evidence.
360. Provisions relating to filing of applications, documents, inspection, etc., in electronic
form.
361. E lectronic form to be exclusive, alternative or in addition.
362. Provision of value added services through electronic form.
363. Application of provisions of Information Technology Act, 2000.
364. Fee for filing, etc.
365. Fees, etc., to be credited into public account.
CHAPTER XXIV
COMPANIES TO FURNISH INFORMATION OR STATISTICS
366. Power of Central Government to direct companies to furnish information or statistics.
CLAUSES

(x)
CHAPTER XXV
NIDHIS
367. Power to modify Act in its application to Nidhis.
CHAPTER XXVI
NATIONAL COMPANY LAW TRIBUNAL AND APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
368. Definitions.
369. C onstitution of National Company Law Tribunal.
370. Qualifications of President and Members of Tribunal.
371. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal.
372. Qualifications of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal.
373. Selection of Members of Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal.
374. Term of of fice of President, Chairperson and other Members.
375. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Members.
376. Acting President and Chairman of Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal.
377. Resignation of Members.
378. Removal of Members.
379. Staff of T ribunal and Appellate Tribunal.
380. Benches of Tribunal.
381. Orders of Tribunal.
382. Appeal from orders of Tribunal.
383. Expeditious disposal by Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal.
384. Appeal to Supreme Court.
385. Procedure before Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal.
386. Power to punish for contempt.
387. Delegation of powers.
388. Members, officers, etc.,  to be public servants.
389. Protection of action taken in good faith.
390. Power to seek assistance of Chief Metropolitan  Magistrate, etc.
391. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.
392. V acancy in Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal not to invalidate acts or proceedings.
393. Right to legal representation.
394. Limitation.
395. Transfer of certain pending proceedings.
CHAPTER XXVII
SPECIAL COURTS
396. Establishment of  special courts.
397. Offences triable by special courts.
398. Appeal and revision.
399. Application of Code to proceedings before a special court.
400. Offences to be non-cognizable.
401. Transitional provisions.
402. Composition of  certain offences.
403. Power of Central Government to appoint company prosecutors.
404. Appeal against acquittal.
405. Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause.
406. Application of fines.
CLAUSES

(xi)
CHAPTER XXVIII
MISCELLANEOUS
407. Punishment  for false statements.
408. Punishment for false evidence.
409. Punishment  where no specific penalty or punishment is provided.
410. Punishment in case of repeated default.
411. Punishment for wrongful withholding of property.
412. Punishment for improper use of “Limited”, “Private Limited” or “OPC Limited”.
413. Adjudication of penalties.
414. Dormant company.
415. Protection of action taken in good faith.
416. Non-disclosure of information in certain cases.
417. Delegation by Central Government of its powers and functions.
418. Powers of Central Government or Tribunal to accord approval, etc., subject to condi-
tions and to prescribe fees on applications.
419. Condonation of delays in certain cases.
420. Annual report by Central Government.
421. Power to modify certain provisions of Act in their application  to private company, One
Person Company and small company.
422. Prohibition of association or partnership of persons exceeding certain number.
423. Repeal of certain enactments and savings.
424. Dissolution of  Company Law Board and consequential provision.
425. Power to remove difficulties.
426. Power of Central Government to make rules.
CLAUSES

THE COMPANIES BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to companies.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies Act, 2008.
(2) This section shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of this Act
shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions and for
different States, and any reference in any provision of this Act to the commencement of this
Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that provision in that State.
(3) It extends to the whole of India.
(4) The provisions of this Act shall apply to—
(a) companies incorporated under this Act or under any previous company
law; and
(b) any company or body corporate governed by any special Act, in the absence
of any corresponding provisions therein.
Short title,
extent,
commence-
ment and
application.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 57 of 2008

2
Definitions.
10 of 1949.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “abridged prospectus” means a memorandum containing such salient
features of a prospectus as may be prescribed;
(b) “accounting standards” means such accounting standards as the Central
Government may notify under section 119, in consultation with the National Advisory
Committee on Accounting and Auditing Standards constituted under section 118;
(c) “alter” or “alteration” includes the making of additions, omissions and
substitutions;
(d) “Appellate Tribunal” means the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
constituted under section 371;
(e) “articles” means the articles of association of a company as originally framed
or as altered from time to time or applied in pursuance of any previous company law
or of this Act;
(f) “associate company”, in relation to another company, means a company in
which that other company has a significant influence, but which is not a subsidiary
company of the company having such influence or of any other company.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “significant influence” means
control of at the least twenty-six per cent. of total voting power, or of business
decisions under an agreement;
(g) “auditing standards” means such auditing standards as the Central
Government may notify under sub-section ( 10) of section 126, in consultation with
the National Advisory Committee on Accounting and Auditing Standards constituted
under section 118;
(h) “authorised capital” or “nominal capital” means such capital as is authorised
by the memorandum of a company to be the maximum amount of share capital of the
company;
(i) “banking company” means a banking company as defined in clause ( c) of
section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(j) “Board of Directors” or “Board”, in relation to a company, means the collective
body of the directors of the company;
(k) “body corporate” or  “corporation” includes a company incorporated outside
India, but does not include—
(i) a co-operative society registered under any law relating to co-operative
societies; and
(ii) any other body corporate (not being a company as defined in this
Act), which the Central Government may, by notification published in the Official
Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(l) “book and paper” and “book or paper” include books of account, deeds,
vouchers, writings, documents, minutes and registers maintained on paper or in
electronic form;
(m) “books of account” includes records maintained in respect of—
(i) all sums of money received and expended by a company and matters in
relation to which the receipts and expenditure take place;
(ii) all sales and purchases of goods and services by the company;
(iii) the assets and liabilities of the company; and

3
(iv) in the case of a company which belongs to any class of companies
specified under section 131, such items of cost as may be prescribed under that
section;
(n) “branch office”,  in relation to a company,  means any establishment
described as such by the company;
(o) “called-up capital” means such part of the subscribed capital, which has
been called for payment;
(p) “charge” means an interest or lien created on the property or assets of a
company or any of its undertakings or both as security and includes a mortgage;
(q) “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant as defined in clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and who
holds a valid certificate of practice under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;
(r) “Chief Executive Officer” means an officer of a company, who has been
designated as such by it;
(s) “Chief Financial Officer” means a person appointed as the Chief Financial
Officer of a company;
(t) “company” means a company incorporated under this Act or under any
previous company law;
(u) “company limited by guarantee” means a company having the liability of its
members limited by the memorandum to such amount as the members may respectively
undertake to contribute to the assets of the company in the event of its being wound
up;
(v) “company limited by shares” means a company having the liability of its
members limited by the memorandum to the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares
respectively held by them;
(w) “Company Liquidator”, in so far as it relates to the winding up of a company,
means a person appointed by the Tribunal, company or creditors, as the case may be,
as a Company Liquidator from a panel of professionals maintained by the Central
Government under sub-section (2) of section 250;
(x) “Company Secretary” or “Secretary” means a Company Secretary as defined
in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and
who is appointed by a company to perform the functions of a Company Secretary
under this Act;
(y) “Company Secretary in practice” means a Company Secretary who is deemed
to be in practice under sub-section ( 2) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act,
1980;
(z) “contributory” means a person liable to contribute towards the payment of
a company’s debts in the event of its being wound up;
(za) “controlling interest” means the largest voting power a member may exercise
in a general meeting of a company, whether directly or indirectly, and either alone or
in association with his relatives, bodies corporate or firms controlled by such person
or his relatives;
(zb) “cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and who holds
a valid certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act;
(zc) “ Court”  means—
(i) the High Court having jurisdiction in relation to the place at which the
registered office of the company concerned is situate, except to the extent to
38 of 1949.
56 of 1980.
56 of 1980.
23 of 1959.

4
which jurisdiction has been conferred on any District Court or District Courts
subordinate to that High Court under sub-clause ( ii);
(ii) the District Court, in cases where the Central Government has, by
notification, empowered any District Court to exercise all or any of the
jurisdictions conferred upon the High Court, within the scope of its jurisdiction
in respect of a company whose registered office is situate in the district;
(iii) the Court of Session having jurisdiction to try any offence under this
Act or under any previous company law;
(iv) the special court established under section 396;
(v) any Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class
having jurisdiction to try any offence under this Act or under any previous
company law;
(zd) “debenture” includes debenture stock, bonds or any other instrument of a
company evidencing a debt, whether constituting a charge on the assets of the
company or not;
(ze) “deemed director” means a person under whose advice, instructions or
directions, the Board of Directors is accustomed to act, but does not include a person
who has been engaged by the company to advise it in a professional capacity;
(zf) “deposit” means a deposit accepted by a company under section 66 and
includes a deposit existing on the commencement of this Act;
(zg) “depository” means a depository as defined in clause (e) of sub-section (1)
of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 1996;
(zh) “derivative” means the derivative as defined in clause (aa) of section 2 of
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956;
(zi) “director” means a director appointed to the Board of a company, and
includes a deemed director;
(zj) “Director-General” means the Director-General of Registration appointed
under sub-section (2) of section 358;
(zk) “dividend” includes any interim dividend;
(zl) “document” includes summons, notice, requisition, order, declaration, form
and register, whether issued, sent or kept in pursuance of this Act or under any other
law for the time being in force or otherwise, maintained on paper or in electronic form;
(zm) “employees’ stock option” means the option given to the directors, officers
or employees of a company or of its holding company or subsidiary company or
companies, if any, which gives such directors, officers or employees, the benefit or
right to purchase, or subscribe for, the shares of the company at a future date at a pre-
determined price;
(zn) “expert” includes an engineer, a valuer, a Chartered Accountant, a Company
Secretary, a Cost and Works Accountant and any other person who has the power or
authority to issue a certificate in pursuance of any law for the time being in force;
(zo) “financial institution” includes a scheduled bank;
(zp) “financial statement”  in relation to a company, includes—
(i) a balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;
(ii) a profit and loss account, or in the case of a company carrying on any
activity not for profit, an income and expenditure account for the financial year;
22 of 1996.
42 of 1956.

5
(iii) cash flow statement for the financial year; and
(iv) any explanatory note attached to, or forming part of, any document
referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii);
(zq) “financial year”, in relation to any company or body corporate, means the
period ending on the 31st day of March every year, and where it has been incorporated
on or after the 1st day of January of a year, the period ending on the 31st day of March
of the following year, in respect whereof financial statement of the company or body
corporate laid before it in its annual general meeting is made up:
Provided that on an application made by a company or body corporate, the
Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the circumstances so warrant, allow any period as
its financial year, whether that period is a year or not;
(zr) “foreign company” means any company or body corporate incorporated
outside India which has a place of business in India whether established before or
after the commencement of this Act;
(zs) “free reserves” means such reserves which, as per the latest audited balance
sheet of a company, are available for distribution as dividend;
(zt) “Global Depository Receipt (GDR)” means any instrument in the form of a
depository receipt, by whatever name called, created by a foreign depository outside
India and authorised by a company making an issue of such depository receipts;
(zu) “Government company” means any company in which not less than fifty-
one per cent. of the paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government, or by any
State Government or Governments, or partly by the Central Government and partly by
one or more State Governments, and includes a company which is a subsidiary company
of such a Government company;
(zv) “holding company”, in relation to one or more other companies, means a
company of which such companies are subsidiary companies;
(zw) “independent director” means an independent director as defined under
sub-section (5) of section 132;
(zx) “Indian Depository Receipt (IDR)” means any instrument in the form of a
depository receipt created by a domestic depository in India and authorised by a
company incorporated outside India making an issue of such depository receipts;
(zy) “interested director” means a director who is in any way, whether by himself
or through any of his relatives or firm, body corporate or other association of individuals
in which he or any of his relatives is a partner, director or a member, interested in a
contract or arrangement, or proposed contract or arrangement, entered into or to be
entered into by or on behalf of a company;
(zz) “issued capital” means such capital as the company issues from time to
time for subscription by the public;
(zza) “key managerial personnel”, in relation to a company, means —
(i) the Managing Director, the Chief Executive Officer or the Manager and
where there is no Managing Director or Manager, a whole-time director or
directors;
(ii) the Company Secretary; and
(iii) the Chief Financial Officer;
(zzb) “listed company” means a company which has any of its securities listed
on any recognised stock exchange;

6
(zzc) “manager” means an individual who, subject to the superintendence,
control and direction of the Board of Directors, has the management of the whole, or
substantially the whole, of the affairs of a company, and includes a director or any
other person occupying the position of a manager, by whatever name called, whether
under a contract of service or not;
(zzd) “managing director” means a director who, by virtue of the articles of a
company or an agreement with the company or a resolution passed in its general
meeting, or by its Board of Directors, is entrusted with the management of the whole,
or substantially the whole, of the affairs of the company;
(zze) “member”, in relation to a company, means—
(i) any subscriber to the memorandum of the company and whose name is
entered in the register of members of the company;
(ii) every other person who agrees in writing to become a member of the
company by virtue of his holding equity or preference shares in the company
and whose name is entered in the register of members of the company;
(iii) every person holding equity or preference shares of the company
and whose name is entered as a beneficial owner in the records of a depository;
(zzf) “memorandum” means the memorandum of association of a company as
originally framed or as altered from time to time in pursuance of any previous company
law or of this Act;
(zzg) “net worth” means the aggregate value of the paid-up share capital and all
reserves created out of the profits and share premium account, after deducting the
aggregate value of the accumulated losses, deferred expenditure and miscellaneous
expenditure not written off, as per the audited balance sheet, but does not include
reserves created out of revaluation of assets, write-back of depreciation and
amalgamation;
(zzh) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and
the expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(zzi) “officer who is in default” includes all or any of the following officers of a
company, namely :—
(i) whole-time director or directors;
(ii) other key managerial personnel;
(iii) where there is no key managerial personnel such director or directors
as specified by the Board in this behalf and who has or have given his or their
consent in writing to the Board to such specification, or all the directors, if no
director is so specified;
(iv) any person who, under the immediate authority of the Board or any
key managerial personnel, is charged with any responsibility including
maintenance, filing or distribution of accounts or records, authorises, actively
participates in, knowingly permits, or knowingly fails to take active steps to
prevent, any default;
(v) any person in accordance with whose advice, directions or instructions
the Board of Directors of the company is accustomed to act other than a person
who gives advice to the Board in a professional capacity;
(vi) every director, in respect of a contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act, who is aware of such contravention by virtue of the receipt by him
of any proceedings of the Board or participation in such proceedings without
objecting to the same, or where such contravention had taken place with his
consent or connivance;

7
(vii) in respect of the issue or transfer of any shares of a company, the
share transfer agents, bankers, registrars and merchant bankers to the issue or
transfer;
(zzj) “Official Liquidator” means an Official Liquidator appointed under section
334;
(zzk) “One Person Company” means a company which has only one person as
a member;
(zzl) “paid-up share capital” or “share capital paid-up” means such aggregate
amount of money credited as paid-up as is equivalent to the amount received as paid-
up in respect of shares issued, but does not include any other amount received in
respect of such shares, by whatever name called;
(zzm) “postal ballot” means voting by post or through any electronic
communication;
(zzn) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(zzo) “previous company law” means any of the laws specified below:—
(i) any Act or Acts relating to companies in force before the Indian
Companies Act, 1866;
(ii) the Indian Companies Act, 1866;
(iii) the Indian Companies Act, 1882;
(iv) the Indian Companies Act, 1913;
(v) the Registration of Transferred Companies Ordinance, 1942;
(vi) the Companies Act, 1956; and
(vii) any law corresponding to any of the Acts or the Ordinance aforesaid
and in force—
(A) in the merged territories or in a Part B State (other than the State
of Jammu and Kashmir), or any part thereof, before the extension thereto
of the Indian Companies Act, 1913; or
(B) in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, or any part thereof, before
the commencement of the Jammu and Kashmir (Extension of Laws) Act,
1956, in so far as banking, insurance and financial corporations are
concerned, and before the commencement of the Central Laws (Extension
to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1968, in so far as other corporations are
concerned;
(viii) the Portuguese Commercial Code, in so far as it relates to “sociedades
anonimas”; and
(ix) the Registration of Companies Act (Sikkim) 1961;
(zzp) “private company” means a company which, by its articles,—
(i) restricts the right to transfer its shares;
(ii) limits the number of its members to fifty :
Provided that where two or more persons hold one or more shares in a
company jointly, they shall, for the purposes of this clause, be treated as a
single member:
Provided further that –
(A) persons who are in the employment of the company; and
10 of 1866.
10 of 1866.
6 of 1882.
7 of 1913.
54 of 1942.
1 of 1956.
7 of 1913.
62 of 1956.
25 of 1968.

8
(B) persons who, having been formerly in the employment of the
company, were members of the company while in that employment and
have continued to be members after the employment ceased,
shall not be included in the number of members; and
(iii) prohibits any invitation to the public to subscribe for any securities
of the company;
(zzq) “promoter” means a person who has—
(a) been named as such in a prospectus; or
(b) control over the affairs of the company, directly or indirectly whether
as a shareholder, director or otherwise:
Provided that nothing in sub-clause ( b) shall apply to a person who is
acting in a professional capacity;
(zzr) “prospectus” means any document described or issued as a prospectus
and includes a red herring or shelf prospectus or any notice, circular, advertisement
or other document inviting offers from the public for the subscription or purchase of
any securities, but does not include any memorandum or other document containing
information about the prospectus or the matters included therein issued prior to the
issue of the prospectus and any document which shows on the face of it that it is not
a prospectus;
(zzs) “public company” means a company which is not a private company or
such private company which is a subsidiary of a company which is not a private
company;
(zzt) “public financial institution” means any financial institution—
(i) which is established or constituted by or under any Central or State
Act; or
(ii) in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share capital
is held or controlled by the Central Government or any State Government or
both by the Central Government and any State Government or Governments or
by the State Governments,
and which is notified by the Central Government as such under this Act;
(zzu) “recognised stock exchange” means a recognised stock exchange as
defined in clause (f) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956;
(zzv) “red herring prospectus” means a prospectus which does not include
complete particulars of the quantum or price of the securities or class of securities
included therein;
(zzw) “register of companies” means the register of companies maintained by
the Registrar on paper or in any electronic mode under this Act;
(zzx) “Registrar” means any officer having the duty of registering companies
under this Act;
(zzy) “related party” with reference to a company means—
(i) a relative of a director or key managerial personnel;
(ii) a firm, in which a director, manager or his relative is a partner;
(iii) a private company in which a director or manager is a member or
director;
42 of 1956.

9
(iv) a public company in which a director or manager is a director or holds
along with his relatives, more than two per cent. of its paid-up share capital;
(v) any body corporate whose Board of Directors, managing director, or
manager is accustomed to act in accordance with the advice, directions or
instructions of a director or manager;
(vi) any person under whose advice, directions or instructions a director
or manager is accustomed to act;
(vii) any company which is—
(A) a holding, subsidiary or an associate company of such company;
or
(B) a subsidiary of a holding company to which it is also a subsidiary:
Provided that nothing in sub-clauses (v) and (vi) shall apply to the
advice, directions or instructions given in a professional capacity;
(zzz) “relative” with reference to any individual means the spouse, brother,
sister and all lineal ascendants and descendants of such individual related to him
either by marriage or adoption;
(zzza) “remuneration” means any money or its equivalent given or passed to
any person for services rendered by him and includes perquisites as defined under
the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(zzzb) “scheduled bank” means the scheduled bank as defined in clause ( e) of
section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(zzzc) “securities” means the securities as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956;
(zzzd) “Securities and Exchange Board” means the Securities and Exchange
Board of India established under section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of
India Act, 1992;
(zzze) “share” means a share in the share capital of a company and includes
stock;
(zzzf) “shelf prospectus” means a prospectus in respect of which the securities
or class of securities included therein are issued for subscription in one or more
issues over a certain period without the issue of a further prospectus;
(zzzg) “small company” means a company, other than a public company,—
(i) whose paid-up share capital does not exceed such amount as may be
prescribed and the prescribed amount shall not be more than five crore rupees;
or
(ii) whose turnover as per its last profit and loss account does not exceed
such amount as may be prescribed and the prescribed amount shall not be more
than twenty crore rupees:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to —
(A) a holding company or a subsidiary company;
(B) a company registered under section 4; or
(C) a company or body corporate governed by any special Act;
(zzzh) “subscribed capital” means such part of the capital which is for the time
being subscribed by the members of a company;
2 of 1934.
43 of 1961.
42 of 1956.
15 of 1992.

10
(zzzi) “subsidiary company” or “subsidiary”, in relation to any other company
(hereinafter referred to as the holding company), means a company in which the
holding company—
(i) controls the composition of the Board of Directors; or
(ii) exercises or controls more than one-half of the total voting power.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, a company shall be
deemed to be a subsidiary company of the holding company even if the control
referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) is of another subsidiary company
of the holding company;
(zzzj) “sweat equity shares” means such equity shares as are issued by a
company to its directors or employees at a discount or for consideration, other than
cash, for their providing know-how or making available rights in the nature of intellectual
property rights or value additions, by whatever name called;
(zzzk) “total voting power” means the total number of votes that may be cast at
a meeting of the company if all the members thereof cast their votes either personally
or by means of postal ballot;
(zzzl) “Tribunal” means the National Company Law Tribunal constituted under
section 369;
(zzzm) “unlimited company” means a company not having any limit on the
liability of its members;
(zzzn) “voting right” means the right of a member of a company to vote in any
meeting of the company;
(zzzo) “whole-time director” includes a director in the whole-time employment
of the company.
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 or the Securities and Exchange Board of India
Act, 1992 or the Depositories Act, 1996 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to
them in that Act.
CHAPTER II
I
NCORPORATION OF COMPANIES
3. (1) A company may be formed for any lawful purpose by any—
(a) seven or more persons, where the company to be formed is to be a public
company, or
(b) two or more persons, where the company to be formed is to be a private
company, or
(c) one person, where the company to be formed is to be a One Person Company,
by subscribing their names or his name to a memorandum in the manner prescribed and
complying with the requirements of this Act in respect of registration:
Provided that the memorandum of a One Person Company shall indicate the name of
the person who shall, in the event of the subscriber’s death, disability or otherwise, become
the member of the company:
Provided further that it shall be the duty of the member of a One Person Company to
intimate the Registrar the change, if any, in the name of the person referred to in the
preceding proviso and indicated in the memorandum within such time and in such form as
may be prescribed, and any such change shall not be deemed to be an alteration of the
memorandum.
42 of 1956.
15 of 1992.
22 of 1996.
Formation of
company.

11
(2) A company formed under sub-section (1) may be either—
(a) a company limited by shares, or
(b) a company limited by guarantee, or
(c) an unlimited company.
4. (1) Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Central Government that a person
or an association of persons proposed to be registered under this Act as a limited company—
(a) has for its objects the promotion of commerce, art, science, sports, education,
research, social welfare, religion, charity or any such other object;
(b) shall apply its profits, if any, or other income in promoting its objects; and
(c) prohibits the payment of any dividend to its members,
the Central Government may, by licence issued in the manner as may be prescribed, and on
such conditions as it deems fit, allow that person or association of persons to be registered
as a limited company under this section without the addition to its name of the word
“Limited”, or as the case may be, the words “Private Limited” or the letters and word “OPC
Limited”, and thereupon the Registrar shall, on application, register such person or
association of persons as a company under this section.
(2) The company registered under this section shall enjoy all the privileges and be
subject to all the obligations of limited companies.
(3) A firm may be a member of the company registered under this section.
(4) A company registered under this section shall not alter the provisions of its
memorandum or articles except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
(5) Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Central Government that a limited
company registered under this Act or under any previous company law has been formed
with any of the objects specified in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) and with the restrictions
and prohibitions as mentioned respectively in clauses (b) and (c) of that sub-section, it may,
by licence, allow the company to be registered under this section subject to such conditions
as the Central Government deems fit and to change its name by omitting the word “Limited”,
or as the case may be, the words “Private limited” or the letters and word “OPC Limited”
from its name and thereupon the Registrar shall, on application, register such company
under this section and all the provisions of this section shall apply to that company.
(6) The Central Government may, by order, revoke the licence granted to a company
registered under this section if the company contravenes any of the requirements of this
section or any of the conditions subject to which a licence is issued or the affairs of the
company are conducted fraudulently or in a manner violative of the objects of the company
or prejudicial to public interest, and without prejudice to any other action against the
company under this Act, direct the company to convert its status and change its name to
add the word “Limited” or the words “Private Limited” or the letters and word “OPC Limited”,
as the case may be, to its name and thereupon the Registrar shall, without prejudice to any
action that may be taken under sub-section ( 7), on application, register the company
accordingly:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this sub-section unless the company
is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that a copy of every such order shall be given to the Registrar.
(7) Where a licence is revoked under sub-section (6), the Central Government may, if
it is satisfied that it is essential in the public interest, order that the company be wound up
under this Act or amalgamated with another company registered under this section.
(8) Where a licence is revoked under sub-section (6) and where the Central Government
is satisfied that it is essential in the public interest that the company registered under this
Formation of
companies
with charitable
objects, etc.

12
section should be amalgamated with another company registered under this section and
having similar objects, then, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
Act, the Central Government may, by order, notified in the Official Gazette, provide for such
amalgamation to form a single company with such constitution, properties, powers, rights,
interest, authorities and privileges and with such liabilities, duties and obligations as may
be specified in the order.
(9) If on the winding-up or dissolution of a company registered under this section,
there remain, after the satisfaction of its debts and liabilities, any assets, they may be
transferred to another company registered under this section and having similar objects,
subject to such conditions as the Tribunal may impose, or may be sold and proceeds
thereof credited to the Rehabilitation and Insolvency Fund formed under section 244.
(10) A company registered under this section can amalgamate only with another
company registered under this section and having similar objects.
(11) Where a company makes any default in complying with any of the requirements
laid down in this section, the company shall, without prejudice to any other action under
the provisions of this section, be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh
rupees but which may extend to one crore rupees and the directors of the company and
every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years or with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five
thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, or with both.
5. (1) The memorandum of a company shall state—
(a) the name of the company with the last word “Limited” in the case of a public
limited company, or the last words “Private Limited” in the case of a private limited
company, or the last letters and word “OPC Limited” in the case of a One Person
limited company:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to a company registered under
section 4;
(b) the State in which the registered office of the company is to be situated;
(c) the objects for which the company is proposed to be incorporated and any
matter considered necessary for furtherance thereof;
(d) the liability of members of the company, whether limited or unlimited, and
also state,—
(i) in the case of a company limited by shares, the that liability of its
members is limited to the amount unpaid, if any, on the face value of the shares
held by them; and
(ii) in the case of a company limited by guarantee, the amount up to
which each member undertakes to contribute —
(A) to the assets of the company in the event of its being wound-up
while he is a member or within one year after he ceases to be a member
and for payment of the debts and liabilities of the company or of such
debts and liabilities as may have been contracted before he ceases to be
a member; and
(B) to the costs, charges and expenses of winding-up and for
adjustment of the rights of the contributories among themselves;
(e) in the case of a company having a share capital,—
(i) the amount of share capital with which the company is to be registered
and the division thereof into shares of a fixed amount and the number of shares
which the subscribers to the memorandum agree to subscribe which shall not
be less than one share; and
Memorandum.

13
(ii) the number of shares each subscriber to the memorandum intends to
take, indicated opposite his name.
(2) The name stated in the memorandum shall not—
(a) be identical with or resemble too nearly to the name of an existing company
registered under this Act or any previous company law; or
(b) be such that its use by the company—
(i) will constitute an offence under any law for the time being in force; or
(ii) is undesirable in the opinion of the Central Government.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), a company shall not be
registered with a name which contains —
(a) any word or expression which is likely to give the impression that the
company is in any way connected with, or having the patronage of, the Central
Government, any State Government, or any local authority, corporation or body
constituted by the Central or any State Government under any law for the time being
in force; or
(b) such word or expression, as may be prescribed, unless the previous approval
of the Central Government has been obtained for the use of any such word or
expression.
(4) A person may make an application, in such form and manner and accompanied by
such fee, as may be prescribed, to the Registrar for the reservation of a name set out in the
application as—
(a) the name of the proposed company; or
(b) the name to which the company proposes to change its name.
(5) Upon receipt of an application under sub-section ( 4), the Registrar may, if he is
satisfied that the name to be reserved is not the one which may be rejected on any ground
referred to in sub-section (2), reserve the name for a period of sixty days from the date of the
application, and on payment of such additional fee as may be prescribed, for a further
period of sixty days.
(6) The memorandum of a company shall be in such form, as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The articles of a company shall contain regulations for the company.
(2) The articles shall also contain such matters, as may be prescribed:
Provided that nothing prescribed in this sub-section shall be deemed to prevent a
company from including such additional matters in its articles as may be considered
necessary for its management.
(3) The articles may contain provisions for entrenchment to the effect that specified
provisions of the articles may be altered only if conditions or procedures as that are more
restrictive than those applicable in the case of a special resolution, are met or complied with.
(4) The provisions for entrenchment referred to in sub-section (3) shall only be made
either on formation of a company, or by an amendment in the articles agreed to by all the
members of the company in the case of a private company and by a special resolution in the
case of a public company.
(5) Where the articles contain provisions for entrenchment, whether made on formation
or by amendment, the company shall give notice to the Registrar of such provisions.
Articles.

14
(6) The Central Government may prescribe model articles for different types of
companies.
(7) Nothing in this section shall apply to the articles of a company registered under
any previous company law unless amended under this Act.
7. (1) There shall be filed with the Registrar within whose jurisdiction the registered
office of a company is proposed to be situated, the following documents and information
for registration, namely :—
(a) the memorandum and articles of the company duly signed by all the
subscribers to the memorandum in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) a declaration in the prescribed form by an advocate, a Chartered
Accountant, Cost Accountant or Company Secretary, who is engaged in the formation
of the company, or by a person named in the articles as a director, manager or Secretary
of the company, that all the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder in
respect of registration and matters precedent or incidental thereto have been complied
with;
(c) an affidavit from each of the subscribers to the memorandum and from
persons named as first directors, if any, in the articles that he is not convicted of any
offence in connection with the promotion, formation or management of any company,
or that he has not been found guilty of any fraud or misfeasance or of any breach of
duty to any company under this Act or any previous company law during the preceding
five years and that all the documents filed with the Registrar for registration of the
company contain information that is correct and complete and true to the best of his
knowledge and belief;
(d) the name of the State where the registered office of the company is proposed
to be situated on incorporation and the address for correspondence till its registered
office is established;
(e) the particulars of name, including surname or family name, residential address,
nationality and such other particulars of every subscriber to the memorandum along
with proof of identity, as may be prescribed, and in the case of a subscriber being a
company, such particulars as may be prescribed;
(f) the particulars of the persons mentioned in the articles as first directors of
the company, their names, including surnames or family names, the Director
Identification Number, residential address, nationality and such other particulars
including proof of identity as may be prescribed; and
(g) the particulars of the interests of the persons mentioned in the articles as
first directors of the company in other firms or bodies corporate along with their
consent to act as directors of the company in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) If the Registrar is satisfied that all the requirements of this Act and the rules made
thereunder in respect of registration and matters precedent or incidental thereto have been
complied with, he shall register all the documents and information referred to in sub-section
(1) in the register and issue a Certificate of Incorporation in the prescribed form to the effect
that the proposed company is incorporated under this Act.
(3) On and from the date mentioned in the Certificate of Incorporation issued under
sub-section (2), the Registrar shall allot to the company a “Corporate Identity Number”,
which shall be a distinct identity for the company and which shall also be included in the
certificate. The company shall maintain and preserve at its registered office copies of all
documents and information as originally filed under sub-section ( 1) till its dissolution
under this Act.
Incorporation
of companies.

15
(4) Where any person furnishes any false or incorrect particulars of any information
or suppresses any material information, of which he is aware in any of the documents filed
with the Registrar in relation to the registration of a company, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less
than five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (4), where the Tribunal, on an
application made to it at any time after the incorporation of a company, is satisfied that the
company has been got incorporated by furnishing any false or incorrect information or
representation or by suppressing any material fact or information in any of the documents
or declaration filed or made for incorporating such company, or by any fraudulent action,
the promoters, the persons named as first directors of the company, the persons making
declaration under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall each be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than twenty-
five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 5), the Tribunal may, if it is
satisfied that the situation so warrants,—
(a) pass such orders, as it may think fit, for regulation of the management of the
company including changes, if any, in its memorandum and articles, in public interest
or in the interest of the company and its members and creditors; or
(b) direct that liability of the members shall be unlimited; or
(c) direct removal of the name of the company from the register; or
(d) pass an order for the winding up of the company:
Provided that before making any order under this sub-section,—
(i) the company shall be given a  reasonable opportunity of being heard in the
matter; and
(ii) the Tribunal shall take into consideration the transactions entered into by
the company, including the obligations, if any, contracted or payment of any liability.
8. From the date of incorporation mentioned in the Certificate of Incorporation, such
subscribers to the memorandum and all other persons, as may, from time to time, become
members of the company, shall be a body corporate by the name contained in the
memorandum, capable of exercising all the functions of an incorporated company under
this Act and having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold
and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, tangible and intangible, to contract
and to sue and be sued, by the said name.
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the memorandum and articles shall, when
registered, bind the company and the members thereof to the same extent as if they
respectively had been signed by the company and by each member, and contained covenants
on its and his part to observe all the provisions of the memorandum and of the articles.
(2) All monies payable by any member to the company under the memorandum or
articles shall be a debt due from him to the company.
10. (1) A public company having a share capital shall not commence any business or
exercise any borrowing powers unless—
(a) a declaration is filed by a director or subscriber in such form and verified in
such manner as may be prescribed, with the Registrar that every subscriber to the
memorandum has paid the value of the shares agreed to be taken by him; and
(b) the company has filed with the Registrar a verification of its registered office
in the manner as may be prescribed.
Effect of
registration.
Effect of
memorandum
and articles.
Commencement
of business,
etc.

16
(2) If any default is made in complying with the requirements of this section, the
company shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and every
officer who is in default shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees for every day during which the default continues.
(3) Where no declaration has been filed with the Registrar under clause ( a) of sub-
section (1) within a period of one hundred and eighty days of the date of incorporation of
the company and the Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that the company is not
carrying on any business or operations, he may, without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (2), initiate action for the removal of the name of the company from the register
under Chapter XVIII.
11. (1) A company shall, on and from the date of its incorporation and at all times
thereafter, have a registered office capable of receiving and acknowledging all
communications and notices as may be addressed to it.
(2) The company shall furnish to the Registrar verification of its registered office
within fifteen days of its incorporation in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Every company shall —
(a) paint or affix its name and the address of its registered office, and keep the
same painted or affixed, on the outside of every office or place in which its business
is carried on, in a conspicuous position, in letters easily legible, and if the characters
employed therefor are not those of the language or of one of the languages in general
use in that locality, also in the characters of that language or of one of those languages;
(b) have its name engraved in legible characters on its seal;
(c) get its name, address of its registered office and the Corporate Identity
Number along with telephone number, fax number, e-mail and website addresses
printed in all its business letters, billheads, letter paper and in all its notices and other
official publications; and
(d) have its name printed on hundies, promissory notes, bills of exchange and
such other documents as may be prescribed.
(4) Notice of every change of the situation of the registered office, verified in the
manner prescribed, after the date of incorporation of the company, shall be given to the
Registrar within fifteen days of the change, who shall record the same.
(5) Except on the authority of a special resolution passed by a company, the registered
office of the company shall not be changed,—
(a) in the case of an existing company, outside the local limits of any city, town
or village where such office is situated at the commencement of this Act or where it
may be situated later by virtue of a special resolution passed by the company; and
(b) in the case of any other company,  outside the local limits of any city, town
or village where such office is first situated or where it may be situated later by virtue
of a special resolution passed by the company.
(6) If any default is made in complying with the requirements of this section, the
company and every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of one thousand
rupees for every day during which the default continues but not exceeding one lakh rupees.
12. (1) A company may, by a special resolution and after complying with the procedure
specified in this section, alter the provisions of its memorandum.
(2) Any change in the name of a company shall be subject to the provisions of sub-
sections (2) and (3) of section 5 and shall not have effect except with the approval of the
Central Government in writing:
Registered
office of
company.
Alteration of
memorandum.

17
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary where the only change in the name
of the company is the deletion therefrom, or addition thereto, of the word “Private” or letters
“OPC”, consequent on the conversion of any one class of companies to another class in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(3) When any change in the name of a company is made under sub-section ( 2), the
Registrar shall enter the new name in the register in place of the old name and issue a fresh
Certificate of  Incorporation with the new name and the change in the name shall be complete
and effective only on the issue of such a certificate.
(4) The alteration of the memorandum relating to the place of the registered office
from one State to another shall not have any effect unless it is approved by the Central
Government on an application made in this behalf.
(5) The Central Government shall dispose of the application under sub-section ( 4)
within a period of sixty days and before passing its order may satisfy itself that the alteration
has the consent of the creditors, debenture holders and others concerned with the company
or that the sufficient provision has been made by the company either for the due discharge
of all its debts and obligations or that adequate security has been provided for such
discharge.
(6) A company shall, in relation to any alteration of its memorandum, file with the
Registrar—
(a) the special resolution passed by the company under sub-section ( 1);
(b) the approval of the Central Government under sub-section ( 2), if the
alternation involve any change in the name of the company;
(c) certified copy of the order of the Central Government made under sub-
section (5), if  the alteration involves a transfer of the registered office from one State
to another. A certified copy of the order of the Central Government approving the
alteration shall be filed by the company with the Registrar of each of the States within
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, who shall register the same.
(7) Where an alteration of the memorandum results in the transfer of the registered
office of a company from one State to another, the Registrar of the State where the registered
office is being shifted to shall issue a fresh Certificate of Incorporation indicating the
alteration.
(8) No alteration made under this section shall have any effect until it has been
registered in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(9) Any alteration of the memorandum, in the case of a company limited by guarantee
and not having a share capital, purporting to give any person a right to participate in the
divisible profits of the company otherwise than as a member, shall be void.
13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the conditions contained in its
memorandum, if any, a company may, by a special resolution, alter its articles including
alterations having the effect of conversion of —
(a) a private company into a public company or a One Person Company, or
(b) a public company into a private company or a One Person Company, or
(c) a One Person Company into a public company or a private company:
Provided that where a company being a private company alters its articles in
such a manner that they no longer include the restrictions and limitations which are
required to be included in the articles of a private company under this Act, the company
shall, as from the date of such alteration, cease to be a private company:
Alteration of
articles.

18
Provided further that any alteration having the effect of conversion of a public
company into a private company or a One Person Company shall not take effect
except with the approval of the Tribunal which shall make such order as it may deem
fit.
(2) Every alteration of the articles under this section and a copy of any order of the
Tribunal approving the alteration as per sub-section ( 1) shall be filed with the Registrar,
together with a printed copy of the altered articles, within fifteen days in such manner as
may be prescribed, who shall register the same.
(3)Any alteration of the articles registered under sub-section (2) shall, subject to the
provisions of this Act, be valid as if it were originally in the articles.
14. (1) Every alteration made in the memorandum or articles of a company shall be
noted in every copy of the memorandum or articles, as the case may be.
(2) Where a company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this
section, the company shall be liable to a penalty, for each such default, of one thousand
rupees for every day during which the default continues but not exceeding one lakh rupees.
15. (1) If, through inadvertence or otherwise, a company on its first registration or on
its registration by a new name, is registered by a name which,—
(a) in the opinion of the Central Government, is identical with or too nearly
resembles the name by which a company in existence had been previously registered,
whether under this Act or any previous company law, it may direct the company to
change its name and the company shall change its name or new name, as the case may
be, within a period of three months from the issue of such direction, after adopting an
ordinary resolution for the purpose;
(b) on an application by a registered proprietor of a trade mark that the name is
identical with or too nearly resembles a registered trade mark of such proprietor under
the Trade Marks Act, 1999, made to the Central Government within three years of
incorporation or registration of the company, whether under this Act or any previous
company law, in the opinion of the Central Government, is identical with or too nearly
resembles an existing trade mark, it may direct the company to change its name and
the company shall change its name or new name, as the case may be, within a period
of six months from the issue of such direction, after adopting an ordinary resolution
for the purpose.
(2) Where a company changes its name or obtains a new name under sub-section (1),
it shall within a period of fifteen days give notice of such change to the Registrar along with
the order of the Central Government, who shall carry out necessary changes in the Certificate
of Incorporation and the memorandum.
(3) If a company makes default in complying with any direction given under sub-
section (1), the company shall be punishable with fine of one thousand rupees for every
day during which the default continues and every officer who is in default shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to one
lakh rupees.
16. (1) A company shall, on being so requested by a member, send to him within seven
days of the request and subject to the payment of such fee as may be prescribed, a copy
each of the following documents, namely:—
(a) the memorandum,
(b) the articles, and
(c) every agreement and every resolution referred to in sub-section (1) of section
106, if and in so far as they have not been embodied in the memorandum or articles.
Alteration of
memorandum
and articles to
be noted in
every copy.
Rectification
of name of
company.
Copies of
memorandum,
articles, etc.,
to be given to
members.
47 of 1999.

19
(2) Where a company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this
section, the company shall be liable for each default, to a penalty of one thousand rupees
for every day during which the default continues but not exceeding one lakh rupees.
17. (1) A company of any class registered under this Act may re-register itself as a
company of the same class or other class under this Act by alteration of memorandum and
articles of the company in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) Where the registration is required to be done under this section, the Registrar
shall on an application made by the company, after satisfying himself that the provisions of
this Chapter applicable for registration of companies have been complied with, close the
former registration of the company and after registering the documents referred to in sub-
section (1) register, issue a Certification of Incorporation in the same manner as its first
registration.
(3) The registration of a company under this section shall not affect any debts,
liabilities, obligations or contracts incurred or entered into, by or on behalf of the company
before the re-registration and those debts, liabilities, obligations and contracts may be
enforced in the manner as if such registration had not been done.
18. (1) No company shall, either by itself or through its nominees, hold any shares in
its holding company and no holding company shall allot or transfer its shares to any of its
subsidiary companies and any such allotment or transfer of shares of a company to its
subsidiary company shall be void:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a case—
(a) where the subsidiary company holds such shares as the legal representative
of a deceased member of the holding company; or
(b) where the subsidiary company holds such shares as a trustee; or
(c) where the subsidiary company is a shareholder even before it became a
subsidiary company of the holding company:
Provided further that the subsidiary company referred to in the preceding proviso
shall have a right to vote at a meeting of the holding company only in respect of the shares
held by it as a legal representative or as a trustee, as referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of
the said proviso.
(2) The reference in this section to shares of a holding company which is a company
limited by guarantee or an unlimited company, not having a share capital, shall be construed
as a reference to the interest of its members, whatever be the form of interest.
19. (1) A document may be served on a company or an officer thereof by sending it to
the company or the officer at the registered office of the company by post under a certificate
of posting or by registered post or by leaving it at its registered office or by means of such
electronic or other mode as may be prescribed:
Provided that where securities are held with a depository, the records of the beneficial
ownership may be served by such depository on the company by means of electronic mode
or by delivery of floppies or disks or any other similar device.
(2) A document may be served on Registrar or any member by sending it to him by
registered post or by delivering at his office or address, by such electronic or other mode as
may be prescribed:
Provided that a member may request for delivery of any document through a particular
mode, for which he will pay such fee as may be determined by the company in its annual
general meeting.
20. Save as otherwise provided in this Act,—
(a) a document or proceeding requiring authentication by a company, or
Re-registration
of companies
already
registered.
Subsidiary
company not
to hold shares
in its holding
company.
Service of
documents.
Authentication
of documents,
proceedings
and contracts.

20
(b) contracts made by or on behalf of a company,
may be signed by any key managerial personnel or an officer of the company duly authorised
by the Board in this behalf.
21. (1) A bill of exchange, hundi or promissory note shall be deemed to have been
made, accepted, drawn or endorsed on behalf of a company if made, accepted, drawn, or
endorsed in the name of, or on behalf or on account of, the company by any person acting
under its authority, express or implied.
(2) A company may, by writing under its common seal, authorise any person, either
generally or in respect of any specified matters, as its attorney, to execute other deeds on its
behalf in any place either in India or outside.
(3) A deed signed by such an attorney on behalf of the company and under his seal
shall bind the company and have the effect as if it were made under its common seal.
CHAPTER III
P
ROSPECTUS AND ALLOTMENT OF SECURITIES
22. The provisions contained in this Chapter and Chapter IV ,—
(a) in so far as they relate to issue and transfer of securities and non-payment
of dividend by listed companies or those companies which intend to get their securities
listed on any stock exchange in India, shall, except as provided under this Act, be
administered by the Securities and Exchange Board by making regulations;
(b) in any other case, shall be administered by the Central Government.
Explanation.—For  the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that all powers
relating to all other matters including those relating to prospectus, return of allotment, issue
of shares and redemption of preference shares shall be exercised by the Central Government,
the Tribunal or the Registrar, as the case may be.
23. (1) Every prospectus issued by or on behalf of a public company either with
reference to its formation or subsequently, or by or on behalf of any person who is or has
been engaged or interested in the formation of a public company, shall be dated and signed
and shall—
(a) state the following information, namely:—
(i) names and addresses of the registered office of the company, Company
Secretary, auditors, legal advisers, bankers, trustees, if any, underwriters and
such other persons as may be prescribed;
(ii) dates of the opening and closing of the issue, and declaration about
the issue of allotment letters and refunds within the prescribed time;
(iii) a statement by the Board of Directors about the separate bank
account where all monies received out of the issue are to be transferred and
disclosure of details of all monies including utilised and unutilised monies out
of the issue in the prescribed manner;
(iv) details about underwriting of the issue;
(v) consent of the directors, auditors, bankers to the issue, expert’s opinion,
if any, and of such other persons, as may be prescribed;
(vi) the authority for the issue and the details of the resolution passed
therefor;
(vii) procedure and time schedule for allotment and issue of certificates;
Execution of
bills of
exchange, etc.
Power of
Securities and
Exchange
Board to
regulate issue
and transfer of
securities, etc.
Matters to be
stated in
prospectus.

21
(viii) capital structure of the company in the prescribed manner;
(ix) such particulars of the terms of the present issue as may be prescribed;
(x) main objects and present business of the company and its location,
schedule of implementation of the project and future prospects;
(xi) particulars of management perception of risk factors;
(xii) minimum subscription, amount payable by way of premium, issue of
shares otherwise than on cash, option to subscribe for securities to be dealt
with in a depository; and
(xiii) details of directors, proposed directors including their appointments
and remuneration, and such particulars of the nature and extent of their interests
in the company as may be prescribed;
(b) set out the following reports for the purposes of the financial information,
namely:—
(i) reports by the auditors of the company with respect to its profits and
losses and assets and liabilities and such other matters as may be prescribed;
(ii) reports relating to profits and losses for each of the five financial
years immediately preceding the financial year of the issue of prospectus
including such reports of the subsidiaries and in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(iii) reports made by the auditors upon the profits and losses of the
business of the company for five financial years, and assets and liabilities of its
business on the last date before the issue of prospectus in the prescribed
manner; and
(iv) reports about the business or transaction to which the proceeds of
the securities are to be applied directly or indirectly;
(c) make a declaration about the compliance of the provisions of this Act and a
statement to the effect that nothing in the prospectus is contrary to the provisions of
this Act and the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; and
(d) state such other matters and set out such other reports, as may be prescribed:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the issue of a prospectus or
form of application for shares and debentures to the existing members or debenture holders
of a company, irrespective of whether any such member or debenture holder has a right to
renounce the offer in favour of any other person.
Explanation.—The date indicated in the prospectus shall be deemed to be the date
of its publication.
(2) No prospectus shall be issued by or on behalf of a company or in relation to an
intended company unless on or before the date of its publication, there has been delivered
to the Registrar for registration a copy thereof signed by every person who is named therein
as a director or proposed director of the company or by his duly authorised attorney.
(3) A prospectus issued under sub-section (1) shall not include a statement purporting
to be made by an expert unless the expert is a person who is not, and has not been, engaged
or interested in the formation or promotion or management, of the company and has given
his written consent to the issue of the prospectus and has not withdrawn such consent
before the delivery of a copy of the prospectus to the Registrar for registration and a
statement to that effect shall be included in the prospectus.
15 of 1992.

22
(4) Every prospectus issued under sub-section ( 1) shall, on the face of it, -
(a) state that a copy has been delivered for registration to the Registrar as
required under sub-section ( 2); and
(b) specify any documents required by this section to be attached to the copy so
delivered or refer to statements included in the prospectus which specify these documents.
(5) The Registrar shall not register a prospectus unless the requirements of this
section with respect to its registration are complied with and the prospectus is accompanied
by the consent in writing of all the persons named in the prospectus.
(6) No prospectus shall be valid if it is issued more than ninety days after the date on
which a copy thereof is delivered to the Registrar under sub-section ( 2).
(7) Where a prospectus is issued in contravention of the provisions of this section,
the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees and every person who is knowingly a
party to the issue of such prospectus shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both.
24. (1) A company may, without prejudice to the provisions of section 23, make an
offer or invitation to a section of the public, whether selected as members or debenture
holders of the company or as clients of the persons issuing the prospectus or in any other
manner, to subscribe for such securities as are mentioned in the offer or invitation, irrespective
of whether such securities are included in a prospectus and referred to therein as being
reserved for such offer or invitation.
(2) No offer or invitation shall be treated as made to a section of the public by virtue
of sub-section (1), if the offer or invitation can properly be regarded in all the circumstances—
(a) as not being calculated to result, directly or indirectly, in the securities
becoming available for subscription or purchase by persons other than those receiving
the offer or invitation, or
(b) otherwise as being a domestic concern of the persons making and receiving
the offer or invitation:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to a case where the
offer or invitation to subscribe for the securities is made to fifty persons or more:
Provided further that nothing in the preceding proviso shall apply to such public
financial institutions or non-banking financial companies as may be notified in the Official
Gazette by the Central Government from time to time.
(3) A company making an offer or invitation under this section shall allot its securities
within seventy days from the date of receipt of the application money for such securities
and if the company is not able to allot the securities within that period, it shall repay the
application money within eight days from the date of completion of seventy days.
(4) The Securities and Exchange Board shall, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of
India, make regulations in respect of an offer or invitation made to the public by a
public financial institution or non-banking financial company referred to in clause ( f) of
section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
(5) A statement indicating the salient features of the offer or invitation made under
this section shall, on or before the date of such offer or invitation, be delivered to the
Registrar for registration and the provisions of sub-sections ( 4) to ( 7) of section 23 shall
apply mutatis mutandis to such offer or invitation.
25. Where an advertisement of any prospectus of a company is published in any
manner, it shall be necessary to specify therein the contents of its memorandum as regards
Offer or
invitation for
subscription of
securities.
Advertisement
of prospectus.
2 of 1934.

23
the objects, the liability of members and the amount of share capital, of the company, and
the names of the signatories to the memorandum and the number of shares subscribed for
by them, and its capital structure.
26. (1) Any class or classes of companies, as the Securities and Exchange Board may
provide by regulations in this behalf, may file a shelf prospectus with the Registrar at the
stage of the first offer of securities included therein which shall indicate a period not
exceeding one year as the period of validity of such prospectus which shall commence from
the date of opening of the first offer of securities under that prospectus, and in respect of a
second or subsequent offer of such securities issued during the period of validity of that
prospectus, no further prospectus is required.
(2) A company filing a shelf prospectus shall be required to file an information
memorandum containing all material facts relating to new charges created, changes in the
financial position of the company as have occurred between the first offer of securities or
the previous offer of securities and the succeeding offer of securities and such other
changes as may be prescribed, with the Registrar within the prescribed time, prior to the
issue of a second or subsequent offer of securities under the shelf prospectus:
Provided that where a company or any other person has received applications for the
allotment of securities along with advance payments of subscription before the making of
any such change, the company or other person shall intimate the changes to such applicants
and if they express a desire to withdraw their application, the company or other person shall
refund all the monies received as subscription within fifteen days thereof.
(3) Where an information memorandum is filed, every time an offer of securities is
made under sub-section (2), such memorandum together with the shelf prospectus shall be
deemed to be a prospectus.
27. (1) A company proposing to make an offer of securities may issue a red herring
prospectus prior to the issue of a prospectus.
(2) A company proposing to issue a red herring prospectus under sub-section ( 1)
shall file it with the Registrar at least three days prior to the opening of the subscription list
and the offer.
(3) A red herring prospectus shall carry the same obligations as are applicable to a
prospectus and any variation between the red herring prospectus and a prospectus shall be
highlighted as variations in the prospectus.
(4) Upon the closing of the offer of securities under this section, the prospectus also
stating therein the total capital raised, whether by way of debt or share capital, and the
closing price of the securities and any other details as are not included in the red herring
prospectus shall be filed with the Registrar and in the case of a listed company with the
Registrar and the Securities and Exchange Board.
28. (1) No form of application for the purchase of any of the securities of a company
shall be issued unless such form is accompanied by an abridged prospectus:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply if it is shown that the form of
application was issued -
(a) in connection with a bona fide  invitation to a person to enter into an
underwriting agreement with respect to such securities, or
(b) in relation to securities which were not offered to the public.
(2) A copy of the abridged prospectus shall, on a request being made by any person
before the closing of the subscription list and the offer, be furnished to him.
(3) Where a company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this
section, it shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees for each default.
Shelf
prospectus.
Red herring
prospectus.
Issue of
application
forms for
securities.

24
29. Where a prospectus, issued, circulated or distributed under this Chapter, includes
any statement which is untrue or misleading in form or context or where any inclusion or
omission of any matter is likely to mislead, every person who authorises the issue of such
prospectus shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to
twenty five lakh rupees:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person if he proves that such
statement or omission was immaterial or that he had reasonable grounds to believe and did
up to the time of issue of the prospectus believe that the statement was true or the inclusion
or omission was necessary.
30. (1) Where a person has subscribed for securities of a company acting on any
statement included, or the inclusion or omission of any matter, in the prospectus which is
misleading and has sustained any loss or damage as a consequence thereof, the company
and every person who—
(a) is a director of the company at the time of the issue of the prospectus,
(b) has authorised himself to be named and is named in the prospectus as a
director of the company, or has agreed to become such director, either immediately or
after an interval of time,
(c) is a promoter of the company,
(d) has authorised the issue of the prospectus, and
(e) is an expert referred to in sub-section (3) section 23,
shall, without prejudice to any punishment to which any person may be liable under section
31, be liable to pay compensation to every person who has sustained such loss or damage.
(2) No person shall be liable under sub-section (1), if he proves—
(a) that, having consented to become a director of the company, he withdrew
his consent before the issue of the prospectus, and that it was issued without his
authority or consent; or
(b) that the prospectus was issued without his knowledge or consent, and that
on becoming aware of its issue, he forthwith gave a reasonable public notice that it
was issued without his knowledge or consent.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where it is proved that a
prospectus has been issued with intent to defraud the applicants for the securities of a
company or any other person or for any fraudulent purpose, every person referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be personally responsible, without any limitation of liability, for all or
any of the losses or damage that may have been incurred by any person who subscribed to
the securities on the basis of such prospectus.
31. Any person who, either knowingly or recklessly makes any statement, promise or
forecast which is false, deceptive or misleading, or deliberately conceals any material facts,
to induce another person to enter into, or to offer to enter into -
(a) any agreement for, or with a view to, acquiring, disposing of, subscribing
for, or underwriting, securities; or
(b) any agreement the purpose or the pretended purpose of which is to secure
a profit to any of the parties from the yield of securities or by reference to fluctuations
in the value of securities,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
Civil liability
for mis-
statements in
prospectus.
Punishment
for
fraudulently
inducing
persons to
invest money.
Criminal
liability for
misstatements
in prospectus.

25
32. A suit may be filed or any other action may be taken under section 30 or section 31
by any person, group of persons or any association of persons affected by any misleading
statement or the inclusion or omission of any matter in the prospectus.
33. (1) Any person who—
(a) makes or abets making of an application in a fictitious name to a company for
acquiring, or subscribing for, its securities; or
(b) makes or abets making of multiple applications to the company in different
names or in different combinations of his name or surname for acquiring or subscribing
for its securities; or
(c) otherwise induces directly or indirectly a company to allot, or register any
transfer of, securities to him, or to any other person in a fictitious name,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with
fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty lakh
rupees.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be prominently reproduced in every
prospectus issued by a company and in every form of application for securities.
(3) Where a person has been convicted under this section, the Court may also order
disgorgement of gains, if any, made by, and seizure and disposal of the securities still in
possession of, such person.
(4) The amount received through disgorgement or disposal of securities under sub-
section (3) shall be credited to the Investor Education and Protection Fund.
34. (1) No allotment of any securities of a company offered to the public for subscription
for the first time after its incorporation shall be made unless the amount stated in the
prospectus as the minimum amount has been subscribed and the sums payable on application
for the amount so stated have been paid to and received by the company, whether in cash
or by cheque or other instrument.
(2) The amount payable on application on every security shall not be less than five
per cent of the nominal amount of the security.
(3) If the stated minimum amount has not been subscribed and the sum payable on
application is not received within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date of
issue of the prospectus, the amount received under sub-section (1) shall be returned within
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Whenever a company having a share capital makes any allotment of shares, it
shall file with the Registrar a return of allotment in such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Nothing in this section shall apply to a private company.
(6) In case of any default under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), the company and
its officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty, for each default, of one thousand
rupees for every day during which default continues but not exceeding one lakh rupees.
35. (1) Every company intending to offer securities to the public for subscription by
the issue of a prospectus shall, before such issue, make an application to one or more
recognised stock exchange or exchanges for permission for the securities to be dealt with in
such stock exchange or exchanges.
(2) Where a prospectus states that an application under sub-section ( 1) has been
made, such prospectus shall also state the name or names of the stock exchange, and any
allotment whenever made on an application in pursuance of such prospectus shall be void
if the permission has not been granted by such stock exchange or stock exchanges before
the expiry of ten weeks from the date of closure of the subscription list:
Action to be
taken by
affected
persons.
Punishment
for
personation
for
acquisition,
etc., of
securities.
Allotment of
securities by
company.
Securities to
be dealt with
in Stock
Exchanges.

26
Provided that where an appeal against the decision of any recognised stock exchange,
refusing permission for the securities to be dealt with in that stock exchange, has been
preferred under section 22 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, such allotment
shall not be void until the dismissal of the appeal.
(3) All monies received on application from the public for subscription to the securities
shall be kept in a separate bank account in a scheduled bank and shall not be utilised for any
purpose other than-
(a) for adjustment against allotment of securities where the securities have
been permitted to be dealt with in the stock exchange or stock exchanges specified in
the prospectus, or
(b) for the repayment of monies within the prescribed time, received from
applicants in pursuance of the prospectus, where securities have not been permitted
to be so dealt with or where the company is for any other reason unable to allot
securities.
(4) Any condition purporting to require or bind any applicant for securities to waive
compliance with any of the requirements of this section shall be void.
(5) If a default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the company
shall be punishable with a fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may
extend to fifty lakh rupees and the officer who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less than
fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both.
(6) A company may pay commission to any person in connection with the subscription
to its securities subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
36. A company may, after passing a special resolution in its general meeting, issue
depository receipts to be dealt with in depository mode in any foreign country in such
manner, and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER IV
S
HARE CAPITAL AND DEBENTURES
37. (1) The share capital of the company limited by shares shall be of two kinds,
namely:—
(a) equity share capital, and
(b) preference share capital.
(2) Equity share capital, with reference to any company limited by shares, means that
part of the issued share capital of the company which has no limits for participation, either
with respect to dividends or with respect to capital, in distribution of profits or otherwise.
(3) Preference share capital, with reference to any company limited by shares, means
that part of the issued share capital of the company which carries or would carry a preferential
right with respect to -
(a) payment of dividend, either as a fixed amount or an amount calculated at a
fixed rate, which may either be free of or subject to income-tax; and
(b) repayment, in the case of a winding up or repayment of capital, of the
amount of the share capital paid-up or deemed to have been paid-up.
38. The shares or debentures or other interest of any member in a company shall be
movable property transferable in the manner provided by the articles of the company.
39. Every share in a company having a share capital shall be distinguished by its
distinctive number:
Global
Depository
Receipt.
Kinds of share
capital.
Nature of
shares or
debentures.
Numbering
of shares.
42 of 1956.

27
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a share held by a person whose
name is entered as holder of beneficial interest in such share in the records of a depository.
40. (1) A certificate, issued under the common seal of the company, specifying the
shares held by any person, shall be prima facie evidence of the title of the person to such
shares.
(2) A duplicate of a certificate of shares may be issued, if such certificate -
(a) is proved to have been lost or destroyed; or
(b) has been defaced, mutilated or torn and is surrendered to the company.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the articles of a company, the manner of
issue of a certificate of shares or the duplicate thereof, the form of such certificate, the
particulars to be entered in the register of members and other matters shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(4) Where a share is held in depository form, the record of the depository is the prima
facie evidence of the interest of the beneficial owner.
(5) If a company with intent to defraud issues a duplicate certificate of shares, the
company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five times the face value
of the shares involved in the issue of the duplicate certificate but which may extend to ten
times the face value of such shares and every officer of the company who is in default shall
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years and with fine which shall
not be less than three lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty five lakh rupees.
(6) Without prejudice to any liability under the Depositories Act, 1996, where any
depository with an intention to defraud a person has transferred shares, it shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty five
lakh rupees.
41. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 44, -
(a) every member of a company limited by shares and holding equity share
capital therein, shall have a right to vote on every resolution placed before the
company, and
(b) his voting right on a poll shall be in proportion to his share in the paid-up
equity share capital of the company.
(2) Every member of a company limited by shares and holding any preference share
capital therein shall, in respect of such capital, have a right to vote only on resolutions
placed before the company which directly affect the rights attached to his preference shares,
any resolution for the winding up of the company or for the repayment or reduction of its
preference share capital and his voting right on a poll shall be in proportion to his share in
the paid-up preference share capital of the company:
Provided that in respect of a resolution on a matter affecting both the equity
shareholders and the preference shareholders, the proportion of the voting rights of equity
shareholders to the voting rights of the preference shareholders shall be in the same
proportion as the paid-up capital in respect of the equity shares bears to the paid-up capital
in respect of the preference shares:
Provided further that where the dividends payable in respect of a class of preference
shares are in arrears for a period of three years or more, such class of preference shareholders
shall have a right to vote on all the resolutions placed before a meeting of the company.
42. ( 1) Where a share capital of the company is divided into different classes of
shares, the rights attached to the shares of any class may be varied with the consent in
writing of the holders of not less than three-fourths of the issued shares of that class or by
means of a special resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of the issued
Certificate of
shares.
22 of 1996.
V oting rights.
Variation of
shareholders’
rights.

28
shares of that class,—
(a) if provision with respect to such variation is contained in the memorandum
or articles of the company, or
(b) in the absence of any such provision in the memorandum or articles, if such
variation is not prohibited by the terms of issue of the shares of that class.
(2) Where the holders of not less than ten per cent of the issued shares of a class did
not consent to such variation or vote in favour of the special resolution for the variation,
they may apply to the Tribunal to have the variation cancelled, and where any such application
is made, the variation shall not have effect unless and until it is confirmed by the Tribunal.
(3) The company shall, within thirty days of the date of the order of the Tribunal, file
a copy thereof with the Registrar.
(4) Where any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the
company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty five thousand
rupees but which may extend to five lakhs rupees and every officer of the company who is
in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months
or with fine which shall not be less than twenty five thousand rupees but which may extend
to five lakh rupees, or with both.
43. Where any calls for further share capital are made on the shares of a class, such
calls shall be made on a uniform basis on all shares falling under that class.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, shares of the same nominal value on
which different amounts have been paid up shall not be deemed to fall under the same
class.
44. (1) A company may, if so authorised by its articles, accept from any member the
whole or a part of the amount remaining unpaid on any shares held by him, even of  no part
of that amount has been called up.
(2) A member of the company limited by shares shall not be entitled to any voting
rights in respect of the amount paid by him under sub-section ( 1) until that amount has
been called up.
45. A company may, if so authorised by its articles, pay dividends in proportion to the
amount paid-up on each share.
46. (1) Where a company issues shares at a premium, whether for cash or otherwise,
a sum equal to the aggregate amount of the premium received on those shares shall be
transferred to a “Securities Premium Account” and the provisions of this Act relating to
reduction of share capital of a company shall, except as provided in this section, apply as if
the share premium account were the paid-up share capital of the company.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the share premium account
may be applied by the company—
(a) towards the issue of unissued shares of the company to the members of the
company as fully paid bonus shares;
(b) in writing off the preliminary expenses of the company;
(c) in writing off the expenses of, or the commission paid or discount allowed
on, any issue of shares or debentures of the company;
(d) in providing for the premium payable on the redemption of any redeemable
preference shares or of any debentures of the company; or
(e) for the purchase of its own shares or other securities under section 61.
Calls on
shares of
same class to
be made on
uniform
basis.
Company to
accept unpaid
share capital,
although not
called up.
Payment of
dividend in
proportion
to amount
paid-up.
Application of
premiums
received on
issue of shares.

29
47. ( 1) Except as provided in section 48, a company shall not issue shares at a
discount.
(2) Any share issued by a company at a discounted price shall be void.
(3) Where a company contravenes the provisions of this section, the company shall
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend
to five lakh rupees and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
48. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 47, a company may issue
sweat equity shares of a class of shares already issued, if the following conditions are
fulfilled, namely :—
(a) the issue is authorised by a special resolution passed by the company;
(b) the resolution specifies the number of shares, the current market price,
consideration, if any, and the class or classes of directors or employees to whom such
equity shares are to be issued;
(c) not less than one year has, at the date of such issue, elapsed since the date
on which the company had commenced business; and
(d) where the equity shares of the company are listed on a recognised stock
exchange, the sweat equity shares are issued in accordance with the regulations
made by the Securities and Exchange Board in this behalf and if they are not so listed,
the sweat equity shares are issued in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.
(2) The rights, limitations, restrictions and provisions as are for the time being
applicable to equity shares shall be applicable to the sweat equity shares issued under this
section and the holders of such shares shall rank pari passu with other equity shareholders.
49. (1) No company limited by shares shall, after the commencement of this Act, issue
any preference shares which are irredeemable.
(2) A company limited by shares may, if so authorised by its articles, issue preference
shares which are liable to be redeemed within a period not exceeding twenty years from the
date of their issue subject to such conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided that a company may issue preference shares for a period exceeding twenty
years for such infrastructural projects as may be prescribed, subject to the redemption of
such percentage of shares as may be prescribed on an annual basis at the option of such
preferential shareholders:
Provided further that—
(a) no such shares shall be redeemed except out of the profits of the company
which would otherwise be available for dividend or out of the proceeds of a fresh
issue of shares made for the purposes of such redemption;
(b) no such shares shall be redeemed unless they are fully paid;
(c) where any such shares are proposed to be redeemed out of the profits of the
company, there shall, out of such profits, be transferred, a sum equal to the nominal
amount of the shares to be redeemed, to a reserve fund, to be called the Capital
Redemption Reserve Account, and the provisions of this Act relating to reduction of
share capital of a company shall, except as provided in this section, apply as if the
Capital Redemption Reserve Account were paid-up share capital of the company; and
(d) the premium, if any, payable on redemption shall be provided for out of the
profits of the company or out of the company’s share premium account, before such
shares are redeemed.
Prohibition
on issue of
shares at
discount.
Issue of sweat
equity shares.
Issue and
redemption of
preference
shares.

30
(3) Where a company is not in a position to redeem any preference shares or to pay
dividend, if any, on such shares in accordance with the terms of issue (such shares being
hereinafter referred to as unredeemed preference shares), it may, with the consent of the
holders of three-fourths in value of such preference shares and with the approval of the
Tribunal on a petition made by it in this behalf, issue further redeemable preference shares
equal to the amount due, including the dividend thereon, in respect of the unredeemed
preference shares, and on the issue of such further redeemable preference shares, the
unredeemed prefrence shares shall be deemed to have been redeemed:
Provided that the Tribunal shall, while giving approval under this sub-section, order
the redemption forthwith of preference shares held by such persons who have not consented
to the issue of further redeemable preference shares.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the issue of
further redeemable preference shares or the redemption of preference shares under this
section shall not be deemed to be an increase or, as the case may be, a reduction, in the
share capital of the company.
50. (1) A company shall not register a transfer of securities of the company, or the
interest of a member in the company in the case of a company having no share capital, other
than the transfer between persons both of whose names are entered as holders of beneficial
interest in the records of a depository, unless a proper instrument of transfer, in such form
as may be prescribed, duly stamped, dated and executed by or on behalf of the transferor
and the transferee and specifying the name, address and occupation, if any, of the transferee
has been delivered to the company by the transferor or the transferee within such period
from the date of execution, as may be prescribed, along with the certificate relating to the
securities, or if no such certificate is in existence, along with the letter of allotment of
securities:
Provided that where the instrument of transfer has been lost or the instrument of
transfer has not been delivered within the prescribed period, the company may register the
transfer on such terms as to indemnity as the Board may think fit.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prejudice the power of the company to register,
on receipt of an intimation of transmission of any right to securities by operation of law from
any person to whom such right has been transmitted.
(3) Where an application is made by the transferor alone and relates to partly paid
shares, the transfer shall not be registered, unless the company gives the notice of the
application, in such manner as may be prescribed, to the transferee and the transferee gives
no objection to the transfer within two weeks from the receipt of notice.
(4) Every company shall, unless prohibited by any provision of law or any order of
Court, tribunal or other authority, deliver the certificates of all securities allotted, transferred
or transmitted—
(a) within two months after incorporation, in the case of subscribers to the
memorandum;
(b) within two months from the date of allotment, in the case of any allotment of
any of its shares;
(c) within one month from the date of receipt by the company of the instrument
of transfer under sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, of the intimation of transmission
under sub-section (2), in the case of a transfer or transmission of securities;
(d) within six months from the date of allotment in the case of any allotment of
debenture.
(5) The transfer of any security or other interest of a deceased person in a company
made by his legal representative shall, even if the legal representative is not himself a holder
Transfer and
transmission
of securities.

31
thereof, be valid as if he had been the holder at the time of the execution of the instrument
of transfer.
(6) Where any default is made in complying with the provisions of sub sections (1) to
(5) of this section, the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than
twenty five thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees and every officer of
the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
(7) Where the transfer of securities is in contravention of any of the provisions of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 or this Act or any other law for the time
being in force, the Tribunal may, on an application made by the depository, company,
depository participant, the holder of the securities or the Securities and Exchange Board,
direct any company or a depository to set right the contravention and rectify its register of
records concerned.
51. Where any person deceitfully personates the owner of any share or interest and
thereby obtains or attempts to obtain any such share or interest or any coupon, or receives
or attempts to receive any money due to any such owner, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three
years or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five
lakh rupees.
52. (1) If a private company limited by shares refuses, whether in pursuance of any
power of the company under its articles or otherwise, to register the transfer of, or the
transmission by operation of law of the right to, any securities or interest of a member in the
company, it shall within one month from the date on which the instrument of transfer, or the
intimation of such transmission, as the case may be, was delivered to the company, send
notice of the refusal to the transferor and the transferee or to the person giving intimation
of such transmission, as the case may be, giving reasons for such refusal.
(2) The transferee may appeal to the Tribunal against the refusal within one month
from the date of receipt of the notice or in case no notice has been sent by the company,
within four months from the date on which the instrument of transfer or the intimation of
transmission, as the case may be, was delivered to the company.
(3) If a public company without sufficient cause refuses to register the transfer of
shares within one month from the date on which the instrument of transfer or the intimation
of transmission, as the case may be, is delivered to the company, the transferee may, within
two months of such refusal or where no intimation has been received from the company,
within three months of the delivery of the instrument of transfer or intimation of transmission,
appeal to the Tribunal.
(4) The Tribunal, while dealing with an application preferred under sub-section (1) or
an appeal made under sub-section (2) or (3), may, after hearing the parties, either reject the
application or dismiss the appeal, or by order—
(a) direct that the transfer or transmission shall be registered by the company
and the company shall comply with such order within ten days of the receipt of the
order; or
(b) direct rectification of the register and also direct the company to pay damages,
if any, sustained by any party aggrieved.
(5) Where any person contravenes the order of the Tribunal under this section, he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but
which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees
but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
15 of 1992.
Punishment
for
personation
of
shareholder.
Refusal of
registration
and appeal
against refusal.

32
53. (1) If the name of any person is, without sufficient cause, entered in the register of
members of a company, or after having been entered in the register, is, without sufficient
cause, omitted therefrom, or if a default is made, or unnecessary delay takes place in entering
in the register, the fact of any person having become or ceased to be a member, the person
aggrieved, or any member of the company, or the company may appeal in such form as may
be prescribed, to the Tribunal, or to a competent court outside India, specified by the
Central Government by notification, in respect of foreign members or debenture holders
residing outside India, for rectification of the register.
(2) The Tribunal may, after hearing the parties to the appeal under  sub-section (1) by
order, either dismiss the appeal or direct that the transfer or transmission shall be registered
by the company within ten days of the receipt of the order or direct rectification of the
register and in the latter case direct the company to pay damages, if any, sustained by the
party aggrieved or the records of a depository.
(3) If any default is made in complying with the order of the Tribunal under this
section, the company and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both.
54. (1) Where any notice, advertisement or other official publication, or any business
letter, billhead or letter paper of a company contains a statement of the amount of the
authorised capital of the company, such notice, advertisement or other official publication,
or such letter, billhead or letter paper shall also contain a statement, in an equally prominent
position and in equally conspicuous characters, of the amount of the capital which has
been subscribed and the amount paid-up.
(2) If any default is made in complying with the requirements of sub-section (1), the
company shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees and every officer of the company
who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees, for each default.
55. (1) A limited company having a share capital may, if so authorised by its articles,
alter its memorandum in its general meeting to—
(a) increase its share capital by such amount as it thinks expedient by issuing
new shares;
(b) consolidate and divide all or any of its share capital into shares of a larger
amount than its existing shares;
(c) convert all or any of its fully paid-up shares into stock, and reconvert that
stock into fully paid-up shares of any denomination;
(d) sub-divide its shares, or any of them, into shares of smaller amount than is
fixed by the memorandum, so, however, that in the sub-division the proportion between
the amount paid and the amount, if any, unpaid on each reduced share shall be the
same as it was in the case of the share from which the reduced share is derived;
(e) cancel shares which, at the date of the passing of the resolution in that
behalf, have not been taken or agreed to be taken by any person, and diminish the
amount of its share capital by the amount of the shares so cancelled.
(2) The cancellation of shares under sub-section ( 1) shall not be deemed to be a
reduction of share capital.
56. (1) Where at any time, a company having a share capital proposes to increase its
subscribed capital by the issue of further shares, such shares shall be offered —
(a) to persons who, at the date of the offer, are holders of equity shares of the
company in proportion, as nearly as circumstances admit, to the share capital paid up
on those shares by circulating an offer for sale subject to such terms and conditions
relating to the time within which the offer has to be accepted, the renunciation of such
offer and such other matters as may be prescribed;
Rectification
of register of
members.
Publication of
authorised,
subscribed and
paid-up
capital.
Further issue
of share
capital.
Power of
limited
company to
alter its
share capital.

33
(b) to employees under a scheme of employees’ stock option, subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed; or
(c) if it is authorised by a special resolution, to persons other than those
mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b), either for cash or for a consideration, if the price
of such shares is determined by the valuation report of a registered valuer subject to
such conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the increase of the subscribed capital of a
public company caused by the exercise of an option as a term attached to the debentures
issued or loan raised by the company to convert such debentures or loans into shares in the
company:
Provided that the terms of issue of such debentures or loan containing such an
option have been approved before the issue of such debentures or the raising of loan by a
special resolution passed by the company in general meeting.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), where any debentures
have been issued, or loan has been obtained from any Government, by a company, and if
that Government considers it necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, by order,
direct that such debentures or loans or any part thereof shall be converted into shares in the
company on such terms and conditions as appear to the Government to be reasonable in
the circumstances of the case even if terms of the issue of such debentures or the raising of
such loans do not include a term for providing for an option for such conversion:
Provided that where the terms and conditions of such conversion are not acceptable
to the company, it may, within sixty days from the date of communication of such order,
appeal to the Tribunal which shall after hearing the company and the Government pass
such order as it deems fit.
(4) In determining the terms and conditions of conversion under sub-section (3), the
Government shall have due regard to the financial position of the company, the terms of
issue of debentures or loans, as the case may be, the rate of interest payable on such
debentures or loans and such other matters as it may consider necessary.
(5) Where the Government has, by an order made under sub-section (3), directed that
any debenture or loan or any part thereof shall be converted into shares in a company and
where no appeal has been preferred to the Tribunal under sub-section ( 3) or where such
appeal has been dismissed, the memorandum of such company shall, where such order has
the effect of increasing the authorised share capital of the company, stand altered and the
authorised share capital of such company shall stand increased by an amount equal to the
amount of the value of shares  which such debentures or loans or part thereof has been
converted in to.
57. (1) Where—
(a) a company alters its share capital in any manner specified in sub-section (1)
of section 55;
(b) an order made by the Government under sub-section ( 3) read with sub-
section ( 5) of section 56 has the effect of increasing the authorised capital of a
company; or
(c) a company redeems any redeemable preference shares,
the company shall file a notice in the prescribed form with the Registrar within thirty days of
such alteration or increase, as the case may be, along with an altered memorandum.
(2) Where a company and any officer of the company who is in default contravenes
the provisions of sub-section (1), it or he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be
less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty five lakh rupees.
Notice to be
given to
Registrar for
alteration of
share capital.

34
58.  An unlimited company having a share capital may, by a resolution for registration
as a limited company under this Act, do either or both of the following things, namely:—
(a) increase the nominal amount of its share capital by increasing the nominal
amount of each of its shares, subject to the condition that no part of the increased
capital shall be capable of being called up except in the event and for the purposes of
the company being wound up;
(b) provide that a specified portion of its uncalled share capital shall not be
capable of being called up except in the event and for the purposes of the company
being wound up.
59. (1) Subject to confirmation by the Tribunal on an application by the company, a
company limited by shares or limited by guarantee and having a share capital may, by a
special resolution, reduce the share capital in any manner and in particular, may—
(a) extinguish or reduce the liability on any of its shares in respect of the share
capital not paid-up; or
(b) either with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its shares,
(i) cancel any paid-up share capital which is lost or is unrepresented by
available assets; or
(ii) pay off any paid-up share capital which is in excess of the wants of
the company,
and alter its memorandum by reducing the amount of its share capital and of its shares
accordingly:
Provided that no such reduction shall be made if the company is in arrears in the
repayment of any deposits accepted by it, either before or after the commencement of this
Act, or the interest payable thereon.
(2) The Tribunal shall give notice of every application made to it under sub-section
(1) to the Central Government and to the Securities and Exchange Board, in the case of
listed companies, and the creditors of the company and shall take into consideration the
representations, if any, made to it by that Government, the Securities and Exchange Board
and the creditors within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the notice:
Provided that where no representation has been received from the Central Government,
the Securities and Exchange Board or the creditors within the said period, it shall be presumed
that they have no objection to the reduction.
(3) The Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the debt or claim of every creditor of the
company has been discharged or determined or has been secured or his consent is obtained,
make an order confirming the reduction on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.
(4) The order of confirmation of the reduction by the Tribunal under sub-section (3)
shall be published by the company in such manner as the Tribunal may direct.
(5) The company shall deliver a certified copy of the order of the Tribunal under sub-
section (3) and of a minute approved by the Tribunal showing—
(a) the amount of share capital,
(b) the number of shares into which it is to be divided,
(c) the amount of each share, and
(d) the amount, if any, at the date of registration deemed to be paid-up on each
share,
to the Registrar within thirty days of the receipt of the copy of the order, who shall register
the same and issue a certificate to that effect.
Reduction of
share capital.
Unlimited
company to
provide for
reserve share
capital on re-
registration.

35
(6) Nothing in this section shall apply to buy-back of its own securities by a company
under section 61.
(7) A member of the company, past or present, shall not be liable to any call or
contribution in respect of any share held by him exceeding the amount of difference, if any,
between the amount paid on the share, or reduced amount, if any, which is to be deemed to
have been paid thereon, as the case may be, and the amount of the share as fixed by the
order of reduction.
(8) Where the name of any creditor entitled to object to the reduction of share capital
under this section is, by reason of his ignorance of the proceedings for reduction or of their
nature and effect with respect to his debt or claim, not entered on the list of creditors, and
after such reduction the company is unable, within the meaning of sub-section ( 2) of
section 246, to pay the amount of his debt or claim,—
(a) every person, who was a member of the company at the date of the registration
of the order for reduction by the Registrar, shall be liable to contribute to the payment
of that debt or claim, an amount not exceeding the amount which he would have been
liable to contribute if the company had commenced winding up on the day immediately
before the said date; and
(b) if the company is wound up, the Tribunal may, on the application of any
such creditor and proof of his ignorance as aforesaid, if it thinks fit, settle a list of
persons so liable to contribute, and make and enforce calls and orders on the
contributories settled on the list, as if they were ordinary contributories in a winding
up.
(9) Nothing in sub-section ( 8) shall affect the rights of the contributories among
themselves.
(10) If any officer of the company—
(a) knowingly conceals the name of any creditor entitled to object to the
reduction;
(b) knowingly misrepresents the nature or amount of the debt or claim of any
creditor; or
(c) abets or is privy to any such concealment or misrepresentation as aforesaid,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with
both.
(11) Where a company fails to comply with the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5),
it shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees.
60.  (1) No company limited by shares or by guarantee and having a share capital shall
have power to buy its own shares unless the consequent reduction of share capital is
effected under the provisions of this Act.
(2) No public company shall give, whether directly or indirectly and whether by
means of a loan, guarantee, the provision of security or otherwise, any financial assistance
for the purpose of, or in connection with, a purchase or subscription made or to be made, by
any person of or for any shares in the company or in its holding company:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to—
(a)  the lending of money by a banking company in the ordinary course of its
business;
(b)  the provision by a company of money in accordance with any scheme for
Restrictions
on purchase
by company
or giving of
loans by it for
purchase of
its shares.

36
the purchase of, or subscription for, fully paid-up shares in the company or its holding
company, if the purchase of, or the subscription for, the shares by trustees to be held
by or for the benefit of the employees of the company; or
(c) the giving of loans by a company to persons in the employment of the
company other than its directors or key managerial personnel, for an amount not
exceeding their salary or wages for a period of six months with a view to enabling
them to purchase or subscribe for fully paid-up shares in the company or its holding
company to be held by them by way of beneficial ownership.
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of a company to redeem any preference
shares issued by it under this Act or under any previous company law.
(4) Where a company contravenes the provisions of this section, it shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty-five
lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be
less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees.
61.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, but subject to the provisions
of sub-section ( 2), a company may purchase its own shares or other specified securities
(hereinafter referred to as buy-back) out of—
(a) its free reserves,
(b) the securities premium account, or
(c) the proceeds of the issue of any shares or other specified securities:
Provided that no buy-back of any kind of shares or other specified securities shall be
made out of the proceeds of an earlier issue of the same kind of shares or same kind of other
specified securities.
(2) No company shall purchase its own shares or other specified securities under
sub-section ( 1), unless—
(a) the buy-back is authorised by its articles;
(b) a special resolution has been passed at a general meeting of the company
authorising the buy-back:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to a case where—
(i) the buy-back is for less than ten per cent. of the total paid-up equity
capital and free reserves of the company; and
(ii) such buy-back has been authorised by the Board by means of a
resolution passed at its meeting;
(c) the buy-back is for less than twenty five per cent. of the total paid-up capital
and free reserves of the company:
Provided that in respect of the buy-back of equity shares in any financial year, the
reference to twenty-five per cent. in this clause shall be construed with respect to its total
paid-up equity capital in that financial year;
(d) the ratio of the aggregate of secured and unsecured debts owed by the
company after buy-back is not more than twice the capital and its free reserves:
Provided that the Central Government may, by order, notify a higher ratio of the debt
to capital and free reserves for a class or classes of companies;
(e) all the shares or other specified securities for buy-back are fully paid-up;
(f) the buy-back of the shares or other specified securities listed on any
recognised stock exchange is in accordance with the regulations made by the Securities
Power of
company to
purchase its
own
securities.

37
and Exchange Board in this behalf; and
(g) the buy-back in respect of shares or other specified securities other
than those specified in clause ( f) is in accordance with such rules as may be
prescribed:
Provided that no offer of buy-back under this sub-section shall be made within
a period of one year reckoned from the date of the preceding offer of buy-back,
if any.
(3) The notice of the meeting at which the special resolution is proposed to be passed
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) shall be accompanied by an explanatory statement
stating—
(a) a full and complete disclosure of all material facts;
(b)  the necessity for the buy-back;
(c) the class of shares or securities intended to be purchased under the buy-
back;
(d) the amount to be invested under the buy-back; and
(e) the time-limit for completion of buy-back.
(4) Every buy-back shall be completed within one year from the date of passing of the
special resolution under clause ( b), or as the case may be, the resolution passed by the
Board under para (ii) of the proviso to that clause, of sub-section ( 2).
(5) The buy-back under sub-section ( 1) may be—
(a) from the existing shareholders or security holders on a proportionate basis;
(b) from the open market;
(c) from odd lots, where the lot of shares or securities of a public company,
whose shares are listed on a recognised stock exchange, is smaller than such
marketable lot, as may be specified by the stock exchange; or
(d) by purchasing the securities issued to employees of the company pursuant
to a scheme of stock option or sweat equity.
.(6) Where a company proposes to buy-back its own shares or other specified
securities under this section in pursuance of a special resolution under clause ( b) of sub-
section (2) or a resolution under para (ii) of the proviso thereto, it shall, before making such
buy-back, file with the Registrar and the Securities and Exchange Board, a declaration of
solvency signed by at least two directors of the company, one of whom shall be the managing
director, if any, in such form as may be prescribed and verified by an affidavit to the effect
that the Board of Directors of the company has made a full inquiry into the affairs of the
company as a result of which they have formed an opinion that it is capable of meeting its
liabilities and will not be rendered insolvent within a period of one year from the date of
declaration adopted by the Board:
Provided that no declaration of solvency shall be filed with the Securities and
Exchange Board by a company whose shares are not listed on any recognised stock
exchange.
(7) Where a company buys back its own shares or other specified securities, it shall
extinguish and physically destroy the shares or securities so bought back within seven
days of the last date of completion of buy-back.
(8) Where a company completes a buy-back of its shares or other specified securities
under this section, it shall not make a further issue of the same kind of shares or other
securities including allotment of new shares under clause ( a) of sub-section (1) of section

38
56 or other specified securities within a period of six months except by way of a bonus issue
or in the discharge of subsisting obligations such as conversion of warrants, stock option
schemes, sweat equity or conversion of preference shares or debentures into equity shares.
(9) Where a company buys back its shares or other specified securities under this
section, it shall maintain a register of the shares or securities so bought, the consideration
paid for the shares or securities bought back, the date of cancellation of shares or securities,
the date of extinguishing and physically destroying the shares or securities and such other
particulars as may be prescribed.
(10) A company shall, after the completion of the buy-back under this section, file
with the Registrar and the Securities and Exchange Board a return containing such particulars
relating to the buy-back within thirty days of such completion, as may be prescribed:
Provided that no return shall be filed with the Securities and Exchange Board by a
company whose shares are not listed on any recognised stock exchange.
(11) Where a company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this
section or any regulation made by the Securities and Exchange Board, for the purposes of
clause (f) of sub-section (2), the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be
less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees and any officer of the
company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which
may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 63, “specified securities”
includes employees’ stock option or other securities as may be notified by the Central
Government from time to time.
62. Where a company purchases its own shares out of free reserves, a sum equal to
the nominal value of the shares so purchased shall be transferred to the Capital  Redemption
Reserve Account and details of such transfer shall be disclosed in the balance sheet.
63. No company shall directly or indirectly purchase its own shares or other specified
securities—
(a) through any subsidiary company including its own subsidiary companies;
(b) through any investment company or group of investment companies; or
(c) if a default is made by the company in the repayment of deposits accepted
either before or after the commencement of this Act, interest payment thereon,
redemption of debentures or preference shares or payment of dividend to any
shareholder, or repayment of any term loan or interest payable thereon to any financial
institution or banking company.
64. (1) A company may issue debentures either with an option to convert such
debentures into shares at the time of redemption or otherwise.
(2) No company shall issue any debentures carrying any voting rights.
(3) All secured debentures may be issued only by such class of companies and
subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(4) Where debentures are issued by a company under this section, the company shall
create a Debenture Redemption Reserve Account out of the profits of the company available
for payment of dividend and the amount credited to such account shall not be utilised by
the company except for the redemption of debentures.
(5) No company shall issue a prospectus or make an offer or invitation to the public or
to its members exceeding five hundred for the subscription of its debentures, unless the
Prohibition
for buy-back
in certain
circumstances.
Transfer of
certain sums
to Capital
Redemption
Reserve
Account.
Debentures.

39
company has, before such issue or offer, appointed one or more debenture trustees and the
conditions governing the appointment of such trustees shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) A debenture trustee shall take steps to protect the interests of the debenture
holders and redress their grievances and rules may be made in this behalf.
(7) Any provision contained in a trust deed for securing the issue of debentures, or in
any contract with the debenture holders secured by a trust deed, shall be void insofar as it
would have the effect of exempting a trustee thereof from, or indemnifying him against, any
liability for breach of trust, where he fails to show the degree of care and diligence required
of him as a trustee, having regard to the provisions of the trust deed conferring on him any
power, authority or discretion:
Provided that the liability of the debenture trustee shall be subject to such exemptions
as may be agreed upon by a majority of debenture holders holding not less than three-
fourths in value of the total debentures at a meeting held for the purpose.
(8) A company shall pay interest and redeem the debentures in accordance with the
terms and conditions of their issue.
(9) Where at any time the debenture trustee comes to a conclusion that the assets of
the company are insufficient or are likely to become insufficient to discharge the principal
amount as and when it becomes due, the debenture trustee may file a petition before the
Tribunal and the Tribunal may, after hearing the company and any other person interested
in the matter, by order, impose such restrictions on the incurring of any further liabilities by
the company as the Tribunal may consider necessary in the interests of the debenture
holders.
(10) Where a company fails to redeem the debentures on the date of their maturity or
fails to pay interest on the debentures when it is due, the Tribunal may, on the application
of any or all of the debenture holders, or debenture trustee and, after hearing the parties
concerned, direct, by order, the company to redeem the debentures forthwith on payment of
principal and interest due thereon.
(11) Where any default is made in complying with the order of the Tribunal under this
section, every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which shall not less than two lakh
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
(12) A contract with the company to take up and pay for any debentures of the
company may be enforced by a decree for specific performance.
(13) The Central Government may prescribe by rules, for securing the issue of
debentures, the form of debenture trust deed, the procedure for the debenture holders to
inspect the trust deed and to obtain copies thereof and such other matters.
65.  (1) Every holder of shares or debentures of a company may, at any time, nominate,
in the prescribed manner, any person to whom his shares or debentures shall vest in the
event of his death.
(2) Where the shares or debentures of a company are held by more than one person
jointly, the joint holders may together nominate, in the prescribed manner, any person to
whom all the rights in the shares or debentures shall vest in the event of death of all the joint
holders.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
in any disposition, whether testamentary or otherwise, in respect of the shares or debentures
of a company, where a nomination made in the prescribed manner purports to confer on any
person the right to vest the shares or debentures of the company, the nominee shall, on the
death of the holder of shares or debentures or, as the case may be, on the death of the joint
holders, become entitled to all the rights in the shares or debentures, of the holder or, as the
Nomination of
shares or
debentures.

40
case may be, of all the joint holders, in relation to such shares, or debentures, to the
exclusion of all other persons, unless the nomination is varied or cancelled in the prescribed
manner.
(4) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the holder of the shares or
debentures, making the nomination to appoint, in the prescribed manner, any person to
become entitled to the shares or debentures of the company, in the event of the death of the
nominee during his minority.
CHAPTER V
A
CCEPTANCE OF DEPOSITS BY COMPANIES
66.  (1) On and after the commencement of this Act, no company shall invite, accept
or renew deposits under this Act from the public except as provided under this Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a banking company and non
banking financial company as defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and to such
other company as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank of
India, specify in this behalf.
(2) A company may, subject to the passing of a resolution in general meeting and
subject to such rules as may be prescribed in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India,
accept deposits from its members on such terms and conditions, including the provision of
security or for the repayment of such deposits with interest, as may be agreed upon between
the company and its members, subject to the fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:—
(a) issuance of a circular to its members including therein a statement showing
the financial position of the company, the credit rating obtained, the total number of
depositors and the amount due towards deposits in respect of any previous deposits
accepted by the company and such other particulars in such form and in such manner
as may be prescribed;
(b) filing a copy of the circular along with such statement with the Registrar
thirty days before the date of issue of the circular;
(c) depositing such sum which shall not be less than fifteen per cent. of the
amount of its deposits maturing during a financial year and the financial year next
following, in a Deposit Repayment Reserve Account;
(d) providing such deposit insurance in such manner and to such extent as may
be prescribed;
(e) certifying that the company has not defaulted in the repayment of deposits
accepted either before or after the commencement of this Act or payment of interest
on such deposits; and
(f) providing such security for the due repayment of the amount of deposit or
the interest thereon including the creation of such charge on the company property
or assets.
(3) Every deposit accepted by a company under sub-section ( 2) shall be repaid with
interest in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement referred to in that
sub-section.
(4) Where a company fails to repay the deposit or part thereof or any interest thereon
under sub-section ( 3), the depositor concerned may apply to the Tribunal for an order
directing the company to pay the sum due or for any loss or damage incurred by him as a
result of such non-payment and for such other orders as the Tribunal may deem fit.
67. (1) Where in respect of any deposit accepted by a company before the
commencement of this Act, the amount of such deposit or part thereof or any interest due
thereon remains unpaid on such commencement or becomes due at any time thereafter, the
company shall—
Prohibition
on
acceptance
of deposits
from public. 2 of 1934.
Repayment of
deposits, etc.
accepted
before
commence-
ment of Act.

41
(a) file within a period of three months from such commencement or from the
date on which such payment are due with the Registrar a statement of all the deposits
accepted by the company and sums unpaid on such amount with the interest payable
thereon along with the arrangements made for such repayment, notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or under the terms and
conditions subject to which the deposit was accepted or any scheme framed under
any law; and
(b) repay within one year from such commencement from the date on which
such payments are due, whichever is earlier.
(2) The Tribunal may on an application made by the company, after considering the
financial condition of the company, the amount of deposit or part thereof and the interest
payable thereon and such other matters, allow further time as considered reasonable to the
company to repay the deposit.
(3) Where a company fails to repay the deposit or part thereof or any interest thereon
within the time specified in sub-section (1) or such further time as may be allowed by the
Tribunal under sub-section (2), the company shall, in addition to the payment of the amount
of deposit or part thereof and the interest due, be punishable with fine which shall not be
less than one crore rupees but which may extend to ten crore rupees and every officer of the
company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
seven years or with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five lakh rupees but which may
extend to two crore rupees, or with both.
68. (1) Where a company fails to repay the deposit or part thereof or any interest
thereon referred to in section 67 within the time specified in sub-section (1) of that section
or such further time as may be allowed by the Tribunal under sub-section (2) of that section,
and it is proved that the deposits had been accepted with intent to defraud the depositors
or for any fraudulent purpose, every officer of the company who was responsible for the
acceptance of such deposit shall, without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-
section (3) of that section, be personally responsible, without any limitation of liability, for
all or any of the losses or damages that may have been incurred by the depositors.
(2) Any suit, proceedings or other action may be taken by any person, group of
persons or any association of persons who had incurred any loss as a result of the failure
of the company to repay the deposits or part thereof or any interest thereon.
CHAPTER VI
R
EGISTRATION OF CHARGES
69. (1) It shall be the duty of every company creating a charge within India or outside,
on its property or assets or any of its undertakings, whether tangible or otherwise, and
situated in India or outside, to register the particulars of the charge signed by the company
and the charge-holder together with the instruments, if any, creating such charge in such
form, on payment of such fee and in such manner as may be prescribed, with the Registrar
within thirty days of its creation:
Provided that the Registrar may, on an application by the company, allow such
registration to be made within a period of three hundred days of such creation on payment
of such additional fee as may be prescribed.
(2) Where a charge is registered with the Registrar under sub-section ( 1), he shall
issue a certificate of registration of such charge in such form and in such manner as may be
prescribed to the company and, as the case may be, to the person in whose favour the
charge is created.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
no charge created by a company shall be taken into account by the liquidator or any other
creditor unless it is duly registered under sub-section (1) and a certificate of registration of
such charge is given by the Registrar under sub-section ( 2).
Damages for
fraud.
Duty to register
charges, etc.

42
(4) Nothing in sub-section ( 3) shall prejudice any contract or obligation for the
repayment of the money secured by a charge.
70. Where a company fails to register the charge within the period specified in section
69, without prejudice to its liability in respect of any offence under this Chapter, the person
in whose favour the charge is created may apply to the Registrar for registration of the
charge along with the instrument created for the charge, in such form and manner as may be
prescribed and the Registrar may, on such application, within fourteen days after giving
notice to the company, unless the company itself registers the charge or shows sufficient
cause why such charge should not be registered, allow such registration on payment of
such fee and additional fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that where registration is effected on application of the person in whose
favour the charge is created, that person shall be entitled to recover from the company the
amount of any fee or additional fee paid by him to the Registrar for the purpose of registration
of charge.
71. The provisions of section 69 relating to registration of charges shall, so far as may
be, apply to—
(a) a company acquiring any property subject to a charge within the meaning of
that section; or
(b) any modification in the terms and conditions of any charge registered under
that section.
72. Where any charge on any property or assets of a company or any of its
undertakings is registered under section 69, any person acquiring such property, assets,
undertakings or part thereof or any share or interest therein shall be deemed to have notice
of the charge from the date of such registration.
73. (1) The Registrar shall, in respect of every company, keep a register containing
particulars of the charges registered under this Chapter in such form and in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) A register kept in pursuance of this section shall be open to inspection by any
person on payment of such fee as may be prescribed for each inspection.
74. (1) A company shall give intimation to the Registrar in the prescribed form, of the
payment or satisfaction in full of any charge registered under this Chapter within thirty
days from the date of such payment or satisfaction and the provisions of sub-section (1) of
section 69 shall, as far as may be, apply to an intimation given under this section.
(2) The Registrar shall, on receipt of  intimation under sub-section (1), cause a notice
to be sent to the holder of the charge calling upon him to show cause within such time not
exceeding fourteen days, as may be specified in such notice, as to why payment or satisfaction
in full should not be recorded as intimated to the Registrar,  and if no cause is shown, by
such holder of the charge the Registrar shall order that a memorandum of satisfaction shall
be entered in the register of charges kept by him under section 73 and shall inform the
company that he has done so.
75. (1) If any person obtains an order for the appointment of a receiver for, or of a
person to manage, the property, subject to a charge, of a company or if any person appoints
such receiver or person under any power contained in any instrument, he shall, within such
time as may be prescribed, give notice of such appointment to the company and the Registrar
along with a copy of the order or instrument and the Registrar shall, on payment of the
prescribed fee, register particulars of the receiver, person or instrument.
(2) Any person appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall, on ceasing to hold such
appointment, give to the company and the Registrar a notice to that effect and the Registrar
shall register such notice.
Application
for
registration
of charge.
Section 69 to
apply in
certain
matters.
Date of notice
of charge.
Register of
charges to be
kept by
Registrar.
Company to
report
satisfaction of
charge.
Intimation of
appointment
of receiver or
manager.

43
76. (1) Every company shall keep at its registered office a register of charges in such
form and in such manner as may be prescribed, which shall include therein all charges and
floating charges affecting any property or assets of the company or any of its undertakings,
indicating in each case such particulars as may be prescribed.
(2) The register of charges kept under sub-section ( 1) shall be open for inspection
during business hours—
(a) by any member without any payment of fee; or
(b) by any other person on payment of such fee as may be prescribed,
subject to such reasonable restrictions as the company may, by its articles, impose.
77. Where any company contravenes any provision of this Chapter, the company
shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may
extend to ten lakhs rupees and any officer of the company who is in default shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with
both.
CHAPTER VII
M
ANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
78.  (1) Every company shall keep and maintain following registers in such form and
in such manner as may be prescribed, namely:—
(a) register of members indicating separately equity and preference shares held
by each member and residing in India and outside;
(b) register of debenture holders;
(c) register of any other security holders.
(2) Every register maintained under sub-section ( 1) shall include an index of the
names included therein.
(3) The register and index of beneficial owners maintained by a depository under
section 11 of the Depositories Act, 1996, shall be deemed to be the corresponding register
and index for the purposes of this Act.
(4) A company may, if so authorised by its articles, keep in any country outside India,
in such manner as may be prescribed, a part of the register referred to in sub-section ( 1),
called “foreign register” containing the names and particulars of the members, debenture
holders, other security holders or beneficial owners residing outside India.
(5) A company shall file with the Registrar—
(a) particulars of the situation of the place where such register of members, etc.,
is kept; and
(b) in the event of any change in the situation of such place or of its
discontinuance, particulars of such change or discontinuance within thirty days from
the date of such change or discontinuance.
(6) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the company
shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees and every officer of the company who is
in default shall be liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees, for each such default.
79. (1) Where the name of a person is entered in the register of members of a company
as the holder of shares or class of shares in that company but who does not hold the
beneficial interest in such shares, such person shall make a declaration in such form as may
be prescribed to the company specifying the name and other particulars of the person who
holds the beneficial interest in such shares or class of shares.
Company’s
register of
charges.
Punishment
for
contravention.
Register of
members, etc.
22 of 1996.
Declaration in
respect of
beneficial
interest in
any share.

44
(2)Every person who holds or acquires a beneficial interest in a share or class of
shares of a company shall make a declaration to the company specifying the nature of his
interest, particulars of the person in whose name the shares stand registered in the books of
the company and such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(3)Where any change occurs in the beneficial interest in such shares or class of
shares, the person referred to in sub-section (1) and the beneficial owner specified in sub-
section (2) shall, within thirty days from the date of such change, make a declaration to the
company in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed.
(4) Where any declaration under this section is made to a company, the company
shall make a note of such declaration in the register concerned and shall file, within thirty
days from the date of receipt of declaration by it, a return in the prescribed form with the
Registrar in respect of such declaration with such fee as may be prescribed, or with such
additional fee, as may be prescribed, within the time specified under section 364.
(5) Where a company, required to file a return under sub-section ( 4), fails to do so
before the expiry of the time specified under section 364 with additional fee, the company
and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than
five hundred rupees but which may extend to one thousand rupees for every day during
which the default continues.
(6)Any instrument created by the ostensible owner of any share or class of shares, in
respect of which a declaration is required to be made under this section, shall not be
enforceable by the beneficial owner or any person claiming through him unless such
declaration is made.
(7)Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prejudice the obligation of a company
to pay dividend to its members under this Act and the said obligation shall, on such
payment, stand discharged.
80. Where it appears to the Central Government that there are good reasons so to do,
it may appoint one or more competent persons to investigate and report as to beneficial
ownership with regard to any share or class of shares and the provisions of section 187
shall, as far as may be, apply to such investigation as if it were an investigation ordered
under that section.
81. (1)  A company may, after giving not less than seven days’ previous notice in such
manner as may be prescribed, close the register of members or the register of debenture
holders or the register of other security holders for any period or periods not exceeding in
the aggregate forty-five days in each year, but not exceeding thirty days at any one time.
(2) If the register of members or of debenture holders or of other security holders is
closed without giving the notice as provided in sub-section ( 1), or after giving shorter
notice than that so provided, or for a continuous or an aggregate period in excess of the
limits specified in that sub-section, the company and every officer of the company who is in
default shall be liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees for every day during which the
register is kept closed but not exceeding one lakh rupees.
82. (1) Every company shall prepare a return (hereinafter referred to as the annual
return) in the prescribed form containing the particulars as they stood on the close of the
financial year regarding—
(a) its registered office, principal business activities, particulars of its holding,
subsidiary and associate companies;
(b) its shares, debentures and other securities and shareholding pattern;
(c) its indebtedness;
(d) its members and debenture holders along with changes therein since the
close of the last financial year;
Investigation
of beneficial
ownership
of shares in
certain
cases.
Power to
close register
of members
or debenture
holders or
other security
holders.
Annual return.

45
(e) its promoters, directors, key managerial personnel along with changes therein
since the close of the last financial year;
(f) meetings of members or a class thereof, Board and its various committees
along with attendance details;
(g) remuneration of directors and key managerial personnel;
(h) penalties imposed on the company, its directors or officers and details of
compounding of offences;
(i) matters related to certification of compliances, disclosures; and
(j) such other matters as may be prescribed,
and signed both by a director and the Company Secretary, or where there is no Company
Secretary, by a Company Secretary in whole-time practice:
Provided that the annual return, filed by a company having such paid-up capital and
turnover as may be prescribed, or a company whose shares are listed on a recognised stock
exchange, shall also be signed by a Company Secretary in whole-time practice certifying
that the annual return states the facts correctly and adequately and that the company has
complied with all the provisions of this Act, in the prescribed form:
Provided further that in relation to a One Person Company and small company, the
annual return shall be signed by the Company Secretary, or where there is no Company
Secretary, by one director of the company.
(2) An extract of the annual return in such form as may be prescribed shall form part of
the Board’s Report.
(3) Every company shall, within thirty days from the date on which the annual general
meeting is held or where no annual general meeting is held in any year within thirty days
from the date on which the annual general meeting should have been held together with the
statement specifying the reasons for not holding the annual general meeting, file with the
Registrar a copy of the annual return with such fee as may be prescribed, or with such
additional fee as may be prescribed, within the time as specified, under section 364.
(4) If a company fails to file its annual return under sub-section (3) before the expiry
of the period specified under section 364 with additional fee, the company shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five
lakhs rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for six months or with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees
but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
(5) Where a Company Secretary in whole-time practice certifies the annual return
otherwise than in conformity with the requirements of this section or the rules made
thereunder, such Company Secretary shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less
than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
83. (1) The registers required to be kept and maintained by a company under section
78 and copies of the annual return filed under section 82 shall be kept at the registered office
of the company:
Provided that such registers or copies of return may also be kept at any other place in
India in which more than one-tenth of the total members entered in the register of members
reside, if approved by a special resolution passed at a general meeting of the company and
the Registrar has been given a copy of the proposed special resolution in advance.
(2) The registers and their indices, except when they are closed under the provisions
of this Act, and the copies of the returns shall be open for inspection by any member,
debenture holder, other security holder or beneficial owner, during business hours without
payment of any fee and by any other person on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
Place of
keeping and
inspection of
registers,
returns, etc.

46
(3) Any such member, debenture holder, other security holder or beneficial owner or
any other person may—
(a)  take extracts from any register, or index or return without payment of any
fee; or
(b)  require a copy of any such register or entries therein or return on payment
of such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government may also, by order, direct an immediate inspection of the
document, or direct that the extract required shall forthwith be allowed to be taken by the
person requiring it.
(5) If any inspection or the making of any extract or copy required under this section
is refused, the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable,
for each such default, to a penalty of one thousand rupees for every day during which the
refusal or default continues but not exceeding one lakh rupees.
84. The registers, their indices and copies of annual returns maintained under sections
78 and 83 shall be prima facie evidence of any matter directed or authorised to be inserted
therein by or under this Act.
85.  (1) Every company other than a One Person Company shall in each year hold in
addition to any other meetings, a general meeting as its annual general meeting and shall
specify the meeting as such in the notices calling it, and not more than fifteen months shall
elapse between the date of one annual general meeting of a company and that of the next:
Provided that in case of the first annual general meeting, it shall be held within a
period of nine months from the date of closing of the first financial year of the company and
in any other case, within a period of six months, from the date of closing of the financial
year:
Provided further that if a company holds its first annual general meeting as aforesaid,
it shall not be necessary for the company to hold any annual general meeting in the year of
its incorporation or in the following year:
Provided also that the Registrar may, for any special reason, extend the time within
which any annual general meeting, other than the first annual general meeting, shall be held,
by a period not exceeding three months.
(2) Every annual general meeting shall be called during business hours, that is, between
9 a.m. and 6 p.m. on any day that is not a National Holiday and shall be held either at the
registered office of the company or at some other place within the city, town or village in
which the registered office of the company is situate:
Provided that the Central Government may exempt any company from the provisions
of this sub-section subject to such conditions as it may impose.
86. (1) If any default is made in holding the annual general meeting of a company
under section 85, the Tribunal may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the
articles of the company, on the application of any member of the company, call, or direct the
calling of, an annual general meeting of the company and give such ancillary or consequential
directions as the Tribunal thinks expedient:
Provided that such directions may include a direction that one member of the company
present in person or by proxy shall be deemed to constitute a meeting.
(2) A general meeting held in pursuance of sub-section (1) shall, subject to any directions
of the Tribunal, be deemed to be an annual general meeting of the company under this Act.
87.  (1) If for any reason it is impracticable to call a meeting of a company, other than
an annual general meeting, in any manner in which meetings of the company may be called,
or to hold or conduct the meeting of the company in the manner prescribed by this Act or
Registers,
etc. to be
evidence.
Annual
general
meeting.
Power of
Tribunal to
call annual
general
meeting.
Power of
Tribunal to
call meetings
of members,
etc.

47
the articles of the company, the Tribunal may, either suo motu or on the application of any
director of the company or of any member of the company who would be entitled to vote at
the meeting,—
(a)  order a meeting of the company to be called, held and conducted in such
manner as the Tribunal thinks fit; and
(b)  give such ancillary or consequential directions as the Tribunal thinks
expedient, including directions modifying or supplementing in relation to the calling,
holding and conducting of the meeting, the operation of the provisions of this Act
and articles of the company:
Provided that such directions may include a direction that one member of the company
present in person or by proxy shall be deemed to constitute a meeting.
(2) Any meeting called, held and conducted in accordance with any order made under
sub-section (1) shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be a meeting of the company duly
called, held and conducted.
88.  If any default is made in holding a meeting of the company in accordance with
section 85 or section 86 or section 87 or in complying with any directions of the Central
Government or the Tribunal, as the case may be, the company and every officer of the
company who is in default shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees and in the case of a continuing default, with a further fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees for every day during which such default continues.
89. (1) The Board may on its own whenever it deems fit call an extraordinary general
meeting in regard to any matter.
(2) The Board shall at the requisition made by, —
(a) in the case of a company having a share capital, such number of members as
hold on the date of the receipt of the requisition, not less than one-tenth of such of
the paid-up share capital of the company as on that date carries the right of voting;
(b) in the case of a company not having a share capital, such number of members
as have on the date of receipt of the requisition, not less than one-tenth of the total
voting power of all the members having on the said date a right to vote,
call an extraordinary general meeting of the company within the period specified in
sub-section ( 4).
(3) The requisition made under sub-section ( 2) shall set out the matters for the
consideration of which the meeting is to be called and shall be signed by the requisitionists
and sent to the registered office of the company.
(4) If the Board does not, within twenty-one days from the date of receipt of a valid
requisition in regard to any matter, proceed to call a meeting for the consideration of that
matter on a day not later than forty-five days from the date of receipt of such requisition, the
meeting may be called and held by the requisitionists themselves within a period of three
months from the date of the requisition in the manner prescribed.
(5) The manner in which an extraordinary general meeting shall be called by the Board
shall, as nearly as may be, apply to the calling of such meeting by the requisitionists under
sub-section ( 4).
(6) Any reasonable expenses incurred by the requisitionists in calling a meeting
under sub-section ( 4) shall be reimbursed to the requisitionists by the company and the
sums so paid shall be deducted from any fee or other remuneration under sub-section (1) of
section 175 payable to such of the directors who were in default in calling the meeting.
90. (1) A general meeting of a company may be called by giving not less than clear
twenty-one days’ notice either in writing or through electronic mode in such manner as may
be prescribed:
Calling of
extraordinary
general
meeting.
Punishment
for default in
complying
with
provisions of
sections 85 to
87.
Notice of
meeting.

48
Provided that a general meeting may be called after giving a shorter notice if consent
is given in writing or by electronic mode by not less than ninety-five per cent. of the
members entitled to vote at such meeting.
(2) Every notice of a meeting shall specify the place, date, day and the hour of the
meeting and shall contain a statement of the business to be transacted at such meeting.
(3) The notice of every meeting of the company shall be given to—
(a) every member of the company, legal representative of any deceased member
or the assigne of an insolvent member;
(b)  the auditor or auditors of the company; and
(c) every director of the company.
(4) Any accidental omission to give notice to, or the non-receipt of such notice by,
any member or other person who is entitled to such notice for any meeting shall not invalidate
the proceedings of the meeting.
91. (1) A statement setting out all the material facts concerning each item of special
business to be transacted at a general meeting, including, in particular, the nature of the
concern or interest, if any, of every director and the manager, if any, and of every other key
managerial personnel shall be annexed to the notice calling such meeting.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), —
(a) in the case of an annual general meeting, all business to be transacted
thereat shall be deemed special, other than—
(i) the consideration of accounts, balance sheet and the reports of the
Board of Directors and auditors;
(ii) the declaration of any dividend;
(iii) the appointment of directors in place of those retiring;
(iv) the appointment of, and the fixing of the remuneration of, the auditors;
and
(b) in the case of any other meeting, all business shall be deemed to be
special:
Provided that where any item of special business to be transacted at a meeting of the
company relates to or affects any other company, the extent of shareholding interest in that
other company of every director, manager, if any, and of every other key managerial personnel
of the first mentioned company shall, if the extent of such shareholding is not less than two
per cent. of the paid-up share capital of that company, also be set out in the statement.
(3) Where any item of business refers to any document, which is to be considered at
the meeting, the time and place where such document can be inspected shall be specified in
the statement under sub-section ( 1).
(4) Where as a result of the non-disclosure or insufficient disclosure in any statement
referred to in sub-section ( 1), being made by a director, manager, if  any, or other key
managerial personnel, any benefit which accrues to such director, manager or other key
managerial personnel or his relatives, either directly or indirectly, the director, manager or
other key managerial personnel, as the case may be, shall hold such benefit in trust for the
company, and shall, without prejudice to any other action being taken against him under
this Act or under any law for the time being in force, be liable to compensate the company
to the extent of the benefit received by him.
(5) Where any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, every
officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
Explanatory
statement to
be annexed
with notice.

49
fifty thousand rupees or five times the amount of benefit accruing to the director, manager
or other key managerial personnel or any of his relatives, whichever is more.
92. (1) Unless the articles of the company provide for a larger number, five members
personally present in the case of public company and two members personally present in
the case of a private company, shall be the quorum for a meeting of the company.
(2) If within half-an-hour from the time appointed for holding a meeting of the company,
the quorum is not there,—
(a) the meeting shall stand adjourned to the same day in the next week at the
same time and place, or to such other date and such other time and place as the Board
may determine; or
(b) the meeting, if called by requisitionists under section 89, shall stand cancelled:
Provided that in case of an adjournment or of a change of day, time or place of meeting
under clause (a), the company shall give not less than three days’ notice to the members
either individually or by press announcement.
(3) If at the adjourned meeting also, a quorum is not present within half-an-hour from
the time appointed for holding meeting, the members present shall be the quorum.
93.  (1) Unless the articles of the company otherwise provide, the members personally
present at the meeting shall elect one of themselves to be the Chairman thereof on a show
of hands.
(2) If a poll is demanded on the election of the Chairman, it shall be taken forthwith in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Chairman elected on a show of hands
under sub-section ( 1) shall continue to be the Chairman of the meeting until some other
person is elected as Chairman as a result of the poll, and such other person shall be Chairman
for the rest of the meeting.
94. Any member of a company entitled to attend and vote at a meeting of the company
shall be entitled to appoint another person as a proxy to attend and vote at the meeting on
his behalf in writing or by electronic mode in such manner and subject to such conditions
as may be prescribed:
Provided that a proxy shall not have the right to speak at such meeting and shall not
be entitled to vote except on a poll.
95. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the articles of a company
may provide that no member shall exercise any voting right in respect of any shares
registered in his name on which any calls or other sums presently payable by him have not
been paid, or in regard to which the company has exercised any right of lien.
(2) A company shall not, except on the grounds specified in sub-section (1), prohibit
any member from exercising his voting right on any other ground.
(3) On a poll taken at a meeting of a company, a member entitled to more than one vote,
or his proxy or other person entitled to vote for him, as the case may be, need not, if he
votes, use all his votes or cast in the same way all the votes he uses.
96. (1) At any general meeting, a resolution put to the vote of the meeting shall,
unless a poll is demanded under section 98 or the voting is carried out electronically, be
decided on a show of hands.
(2) A declaration by the Chairman of the meeting of the passing of a resolution or
otherwise by show of hands under sub-section ( 1) and an entry to that effect in the books
containing the minutes of the meeting of the company shall be conclusive evidence of the
fact of passing of such resolution or otherwise.
Quorum for
meetings.
Chairman of
meetings.
Proxies.
Restriction on
voting rights.
V oting by show
of hands.

50
97. Unless the articles provide otherwise, a member may exercise his vote at a meeting
by electronic means in the manner as may be prescribed.
98. (1) Before or on the declaration of the result of the voting on any resolution on
show of hands, a poll may be ordered to be taken by the Chairman of the meeting on his own
motion, and shall be ordered to be taken by him on a demand made in that behalf,—
(a) in the case a company having a share capital, by the members present in
person or by proxy and having not less than one-tenth of the total voting power or
holding shares on which an aggregate sum of not less than five lakh rupees has been
paid up; and
(b)   in the case of any other company, by any member or members present in
person or by proxy and having not less than one-tenth of the total voting power.
(2) The demand for a poll may be withdrawn at any time by the persons who made the
demand.
(3) A poll demanded for adjournment of the meeting or appointment of Chairman of
the meeting shall be taken forthwith.
(4) A poll demanded on any question other than adjournment of the meeting or
appointment of Chairman shall be taken at such time, not being later than forty-eight hours
from the time when the demand was made, as the Chairman of the meeting may direct.
(5) Where a poll is to be taken, the Chairman of the meeting shall appoint such number
of persons, as he deems necessary, to scrutinize the poll process and votes given on the
poll and to report thereon to him in the manner as may be prescribed.
(6) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Chairman of the meeting shall have
power to regulate the manner in which the poll shall be taken.
(7) The result of the poll shall be deemed to be the decision of the meeting on the
resolution on which the poll was taken.
99.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a company—
(a) shall, in respect of such items of business as the Central Government may,
by notification, declare to be transacted only by means of postal ballot; and
(b)  may, in respect of any item of business, other than ordinary business and
any business in respect of which directors or auditors have a right to be heard at any
meeting,
transact by means of postal ballot in such manner as may be prescribed, instead of transacting
such business at a general meeting.
(2) If a resolution is assented to by the requisite majority of the shareholders by
means of postal ballot, it shall be deemed to have been duly passed at a general meeting
convened in that behalf.
100. (1) A company shall, on requisition in writing of such number of members, as
required in section 89,—
(a) give notice to members of any resolution which may properly be moved and
is intended to be moved at a meeting; and
(b) circulate to members any statement with respect to the matters referred to in
any proposed resolution or any business to be dealt with at that meeting.
(2) A company shall not be bound under this section to give notice of any resolution
or to circulate any statement unless—
V oting
through
electronic
means.
Demand for
poll.
Postal ballot.
Circulation of
members’
resolution.

51
     (a)   a copy of the requisition signed by the requisitionists (or two or more
copies which between them contain the signatures of all the requisitionists) is
deposited at the registered office of the company,—
   (i)   in the case of a requisition requiring notice of a resolution, not less
than six weeks before the meeting;
 (ii)   in the case of any other requisition, not less than two weeks before
the meeting; and
 (b)   there is deposited or tendered with the requisition a sum reasonably
sufficient to meet the company’s expenses in giving effect thereto:
Provided that if, after a copy of a requisition requiring notice of a resolution has
been deposited at the registered office of the company, an annual general meeting is
called on a date within six weeks after the copy has been deposited, the copy, although
not deposited within the time required by this sub-section, shall be deemed to have
been properly deposited for the purposes thereof.
(3) The company shall not be bound to circulate any statement as required by clause
(b) of sub-section ( 1), if on the application either of the company or of any other person
who claims to be aggrieved, the Central Government, by order, declares that the rights
conferred by this section are being abused to secure needless publicity for defamatory
matter.
(4) An order made under sub-section (3) may also direct that the cost incurred by the
company by virtue of this section shall be paid to the company by the requisitionists,
notwithstanding that they are not parties to the application.
(5) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the company
and its every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand
rupees.
101. (1) The President of India or the Governor of a State, if he is a member of a
company, may appoint  such person as he thinks fit to act as his representative at any
meeting of the company or at any meeting of any class of members of the company.
(2) A person appointed to act under sub-section (1) shall, for the purposes of this Act,
be deemed to be a member of such a company and shall be entitled to exercise the same
rights and powers, including the right to vote by proxy and postal ballot, as the President or,
as the case may be, the Governor could exercise as a member of the company.
102.  (1) A body corporate, whether a company within the meaning of this Act or not,
may, —
(a) if it is a member of a company within the meaning of this Act, by resolution
of its Board of Directors or other governing body, authorise such person as it thinks
fit to act as its representative at any meeting of the company, or at any meeting of any
class of members of the company;
(b) if it is a creditor, including a holder of debentures, of a company within the
meaning of this Act, by resolution of its directors or other governing body, authorise
such person as it thinks fit to act as its representative at any meeting of any creditors
of the company held in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, or in
pursuance of the provisions contained in any debenture or trust deed, as the case
may be.
(2) A person authorised by resolution under sub-section ( 1) shall be entitled to
exercise the same rights and powers, including the right to vote by proxy and by postal
ballot, on behalf of the body corporate which he represents as that body could exercise if it
were an individual member, creditor or holder of debentures of the company.
Representation
of the President
and Governors
in meetings.
Representation
of corporations
at meeting of
companies and
of creditors.

52
103. (1) A resolution shall be an ordinary resolution if it is required to be passed by
the votes cast, whether on a show of hands, or electronically or on a poll, as the case may
be, in favour of the resolution, including the casting vote, if any, of the Chairman, by
members who, being entitled so to do, vote in person, or where proxies are allowed, by
proxy or by postal ballot, exceed the votes, if any, cast against the resolution by members,
etc., so entitled and voting.
(2) A resolution shall be a special resolution when—
(a) the intention to propose the resolution as a special resolution has been duly
specified in the notice calling the general meeting or other intimation given to the
members of the resolution;
(b) the notice required under this Act has been duly given; and
(c) the votes cast in favour of the resolution, whether on a show of hands, or
electronically or on a poll, as the case may be, by members who, being entitled so to
do, vote in person, or where proxies are allowed, by proxy, are required to be not less
than three times the number of the votes, if any, cast against the resolution by members
so entitled and voting.
104. Where, by any provision contained in this Act or in the articles, special notice is
required of any resolution, notice of the intention to move such resolution shall be given to
the company by such number of members as may be prescribed and the company shall give
its members notice of the resolution in such manner as may be prescribed.
105. Where a resolution is passed at an adjourned meeting of—
(a) a company,
(b) the holders of any class of shares in a company, or
(c) the Board of Directors of a company,
the resolution shall, for all purposes, be treated as having been passed on the date on
which it was in fact passed, and shall not be deemed to have been passed on any earlier
date.
106. (1) A copy of every resolution or any agreement, in respect of such matters as
may be prescribed, together with the explanatory statement under section 91, if any, annexed
to the notice calling the meeting in which the resolution is proposed, shall be filed with the
Registrar within thirty days of the passing or making thereof in the manner as may be
prescribed, with such fee as may be prescribed or with such additional fee as may be
prescribed within the time specified, under section 364.
(2) If a company fails to file the resolution or the agreement under sub-section ( 1)
before the expiry of the period specified under section 364 with additional fee, the company
shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may
extend to twenty five lakh rupees and every officer who is in default, including liquidator of
the company, if any, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend
to five lakh rupees, or with both.
107. (1) Every company shall cause to be prepared, signed and kept minutes of the
proceedings of every general meeting, including any meeting called by the requisitionists
under section 89, and of proceedings of every meeting of any class of shareholders or
creditors, and every resolution passed by postal ballot and every meeting of its Board of
Directors or of every committee of the Board, within such time and in such manner as may
be prescribed.
Ordinary and
special
resolutions.
Resolutions
requiring
special
notice.
Resolutions
passed at
adjourned
meeting.
Resolutions
and
agreements
to be filed.
Minutes of
proceedings of
general
meetings,
meeting of
Board of
Directors and
other meeting
and
resolutions
passed by
postal ballot.

53
(2) The minutes of each meeting shall contain a fair and correct summary of the
proceedings thereat.
(3) All appointments of officers made at any of the meetings aforesaid shall be included
in the minutes of  the meeting.
(4) In the case of a meeting of the Board of Directors or of a committee of the Board,
the minutes shall also contain —
(a) the names of the directors present at the meeting; and
(b) in the case of each resolution passed at the meeting, the names of the
directors, if any, dissenting from, or not concurring with the resolution.
(5) There shall not be included in the minutes, any matter which, in the opinion of the
Chairman of the meeting,—
(a) is or could reasonably be regarded as defamatory of any person;
(b) is irrelevant or immaterial to the proceedings; or
(c) is detrimental to the interests of the company.
(6) The Chairman shall exercise an absolute discretion in regard to the inclusion or
non-inclusion of any matter in the minutes on the grounds specified in sub-section ( 5).
(7) Minutes kept in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be evidence
of the proceedings recorded therein.
(8) Where minutes have been kept in accordance with sub-section ( 1) and the rules
made thereunder, then, until the contrary is proved, the meeting shall be deemed to have
been duly called and held, and all proceedings thereat to have duly taken place, and the
resolutions passed by postal ballot to have been duly passed and in particular, all
appointments of directors, key managerial personnel, auditors or company secretary in
practice, shall be deemed to be valid.
(9) No document purporting to be a report of the proceedings of any general meeting
of a company shall be circulated or advertised at the expense of the company, unless it
includes the matters required by this section to be contained in the minutes of the
proceedings of such meeting.
(10) Every company shall observe such secretarial standards as may be prescribed
with respect to general and Board meetings.
(11) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section and the
rules made thereunder in respect of any meeting, the company shall be liable to a penalty of
twenty five thousand rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees.
108. (1) The books containing the minutes of the proceedings of any general meeting
of a company, shall—
(a) be kept at the registered office of the company, and
(b) be open, during business hours, to the inspection by any member without
charge, subject to such reasonable restrictions as the company may, by its articles or
in general meeting, impose, so, however, that not less than two hours in each business
day are allowed for inspection.
(2) Any member shall be entitled to be furnished, within seven working days after he
has made a request in that behalf to the company, and on payment of such fees as may be
prescribed, with a copy of any minutes referred to in sub-section ( 1).
(3) If any inspection under sub-section ( 1) is refused, or if any copy required under
sub-section (2) is not furnished within the time specified therein, the company shall be
Inspection of
minute-books
of general
meeting.

54
liable to a penalty of twenty five thousand rupees and every officer of the company who is
in default shall be liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees for each such refusal or
default, as the case may be.
(4) In the case of any such refusal or default, the Central Government may, without
prejudice to any action being taken under sub-section ( 3), by order, direct an immediate
inspection of the minute-books or direct that the copy required shall forthwith be sent to
the person requiring it.
109. (1) Every listed public company shall prepare in the prescribed manner a report
on each annual general meeting including the confirmation to the effect that the meeting
was convened, held and conducted as per the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder.
(2) The company shall file with the Registrar a copy of the report referred to in sub-
section (1) within thirty days of the conclusion of the annual general meeting with such fee
as may be prescribed, or with such additional fee as may be prescribed, within the time as
specified, under section 364.
(3) If the company fails to file the report under sub-section (2) before the expiry of the
period specified under section 364 with additional fee, the company shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh
rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than twenty five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh
rupees.
CHAPTER VIII
D
ECLARATION AND PAYMENT OF DIVIDEND
110. (1) No dividend shall be declared or paid by a company for any financial year
except—
(a) out of the profits of the company for that year arrived at after providing for
depreciation in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 2), or out of the
profits of the company for any previous financial year or years arrived at after providing
for depreciation in accordance with the provisions of that sub-section and remaining
undistributed, or out of both; or
(b) out of money provided by the Central Government or a State Government
for the payment of dividend in pursuance of a guarantee given by that Government:
Provided that a company may, before the declaration of any dividend in any financial
year, transfer such percentage of its profits for that financial year as it may consider
appropriate to the reserves of the company:
Provided further that if owing to inadequacy or absence of profits in any financial
year, the company proposes to declare dividend out of the accumulated profits earned by it
in the previous financial year or years and transferred by it to the reserves, such declaration
shall be made by a resolution passed at a meeting of the Board with the consent of all the
directors and the approval of the financial institutions whose term loans are subsisting, and
thereafter in accordance with a special resolution passed by the shareholders at an annual
general meeting.
(2) For the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (1), depreciation shall be provided in
any one of the following manners, namely:—
(a) the amount of depreciation on assets as shown by the books of the company
at the end of each financial year at the rate prescribed in the rules made in this behalf;
Report on
general
meeting.
Declaration of
dividend.

55
(b) as regards any other depreciable asset for which no rate of depreciation has
been laid down under this Act, on such basis as may be approved by the Central
Government by any general order published in the Official Gazette or by a special
order in any particular case:
Provided that if any asset is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed for any reason
before depreciation of such asset has been provided for in full, the excess, if any, of the
written down value of such asset over its sale proceeds or, as the case may be, its scrap
value, shall be written off in the financial year in which the asset is sold, discarded, demolished
or destroyed.
(3) The Board of Directors of a company may declare interim dividend during any
financial year out of the profits of the company for part of the year.
(4) The amount of the dividend, including interim dividend, shall be deposited in a
scheduled bank in a separate account within five days from the date of declaration of such
dividend.
(5) No dividend shall be paid by a company in respect of any share therein except to
the registered shareholder of such share or to his order or to his banker and shall not be
payable except in cash:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to prohibit the capitalisation
of profits or reserves of a company for the purpose of issuing fully paid-up bonus shares or
paying up any amount for the time being unpaid on any shares held by the members of the
company:
Provided further that any dividend payable in cash may be made by cheque or warrant
or in any electronic mode to the shareholder entitled to the payment of the dividend.
(6) A company which fails to comply with the provisions of section 67 shall not, so
long as such failure continues, declare any dividend on its equity shares.
111. (1) Where a dividend has been declared by a company but has not been paid or
claimed within thirty days from the date of the declaration to any shareholder entitled to the
payment of the dividend, the company shall, within seven days from the date of expiry of
the said period of thirty days, transfer the total amount of dividend which remains unpaid or
unclaimed to a special account to be opened by the company in that behalf in any scheduled
bank to be called the Unpaid Dividend Account.
(2) If any default is made in transferring the total amount referred to in sub-section (1)
or any part thereof to the Unpaid Dividend Account of the company, it shall pay, from the
date of such default, interest on so much of the amount as has not been transferred to the
said account, at the rate of twelve per cent per annum and the interest accruing on such
amount shall enure to the benefit of the members of the company in proportion to the
amount remaining unpaid to them.
(3) Any person claiming to be entitled to any money transferred under sub-section (1)
to the Unpaid Dividend Account of the company may apply to the company for payment of
the money claimed.
(4) Any money transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account of a company in pursuance
of this section which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date
of such transfer shall be transferred by the company to the Fund established under sub-
section (1) of section 112 and the company shall send a statement in the prescribed form of
the details of such transfer to the authority or committee which administers the said Fund
and that authority or committee shall issue a receipt to the company as evidence of such
transfer.
(5) If a company fails to comply with any of the requirements of this section, the
company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but
Unpaid
Dividend
Account.

56
which may extend to twenty five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in
default shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
112. (1) The Central Government shall establish a fund to be called the Investor
Education and Protection Fund (hereinafter in this section referred to as the Fund).
 (2)  There shall be credited to the Fund –
(a) the amount given by the Central Government by way of grants after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf for being utilised for the
purposes of the Fund;
(b) donations given to the Fund by the Central Government, State Governments,
companies or any other institution for the purposes of the Fund;
(c) the amount in the Unpaid Dividend Accounts of companies transferred to
the Fund under sub-section (4) of section 111;
(d) the amount in the general revenue account of the Central Government
which had been transferred to that account under sub-section (5) of section 205A of
the Companies Act, 1956, as it stood immediately before the commencement of the
Companies (Amendment) Act, 1999, and remaining unpaid or unclaimed on the
commencement of this Act;
(e) the amount lying in the investor Education and Protection Fund under
section 205(c) of the Companies Act, 1956;
(f) the interest or other income received out of investments made from the
Fund;
(g) the amount received under sub-section (4) of section 33; and
(h) such other amount as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be utilised for the refund in respect of unclaimed dividends, the
application monies due for refund and interest thereon, and promotion of investors’
education, awareness and protection in accordance with such rules as may be
prescribed.
(4) The Central Government shall constitute, by notification, an authority consisting
of a Chairperson, such number of members, not exceeding seven, as the Central Government
may appoint and an Administrator (who shall be the Chief Executive Officer).
(5) The authority shall administer the Fund and maintain separate accounts and
other relevant records in relation to the Fund in such form as may be prescribed after
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India (hereinafter referred to
as the Comptroller and Auditor-General).
(6) It shall be competent for the authority constituted under sub-section (4) to spend
money out of the Fund for carrying out the objects for which the Fund is established.
(7) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
at such intervals as may be specified by him and such accounts as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to
the Central Government by the authority.
(8) The authority shall prepare in such form and at such time for each financial year
as may be prescribed its annual report giving a full account of its activities during the
financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall cause the annual report and the audit report given by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(9) Any person claiming to be entitled to the amount referred in clauses (c) and (d) of
sub-section (1) may apply to the authority for payment of the money claimed.
Investor
Education
and
Protection
Fund.
21 of 1999
1 of 1956

57
113. The amount lying in the Investor Education and Protection Fund established
under section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956 shall stand credited to the Investor Education
and Protection Fund established under sub-section ( 1) of section 112.
114. Where any instrument of transfer of shares has been delivered to any company
for registration and the transfer of such shares has not been registered by the company, it
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act,—
(a) transfer the dividend in relation to such shares to the Unpaid Dividend
Account referred to in section 111 unless the company is authorised by the registered
holder of such shares in writing to pay such dividend to the transferee specified in
such instrument of transfer; and
(b) keep in abeyance in relation to such shares, any offer of rights shares under
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 56 and any issue of fully paid-up bonus
shares in pursuance of first proviso to sub-section ( 5) of section 110.
115. Where a dividend has been declared by a company but has not been paid or the
warrant in respect thereof has not been posted within thirty days from the date of declaration
to any shareholder entitled to the payment of the dividend, every director of the company
shall, if he is knowingly a party to the default, be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to two years and with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees for
every day during which such default continues and the company shall be liable to pay
simple interest at the rate of eighteen per cent per annum during the period for which such
default continues:
Provided that no offence shall be deemed to have been committed in the following
cases, namely:—
(a) where the dividend could not be paid by reason of the operation of any law;
(b) where a shareholder has given directions to the company regarding the
payment of the dividend and those directions cannot be complied with;
(c) where there is a dispute regarding the right to receive the dividend;
(d) where the dividend has been lawfully adjusted by the company against any
sum due to it from the shareholder; or
(e) where, for any other reason, the failure to pay the dividend or to post the
warrant within the period under this section was not due to any default on the part of
the company.
CHAPTER IX
A
CCOUNTS OF COMPANIES
116. (1) Every company shall prepare and keep at its registered office books of
accounts and other relevant books and papers which give a true and fair view of the state
of the affairs of the company, including that of its branch office or offices, if any, and explain
the transactions effected both at the registered office and its branches and such books
shall be kept on accrual basis and according to the double entry system of accounting:
Provided that all or any of the books of accounts aforesaid and other relevant papers
may be kept at such other place in India as the Board of Directors may decide and where
such a decision is taken, the company shall, within seven days thereof, file with the Registrar
a notice in writing giving the full address of that other place:
Provided further that the company may keep such books of accounts or other relevant
papers in electronic mode in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Where a company has a branch office within India or outside, it shall be deemed to
1 of 1956.
Amount lying
in previous
Fund to become
part of Fund
under this Act.
Right to
dividend,
rights shares
and bonus
shares to be
held in
abeyance
pending
registration of
transfer of
shares.
Books of
accounts,  etc .,
to be kept by
company.
Punishment
for failure to
distribute
dividends
within thirty
days.

58
have complied with the provisions of sub-section (1), if proper books of accounts relating
to the transactions effected at the branch office are kept at that office and proper summarised
returns periodically are sent by the branch office to the company at its registered office or
the other place referred to in sub-section ( 1).
(3) The books of accounts and other books and papers maintained by the company
within India shall be open for inspection at the registered office of the company or at such
other place in India by any director during business hours, and in the case of financial
information, if any, maintained outside the country, copies of such financial information
shall be maintained and produced for inspection by any director subject to such conditions
as may be prescribed:
Provided that the inspection in respect of any subsidiary of the company shall be
done only by any person authorised in this behalf by a resolution of the Board of Directors.
(4) Where an inspection is made under sub-section ( 3), the officers and other
employees of the company shall give to the person making such inspection all assistance in
connection with the inspection which the company may reasonably be expected to give.
(5) The books of accounts of every company relating to a period of not less than eight
financial years immediately preceding a financial year, or where the company had been in
existence for a period less than eight years, in respect of all the preceding years together
with the vouchers relevant to any entry in such books of accounts shall be kept in good
order:
Provided that where an investigation has been ordered in respect of the company
under section 183 or section 184, the Central Government may direct that the books of
accounts may be kept for such longer period as it may deem fit.
(6) Where any company contravenes the provisions of this section, the managing
director, the whole-time director in charge of finance, the Chief Financial Officer or any other
person charged by the Board with the duty of complying with the requirements of this
section shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or
with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five
lakh rupees, or with both.
117. (1) The financial statement shall give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of
the company or companies as at the end of the financial year, comply with the accounting
standards notified under section 119 and shall be in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) At every annual general meeting of a company held in pursuance of section 85, the
Board of Directors of the company shall lay before such meeting a financial statement for
the financial year.
(3) Where a company has one or more subsidiaries, it shall prepare a consolidated
financial statement of all the subsidiaries in the same form and manner as that of its own
which shall also be laid before the annual general meeting of the company along with the
laying of its financial statement under sub-section ( 2).
(4) Where the financial statements of a company do not comply with the accounting
standards referred to in sub-section (1), the company shall disclose in its financial statements,
the deviation from the accounting standards, the reasons for such deviation and the financial
effects, if any, arising out of such deviation.
(5) The Central Government may, on its own or on an application by a class or classes
of companies, by notification, exempt any class or classes of companies from complying
with any of the requirements of this section or the rules made thereunder, if it is considered
necessary to grant such exemption in the public interest and any such exemption may be
granted either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as may be specified in the
notification.
Financial
statement.

59
(6) Where any company contravenes the provisions of this section, the managing
director, the whole-time director in charge of finance, the Chief Financial Officer or any other
person charged by the Board with the duty of complying with the requirements of this section
and in the absence of any of the officers mentioned above, all the directors shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less
than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, except where the context otherwise
requires, any reference to the financial statement shall include any notes or documents
annexed or attached thereto, giving information required to be given by this Act and allowed
by this Act to be given in the form of such notes or documents.
118. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute an advisory committee
to be called the National Advisory Committee on Accounting and Auditing Standards
(hereinafter referred to as the Advisory Committee) to advise the Central Government on
the formulation and laying down of accounting and auditing policies and standards for
adoption by companies or class of companies or their auditors, as the case may be.
     (2) The Advisory Committee shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a)  a Chairperson who shall be a person of eminence and well versed in
accountancy, finance, business administration, business law, economics or similar
disciplines, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(b) one representative of the Central Government to be nominated by it;
(c) the Chairman of the Central Board of Direct Taxes constituted under the
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 or his nominee;
(d) one representative of the Reserve Bank of India to be nominated by it;
(e) one representative of the Securities and Exchange Board to be nominated
by it;
(f) one representative of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to be
nominated by him;
(g) one member each to be nominated by the Institute of Chartered Accountants
of India constituted under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, the Institute of Cost
and Works Accountants of India constituted under the Cost and Works Accountants
Act, 1959 and the Institute of Company Secretaries of India constituted under the
Company Secretaries Act, 1980;
(h) a person who is or has been a professor in accountancy, finance or business
management in any University or deemed University to be nominated by the Central
Government; and
(i) two representatives of the Chambers of Commerce and Industry, to be
nominated by the Central Government.
 (3) The members of the Advisory Committee nominated by the Central Government
shall hold office for such term as may be determined by it at the time of their appointment
and any vacancy in the membership of the Committee shall be filled by the Central
Government in the same manner as that for the member in whose vacancy it is proposed to
be filled.
 (4) The members of the Advisory Committee shall be entitled to such fees, traveling,
conveyance and other allowances as may be prescribed.
 (5) The Advisory Committee shall, after consulting the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India, submit its recommendations to the Central Government on matters
relating to accounting and auditing policies and standards for adoption by companies or class
of companies or their auditors, as the case may be.
Constitution
of National
Advisory
Committee on
Accounting
and Auditing
Standards.
38 of 1949
23 of 1959
56 of 1980
54 of 1963

60
119. The Central Government may, after consultation with the Advisory Committee,
by notification, lay down accounting standards for adoption by companies or class of
companies.
120. (1) The financial statement, including consolidated financial statement, if any,
shall be approved by the Board of Directors before they are signed on behalf of the Board
at least by the Chairman where he is authorised by the Board or by two directors out of
which one shall be Managing Director or Chief Executive Officer, or, in the case of a One
Person Company, only by one director, for submission to the auditor for his report thereon:
Provided that such financial statements shall be authenticated in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(2) The auditors’ report shall be attached to every financial statement.
(3) There shall be annexed to every financial statement laid before a company in
general meeting, a report by its Board of Directors, which shall include—
(a) the extract of the annual return as provided under sub-section (2) of section 82,
(b) number of meetings of the Board,
(c) Directors’ Responsibility Statement,
(d) declaration by independent directors where they are required to be appointed
under sub-section (3) of section 132,
(e) Report of the committee on directors’ remuneration,
(f) explanations or comments by the Board on every qualification, reservation
or adverse remark made by the auditor in his report,
(g) particulars of loans, guarantees or investments under sub-section ( 2) of
section 164, and
(h) particulars of contracts or arrangements under sub-section (1) of section 166.
(4) The Directors’ Responsibility Statement referred to in sub-section (3) shall state
that-
(a) in the preparation of the annual accounts, the applicable accounting standards
had been followed along with proper explanation relating to material departures;
(b) the directors had selected such accounting policies and applied them
consistently and made judgments and estimates that are reasonable and prudent so
as to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company at the end of the
financial year and of the profit and loss of the company for that period;
(c) the directors had taken proper and sufficient care for the maintenance of
adequate accounting records in accordance with the provisions of this Act for
safeguarding the assets of the company and for preventing and detecting fraud and
other irregularities;
(d) the directors had prepared the annual accounts on a going concern basis;
and
(e) the directors, in the case of a listed company, had laid down internal financial
controls to be followed by the company and that such internal financial controls have
been complied with.
(5) The Board’s report and any annexures thereto under sub-section ( 3) shall be
signed by its Chairman if he is authorised by the Board and where he is not so authorised,
shall be signed by at least two directors, one of whom shall be a managing director, or by the
director where there is one director.
(6) A signed copy of every financial statement, including consolidated financial
statement, if any, shall be issued, circulated or published along with a copy each of –
(a) any notes or documents which are required to be attached to the financial
statement in pursuance of section 117,
Central
Government
to notify
accounting
standards.
Financial
Statement,
Board’s
report, etc.

61
(b) the auditors report, and
(c) the Board’s report referred to in sub-section (3).
(7) Where a company fails to comply with the provisions of this section, it shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which
may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer who is in default shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which shall not be
less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
121. (1) A copy of the financial statement, auditor’s report and every other document
required by law to be annexed or attached to the financial statement, which are to be laid
before a company in its general meeting, shall be sent to every member of the company, to
every trustee for the debenture holder of any debentures issued by the company, and to all
the persons other than such member or trustee, being the person so entitled, twenty-one
days before the date of the meeting:
Provided that the Central Government may prescribe the manner of circulation of
financial statements of companies having such net worth and turnover as may be prescribed.
(2) A company shall allow every member or trustee of the holder of any debentures
issued by the company to inspect the documents stated under sub-section (1) at its registered
office during business hours.
(3) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the company
shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and every officer of the company
who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees.
122. (1) A copy of the financial statement along with all the documents which are
required to be annexed or attached to such financial statement under this Act, duly adopted
at the annual general meeting of the company, shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty
days of the date of annual general meeting in such manner, with such fee or additional fee
as may be prescribed within the time specified under section 364:
Provided that where the financial statement under sub-section ( 1) is not adopted at
annual general meeting or adjourned annual general meeting, such unadopted financial
statement along with the required documents under sub-section ( 1) shall be filed with the
Registrar within thirty days of the date of annual general meeting and the Registrar shall
take them in his records as provisional till the financial statement is filed with him after their
adoption in the adjourned annual general meeting for that purpose:
Provided further that financial statement adopted in the adjourned annual general
meeting shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days of the date of such adjourned
annual general meeting with such fee or such additional fee as may be prescribed within the
time specified under section 364.
(2) Where the annual general meeting of a company for any year has not been held,
the financial statement along with the documents required to be annexed or attached under
sub-section (1), duly signed along with the statement of facts and reasons for not holding
the annual general meeting shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty days of the last date
before which the annual general meeting should have been held and in such manner, with
such fee or additional fee as may be prescribed within the time specified, under section 364.
(3) If a company fails to file the copy of the financial statement under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2), as the case may be, before the expiry of the period specified in section
364, the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees
but which may extend to ten lakh rupees, and the managing director or the managing
director and the Chief Financial Officer, if any, and, in the absence of the managing director
and the Chief Financial Officer, any other director who is charged by the Board with the
responsibility of complying with the provisions of this section, and, in the absence of any
such director, all the directors of the company, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
Right of
member to
copies of
audited balance
sheet.
Copy of
financial
statement to
be filed with
Registrar.

62
CHAPTER X
AUDIT AND AUDITORS
123.  (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, every company shall, at each
annual general meeting, appoint an individual or a firm as an auditor who shall hold office
from the conclusion of that meeting till the conclusion of the next annual general meeting:
Provided that before such appointment is made, the written consent of the auditor to
such appointment, and a certificate from him or it that the appointment, if made, will be in
accordance with the conditions as may be prescribed, shall be obtained from the auditor:
Provided further that the company shall inform the auditor concerned of his
appointment, and also file a notice of such appointment with the Registrar within fifteen
days of the meeting in which the auditor is appointed.
Explanation .-—For the purposes of this Chapter, “appointment” includes re-
appointment.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in the case of a Government
company or any other company owned and controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Central
Government, or by any State Government or Governments, or partly by the Central
Government and partly by one or more State Governments, the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India shall, in respect of a financial year, appoint an auditor duly qualified to be
appointed as an auditor of companies under this Act, within a period of one hundred and
eighty days from the commencement of the financial year, who shall hold office till the
adoption of accounts of that financial year.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the first auditor of a
company, other than a Government company, shall be appointed by the Board of Directors
within thirty days from the date of registration of the company and in the case of failure of
the Board to appoint such auditor, it shall inform the members of the company, who shall at
an extraordinary general meeting appoint such auditor. The said auditor shall hold office till
the conclusion of the first annual general meeting.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section (2), in the
case of a Government Company, the first auditor shall be appointed by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India within thirty days from the date of registration of the company and
in case the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India does not appoint such auditor within
the said period, the Board of Directors of the company shall appoint such auditor within
next thirty days. In the case of failure of the Board to appoint such auditor within next thirty
days, it shall inform the Central Government or the State Government concerned and the
Central Government or the State Government concerned, as the case may be, shall appoint
such auditor, who shall hold office till the appointment of an auditor under sub-section (2).
(5) Any casual vacancy in the office of an auditor shall,—
(i) in the case of a company other than a company whose accounts are subject
to audit by an auditor appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be
filled by the Board of Directors, but if such casual vacancy is as a result of the
resignation of an auditor, such appointment shall also be approved by the company
at a general meeting convened within three months of the approval of the Board;
(ii) in case of a company whose accounts are subject to audit by an auditor
appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be filled within thirty
days, failing which by the Board.
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1) and the rules made thereunder, a
retiring auditor may be re-appointed at an annual general meeting, if—
(a) he is not disqualified for re-appointment;
(b) he has not given the company a notice in writing of his unwillingness to be
Appointment
of auditors.

63
re-appointed; and
(c) a special resolution has not been passed at that meeting appointing some
other auditor or providing expressly that he shall not be re-appointed.
(7) Where at any annual general meeting, no auditor is appointed or re-appointed, the
existing auditor shall continue to be the auditor of the company.
(8) Where the company constitutes an Audit Committee as required under
section 158, all appointments, including the filling of a casual vacancy of an auditor under
this section shall be made after taking into account the recommendations of such committee.
(9) The auditor appointed under this section may be removed from his office before
the expiry of his term only by a special resolution of the company:
Provided that before taking any action under this sub-section, the auditor concerned
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(10) Without prejudice to any action under the provisions of this Act or any other law
for the time being in force, the Tribunal, if it is satisfied that the auditor of a company has
acted in a fraudulent manner or abetted or colluded in any fraud by, or in relation to, the
company or its directors or officers, it may, by order, direct the company to change its
auditors.
124. (1) A person shall be eligible for appointment as an auditor of a company only if
he is a Chartered Accountant in practice.
(2) Where a firm is appointed as an auditor of a company, only the partners who are
Chartered Accountants in practice shall be authorised by the firm to act and sign on behalf
of the firm.
(3) None of the following persons shall be eligible for appointment as an auditor of a
company, namely:—
(a) a body corporate;
(b) an officer or employee of the company;
(c) a person who is a partner, or who is in the employment, of an officer or
employee of the company;
(d) a person who, or his relative or partner—
(i) is holding any security of the company or its subsidiary, or of its
holding or associate company or a subsidiary of such holding company, of
value in terms of such percentage as may be prescribed;
(ii) is indebted to the company, or its subsidiary, or its holding or associate
company or a subsidiary of such holding company; or
(iii) has given a guarantee or provided any security in connection with
the indebtedness of any third person to the company, or its subsidiary, or its
holding or associate company or a subsidiary of such holding company, for
such amount as may be prescribed;
(e) a person or a firm who has business relationship with the company, or its
subsidiary, or its holding or associate company or subsidiary of such holding company
or associate company of such nature as may be prescribed;
(f) a person whose relative is in the employment of the company as a director or
key managerial personnel;
(g) a person who is in employment elsewhere or a person or firm who holds
appointment as an auditor in companies exceeding such number as may be prescribed
on the date of his appointment.
Eligibility,
qualifications
and disqualifi-
cations of
auditors.

64
(4) Where a person appointed as an auditor of a company incurs any of the
disqualifications mentioned in sub-section ( 3) after his appointment, he shall vacate his
office as such auditor and such vacation shall be deemed to be a casual vacancy in the
office of the auditor.
125. (1) The remuneration of the auditor of a company shall be fixed in its general
meeting or in such manner as may be determined therein.
(2) The  “remuneration” under sub-section ( 1) in addition to the fee payable to an
auditor, include the expenses, if any, incurred by the auditor in connection with the audit of
the company and anything given to him otherwise than in cash, but does not include any
remuneration paid to him for any other service rendered by him at the request of the company.
126. (1) Every auditor of a company shall have a right of access at all times to the
books of account  and vouchers of the company, whether kept at the registered office of the
company or at any other place in India, and shall be entitled to require from the officers of
the company such information and explanation as he may consider necessary for the
performance of his duties as auditor and shall inquire into such matters as may be prescribed:
Provided that the auditor of a company which is a holding company shall also have
the right of access to the records of all its subsidiaries in so far as it relates to the consolidation
of its financial statement with that of its subsidiaries.
(2) The auditor shall make a report to the members of the company on the accounts
examined by him and on every financial statement or other document which are required by
or under this Act to be laid before the company in general meeting and the report shall after
taking into account the provisions of this Act, the accounting and auditing standards and
matters which are required to be included in the audit report under the provisions of this Act
or any rules made thereunder or under any order made under sub-section ( 11) and to the
best of his information and knowledge, the said accounts, financial statement or other
document give a true and fair view of the state of the company’s affairs as at the end of its
financial year and such other matters as may be prescribed.
(3) The auditor’s report shall also state—
(a) whether he has obtained all the information and explanations which to the
best of his knowledge and belief were necessary for the purpose of his audit;
(b) whether, in his opinion, proper books of account as required by law have
been kept by the company so far as appears from his examination of those books and
proper returns adequate for the purposes of his audit have been received from
branches not visited by him;
(c) whether the report on the accounts of any branch office of the company
audited under sub-section ( 8) by a person other than the company auditor has been
sent to him under the proviso to that sub-section and the manner in which he has
dealt with it in preparing his report;
(d) whether the company’s balance sheet and profit and loss account dealt with
in the report are in agreement with the books of account and returns;
(e) whether, in his opinion, the financial statements comply with the accounting
standards and the auditing standards;
(f) the observations or comments of the auditors which have any adverse effect
on the functioning of the company;
(g) whether any director is disqualified from being appointed as a director
under sub-section (2) of section 145;
(h) any qualification, reservation or adverse remark relating to the maintenance
of accounts and other matters connected therewith;
Remuneration
of auditors.
Powers and
duties of
auditors and
Auditing
Standards.

65
(i) in case of listed companies, whether the company has complied with the
internal financial controls and directions issued by the Board; and
(j) such other matters as may be prescribed.
(4) Where any of the matters required to be included in the audit report under this
section is answered in the negative or with a qualification, the report shall state the reasons
therefor.
(5) In the case of a Government company, the auditor appointed by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India under sub-section (2) of section 123 shall submit a copy of his
audit report to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India which shall, among other
things, include the directions, if any, issued by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India in respect of the accounting standards, the variance, if any, from the accounting
standards notified by the Government, the action taken on such directions and the impact
thereof on the company’s accounts.
(6) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall within sixty days from the date
of receipt of the audit report under sub-section ( 5) have a right to—
(a) comment upon or supplement such audit report, and
(b) conduct any supplementary audit of the company’s accounts by himself or
by such person or persons as he may authorise in this behalf and such person or
persons shall have the same rights and obligations as the auditor who has submitted
the report:
Provided that any comments given by the Comptroller and Auditor-General on the
report of the supplementary audit conducted by him shall be placed before the annual
general meeting of the company at the same time and in the same manner as the audit report.
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Chapter, the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India may, in case of any company covered under sub-section (2) of section 123,
if he so deems necessary, by an order, cause test audit to be conducted of the accounts of
such company. The provisions of section 19A of the Comptroller and Auditor-General’s
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971, shall apply to the report of such test
audit.
(8) Where a company has a branch office, the accounts of that office shall be audited
either by the auditor appointed for the company (hereinafter in this section referred to as
the company’s auditor) under this Act or by any other person qualified for appointment as
an auditor of the company under this Act and appointed as such under section 123, or
where the branch office is situated in a country outside India, the accounts of the branch
office shall be audited either by the company’s auditor or by an accountant or by other
person duly qualified to act as an auditor of the accounts of the branch office in accordance
with the laws of that country and the duties and powers of the company’s auditor with
reference to the audit of the branch and the branch auditor, if any, shall be such as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the branch auditor shall prepare a report on the accounts of the branch
examined by him and send it to the auditor of the company who shall deal with it in his report
in such manner as he considers necessary.
(9) Every auditor shall comply with the auditing standards.
(10) The Central Government may, after consultation with the National Advisory
Committee on Accounting and Auditing Standards, by notification, lay down auditing
standards:
Provided that until any auditing standards are notified, any standard or standards of
auditing specified by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India shall be deemed to be
the auditing standards.
56 of 1971.

66
(11) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Advisory Committee,
by general or special order, direct,  in respect of such class or description of companies, as
may be specified in the order, that the auditor’s report shall also include a statement on such
matters as may be specified therein.
127. An auditor appointed under this Act shall provide the company only such other
services as are approved by the Board of Directors or the audit committee, as the case may
be, but which shall not include any of the following services, namely:—
(a) accounting and book keeping services;
(b) internal audit;
(c) design and implementation of any financial information system;
(d) actuarial services;
(e) investment advisory services;
(f) investment banking services;
(g) rendering of outsourced financial services; and
(h) management services.
128. Only the person appointed as an auditor of the company shall sign the auditor’s
report or sign or certify any other document of the company, and the auditor’s report shall
be read before the company in general meeting and shall be open to inspection by any
member of the company.
129. All notices of, and other communications relating to, any general meeting shall
be forwarded to the auditor of the company, and the auditor shall, unless otherwise exempted
by the company, attend either by himself or through his authorised representative, who
shall also be qualified to be an auditor, any general meeting and shall have right to be heard
at such meeting on any part of the business which concerns him as the auditor.
130. (1) Where any of the provisions of sections 123 to 129 is contravened, the
company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees and any officer who is in default shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with
both.
(2) Where an auditor of a company contravenes any of the provisions of section 126
or section  127 or section 128 he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than
twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees:
Provided that where it is proved that an auditor has knowingly or wilfully contravened
any of the provisions of the aforesaid sections, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, or with both.
(3) Where an auditor has been convicted under sub-section ( 2), he shall be liable
to—
(i) refund the remuneration received by him to the company; and
(ii) pay for damages to the company or to any other persons for loss arising out
of incorrect or misleading statements of particulars made in his audit report.
131. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the Central Government
may, by order, in respect of such class of companies engaged in the production, processing,
manufacturing, mining or infrastructural activities, as may be specified therein, direct that
particulars relating to the utilisation of material or labour or to such other items of cost as
may be prescribed shall also be included in the books of account kept by such class of
companies:
Auditor not to
render certain
services.
Auditor to
sign audit
reports, etc.
Auditors to
attend general
meeting.
Punishment
for
contravention.
Central
Government
to specify
audit of items
of cost in
respect of
certain
companies.

67
Provided that the Central Government shall, before issuing such order in respect of
any class of companies regulated under a special Act, consult the regulatory body
constituted or established under such special  Act.
(2) If the Central Government is of the opinion, in relation to any company covered by
an order under sub-section (1), that it is necessary to do so, it may, by order, direct that the
audit of cost records of such company shall be conducted in the manner specified therein.
(3) Where a company includes the particulars relating to items of cost in the books of
account in pursuance of a resolution passed by the company, the audit of cost records as
contained in the books of account of the company shall be conducted by a Cost Accountant
in practice who shall be appointed by the Board on such remuneration as may be determined
by the members in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that no person appointed under section 123 as an auditor of the company
shall be appointed for conducting the audit of cost records.
(4) An audit conducted under this section shall be in addition to the audit conducted
under section 126.
(5) The qualifications, disqualifications, rights, duties and obligations applicable to
auditors under this Chapter shall, so far as may be applicable, apply to a cost auditor
appointed under this section and it shall be the duty of the company to give all assistance
and facilities to the cost auditor appointed under this section for auditing the cost records
of the company:
Provided that the report on the audit of cost records shall be submitted by the Cost
Accountant in practice to the Board of Directors of the company.
(6) A company shall within thirty days from the date of receipt of a copy of the cost
audit report prepared in pursuance of a direction under sub-section ( 2) furnish the Central
Government with such report along with full information and explanation on every reservation
or qualification contained therein.
(7) If, after considering the cost audit report referred to under this section and the
information and explanation furnished by the company under sub-section ( 6), the Central
Government is of opinion that any further information or explanation is necessary, it may
call for such further information and explanation and the company shall furnish the same
within such time as may be specified by that Government.
(8) Where any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section,—
(a) the company and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh
rupees;
(b) the cost auditor who is in default shall be punishable with fine which shall
not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
CHAPTER XI
A
PPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICA TIONS OF DIRECTORS
132. (1) Every company shall have a Board of Directors consisting of only individuals
as directors and shall have —
(a) a minimum number of three directors in the case of a public company, two
directors in the case of a private company, and one director in the case of a One
Person Company; and
(b) a maximum of twelve directors, excluding the directors nominated by the
lending institutions.
(2) One of the directors shall at least be a person ordinarily resident in India.
Company to
have Board of
Directors.

68
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “ordinarily resident in India”
means a person who stays in India for a total period of not less than one hundred and
eighty-two days in a calendar year.
(3) Every listed public company having such amount of paid-up share capital as may
be prescribed shall have at the least one-third of the total number of directors as independent
directors. The Central Government may prescribe the minimum number of independent
directors in case of other public companies and subsidiaries of any public company.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, any fraction contained in such
one-third number shall be rounded off as one.
(4) Every company existing on or before the commencement of this Act shall comply
with the requirements of the provisions of sub-section (3) within one year from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(5) “Independent director”, in relation to a company, means a non-executive director
of the company, other than a nominee director,—
(a) who, in the opinion of the Board, is a person of integrity and possesses
relevant expertise and experience;
(b) who, neither himself nor any of his relatives—
(i) has or had any pecuniary relationship or transaction with the company,
its holding, subsidiary or associate company, or its promoters, or directors
amounting to ten per cent. or more of its gross turnover or total income during the
two immediately preceding financial years or during the current financial year;
(ii) holds or has held any senior management position, position of a key
managerial personnel or is or had been employee of the company in any of the
three financial years immediately preceding the financial year in which he is
proposed to be appointed;
(iii) is or has been an employee or a partner, in any of the three financial
years immediately preceding the financial year in which he is proposed to be
appointed, of—
(A)  a firm of auditors or company secretaries in practice or cost
auditors of the company or its holding, subsidiary or associate company;
or
(B) any legal or a consulting firm that has or had any transaction
with the company, its holding, subsidiary or associate company amounting
to ten per cent. or more of the gross turnover of such firm;
(iv) holds together with his relatives two per cent. or more of the total
voting power of the company; or
(v) is a Chief Executive or director, by whatever name called, of any non-
profit organisation that receives twenty-five per cent. or more of its income
from the company, any of its promoters, directors or its holding, subsidiary or
associate company or that holds two per cent. or more of the total voting power
of the company; or
(c) who possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “nominee director” means a director
nominated by any institution in pursuance of the provisions of any law for the time being in
force, or of any agreement, or appointed by any Government, to represent its shareholding.
(6) An independent director shall not be entitled to any remuneration, other than
sitting fee, reimbursement of expenses for participation in the Board and other meetings and
profit-related commission and stock options as may be approved by the members.

69
133. (1) Where no provision is made in the articles of a company for the appointment
of the first directors, the subscribers to the memorandum who are individuals shall be
deemed to be the first directors of the company until the directors are duly appointed in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every director shall be appointed
by the company in general meeting.
(3) No person shall be appointed as a director of a company unless he has been
allotted the Director Identification Number (DIN) under section 135:
Provided that a person may be appointed as a director, if an application for the
allotment of a DIN has been made to the Central Government under section 134 and the
same is pending with the Central Government and he may hold the office of a director till
such time that person is allotted DIN.
(4) Every person proposed to be appointed as a director by the company in general
meeting or otherwise, shall furnish his Director Identification Number and a declaration that
he is not disqualified to become a director under this Act.
(5) A person appointed as a director shall not act as a director unless he gives his
consent to hold the office as such director and such consent shall be filed with the Registrar
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that in the case of appointment of an independent director, the Board shall
also give a report in the general meeting that in its opinion he fulfils the conditions specified
in this Act for such an appointment.
(6) Unless the articles provide for the retirement of all the directors at every annual
general meeting, not exceeding one-third of the total number of directors of a public company
shall be liable to retire, and out of the remaining, one-third shall retire by rotation at every
annual general meeting in accordance with such procedure and principles as may be
prescribed and such retiring directors shall be entitled to be re-appointed.
(7) Where a company fails to re-appoint a retiring director or to appoint any person as
a director in place of the retiring director at any general meeting, such appointment shall be
made at any adjourned meeting within such time and in accordance with such procedure as
may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter, “appointment” of a director includes
his re-appointment.
134. Every Individual intending to be appointed as director of a company shall make
an application for allotment of Director Identification Number to the Central Government in
such form and manner and along with such fee as may be prescribed.
135. The Central Government shall, within one month from the receipt of the application
under section 134, allot a Director Identification Number to an applicant in such manner as
may be prescribed.
136. No individual, who has already been allotted a Director Identification Number
under section 135, shall apply  for, obtain or possess another Director Identification Number.
137. Every existing director shall, within one month of the receipt of Director
Identification Number from the Central Government, intimate his Director Identification
Number to the company or all companies wherein he is a director.
Appointment
of Directors.
Application
for allotment
of Director
Identification
Number.
Allotment of
Director
Identification
Number.
Prohibition to
obtain more
than one
Director
Identification
Number.
Director to
intimate
Director
Identification
Number.

70
138. (1) Every company shall, within fifteen days of the receipt of intimation under
section 137, furnish the Director Identification Number (DIN) of all its directors to the
Registrar or any other officer or authority as may be specified by the Central Government
with such fee as may be prescribed or with such additional fee as may be prescribed within
the time specified under section 364 and every such intimation shall be furnished in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Where a company fails to furnish DIN under sub-section (1), before the expiry of
the period specified under section 364 with additional fee, the company shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to
one lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term of six months or with fine which shall not be less than five thousand
rupees but which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.
139. Every person or company, while furnishing any return, information or particulars
as are required to be furnished under this Act, shall mention the Director Identification
Number in such return, information or particulars in case such return, information or particulars
relate to the director or contain any reference of any director.
140. If any individual or director,  contravenes any of the provisions of sections 133,
136 and 137, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and where the contravention
is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every
day during which the contravention continues.
141. (1) A person who is not a retiring director shall, subject to the provisions of this
Act, be eligible for appointment to the office of a director at any general meeting, if he, or
some member intending to propose him as a director, has, not less than fourteen days
before the meeting, left at the office of the company, a notice in writing under his hand
signifying his candidature as a director or, as the case may be, the intention of such member
to propose him as a candidate for that office, along with the deposit of such sum of money
as may be prescribed and the amount so deposited shall be refunded to such person or, as
the case may be, to the member, if the person proposed gets elected as a director or gets
more than twenty-five per cent. of total votes cast.
(2)The company shall inform its members of the candidature of a person for the office
of director under sub-section (1) in the manner prescribed.
142.  (1) The articles of a company may confer on its Board of Directors the power to
appoint any person, other than a person who fails to get appointed as a director in a general
meeting , as an additional director at any time who shall hold office up to the date of the next
annual general meeting or the last date on which the annual general meeting should have
been held, whichever is earlier.
(2) The Board of Directors may, if so authorised by its articles or by a resolution
passed by the company in general meeting, appoint a person, not being a person holding
any alternate directorship for any other director in the company, to act as an alternate
director for a director during his absence for a period of not less than three months from
India:
Provided that a person who is proposed to be appointed as an alternate director for
an independent director should be qualified to be appointed as an independent director
under the provisions of this Act:
Provided further that an alternate director shall not hold office for a period longer
than that permissible to the director in whose place he has been appointed and shall vacate
the office if and when the director in whose place he has been appointed returns to India:
Provided also that if the term of office of the original director is determined before he
so returns to India, any provision for the automatic re-appointment of retiring directors in
default of another appointment shall apply to the original, and not to the alternate director.
Company to
inform Director
Identification
Number to
Registrar.
Obligation to
indicate
Director
Identification
Number.
Punishment
for
contravention.
Right of
persons other
than retiring
directors to
stand for
directorship.
Appointment
of additional
director,
alternate
director and
nominee
director.

71
(3) Subject to the articles, the Board may appoint any person as a director nominated
by any institution in pursuance of the provisions of any law for the time being in force or of
any agreement or by the Central Government or State Government by virtue of its
shareholding in a Government company.
(4) In the case of a public company or a private company which is a subsidiary of a
public company, if the office of any director appointed by the company in general meeting
is vacated before his term of office expires in the normal course, the resulting casual vacancy
may, in default of and subject to any regulations in the articles of the company, be filled by
the Board of Directors at a meeting of the Board:
Provided that any person so appointed shall hold office only up to the date up to
which the director in whose place he is appointed would have held office if it had not been
vacated.
143. (1) At a general meeting of a company, a motion for the appointment of two or
more persons as directors of the company by a single resolution shall not be moved unless
a proposal to move such a motion has first been agreed to at the meeting without any vote
being cast against it.
(2) A resolution moved in contravention of sub-section (1) shall be void, whether or
not any objection was taken when it was moved.
(3) A motion for approving a person for appointment, or for nominating a person for
appointment as a director, shall be treated a nomination for his appointment.
144. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the articles of a company may
provide for the appointment of not less than two-thirds of the total number of the directors
of a company in accordance with the principle of proportional representation, whether by
the single transferable vote or by a system of cumulative voting or otherwise and such
appointments may be made once in every three years and casual vacancies of such directors
shall be filled as provided in sub-section (4) of section 142.
145.  (1)  A person shall not be eligible for appointment as a director of a company,
if —
(a) he has been found to be of unsound mind by a court of competent jurisdiction
and the said finding is in force;
(b) he is an undischarged insolvent;
(c) he has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent and his application is
pending;
(d) he has been convicted by a Court of any offence involving moral turpitude
and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months, and a
period of five years has not elapsed from the date of expiry of the sentence;
(e) an order disqualifying him for appointment as a director has been passed by
a Court or Tribunal and the order is in force;
(f) he has not paid any calls in respect of any shares of the company held by
him, whether alone or jointly with others, and six months have elapsed from the last
day fixed for the payment of the call;
(g) he has been convicted of the offence dealing with related party transactions
at any time during the last preceding five years; or
(h) he has not obtained Director Identification Number—
(2) No person who is or has been a director of a company which—
(a) has not filed financial statements or annual returns for any continuous
period of three financial years; or
Appointment
of directors to
be voted
individually.
Option to
adopt
principle of
proportional
representation
for
appointment
of directors.
Disqualifications
for
appointment
of director.

72
(b) has failed to repay the deposits accepted by it or pay interest thereon or to redeem
any debentures on the due date or pay interest due thereon or pay any dividend declared
and such failure to pay or redeem continues for one year or more,
shall be eligible to be re-appointed as a director of that company or appointed in other
public company for a period of five years from the date on which the said company fails to
do so:
Provided that in the case of a sick company under revival and rehabilitation pursuant
to Chapter XIX, nothing contained in this section shall apply to a person proposed to be
appointed as a director for any default specified in clause ( b) and committed prior to his
appointment.
(3)A private company may by its articles provide for any disqualifications for
appointment as a director in addition to those specified in sub-sections ( 1) and (2):
Provided that the disqualifications referred to in clauses (d), (e) and (g) of sub-section
(1) shall not take effect—
(i) for thirty days from the date of conviction or order of disqualification;
(ii) where an appeal or petition is preferred within thirty days as aforesaid
against the conviction resulting in sentence or order, until expiry of seven days from
the date on which such appeal or petition is disposed of; or
(iii) where any further appeal or petition is preferred against order or sentence
within seven days, until such further appeal or petition is disposed of.
146.  (1) No person, after the commencement of this Act, shall hold office as a director,
including any alternate directorship, in more than fifteen public limited companies at the
same time.
(2) Where a person accepts an appointment as a director in contravention of sub-
section (1), he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five thousand
rupees but which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees for every day during which
the contravention continues.
147. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a director of a company shall act in
accordance with the company’s articles.
(2) A director of a company shall act in good faith in order to promote the objects of
the company for the benefit of its members as a whole, and in the best interest of the
company.
(3) A director of a company shall exercise his duties with due and reasonable care,
skill and diligence.
(4) A director of a company shall not involve in a situation in which he may have a
direct or indirect interest that conflicts, or possibly may conflict, with the interest of the
company.
(5) A director of a company shall not achieve or attempt to achieve any undue gain or
advantage either to himself or to his relatives, partners, or associates.
(6)A director of a company shall not assign his office and any assignment so made
shall be void.
(7)Any director who contravenes the provisions of this section shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh
rupees:
Provided that if he is found guilty of making any undue gain either to himself or to his
relatives, partners or associates he shall also be liable to pay an amount equal to that gain
to the company.
Number of
directorships.
Duties of
directors.

73
148. (1) The office of a director shall become vacant in case—
(a) he incurs any of the disqualifications specified in section 145;
(b) he absents himself from all the meetings of the Board of Directors held
during a period of twelve months with or without seeking leave of absence of the
Board;
(c) he acts in contravention of the provisions relating to entering into contracts
or arrangements in which he is directly or indirectly interested;
(d) he fails to disclose his interest in any contract or arrangement;
(e) he becomes disqualified by an order of a Court or tribunal;
(f) he is removed in pursuance of the provisions of this Act;
(g) he, having been appointed a director by virtue of his holding any office or
other employment in the holding, subsidiary or associate company, ceases to hold
such office or other employment in that company.
(2) If a person, who after knowing that the office of director held by him has become
vacant on account of any disqualification specified in sub-section ( 1), acts as a director,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or
with both.
(3) Where all the directors of a company vacate their offices under any of the
disqualifications specified in sub-section ( 1), the promoter or, in his absence, the Central
Government shall appoint the required number of directors who shall hold office till the
directors are appointed by the company in the general meeting.
(4) A private company may, by its articles, provide any other ground for the vacation
of the office of a director in addition to those specified in sub-section ( 1).
149.  ( 1) A director may resign from his office by giving a notice in writing to the
company and the Board shall on receipt of such notice take note of the same and intimate
the Registrar in such manner and in such form as may be prescribed and shall also place the
fact of such resignation in the subsequent general meeting held by the company:
Provided that a director may also forward a copy of his resignation to the Registrar in
the manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The resignation of a director shall take effect from the date on which the notice is
received by the company or the date, if any, specified by the director in the notice, whichever
is later.
(3) Where as a result of any vacancy in the Board, the number of directors is reduced
below the quorum fixed for a meeting of the Board, the continuing director or director(s)
shall be deemed to constitute the quorum.
(4)Where all the directors of a company resign from their offices, or vacate their
offices under section 148, the promoter or, in his absence, the Central Government shall
appoint the required number of directors who shall hold office till the directors are appointed
by the company in general meeting.
150.  ( 1) A company may, by ordinary resolution, remove a director, not being a
director appointed by the Tribunal under section 213, before the expiry of period of his
office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard and following such procedure
as may be prescribed.
(2) Special notice shall be required of any resolution, to remove a director under this
section, or to appoint somebody in place of a director so removed, at the meeting at which
he is removed.
Vacation of
office of
director.
Resignation of
director.
Removal of
directors.

74
(3) On receipt of notice of a resolution to remove a director under this section, the
company shall forthwith send a copy thereof to the director concerned, and the director,
whether or not he is a member of the company, shall be entitled to be heard on the resolution
at the meeting.
(4)A vacancy created by the removal of a director under this section may, if he had
been appointed by the company in general meeting or by the Board, be filled by the
appointment of another director in his place by the meeting at which he is removed, provided
special notice of the intended appointment has been given under sub-section ( 2).
(5)A director so appointed shall hold office until the date up to which his predecessor
would have held office if he had not been removed.
(6)If the vacancy is not filled under sub-section ( 4), it may be filled as a casual
vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this Act:
Provided that the director who was removed from office shall not be re-appointed as
a director by the Board of Directors.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be taken—
(a) as depriving a person removed under this section of any compensation
or damages payable to him in respect of the termination of his appointment as director
as per the terms of contract or terms of his appointment as director, or of any other
appointment terminating with the termination as director; or
(b) as derogating from any power to remove a director under other provisions
of this Act.
151. (1) Every company shall keep at its registered office a register containing
such particulars of its directors and key managerial personnel as may be prescribed, which
shall include the details of securities held by each of them in the company or its holding,
subsidiary or associate companies.
(2) A return containing such particulars and documents as may be prescribed, of the
directors and the key managerial personnel shall be filed with the Registrar within thirty
days from the appointment of every director and key managerial personnel, as the case may
be, and within thirty days of any change taking place.
152. (1) The registers kept under sub-section ( 1) of section 151 shall be open for
inspection during business hours and the members shall have a right to take extracts
therefrom and copies thereof shall, on a request by the members, be provided to them free
of cost within thirty days.
(2) The registers kept under section 151 shall also be kept open for inspection at
every annual general meeting of the company and shall be made accessible to any person
attending the meeting.
(3) If any inspection as provided in sub-section (1) is refused, or if any copy required
under that sub-section is not sent within thirty days from the date of receipt of such
request, the Registrar shall on an application made to him order immediate inspection and
supply of copies required thereunder.
153.  Where a company contravenes any of the provisions of this Chapter and for
which no specific punishment is provided therein, the company and every director or
employee who is responsible for such contravention shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Members’ right
to inspect.
Register of
directors and
key
managerial
personnel and
their
shareholding.
Punishment.

75
CHAPTER XII
MEETINGS OF BOARD AND ITS POWERS
154. (1) Every company shall hold the first meeting of the Board of Directors within
thirty days of the date of its incorporation and thereafter hold a minimum number of four
meetings of its Board of Directors every year in such a manner that not more than 120 days
shall intervene between two consecutive meetings of the Board:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions
of this sub-section shall not apply in relation to any class or description of companies or
shall apply subject to such exceptions, modifications or conditions as may be specified in
the notification.
(2)The participation of directors in a meeting of the Board may be either in person or
through video conferencing or such other electronic means, as may be prescribed, which
are capable of recording and recognising the participation of the directors and of recording
and storing the proceedings of such meetings:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, specify such matters
which shall not be dealt with in a meeting through video conferencing or other electronic
means.
(3)A meeting of the Board shall be called by giving not less than seven days’ notice
in writing or by electronic means to every director at his address registered with the company:
Provided that a meeting of the Board may be called at shorter notice to transact
urgent business subject to the condition that at least one independent director, if any, shall
be present at the meeting:
Provided further that in case of absence of independent directors from such a meeting
of the Board, decisions taken at such a meeting shall be circulated to all the directors and
will be final only on ratification thereof by at least one independent director.
(4) Every officer of the company whose duty is to give notice under this section and
who fails to do so shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees.
155. (1)  The quorum for a meeting of the Board of Directors of a company shall be
one-third of its total strength or two directors, whichever is higher, and the participation of
the directors by video conferencing or by other electronic means shall also be counted for
the purposes of quorum under this sub-section.
(2)Where at any time, the number of interested directors exceeds, or is equal to, two-
thirds of the total strength of the Board of Directors, the number of directors who are not
interested directors and present at the meeting, being not less than two, shall be the quorum
during such time.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “interested director” means a
director within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 162.
(3)Where a meeting of the Board could not be held for want of quorum, then, unless
the articles otherwise provide, the meeting shall automatically stand adjourned to the same
day at the same time and place in the next week or if that day is a public holiday, till the next
succeeding day, which is not a public holiday, at the same time and place.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) any fraction of a number shall be rounded off as one;
(ii) “total strength” shall not include directors whose places are vacant.
156. (1) No resolution shall be deemed to have been duly passed by the Board or by
a committee thereof by circulation, unless the resolution has been circulated in draft, together
with the necessary papers, if any, to all the directors, or members of the committee, as the
Meetings of
Board.
Quorum for
meetings of
Board.
Passing of
resolution by
Board or
committee.

76
case may be, at their usual addresses in India, and has been approved by a majority of the
directors or members, who are entitled to vote on the resolution.
(2) A resolution under sub-section (1) shall be noted at a subsequent meeting of the
Board or the committee thereof, as the case may be, and made part of the minutes of such
meeting.
157. No act done by a person as a director shall be deemed to be invalid,
notwithstanding that it was subsequently noticed that his appointment was invalid by
reason of any defect or disqualification or had terminated by virtue of any provision
contained in this Act or in the articles:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to give validity to any act done
by the director after his appointment has been noticed by the company to be invalid or to
have terminated.
158. (1) The Board of Directors of every listed company and such other class or
description of companies, as may be prescribed, shall constitute an Audit Committee and a
Remuneration Committee of the Board.
(2)The Audit Committee shall consist of a minimum of three directors with independent
directors forming a majority and at least one director having knowledge of financial
management, audit or accounts.
(3) The Chairman of an Audit Committee shall be an independent director.
(4) Every Audit Committee of a company existing immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall, within one year of such commencement, be reconstituted
in accordance with sub-sections (2) and (3).
(5)Every Audit Committee shall act in accordance with the terms of reference specified
in writing by the Board which shall include, among other things, the recommendation for
appointment of auditors of the company, examination of the financial statements and the
auditors’ report thereon, transactions of the company with related parties, valuation of
undertakings or assets of the company, wherever it is necessary, evaluation of internal
financial controls and related matters.
(6)The Audit Committee may call for the comments of the auditors about internal
control systems, the scope of audit, including the observations of the auditors and review
financial statements before their submission to the Board.
(7)The Audit Committee shall have authority to investigate into any matter in relation
to the items specified in sub-section (5) or referred to it by the Board and for this purpose
shall have power to obtain professional advice from external sources and have full access
to information contained in the records of the company.
(8)The auditors of a company and the key managerial personnel shall have a right to
attend the meetings of the Audit Committee when it considers the auditor’s report but shall
not have the right to vote.
(9)The Board’s report under sub-section ( 3) of section 120 shall disclose the
composition of an Audit Committee and where the Board had not accepted any
recommendation of the Audit Committee, the same shall be disclosed in such report along
with the reasons therefor.
(10)  The Remuneration Committee shall consist of non-executive directors as may be
appointed by the Board out of which at least one shall be an independent director.
(11) The Remuneration Committee shall determine the company’s policies relating to
the remuneration of the directors, including the remuneration and other perquisites of the
directors, key managerial personnel and such other employees as may be decided by the
Board.
Defects in
appointment
of directors
not to
invalidate
actions taken.
Committees of
Board.

77
(12) The Board of Directors of a company having a combined membership of the
shareholders, debenture holders and other security holders of more than one thousand at
any time during a financial year shall constitute a Stakeholders Relationship Committee
consisting of a chairman who shall be a non-executive director and such other members of
the Board as may be decided by the Board.
(13) Stakeholders Relationship Committee shall consider and resolve the grievances
of stakeholders.
(14) The chairman of each of the committees constituted under this section or, in his
absence, any other member of the Committee authorised by him shall attend the general
meetings of the company.
(15) In case of any contravention of the provisions of this section, the company shall
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend
to five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with
both.
159.  (1) The Board of Directors of a company shall be entitled to exercise all such
powers, and to do all such acts and things, as the company is authorised to exercise and do:
Provided that in exercising such power or doing such act or thing, the Board shall be
subject to the provisions contained in that behalf in this Act, or in the memorandum or
articles of the company, or in any regulations not inconsistent therewith and duly made
thereunder, including regulations made by the company in general meeting:
Provided further that the Board shall not exercise any power or do any act or thing
which is directed or required, whether under this Act or by the memorandum or articles of
the company or otherwise, to be exercised or done by the company in general meeting.
(2)No resolution passed by the company in general meeting shall invalidate any prior
act of the Board which would have been valid if that resolution had not been passed.
(3)The Board of Directors of a company shall exercise the following powers on behalf
of the company by means of resolutions passed at meetings of the Board, namely:—
(a) to make calls on shareholders in respect of money unpaid on their shares;
(b) to authorise buy-back of securities under section 61;
(c) to issue securities, including debentures, whether in India or outside;
(d) to borrow monies including arrangement with its bankers for overdraft, cash
credit or other account;
(e)  to invest the funds of the company;
(f)  to grant loans or give guarantee or provide security in respect of loans;
(g) to approve financial statement and the director’s report;
(h) to diversify the business of the company;
(i)  to approve amalgamation, merger or reconstruction;
(j) to take over a company or acquire a controlling or substantial stake in another
company:
Provided that the Board may, by a resolution passed at a meeting, delegate to any
committee of directors, the managing director, the manager or any other principal officer of
the company or in the case of a branch office of the company, the principal officer of the
branch office, the powers specified in clauses (d) to (f) on such conditions as it may specify.
Powers of
Board.

78
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the right of the company in
general meeting to impose restrictions and conditions on the exercise by the Board of any
of the powers specified in this section.
160. (1) The Board of Directors of a company shall exercise the following powers
only with the consent of the company by a special resolution, namely:—
(a) to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the whole of the undertaking of the
company or where the company owns more than one undertaking, of the whole or
substantially the whole of any of such undertakings.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,-
(i) the word “undertaking” shall mean an undertaking in which the
investment of the company exceeds twenty per cent of its net worth as per the
audited balance sheet of the preceding financial year or an undertaking which
generates twenty per cent of the total income of the company during the previous
financial year;
(ii) the expression “substantially the whole of the undertaking” in any
financial year shall mean twenty per cent or more of the value of the undertaking
as per the audited balance sheet of the preceding financial year;
(b) to invest otherwise in trust securities the amount of compensation received
by it as a result of any merger or amalgamation;
(c) to borrow money exceeding the aggregate of its paid-up share capital and
free reserves, apart from temporary loans obtained from the company’s bankers in the
ordinary course of business;
(d) to remit, or give time for the repayment of, any debt due from a director;
(e) to contribute to charitable and other funds as donation in any financial year
an amount in excess of five per cent of its average net profits for the three immediately
preceding financial years.
(2)Every special resolution passed by the company in general meeting in relation to
the exercise of the powers referred to in clause ( c) or clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) shall
specify the total amount up to which monies may be borrowed by the Board of Directors
under clause ( c) or, as the case may be, contributed to charitable and other funds in any
financial year under clause (e).
(3)Nothing contained in clause ( a) of sub-section (1) shall affect—
(a) the title of a buyer or other person who buys or takes on lease any property,
investment or undertaking as is referred to in that clause, in good faith; or
(b) the sale or lease of any property of the company where the ordinary business
of the company consists of, or comprises, such selling or leasing.
(4)Any special resolution passed by the company consenting to the transaction as is
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) may stipulate such conditions as may be specified
in such resolution, including conditions regarding the use, disposal or investment of the
sale proceeds which may result from the transactions:
Provided that this sub-section shall not be deemed to authorise the company to effect
any reduction in its capital except in accordance with the provisions contained in that
behalf in this Act.
(5)No debt incurred by the company in excess of the limit imposed by clause ( c) of
sub-section (1) shall be valid or effectual, unless the lender proves that he advanced the
loan in good faith and without knowledge that the limit imposed by that clause had been
exceeded.
Restrictions
on powers of
Board.

79
161. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, a
company, other than a Government company and a company which has been in existence
for less than three financial years, may contribute any amount directly or indirectly—
(a)  to any political party, or
(b) to any person for a political purpose:
Provided that the amount or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amount which
may be so contributed by the company in any financial year shall not exceed five per cent.
of its average net profits during the three immediately preceding financial years:
Provided further that no such contribution shall be made by a company unless a
resolution authorising the making of such contribution is passed at a meeting of the Board
of Directors and such resolution shall, subject to the other provisions of this section, be
deemed to be justification in law for the making and the acceptance of the contribution
authorised by it.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1),—
(a)  a donation or subscription or payment caused to be given by a company on
its behalf or on its account to a person who, to its knowledge, is carrying on any
activity which, at the time at which such donation or subscription or payment was
given or made, can reasonably be regarded as likely to affect public support for a
political party shall also be deemed to be contribution of the amount of such donation,
subscription or payment to such person for a political purpose;
(b)  the amount of expenditure incurred, directly or indirectly, by a company on
an advertisement in any publication, being a publication in the nature of a souvenir,
brochure, tract, pamphlet or the like, shall also be deemed,—
(i) where such publication is by or on behalf of a political party, to be a
contribution of such amount to such political party, and
(ii) where such publication is not by or on behalf of, but for the advantage
of a political party, to be a contribution for a political purpose.
(3) Every company shall disclose in its profit and loss account any amount or amount
contributed by it to any political party or to any person for a political purpose during the
financial year to which that account relates, giving particulars of the total amount contributed
and the name of the party or person to which or to whom such amount has been contributed.
(4) Where a company makes any contribution in contravention of the provisions of
this section, the company shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five times the
amount so contributed and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to
five times the amount so contributed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “political party” means a political
party registered under section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
162.  (1) Every director shall at the first meeting of the Board in which he participates
as a director and thereafter at the first meeting of the Board in every financial year or
whenever there is any change in the disclosures already made, then at the first Board
meeting held after the change, disclose his concern or interest in any company or companies
or bodies corporate, firms, or other association of individuals which shall include the
shareholding, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every director of a company who is in any way, whether directly or indirectly,
concerned or interested in a contract or arrangement or proposed contract or arrangement
entered into or to be entered into—
Prohibitions
and
restrictions
regarding
political
contributions.
43 of 1951.
Disclosure of
interest by
director.

80
(a)  with a body corporate in which he, himself or in association with any other
director, holds more than two per cent. shareholding of that body corporate, or is a
promoter, manager, Chief Executive Officer of that body corporate; or
(b)  with a firm or other entity in which, he is a partner, owner or member, as the
case may be,
shall disclose the nature of his concern or interest at the meeting of the Board in which the
contract or arrangement is discussed and shall not participate in such meeting:
Provided that where any director who is not so concerned or interested at the time of
entering into such contract or arrangement, he shall, if he becomes concerned or interested
after the contract or arrangement is entered into, disclose his concern or interest forthwith
when he becomes concerned or interested or at the next first meeting of the Board held after
he becomes so concerned or interested.
(3)A contract or arrangement entered into by the company without disclosure under
sub-section (2) or with participation by a director who is concerned or interested in any
way, directly or indirectly, in the contract or arrangement, shall be voidable at the option of
the company.
(4) Where a director contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1), he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or
with both.
(5) Every director who contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 2) shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or
with both.
(6) Nothing in this section—
(a) shall be taken to prejudice the operation of any rule of law restricting a
director of a company from having any concern or interest in any contract or
arrangement with the company;
(b) shall apply to any contract or arrangement entered into or to be entered into
between two companies where any of the directors of the one company or two or
more of them together holds or hold not more than two per cent. of the paid-up share
capital in the other company.
163. (1)  Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no company shall, directly or indirectly,
advance any loan, including any loan represented by a book debt, to any of its directors or
to any other person in whom he is interested or give any guarantee or provide any security
in connection with any loan taken by him or such other person:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to—
(a) the giving of any loan to a managing or whole-time director—
(i) as a part of the conditions of service extended by the company to all
its employees; or
(ii) pursuant to any scheme approved by the members by a special
resolution;
(b)  a company which in the ordinary course of its business provides loans or
gives guarantees or securities for the due repayment of any loan and in respect of
such loans an interest is charged at a rate not less than the bank rate declared by the
Reserve Bank of India.
(2)Where any loan is advanced or a guarantee or security is given or provided in
contravention of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the company shall be punishable with
Loan to
directors,
etc.

81
fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty- five lakh
rupees, and the director or the other person to whom any loan is advanced or guarantee or
security is given or provided in connection with any loan taken by him or the other person,
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which
shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, or
with both.
164. (1) No company shall directly or indirectly —
(a) give any loan to any other body corporate or person;
(b) give any guarantee or provide security in connection with a loan to any
other body corporate or person; or
(c)  acquire by way of subscription, purchase or otherwise, the securities of any
other body corporate,
exceeding sixty per cent. of its paid-up share capital and free reserves or one hundred per
cent. of its free reserves, whichever is more.
(2)Where the giving of any loan or guarantee or providing any security or the
acquisition under sub-section ( 1) exceeds the limits specified in sub-section ( 1), prior
approval by means of a special resolution passed at a general meeting shall be necessary.
(3)The company shall disclose to the members in the financial statements the full
particulars of the loans given and the purpose for which the loan is proposed to be utilised
by the recipient of the loan.
(4) No investment shall be made or loan or guarantee or security given by the company
unless the resolution sanctioning it is passed at a meeting of the Board with the consent of
all the directors present at the meeting and the prior approval of the public financial institution
concerned where any term loan is subsisting, is obtained:
Provided that prior approval of a public financial institution shall not be required
where the aggregate of the loans and investments so far made, the amount for which
guarantee or security so far provided to or in all other bodies corporate, along with the
investments, loans, guarantee or security proposed to be made or given does not exceed
the limit as specified in sub-section ( 1), and there is no default in repayment of loan
instalments or payment of interest thereon as per the terms and conditions of such loan to
the public financial institution.
(5) No company, which is registered under section 12 of the Securities and Exchange
Board of India Act, 1992 and covered under such class or classes of companies as may be
prescribed, shall take inter-corporate loan or deposits exceeding the prescribed limit. Such
a company shall furnish in its financial statement the details of the loan or deposits.
(6)No loan shall be given under this section at a rate of interest lower than the
prevailing bank rate being the standard rate made public under section 49 of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934.
(7)No company which is in default in the repayment of any deposits accepted before
the commencement of this Act or payment of interest thereon even after such commencement,
shall give any loan or give any guarantee or provide any security or make an acquisition till
such default is subsisting.
(8)Every company giving loan or giving a guarantee or providing security or making
an acquisition under this section shall keep a register which shall contain such particulars
and shall be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.
(9)The register referred to in sub-section ( 8) shall be kept at the registered office of
the company and —
(a) shall be open to inspection at such office; and
Loan and
investment by
company.
15 of 1992.
2 of 1934.

82
(b)  extracts may be taken therefrom by any member, and copies thereof may be
furnished to any member of the company on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
(10) Nothing contained in this section shall apply —
(a) to a loan made, guarantee given or security provided by —
(i) a banking company or an insurance company or a housing finance
company in the ordinary course of its business or a company engaged in the
business of financing of companies providing infrastructural facilities;
(ii) a holding company to its wholly-owned subsidiary; or
(iii) a private company unless it is a subsidiary of a public company.
(b) to any acquisition —
(i) made by a non-banking financial company registered under Chapter
III- B of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and whose principal business is
acquisition of securities;
(ii) made by a holding company by way of subscription, purchase or
otherwise, the securities of its wholly owned subsidiary; or
(iii) of shares allotted in pursuance of sub-section ( 1) of section 56.
(11) Where a company contravenes the provisions of this section, it shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than twenty- five thousand rupees but which may extend
to one lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
165. (1)  All investments made or held by a company in any property, security or other
asset shall be made and held by it in its own name:
Provided that the company may hold any shares in its subsidiary company in the
name of any nominee or nominees of the company, if and in so far as it is necessary to do so,
to ensure that the number of members of the subsidiary company is not reduced below the
statutory limit.
(2)Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a company from holding
investments in the name of a depository when such investments are in the form of securities
held by the company as a beneficial owner.
(3)Where in pursuance of sub-section ( 2) any shares or securities in which
investments have been made by a company are not held by it in its own name, the company
shall maintain a register which shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed and such
register shall be open to the inspection by any member or debenture holder of the company
without any charge during business hours subject to such reasonable restrictions as the
company may by its articles or in general meeting impose.
(4)Where a company contravenes the provisions of this section, it shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to
twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less
than twenty five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
166.  (1) Except with the consent of the Board of Directors of a public company
accorded by a resolution passed at a meeting of the Board and subject to such conditions
as may be prescribed, no such company shall enter into any contract or arrangement with a
related party with respect to—
(a) sale, purchase or supply of any goods or materials;
Investments of
company to be
held in its own
name.
Related party
transactions.
2 of 1934.

83
(b)  selling or otherwise disposing of, or buying, property of any kind;
(c)  leasing of property of any kind;
(d)  availing or rendering of any services;
(e)  appointment of any agents for purchase or sale of goods, materials, services
or property;
(f)  appointment to any office or place of profit in the company or its subsidiary
company; and
(g) underwriting the subscription of any securities or derivatives thereof, of the
company:
Provided that no contract or arrangement, in the case of a company having a paid-up
share capital of not less than such amount, or transactions not exceeding such sums, as
may be prescribed, shall be entered into except with the prior approval of the company by
a special resolution:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any transactions
entered into by the company in its ordinary course of business other than transactions
which are not on an arm’s length basis.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, arm’s length transaction means
a transaction between two related parties that is conducted on terms as if they were unrelated,
so that there is no question of a conflict of interest.
(2) Every contract or arrangement entered into under sub-section (1) shall be referred
to in the report of the directors to the shareholders along with the justification for entering
into such contract or arrangement.
(3)Where any contract or arrangement is entered into by a director or any other
employee, without obtaining the consent of the Board or approval by a special resolution in
the general meeting under sub-section (1) and if it is not ratified by the Board or, as the case
may be, by the shareholders at a meeting within three months from the date on which such
contract or arrangement was entered into, such contract or arrangement shall be voidable at
the option of the Board and if the contract or arrangement is with a related party to any
director, or is authorised by any other director, the directors concerned shall indemnify the
company against any loss incurred by it.
(4)Without prejudice to anything contained in sub-section (3), it shall be open to the
company to proceed against a director or other employee who had authorised for entering
into such contract or arrangement in contravention of the provisions of this section for
recovery of any loss or damage sustained by it as a result of such contract or arrangement.
(5) Any director or other employee of a public company, who had authorised the
contract or arrangement in violation of the provisions of this section shall,—
(i) in case of public company whose shares are not listed in any stock exchange,
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty- five thousand rupees but
which may extend to five lakh rupees; and
(ii) in case of listed public company, be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five
thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “office or place of profit” means
any office or place —
(a)   in case the office or place is held by a director, if the director holding it
obtains from the company anything by way of remuneration over and above the
remuneration to which he is entitled as such director, whether as salary, fee, commission,

84
perquisites, the right to occupy any rent-free premises as a place of residence, or
otherwise;
(b)   in case the office or place is held by an individual other than a director or by
any firm, private company or other body corporate, if the individual, firm, private
company or body corporate holding it obtains from the company anything by way of
remuneration, whether as salary, fee, commission, perquisites, the right to occupy
any rent-free premises as a place of residence, or otherwise.
167. ( 1)  Every company shall keep one or more registers giving separately the
particulars of all contracts or arrangements to which sub-section (2) of section 162 applies,
including such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2)Every director, including a deemed director, or key managerial personnel shall,
within thirty days of his appointment, or relinquishment of, his office, as the case may be,
disclose to the company the particulars specified in sub-section (1) of section 162 relating
to his concern or interest in the other associations which are required to be included in the
register under sub-section ( 1).
(3)Every director, including a deemed director, shall give notice in writing to the
company at a meeting of the Board, of such matters relating to himself as may be necessary
for the purpose of enabling the company to comply with the provisions of this section.
(4)The register kept pursuant to sub-section ( 1) shall be kept at the registered office
of the company and it shall be open for inspection at such office during business hours and
extracts may be taken therefrom, and copies thereof as may be required by any member of
the company shall be furnished by the company to such extent, in such manner, and on
payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
(5)The registers to be kept under this section shall also be produced at the
commencement of every annual general meeting of the company and shall remain open and
accessible during the continuance of the meeting to any person having the right to attend
the meeting.
(6)Nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to any contract or arrangement —
(a) for the sale, purchase or supply of any goods, materials or services if the
value of such goods and materials or the cost of such services does not exceed five
lakh rupees in the aggregate in any year; or
(b) by a banking company for the collection of bills in the ordinary course of its
business.
(7) Every director who fails to comply with the provisions of this section and the rules
made thereunder shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees.
168. (1) Every company shall keep at its registered office, —
(a)  where a contract of service with a managing or whole-time director is in
writing, a copy of the contract; or
(b) where such a contract is not in writing, a written memorandum setting out its
terms.
(2) Copies of the contract or the memorandum kept under sub-section ( 1) shall be
open to inspection by any member of the company without payment of fee.
(3) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), the company shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and
every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of five thousand
rupees for each default.
(4)The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private company.
Register of
contracts or
arrangements
in which
directors are
interested.
Contract of
employment
with managing
or whole-time
directors.

85
169.  (1) No director of a company shall, in connection with—
(a) the transfer of the whole or any part of any undertaking or property of the
company, or
(b) the transfer to any person of all or any of the shares in a company being a
transfer resulting from —
(i) an offer made to the general body of shareholders;
(ii) an offer made by or on behalf of some other body corporate with a
view to a company becoming a subsidiary company of such body corporate or
a subsidiary company of its holding company;
(iii) an offer made by or on behalf of an individual with a view to his
obtaining the right to exercise, or control the exercise of, not less than one-third
of the total voting power at any general meeting of the company; or
(iv) any other offer which is conditional on acceptance to a given extent,
receive any payment by way of compensation for loss of office or as consideration for
retirement from office, or in connection with such loss or retirement from such company
or from the transferee of such undertaking or property, or from the transferees of
shares or from any other person, not being such company, unless particulars as may
be prescribed with respect to the payment proposed to be made by such transferee or
person, including the amount thereof, have been disclosed to the members of the
company and the proposal has been approved by the company in general meeting.
(2)Nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall affect any payment made by a company to a
managing director or whole-time director or manager of the company by way of compensation
for loss of office or as consideration for retirement from office or in connection with such
loss or retirement subject to limits or priorities, as may be prescribed.
(3)If the payment under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) is not approved for want of
quorum either in a meeting or an adjourned meeting, the proposal shall not be deemed to
have been approved.
(4)Where a director of a company receives payment of any amount in contravention
of sub-section (1) or the proposed payment is made before it is approved in the meeting, the
amount so received by the director shall be deemed to have been received by him in trust for
the company.
(5)Where any director contravenes any of the provisions of this section, he shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which
may extend to one lakh rupees.
(6)Nothing in this section shall be taken to prejudice the operation of any rule of law
requiring disclosure to be made with respect to any payment received under this section or
any other like payments made to a director.
170. (1) No company shall enter into an arrangement by which —
(a) a director of the company or its holding company or a person connected
with him acquires or is to acquire assets for consideration other than cash, from the
company; or
(b) the company acquires or is to acquire assets for consideration other than
cash, from such a director or person so connected,
unless prior approval for such arrangement is accorded by a resolution of the company in
general meeting and if the director or connected person is a director of its holding company,
approval under this sub-section shall also be required to be obtained by passing a resolution
in general meeting of the holding company.
Payment to
director for
loss of office,
etc., in
connection
with transfer
of
undertaking,
property or
shares.
Restriction on
non-cash
transactions
involving
directors.

86
(2)The notice for approval of the resolution by the company or holding company in
general meeting under sub-section ( 1) shall include the particulars of the arrangement
along with the value of the assets involved in such arrangement duly calculated by a
registered valuer.
(3)Any arrangement entered into by a company or its holding company in
contravention of the provisions of this section shall be voidable at the instance of the
company unless—
(a) the restitution of any money or other consideration which is the
subject-matter of the arrangement is no longer possible and the company has
been indemnified by any other person for any loss or damage caused to it; or
(b) any rights are acquired bona fide  for value and without notice of the
contravention of the provisions of this section by any other person.
171. (1) Where a One Person Company limited by shares or by guarantee enters into
a contract with the sole member of the company who is also director of the company, the
company shall, unless the contract is in writing, ensure that the terms of the contract or
offer are contained in a memorandum or are recorded in the minutes of the first meeting of
the Board of Directors of the company held next after the entering into the contract:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to contracts entered into by the
company in the ordinary course of its business.
(2) The company shall inform the Registrar about every contract entered into by the
company and recorded in the minutes of the meeting of its Board of Directors under sub-
section (1) within fifteen days of the date of approval by the Board of Directors with such
fee as may be prescribed, or with such additional fee as may be prescribed within the time
specified, under section 364.
(3) Where the company fails to inform the Registrar under sub-section (2) before the
expiry of the period specified under section 364 with additional fee, the company shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which
may extend to one lakh rupees and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less
than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
172. (1) No director of a company or any of its key managerial personnel shall buy —
(a) a right to call for delivery at a specified price and within a specified time, of
a specified number of relevant shares or a specified amount of relevant debentures,
(b) a right to make delivery at a specified price and within a specified time, of a
specified number of relevant shares or a specified amount of relevant debentures, or
(c) a right, as he may elect, to call for delivery at a specified price and within a
specified time, or to make delivery at a specified price and within a specified time, of
a specified number of relevant shares or a specified amount of relevant debentures.
(2) Where a director or any key managerial personnel contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years or with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which
may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
(3) Where a director or other key managerial personnel acquires any securities in
contravention of sub-section (1), he shall, without prejudice to any punishment which may
be imposed under sub-section (2), be liable to surrender the same to the company and the
company shall not register the securities so acquired in his name in the register, and if they
are in dematerialised form, it shall inform the depository not to record such acquisition.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, relevant shares and relevant
debentures mean shares and debentures of the company in which the concerned person is
Contracts by
One Person
Companies.
Prohibition on
forward
dealings in
securities of
company by a
key
managerial
personnel.

87
a whole-time director or other key managerial person or shares and debentures of its holding
and subsidiary companies.
173. (1) No director or key managerial personnel shall either on his own behalf or on
behalf of any other person, deal in securities of a company, or counsel about, procure or
communicate, directly or indirectly, any non-public price-sensitive information to any person:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to any communication
required in the ordinary course of business or profession or employment or under any law.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “price-sensitive information” means
any information which relates, directly or indirectly, to a company and which if published is
likely to materially affect the price of securities of the company.
(2) If any director or key managerial personnel contravenes the provisions of this
section, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years
or with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may extend to one crore
rupees, or with both.
CHAPTER XIII
A
PPOINTMENT AND REMUNERATION OF MANAGERIAL PERSONNEL
174. (1) No company shall appoint or employ at the same time a managing director
and manager.
(2)  No company shall appoint or re-appoint any person as its managing director,
whole-time director or manager for a term exceeding five years at a time:
Provided that no re-appointment shall be made earlier than one year before the expiry
of his term.
(3)  No company shall appoint any firm, body corporate or other association as its
manager.
(4)  No company shall appoint or continue the employment of any person as its key
managerial personnel who —
(a) is below the age of twenty-one years or has attained the age of seventy
years:
Provided that appointment of a person who has attained the age of seventy
years may be made by passing a special resolution;
(b) is an undischarged insolvent or has at any time been adjudged an insolvent;
(c) has at any time suspended payment to his creditors or makes, or has at any
time made, a composition with them; or
(d) has at any time been convicted by a court of an offence involving moral
turpitude.
(5)A managing director, whole-time director or manager shall be appointed by the
Board of Directors at a meeting with the consent of all the directors present at such meeting,
which shall be subject to approval by a special resolution at the next general meeting of the
company:
Provided that a notice convening Board or general meeting for considering such
appointment shall include the terms and conditions of such appointment, remuneration
payable and such other matters including interest, if any, of a director or directors in such
appointments, if any.
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, where an appointment of a managing director,
whole-time director or manager is not approved by the company at a general meeting, any
act done by him before such approval shall not be deemed to be invalid.
Prohibition on
insider trading
of securities.
Appointment
of managing
director,
whole-time
director or
manager.

88
175.  (1) A managing or whole-time director or a manager of a company may be paid
remuneration either by way of a monthly payment or at a specified percentage of the net
profits of the company, computed in the manner prescribed, or partly by monthly payment
and partly by the percentage of net profits.
(2)  Where any insurance is taken by a company on behalf of its managing director,
whole-time director, manager, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer or Company
Secretary for indemnifying any of them against any liability in respect of any negligence,
default, misfeasance, breach of duty or breach of trust for which they may be guilty in
relation to the company, the premium paid on such insurance shall not be treated as part of
the remuneration payable to any such personnel.
(3)  Any director who is in receipt of any commission from the company and who is a
managing or whole-time director of the company shall not be disqualified from receiving
any remuneration or commission from any holding company or subsidiary company of such
company subject to its disclosure by the company in the Board’s report.
(4) Every person who contravenes the provisions of this section shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh
rupees.
176. (1) A director who is neither a whole-time director nor a managing director of a
company may be paid remuneration in the form of —
(a) fee for attending meetings of the Board or committees thereof in accordance
with the articles; and
(b) profit-related commission with the prior approval of members by a special
resolution.
(2) If any director draws or receives directly or indirectly by way of remuneration any
sum in excess of the amount under sub-section (1), he shall refund such sum to the company
within thirty days.
177. (1) Payment may be made by a company to a managing or whole-time director or
manager, but not to any other director by way of compensation for loss of office, or as
consideration for retirement from office or in connection with such loss or retirement.
(2) No payment shall be made under sub-section (1) in the following cases, namely:—
(a) where the director resigns from his office as a result of the reconstruction of
the company, or of its amalgamation with any other body corporate or bodies corporate,
and is appointed as the managing director, manager or other officer of the reconstructed
company or of the body corporate resulting from the amalgamation;
(b) where the director resigns from his office otherwise than on the reconstruction
of the company or its amalgamation as aforesaid;
(c) where the office of the director is vacated under sub-section ( 1) of section
148;
(d) where the company is being wound up, whether by an order of the Tribunal
or voluntarily, provided the winding up was due to the negligence or default of the
director;
(e) where the director has been guilty of fraud or breach of trust in relation to, or
of gross negligence in or gross mismanagement of, the conduct of the affairs of the
company or any subsidiary company or holding company thereof; and
(f) where the director has instigated, or has taken part directly or indirectly in
bringing about, the termination of his office.
(3)Any payment made to a managing or whole-time director or manager in pursuance
of sub-section (1) shall not exceed the remuneration which he would have earned if he had
Remuneration
of managerial
personnel.
Remuneration
payable to
directors.
Compensation
for loss of
office of
managing or
whole-time
director or
manager.

89
been in office for the remainder of his term or for three years, whichever is shorter, calculated
on the basis of the average remuneration actually earned by him during a period of three
years immediately preceding the date on which he ceased to hold office, or where he held
the office for a lesser period than three years, during such period:
Provided that no such payment shall be made to the director in the event of the
commencement of the winding up of the company, whether before or at any time within
twelve months after, the date on which he ceased to hold office, if the assets of the company
on the winding up, after deducting the expenses thereof, are not sufficient to repay to the
shareholders the share capital, including the premiums, if any, contributed by them.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the payment to a managing or
whole-time director, or manager, of any remuneration for services rendered by him to the
company in any other capacity.
178. (1) Every company belonging to such class or description of companies as may
be prescribed shall have whole-time key managerial personnel.
(2)Every whole-time key managerial personnel of a company shall be appointed by
means of a resolution of the Board containing the terms and conditions of the appointment
including the remuneration.
(3) A whole-time key managerial personnel shall not hold office in more than one
company at the same time:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall disentitle a key managerial
personnel from being a director of any company with the permission of the company.
(4) If the office of any key managerial personnel is vacated, the resulting vacancy
shall be filled up by the Board at a meeting of the Board within a period of six months from
the date of such vacancy.
(5) Where a company fails to comply with any of the provisions of this section, it
shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and every director and key managerial personnel
who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees, for each such
default.
CHAPTER XIV
I
NSPECTION, INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION
179. (1) Where on a scrutiny of any document filed by a company or on any information
received by him, the Registrar is of the opinion that any further information or explanation
or any further documents relating to the company is necessary, he may by a written notice
require the company—
(a) to furnish in writing such information or explanation; or
(b) to produce such documents,
within such reasonable time, as may be specified in the notice.
(2) On the receipt of a notice under sub-section (1), it shall be the duty of the company
and of its officers concerned to furnish such information or explanation to the best of their
knowledge and power and to produce the documents to the Registrar within the time
specified or extended by the Registrar:
 Provided that where such information or explanation relates to any past period, the
officers who had been in the employment of the company for such period, if so called upon
by the Registrar through a notice served on them in writing, shall also furnish such
information or explanation to the best of their knowledge.
(3) If no information or explanation is furnished to the Registrar within the time
specified under sub-section ( 1) or if the Registrar on an examination of the documents
Appointment
of key
managerial
personnel.
Power to call
for
information,
inspect books
and conduct
inquiries.

90
furnished is of the opinion that the information or explanation furnished is inadequate or
does not disclose a full and fair statement of the information required or if the Registrar is
satisfied on a scrutiny of the documents furnished that an unsatisfactory state of affairs
exists in the company with regard to compliance with the provisions of this Act, he may, by
another written notice, call on the company to produce for his inspection such further
books of account, books, papers and explanations as he may require at such place and at
such time as he may specify in the notice:
Provided that before any notice is served under this sub-section, the Registrar shall
record his reasons in writing for issuing such notice.
(4) If the Registrar is satisfied on the basis of information available with or furnished
to him or on a representation made to him by any person that the business of a company is
being carried on for a fraudulent or unlawful purpose, the Registrar may, after informing the
company of the allegations made against it by a written order, call on the company to
furnish in writing any information or explanation on matters specified in the order within
such time as he may specify therein and carry out such inquiry as he deems fit providing the
company a reasonable opportunity of being heard:
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that circumstances so
warrant, direct the Registrar or a competent inspector appointed by it for the purpose to
carry out the inquiry under this sub-section.
(5) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Central
Government may, if it is satisfied that circumstances so warrant, direct inspection of books
and papers of a company by an inspector appointed by it for the purpose.
(6) Where a company fails to furnish any information called for under this section
within the time or extended time provided for the purpose, the company shall be punishable
with a fine of five hundred rupees per day during the period for which the default continues
and shall also be liable to a further fine of rupees one lakh for each offence.
180. ( 1) Where a Registrar or inspector calls for the books of account and other
books and papers under section 179, it shall be the duty of every director, officer or other
employee of the company to produce all such documents to the Registrar or inspector and
furnish him with such statements, information or explanations in such form as the Registrar
or inspector may require and shall render all assistance to the Registrar or inspector in
connection with such inspection.
(2) The Registrar or inspector, making an inspection or inquiry under section 179 may,
during the course of such inspection or inquiry, as the case may be,—
(a) make or cause to be made copies of books of account and other books and
papers, or
(b) place or cause to be placed any marks of identification in such books in
token of the inspection having been made.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or
in any contract to the contrary, the Registrar or inspector making an inspection or inquiry
shall have all the powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them
on oath; and
(b) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of the company at
any place.
(4) Where any default is made in complying with the directions issued by the Registrar
or the inspector in exercise of the powers under the provisions of this section, the company
shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees and every officer who is in default shall be punishable
Conduct of
inspection and
inquiry.
5 of 1908.

91
with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less than
twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
(5) Where a director or other officer of the company has been convicted of an offence
under this section, he shall, on and from the date of his conviction, be deemed to have
vacated his office as such and shall be disqualified from holding the office of a director or
any other employee in the company or any other company for a period of five years from
such date.
181. The Registrar or inspector shall, after the inspection of the books of account or
an inquiry under section 179 and other books and papers of the company under section 180,
submit a report in writing to the Central Government along with such documents, if any, and
such report may, if necessary, include a recommendation that further investigation into the
affairs of the company is necessary giving his reasons in support.
182. (1) Where, upon information in his possession or otherwise, the Registrar or
inspector has reasonable ground to believe that the books and papers of a company, or
relating to the managing director or manager thereof, are likely to be destroyed, mutilated,
altered, falsified or secreted, he may, after obtaining an order from the special court for the
seizure of such books and papers,—
(a) enter, with such assistance as may be required, and search, the place or
places where such books or papers are kept, and
(b) seize such books and papers as he considers necessary after allowing the
company to take copies of, or extracts from, such books or papers at its cost.
(2) The Registrar or inspector shall return the books and papers seized under sub-
section (1), as soon as may be, and in any case not later than the one hundred and eightieth
day after such seizure, to the company from whose custody or power such books or papers
were seized:
Provided that the books and papers may be called for by the Registrar or inspector for
a further period of one hundred and eighty days by an order in writing if they are needed
again:
Provided further that the Registrar or inspector may, before returning such books and
papers as aforesaid, take copies of, or extracts from them or place identification marks on
them or any part thereof or deal with the same in such other manner as he considers
necessary.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating to searches or
seizures shall apply mutatis mutandis to every search and seizure made under this section.
183. (1) Where the Central Government is of the opinion, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, that it is necessary to investigate into the affairs of a company,—
(a) on the receipt of a report of the Registrar or inspector under section 181;
(b) on intimation of a special resolution passed by a company that the affairs of
the company ought to be investigated; or
(c) in public interest,
it may order an investigation into the affairs of the company.
(2) Where an order is passed by a Court or the Tribunal in any proceedings before it
that the affairs of a company ought to be investigated, the Central Government shall order
an investigation into the affairs of that company.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the Central Government may appoint one or
more competent persons as inspectors to investigate into the affairs of the company and to
report thereon in such manner as the Central Government may direct.
Report on
inspection
made.
Search and
seizure.
Investigation
into affairs of
company.
2 of 1974.

92
184. The Tribunal may, —
(a) on an application made by —
(i) not less than one hundred members or members holding not less than
one-tenth of the total voting power in the case of a company having a share
capital; or
(ii) not less than one-fifth of the persons on the company’s register of
members, in the case of a company having no share capital,
and supported by such evidence as may be necessary for the purpose of showing
that the applicants have good reasons for seeking an order for conducting an
investigation into the affairs of the company; or
(b) on an application made to it by any other person or otherwise, if it is satisfied
that there are circumstances suggesting that —
(i) the business of the company is being conducted with intent to defraud
its creditors, members or any other persons or otherwise for a fraudulent or
unlawful purpose, or in a manner oppressive of any of its members or that the
company was formed for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose;
(ii) persons concerned in the formation of the company or the management
of its affairs have in connection therewith been guilty of fraud, misfeasance or
other misconduct towards the company or towards any of its members; or
(iii) the members of the company have not been given all the information
with respect to its affairs which they might reasonably expect, including
information relating to the calculation of the commission payable to a managing
or other director, or the manager, of the company,
order, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the parties concerned, that the affairs of the
company ought to be investigated by an inspector or inspectors appointed by the Central
Government and where such an order is passed , the Central Government shall appoint one
or more competent persons as inspectors to investigate into the affairs of the company in
respect of such matters and to report thereupon to it in such manner as the Central
Government may direct.
185. (1) Where an investigation is ordered by the Central Government in pursuance
of sub-section (1) of section 183, or in pursuance of an order made by the Tribunal under
section 184, the Central Government may before appointing an inspector require the company
or the applicants to give security for such amount not exceeding twenty-five lakh rupees as
it may think fit, for payment of the costs and expenses of the investigation.
(2) After the completion of any investigation, the costs and expenses of such
investigation shall be worked out and a notice shall be served on the company concerned
for payment of the said amount within a certain period specified in the notice and if the
amount is not paid within the time specified by the Central Government or such extension of
time as may be given by it, the amount shall be a charge on the property and assets of the
company and shall be recoverable as such under this Act.
186. No firm, body corporate or other association shall be appointed as an inspector.
187. (1) Where it appears to the Central Government that there is good reason so to
do, it may appoint one or more inspectors to investigate and report on the membership of
any company and other matters relating to the company, for the purpose of determining the
true persons—
Investigation
into
company’s
affairs in
other cases.
Security for
payment of
costs and
expenses of
investigation.
Firm, body
corporate or
association
not to be
appointed as
inspectors.
Investigation
of ownership
of company.

93
(a) who are or have been financially interested in the success or failure, whether
real or apparent, of the company; or
(b) who are or have been able to control or to materially influence the policy of
the company.
(2) Without prejudice to its powers under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government
shall appoint one or more inspectors under that sub-section, if the Tribunal, in the course of
any proceedings before it, directs by an order that the affairs of the company ought to be
investigated as regards the membership of the company and other matters relating to the
company, for the purposes specified in sub-section ( 1).
(3) While appointing an inspector under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government
may define the scope of the investigation, whether as respects the matters or the period to
which it is to extend or otherwise, and in particular, may limit the investigation to matters
connected with particular shares or debentures.
(4) Subject to the terms of appointment of an inspector, his powers shall extend to the
investigation of any circumstances suggesting the existence of any arrangement or
understanding which, though not legally binding, is or was observed or is likely to be
observed in practice and which is relevant for the purposes of his investigation.
188. (1) It shall be the duty of all officers and other employees and agents of a
company which is under investigation under this Chapter, and where the affairs of any
other body corporate or a person are investigated under section 187, of all officers and
other employees including ex-employees and agents of such body corporate or a person—
(a) to preserve and to produce to an inspector or any person authorised by him
in this behalf all books and papers of, or relating to, the company or, as the case may
be, relating to the other body corporate or the person, which are in their custody or
power; and
(b) otherwise to give to the inspector all assistance in connection with the
investigation which they are reasonably able to give.
(2) The inspector may require any body corporate, other than a body corporate
referred to in sub-section ( 1), to furnish such information to, or produce such books and
papers before, him or any person authorised by him in this behalf as he may consider
necessary if the furnishing of such information or the production of such books and papers
is relevant or necessary for the purposes of his investigation.
(3) The inspector shall not keep in his custody any books and papers produced under
sub-section (1) or sub-section ( 2) for more than one hundred and eighty days and return
the same to the company, body corporate, firm or individual by whom or on whose behalf
the books and papers were produced:
Provided that the books and papers may be called for by the inspector if they are
needed again for a further period of one hundred and eighty days by an order in writing.
(4) An inspector may examine on oath—
(a) any of the persons referred to in sub-section ( 1); and
(b) with the prior approval of the Central Government, any other person,
in relation to the affairs of the company, or other body corporate or person, as the case may
be, and for that purpose may require any of those persons to appear before him personally.
(5) Notes of any examination under sub-section (4) shall be taken down in writing and
shall be read over to, or by, and signed by, the person examined, and may thereafter be used
in evidence against him.
(6) If any person fails without reasonable cause or refuses—
Procedure,
powers, etc.,
of inspectors.

94
(a) to produce to an inspector or any person authorised by him in this behalf
any book or paper which it is his duty under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) to
produce;
(b) to furnish any information which is his duty under sub-section (2) to furnish;
(c) to appear before the inspector personally when required to do so under sub-
section (4) or to answer any question which is put to him by the inspector in pursuance
of that sub-section; or
(d) to sign the notes of any examination referred to in sub-section (5),
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and
with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to
one lakh rupees, and also with a further fine which may extend to two thousand rupees for
every day after the first during which the failure or refusal continues.
(7) Officers of the Central Government, any State Government or statutory authority
shall provide reasonable assistance to the inspector for the purpose of the inspection,
inquiry or investigation, which the inspector may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, require.
(8) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government of a
foreign State for reciprocal arrangements to assist in any inspection, inquiry or investigation
under this Act or under the corresponding law in force in that State. The Central Government
may, by notification, render the application of this Chapter in relation to a foreign State with
which reciprocal arrangements have been made subject to such modifications, exceptions,
conditions and qualifications as may be deemed expedient for implementing the agreement
with that State.
189. If an inspector appointed under section 183 or section 184 or section 187 to
investigate into the affairs of a company considers it necessary for the purposes of the
investigation, to investigate also the affairs of —
(a) any other body corporate which is, or has at any relevant time been the
company’s subsidiary company or holding company, or a subsidiary company of its
holding company;
(b) any other body corporate which is, or has at any relevant time been managed
by any person as managing director or as manager, who is, or was, at the relevant
time, the managing director or the manager of the company;
(c) any other body corporate whose Board of Directors comprises nominees of
the company or is accustomed to act in accordance with the directions or instructions
of the company or any of its directors; or
(d) any person who is or has at any relevant time been the company’s managing
director or manager or employee,
he shall, subject to the prior approval of the Central Government, investigate into and report
on the affairs of the other body corporate or of the managing director or manager, in so far
as he considers that the results of his investigation are relevant to the investigation of the
affairs of the company for which he is appointed:
Provided that the Central Government shall, before according approval under this
section give the body corporate or person a reasonable opportunity to show cause why
such approval shall not be given.
190. (1) Where in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, the inspector has
reasonable grounds to believe that the books and papers of, or relating to, any company or
other body corporate or managing director or manager of such company are likely to be
destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified or secreted, the inspector may —
Power of
inspectors to
conduct
investigation
into affairs of
related
companies,
etc.
Seizure of
documents by
inspector.

95
(a) enter, with such assistance as may be required, the place or places where
such books and papers are kept in such manner as may be required; and
(b) seize books and papers as he considers necessary after allowing the company
to take copies of, or extracts from, such books, papers at its cost for the purposes of
his investigation.
(2) The inspector shall keep in his custody the books and papers seized under this
section for such a period not later than the conclusion of the investigation as he considers
necessary and thereafter shall return the same to the company or the other body corporate,
or, as the case may be, to the managing director or the manager or any other person from
whose custody or power they were seized:
Provided that the inspector may, before returning such books and papers as aforesaid,
take copies of, or extracts from them or place identification marks on them or any part
thereof or deal with the same in such manner as he considers necessary.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to searches or
seizures shall apply mutatis mutandis to every search or seizure made under this section.
191. (1) Where it appears to the Tribunal, whether on a reference made to it by the
Central Government or in connection with any inquiry or investigation into the affairs of a
company under sections 180 and 183 or on any complaint made by any person in this behalf
that the removal, transfer or disposal of funds, assets, properties of the company is likely to
take place in a manner that is prejudicial to the interests of the company or its shareholders
or creditors or in public interest, it may by order direct that such transfer, removal or
disposal shall not take place during such period not exceeding three years as may be
specified in the order or may take place subject to such conditions and restrictions as the
Tribunal may deem fit.
(2) In case of any removal, transfer or disposal of funds, assets, properties of the
company in contravention of the order of the Tribunal under sub-section (1), the company
shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer who is in default shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with
both.
192. (1) Where it appears to the Tribunal, in connection with any investigation under
section 188 or on a complaint made by any person in this behalf, that there is good reason
to find out the relevant facts about any securities issued or to be issued by a company and
the Tribunal is of the opinion that such facts cannot be found out unless certain restrictions,
as it may deem fit, are imposed, the Tribunal may, by order, direct that the securities shall be
subject to such restrictions as it may deem fit for such period not exceeding three years as
may be specified in the order.
(2) Where securities in any company are issued or transferred or acted upon in
contravention of an order of the Tribunal under sub-section ( 1), the company shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to
twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less
than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
193. (1) An inspector appointed under this Chapter may, and if so directed by the
Central Government shall, submit interim reports to that Government, and on the conclusion
of the investigation, shall submit a final report to the Central Government.
(2) Every report made under sub-section ( 1) shall be in writing or printed as the
Central Government may direct.
Freezing of
assets on an
inquiry and
investigation
of a company.
Imposition of
restrictions
upon
securities.
Inspector’s
report.
2 of 1974

96
(3) The Central Government —
(a) shall forward a copy of final report, other than an interim report, made by any
inspector, to the company at its registered office and also to any body corporate or
person dealt with in the report by virtue of section 189;
(b) may, if it thinks fit, furnish a copy of the final report, on request and on
payment of the prescribed fee, to any person —
(i) who is a member of the company or other body corporate dealt with in
the report under section 183 or section 189; or
(ii) whose interest as a creditor of the company or other body corporate
appears to the Central Government to be affected;
(c) shall, where the inspectors are appointed under section 183 in pursuance of
an order of a Court or the Tribunal, forward a copy of any report to that Court or the
Tribunal;
(d) shall, where the inspectors are appointed in pursuance of the provisions of
section 184, furnish a copy of the final report to the Tribunal or to the applicants who
requested investigation;
(e) may also cause the final report to be published.
(4) The report of any inspector appointed under this Chapter and authenticated in
such manner, as may be prescribed, shall be admissible in any legal proceeding as evidence
in relation to any matter contained in the report.
194. No suit or other proceeding shall lie in any  court, the Tribunal or other authority
in respect of any action initiated by the Central Government for making an investigation
under this Chapter or for the appointment of an inspector thereunder and no proceedings of
an inspector shall be called in question or stayed by any court, the Tribunal or other
authority on any ground whatsoever until the conclusion of the investigation and the
submission of a report by the inspector.
195. ( 1) If, from an inspector’s report, made under section 193, it appears to the
Central Government that any person has, in relation to the company or in relation to any
other body corporate or other person whose affairs have been investigated under section
183 or section 184 or section 189, been guilty of any offence for which he is criminally liable,
the Central Government may prosecute such person for the offence and it shall be the duty
of all officers and other employees of the company or body corporate to give the Central
Government the necessary assistance in connection with the prosecution.
(2) If any company or other body corporate is liable to be wound up under this Act
and it appears to the Central Government from any such report made under section 193 that
it is expedient so to do by reason of any such circumstances as are referred to in section 184,
the Central Government may, unless the company or body corporate is already being wound
up by the Tribunal, cause to be presented to the Tribunal by any person authorised by the
Central Government in this behalf—
(a) a petition for the winding up of the company or body corporate on the
ground that it is just and equitable that it should be wound up, or
(b) an application under section 212, or
(c) both.
(3) If from any such report as aforesaid, it appears to the Central Government that
proceedings ought, in the public interest, to be brought by the company or any body
corporate whose affairs have been investigated under section 183 —
(a) for the recovery of damages in respect of any fraud, misfeasance or other
misconduct in connection with the promotion or formation, or the management of the
affairs, of such company or body corporate; or
No suit or
proceeding till
submission of
final report.
Actions to be
taken in
pursuance of
inspector’s
report.

97
(b) for the recovery of any property of such company or body corporate which
has been misapplied or wrongfully retained,
the Central Government may itself bring proceedings for winding-up in the name of such
company or body corporate.
(4) The Central Government shall be indemnified by such company or body corporate
against any costs or expenses incurred by it in, or in connection with, any proceedings
brought by virtue of sub-section ( 3).
196. (1) The expenses of, and incidental to, an investigation by an inspector appointed
by the Central Government under this Chapter other than expenses of inspection under
section 185 shall be defrayed in the first instance by the Central Government, but shall be
reimbursed by the following persons to the extent mentioned below, namely:—
(a) any person who is convicted on a prosecution instituted, or who is ordered
to pay damages or restore any property in proceedings brought, under section 195, to
the extent that he may in the same proceedings be ordered to pay the said expenses as
may be specified by the court convicting such person, or ordering him to pay such
damages or restore such property, as the case may be;
(b) any company or body corporate in whose name proceedings are brought as
aforesaid, to the extent of the amount or value of any sums or property recovered by
it as a result of such proceedings;
(c) unless, as a result of the investigation, a prosecution is instituted under
section 195, —
(i) any company, body corporate, managing director or manager dealt
with by the report of the inspector, and
(ii) the applicants for the investigation, where the inspector was appointed
under section 184,
to such extent as the Central Government may direct.
(2) Any amount for which a company or body corporate is liable under clause (b) of
sub-section (1) shall be a first charge on the sums or property mentioned in that clause.
197. An investigation under this Chapter may be initiated notwithstanding, and no
such investigation shall be stopped or suspended by reason only of, the fact that—
(a) an application has been made under section 212;
(b) the company has passed a special resolution for voluntary winding-up; or
(c) any other proceeding for the winding up of the company is pending before
the Tribunal :
Provided that where a winding-up order is passed by the Tribunal in a proceeding
referred to in clause (c), the inspector shall inform the Tribunal about the pendency of the
proceeding before it and the Tribunal shall pass such order as it may deem fit:
Provided further that nothing in the winding-up order shall absolve any director or
other employee of the company from participating in the proceeding before the inspector or
any liability as a result of the finding by the inspector.
198. Nothing in this Chapter shall require the disclosure to the Tribunal or to the
Central Government or to the Registrar or to an inspector appointed by the Central
Government—
(a) by a legal adviser, of any privileged communication made to him in that
capacity, except as respects the name and address of his client; or
Expenses of
investigation.
Voluntary
winding-up of
company, etc.,
not to stop
investigation
proceedings.
Legal advisers
and bankers
not to
disclose.

98
(b) by the bankers of any company, body corporate, or other person, of any
information as to the affairs of any of their customers, other than such company,
body corporate, or person.
199. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply mutatis mutandis  to inspection,
inquiry or investigation in relation to foreign companies.
200. Where a person who is required to provide an explanation or make a statement
during the course of inspection, inquiry or investigation, or an officer or other employee of
a company or other body corporate which is also under investigation, —
(a) destroys, mutilates or falsifies, or is a party to the destruction, mutilation or
falsification of, documents relating to the property, assets or affairs of the company
or the body corporate;
(b) makes, or is a party to the making of, a false entry in any document concerning
the company or body corporate; or
(c) provides an explanation which is false or which he knows to be false,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and
with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to
five lakh rupees.
CAHPTER XV
C
OMPROMISES, ARRANGEMENTS AND AMALGAMATIONS
201. (1) Where a compromise or arrangement is proposed—
(a) between a company and its creditors or any class of them, or
(b) between a company and its members or any class of them,
the Tribunal may, on the application of the company or of any creditor or member of the
company, or in the case of a company which is being woundup, of the liquidator, order a
meeting of the creditors or class of creditors, or of the members or class of members, as the
case may be, to be called, held and conducted in such manner as the Tribunal directs.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, arrangement includes a
reorganisation of the company’s share capital by the consolidation of shares of different
classes or by the division of shares into shares of different classes, or by both of those
methods.
(2) An application made under sub-section ( 1) shall disclose to the Tribunal by
affidavit—
(a) all material facts relating to the company, such as the latest financial position
of the company, the latest auditor’s report on the accounts of the company and the
pendency of any investigation or proceedings against the company;
(b) reduction of share capital of the company, if any, included in the compromise
or arrangement;
(c) any scheme of corporate debt restructuring consented to by not less than
seventy-five per cent. of the secured creditors in value, including—
(i) a creditor’s responsibility statement,
(ii) safeguards for the protection of other secured and unsecured creditors,
(iii) report by the auditor that the fund requirements of the company after
the corporate debt restructuring as approved shall conform to the liquidity test
based upon the estimates provided to them by the Board,
Investigation,
etc., of
foreign
companies.
Penalty for
furnishing
false
statement,
mutilation,
destruction of
documents.
Power to
compromise
or make
arrangements
with creditors
and members.

99
(iv) where the company proposes to adopt the corporate debt restructuring
guidelines specified by the Reserve Bank of India, a statement to that effect,
and
(v) a valuation report in respect of the shares and the property and all
assets, tangible and intangible, movable and immovable, of the company by a
registered valuer.
(3) Where a meeting is proposed to be called in pursuance of an order of the Tribunal
under sub-section (1), a notice of such meeting shall be sent to all the creditors or class of
creditors and to all the members or class of members and the debenture holders of the
company, either individually or by an advertisement, which shall be accompanied by a
statement disclosing the details of the compromise or arrangement, the valuation report, if
any, and explaining their effect on creditors, members and the debenture holders and the
effect of the compromise or arrangement on any material interests of the directors of the
company or the debenture trustees, and such other matters as may be prescribed:
Provided that where an advertisement is issued under this sub-section, it shall indicate
the time within which copies of the compromise or arrangement shall be made available to
the concerned persons free of charge from the registered office of the company.
(4) A notice under sub-section ( 3) shall also indicate that the persons to whom the
notice is sent shall intimate in writing their consent to the adoption of the compromise or
arrangement within one month from the date of receipt of such notice:
Provided that any objection to the compromise or arrangement shall be made only by
persons holding not less than ten per cent. of the shareholding or having outstanding debt
amounting to not less than five per cent. of the total outstanding debt as per the latest
audited financial statement.
(5) A notice under sub-section (3) along with all the documents in such form as may
be prescribed shall also be sent to the Central Government, the Reserve Bank of India, the
Securities and Exchange Board, the Registrar, the respective stock exchanges, the Official
Liquidator, the Competition Commission of India established under sub-section (1) of section
7 of the Competition Act, 2002, if necessary, and such other authorities which are likely to be
affected by the compromise or arrangement and shall require that representations, if any, to
be made by them shall be made within one month from the date of receipt of such notice,
failing which, it shall be presumed that they have no representations to make on the proposals.
(6) Where, at a meeting held in pursuance of sub-section (1), a majority representing
three-fourths in value of the creditors, or class of creditors or members or class of members,
as the case may be, present and voting in person or by proxy or by postal ballot, agree to
any compromise or arrangement and if such compromise or arrangement is sanctioned by
the Tribunal by an order, the same shall be binding on the company, all the creditors, or
class of creditors or members or class of members, as the case may be, or, in case of a
company being wound-up, on the liquidator and the contributories of the company.
(7) An order made by the Tribunal under sub-section (6) shall provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) where the compromise or arrangement provides for conversion of preferential
shares into equity shares, such preference shareholders shall be given an option to
either obtain arrears of dividend in cash or accept equity shares equal to the value of
the dividend payable;
(b) the protection of any class of creditors;
(c) if the compromise or arrangement results in the variation of the shareholders’
rights, it shall be given effect to under the provisions of section 42;
(d) if the compromise or arrangement is agreed to by the creditors under sub-
section (6), any proceedings pending before the Board for Industrial and Financial
12 of 2003.

100
Reconstruction established under section 4 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special
Provisions) Act, 1985 shall abate;
(e) such other matters as are in the opinion of the Tribunal necessary to
effectively implement the terms of the compromise or arrangement.
(8) The order of the Tribunal shall be filed with the Registrar by the Company within
thirty days of the receipt of the order.
(9) No compromise or arrangement under this section shall include any buy-back of
securities as is provided under section 61.
(10) Any compromise or arrangement may include takeover offer made in such manner
as may be prescribed:
Provided that in case of listed companies, takeover offer shall be as per the guidelines
issued by the Securities and Exchange Board.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “takeover offer” means an offer to
acquire all the shares in a company or where there is more than one class of shares, all the
shares of one or more classes, other than shares that at the date of the offer are already held
by the offeror, and the terms of the offer are the same   in relation to all the shares to which
the offer relates or where the shares to which the offer relates include shares of different
classes, in relation to all the shares of each class.
(11) An aggrieved party may make an application to the Tribunal in the event of any
grievances with respect to the takeover offer of companies other than listed companies in
such manner as may be prescribed and the Tribunal may, on application, pass such order as
it may deem fit.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of
section 59 shall not apply to the reduction of share capital effected in pursuance of the
order of the Tribunal under this section.
202. (1) Where the Tribunal makes an order under section 201 sanctioning a
compromise or an arrangement in respect of a company, it—
(a) shall have power to supervise the implementation of the compromise or
arrangement; and
(b) may, at the time of making such order or at any time thereafter, give such
directions in regard to any matter or make such modifications in the compromise or
arrangement as it may consider necessary for the proper implementation of the
compromise or arrangement.
(2) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the compromise or arrangement sanctioned under
section 201 cannot be implemented satisfactorily with or without modifications, and the
company is unable to pay its debts as per the scheme, it may make an order for winding-up
the company and such an order shall be deemed to be an order made under section 248.
(3) The provisions of this section shall, so far as may be, also apply to a company in
respect of which an order has been made before the commencement of this Act sanctioning
a compromise or an arrangement.
203. ( 1) Where an application is made to the Tribunal under section 201 for the
sanctioning of a compromise or an arrangement proposed between a company and any
such persons as are mentioned in that section, and it is shown to the Tribunal—
(a) that the compromise or arrangement has been proposed for the purposes of,
or in connection with, a scheme for the reconstruction of the company or companies
involving merger or the amalgamation of any two or more companies; and
(b) that under the scheme, the whole or any part of the undertaking, property or
liabilities of any company (hereinafter referred to as the transferor company) is required
Power of
Tribunal to
enforce
compromise
or
arrangement.
Merger and
amalgamation
of companies.
1 of 1986.

101
to be transferred to another company (hereinafter referred to as the transferee
company), or is proposed to be divided among and transferred to two or more
companies,
the Tribunal may on such application, order a meeting of the creditors or class of creditors
or the members or class of members, as the case may be, to be called, held and conducted in
such manner as the Tribunal may direct and the provisions of sub-sections ( 3) to ( 6) of
section 201 shall apply mutatis mutandis.
(2) Where an order has been made by the Tribunal under sub-section ( 1), merging
companies or the companies in respect of which a division is proposed, shall also be
required to circulate the following for the meeting so ordered by the Tribunal, namely:—
(a) the draft of the proposed terms of the scheme drawn up and adopted by the
directors of the merging company;
(b) confirmation that a copy of the draft scheme has been filed with the Registrar;
(c) a report adopted by the directors of the merging companies explaining effect
of compromise on each class of shareholders laying out in particular the share exchange
ratio, specifying any special valuation difficulties;
(d) the report of the expert with regard to valuation, if any;
(e) a supplementary accounting statement if the last annual accounts of any of
the merging company relate to a financial year ending more than six months before the
first meeting of the company summoned for the purposes of approving the scheme;
(f) approval of the draft of the proposed terms by an ordinary resolution of the
transferor company or, as the case may be, each of the transferor companies in the
case of merger by formation by a new company.
(3) The Tribunal, after satisfying itself that the procedure specified in sub-
sections (1) and ( 2) has been complied with, may, by order, sanction the compromise or
arrangement or by a subsequent order, make provision for all the following matters, namely:—
(a) the transfer to the transferee company of the whole or any part of the
undertaking, property or liabilities of the transferor company from a date to be
determined by the parties unless the Tribunal, for reasons to be recorded by it in
writing, decides otherwise;
(b) the allotment or appropriation by the transferee company of any shares,
debentures, policies or other like instruments in the company which, under the
compromise or arrangement, are to be allotted or appropriated by that company to or
for any person;
(c) the continuation by or against the transferee company of any legal
proceedings pending by or against any transferor company on the date of transfer;
(d) dissolution, without winding up, of any transferor company;
(e) the provision to be made for any persons who, within such time and in such
manner as the Tribunal directs, dissent from the compromise or arrangement;
(f) where there is an allotment of any foreign direct investment, such allotment
to the transferor company and the transferee company at such percentage as may be
specified in the order;
(g) the transfer of the employees of the transferor company to the transferee
company;
(h) where the transferor company is a listed company and the transferee company
is an unlisted company,–

102
(i) the transferee company shall continue to be an unlisted company;
(ii) if shareholders of the transferor company decide to opt out of the
transferee company, provision shall be made for payment of the value of shares
held by them and other benefits in accordance with a pre-determined price
formula or after a valuation is made, and the arrangements under this provision
may be made by the Tribunal;
(iii) if the transferor company is not dissolved, it shall become an unlisted
company and if it is left with a small portion of the assets, the public shareholders
may decide to opt out of the company and provision shall be made for the
payment of the value of shares and other benefits in accordance with a pre-
determined price formula or after a valuation is made;
(i) where the transferor company is dissolved, the fee, if any, paid by the
transferee company on its authorised capital shall be set-off against any fees payable
by the transferee company on its authorised capital subsequent to the amalgamation;
and
(j) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters as are deemed
necessary to secure that the merger or amalgamation is fully and effectively carried
out.
(4) Where an order under this section provides for the transfer of any property or
liabilities, then, by virtue of the order, that property shall be transferred to the transferee
company and the liabilities shall be transferred to and become the liabilities of the transferee
company and any property may, if the order so directs, be freed from any charge which shall
by virtue of the compromise or arrangement, cease to have effect.
(5) Within thirty days after the making of an order under this section, every company
in relation to which the order is made shall cause a certified copy thereof to be filed with the
Registrar for registration.
(6) Where any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the
transferor company or the transferee company or both shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees and
every officer of such companies who is in default, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) a scheme involves a merger and where under the scheme the undertaking,
property and liabilities of one or more companies, including the company in respect
of which the compromise or arrangement is proposed, are to be transferred to another
existing company, it is a merger by absorption, or where the undertaking, property
and liabilities of two or more companies, including the company in respect of which
the compromise or arrangement is proposed, are to be transferred to a new company,
whether or not a public company, it is a merger by formation of a new company;
(ii) references to merging companies are in relation to a merger by absorption,
to the transferor and transferee companies, and, in relation to a merger by formation
of a new company, to the transferor companies;
(iii) a scheme involves a division where under the scheme the undertaking,
property and liabilities of the company in respect of which the compromise or
arrangement is proposed are to be divided among and transferred to two or more
companies each of which is either an existing company or a new company; and
(iv) property includes assets, rights and interests of every description and
liabilities include debts and obligations of every description.

103
 204. ( 1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 203, a scheme of merger or
amalgamation may be entered into between two small companies or between a holding
company and its wholly-owned subsidiary company, subject to the following, namely:—
(a) a notice of the proposed scheme inviting comments or objections, if any,
from any persons affected by the scheme within thirty days is issued by both the
transferor and the transferee company;
(b) the objections received are considered by the companies in their respective
general meetings and the scheme is approved by the respective members or class of
members at a general meeting by passing a special resolution; and
(c) the scheme is approved by three-fourths in value of the creditors or class of
creditors of respective companies indicated in a meeting convened by the company
by giving a notice of twenty-one days along with the scheme to its creditors for the
purpose or otherwise approved in writing.
(2) The transferee company shall file a copy of the scheme so approved in the manner
as may be prescribed, with the Registrar and the Official Liquidator.
(3) On the receipt of the scheme, if the Registrar or the Official Liquidator has no
objections or comments to the scheme, the Registrar shall register the same and issue a
confirmation thereof to the companies.
(4) If the Official Liquidator has any objections or comments, he may communicate
the same in writing to the Registrar within a period of thirty days:
Provided that if no such communication is made by the Official Liquidator, it shall be
presumed that he has no objection to the scheme.
(5) If the Registrar after receiving the comments of the Official Liquidator or for any
reason is of the opinion that such a scheme is not in public interest or in interest of the
creditors, he may file an application before the Tribunal within ninety days of the receipt of
the scheme under sub-section ( 2) stating his objections and requesting that Tribunal may
consider the scheme under section 203.
(6) On receipt of an application from the Registrar or from any person, if the Tribunal,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, is of the opinion that the scheme should be considered
as per the procedure laid down in section 203, the Tribunal may direct accordingly or it may
confirm the scheme by passing such order as it deems fit:
Provided that if the Registrar or the Official Liquidator does not have any objections
to the scheme or they do not file any application under this section before the Tribunal, it
shall be deemed that they have no objection to the scheme.
(7) A copy of the order under sub-section (6) shall be communicated to the Registrar
and the persons concerned and the Registrar shall register the scheme and issue a
confirmation thereof to the companies.
(8) The registration of the scheme shall be deemed to have the effect of dissolution of
the transferor company without process of winding up.
(9) The registration of the scheme shall have the following effects, namely:—
(a) transfer of property or liabilities of the transferor company to the transferee
company so that the property becomes the property of the transferee company and
the liabilities become the liabilities of the transferee company;
(b) the charges, if any, on the property of the transferor company shall be
applicable and enforceable as if the charges were on the property of the transferee
company;
(c) legal proceedings by or against the transferor company pending before any
court of law shall be continued by or against the transferee company; and
Merger or
amalgamation
of certain
companies.

104
(d) where the scheme provides for purchase of shares held by the dissenting
shareholders or settlement of debt due to dissenting creditors, such amount, to the
extent it is unpaid, shall become the liability of the transferee company.
(10) The transferee company shall file an application with the Registrar along with the
scheme registered, indicating the revised authorised capital and pay the prescribed fee due
on revised capital:
Provided that the fee, if any, paid by the transferor company on its authorised capital
prior to its merger or amalgamation with the transferee company shall be set off against the
fees payable by the transferee company on its authorised capital enhanced by the merger or
amalgamation.
205. (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply mutatis mutandis to schemes of
mergers and amalgamations between companies registered under this Act and companies
incorporated in the jurisdictions of such countries as may be notified from time to time by
the Central Government.
(2) A foreign company may merge or amalgamate into a company registered under this
Act or vice versa and the terms and conditions of the scheme of merger or amalgamation
may provide, among other things, for the payment of consideration to the shareholders of
the merging company in cash, or in Indian Depository Receipts, or partly in cash and partly
in Indian Depository Receipts, as the case may be, as per the scheme to be drawn up for the
purpose.
206. (1) Where a scheme or contract involving the transfer of shares or any class of
shares in a company (the transferor company) to another company (the transferee company)
has, within four months after the making of an offer in that behalf by the transferee company,
been approved by the holders of not less than nine-tenths in value of the shares whose
transfer is involved, other than shares already held at the date of the offer by, or by a
nominee of the transferee company or its subsidiary companies, the transferee company
may, at any time within two months after the expiry of the said four months, give notice in
the prescribed manner to any dissenting shareholder that it desires to acquire his shares.
(2) Where a notice under sub-section ( 1) is given, the transferee company shall,
unless on an application made by the dissenting shareholder, within one month from the
date on which the notice was given, the Tribunal thinks fit to order otherwise, be entitled to
and bound to acquire those shares on the terms on which, under the scheme or contract, the
shares of the approving shareholders are to be transferred to the transferee company.
(3) Where a notice has been given by the transferee company under sub-section ( 1)
and the Tribunal has not, on an application made by the dissenting shareholder, made an
order to the contrary, the transferee company shall, on the expiry of one month from the date
on which the notice has been given, or, if an application to the Tribunal by the dissenting
shareholder is then pending, after that application has been disposed of, send a copy of the
notice to the transferor company together with an instrument of transfer, to be executed on
behalf of the shareholder by any person appointed by the transferee company and on its
own behalf by the transferor company, and pay or transfer to the transferor company the
amount or other consideration representing the price payable by the transferee company
for the shares which, by virtue of this section, that company is entitled to acquire, and the
transferor company shall—
(a) thereupon register the transferee company as the holder of those shares,
and
(b) within one month of the date of such registration, inform the dissenting
shareholders of the fact of such registration and of the receipt of the amount or other
consideration representing the price payable to them by the transferee company.
(4) Any sum received by the transferor company under this section shall be paid into
a separate bank account, and any such sum and any other consideration so received shall
Amalgamation
by mutual
agreement.
Power to
acquire shares
of
shareholders
dissenting
from scheme
or contract
approved by
majority.

105
be held by that company in trust for the several persons entitled to the shares in respect of
which the said sum or other consideration were respectively received and shall be disbursed
to the entitled shareholders within sixty days.
(5) In relation to an offer made by a transferee company to shareholders of a transferor
company before the commencement of this Act, this section shall have effect with the
following modifications, namely:—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “the shares whose transfer is involved
other than shares already held at the date of the offer by, or by a nominee of, the
transferee company or its subsidiaries,”,  the words “the shares affected” shall be
substituted; and
(b) in sub-section (3), the words “together with an instrument of transfer, to be
executed on behalf of the shareholder by any person appointed by the transferee
company and on its own behalf by the transferor company” shall be omitted.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “dissenting shareholder” includes a
shareholder who has not assented to the scheme or contract and any shareholder who has
failed or refused to transfer his shares to the transferee company in accordance with the
scheme or contract.
207. (1) In the event of an acquirer, or a person acting in concert with such acquirer,
becoming registered holder of ninety per cent. or more of the issued equity share capital of
a company, or in the event of any person or group of persons becoming ninety per cent.
majority or holding ninety per cent. of the issued equity share capital of a company, by
virtue of an amalgamation, share exchange, conversion of securities or for any other reason,
such acquirer, person or group of persons, as the case may be, shall notify the company of
their intention to buy the remaining equity shares.
(2) The acquirer, person or group of persons under sub-section ( 1) may offer to the
minority shareholders of equity shares of the company for buying the equity shares held by
such shareholders at a price determined on the basis of valuation by a registered valuer in
accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the minority
shareholders of the company may offer to the majority shareholders to purchase the minority
equity shareholding of the company at the price determined in accordance with such rules
as may be prescribed under sub-section ( 2).
(4) The majority shareholders shall deposit an amount equal to the value of shares to
be acquired by them under sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3), as the case may be, in a
separate bank account to be operated by the transferor company for payment to the minority
shareholders and such amount shall be disbursed to the entitled shareholders within sixty
days.
(5) In the event of a purchase under this section, whether wholly or partially, the
transferor company shall act as a transfer agent for receiving and paying the price to the
minority shareholders and as an agent for taking delivery of the shares and delivering such
shares to the majority, as the case may be.
(6) In the absence of a physical delivery of shares by the shareholders within the time
specified by the company, the share certificates shall be deemed to be cancelled, and the
transferor company shall be authorised to issue shares in lieu of the cancelled shares and
complete the transfer in accordance with law and make payment of the price out of deposit
made under sub-section (4) by the majority in advance to the minority by dispatch of such
payment.
(7) In the event of a majority shareholder or shareholders requiring a full purchase
and making payment of price by deposit with the company for any shareholder or
shareholders who have died or ceased to exist, or whose heirs, successors, administrators
Purchase of
minority
shareholding.

106
or assignees have not been brought on record by transmission, the right of such shareholders
to make an offer for sale of minority equity shareholding shall continue and be available for
a period of three years from the date of majority acquisition or majority shareholding.
(8) Where the shares of minority shareholders have been acquired in pursuance of
this section and as on or prior to the date of transfer following such acquisition, the
shareholders holding seventy-five per cent. or more minority equity shareholding negotiate
or reach an understanding on a higher price for any transfer, proposed or agreed upon, of
the shares held by them without disclosing the fact or likelihood of transfer taking place on
the basis of such negotiation, understanding or agreement, the majority shareholders shall
share the additional compensation so received by them with such minority shareholders on
a pro rata basis.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expressions “acquirer” and
“person acting in concert” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clause
(b) and clause (e) of sub-regulation (1) of regulation 2 of the Securities and Exchange Board
of India (Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers) Regulations, 1997.
208. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is essential in public interest
that two or more companies should amalgamate, the Central Government may, by order
notified in the Official Gazette, provide for the amalgamation of those companies into a
single company with such constitution, with such property, powers, rights, interests,
authorities and privileges, and with such liabilities, duties, and obligations, as may be
specified in the order.
(2) The order under sub-section ( 1) may also provide for the continuation by or
against the transferee company of any legal proceedings pending by or against any transferor
company and such consequential, incidental and supplemental provisions as may, in the
opinion of the Central Government, be necessary to give effect to the amalgamation.
(3) Every member or creditor, including a debenture holder, of each of the transferor
companies before the amalgamation shall have, as nearly as may be, the same interest in or
rights against the transferee company as he had in the company of which he was originally
a member or creditor, and in case the interest or rights of such member or creditor in or
against the transferee company are less than his interest in or rights against the original
company, he shall be entitled to compensation to that extent, which shall be assessed by
such authority as may be prescribed and every such assessment shall be published in the
Official Gazette, and the compensation so assessed shall be paid to the member or creditor
concerned by the transferee company.
(4) Any person aggrieved by any assessment of compensation made by the prescribed
authority under sub-section (3) may, within thirty days from the date of publication of such
assessment in the Official Gazette, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal and thereupon the
assessment of the compensation shall be made by the Tribunal.
(5) No order shall be made under this section unless—
(a) a copy of the proposed order has been sent in draft to each of the companies
concerned;
(b) the time for preferring an appeal under sub-section (4) has expired, or where
any such appeal has been preferred, the appeal has been finally disposed of; and
(c) the Central Government has considered, and made such modifications, if
any, in the draft order as it may deem fit in the light of any suggestions and objections
which may be received by it from any such company within such period as the Central
Government may fix in that behalf, not being less than two months from the date on
which the copy aforesaid is received by that company, or from any class of
shareholders therein, or from any creditors or any class of creditors thereof.
(6) Copies of every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it has
been made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Power of
Central
Government
to provide for
amalgamation
of companies
in public
interest.

107
209. (1) In relation to every offer of a scheme or contract involving the transfer of
shares or any class of shares in the transferor company to the transferee company under
this Chapter,—
(a) every circular containing such offer and recommendation to the members of
the transferor company by its directors to accept such offer shall be accompanied by
such information and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) every such offer shall contain a statement by or on behalf of the transferee
company, disclosing the steps it has taken to ensure that necessary cash will be
available; and
(c) every such circular shall be presented to the Registrar for registration and
no such circular shall be issued until it is so registered:
Provided that the Registrar may refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writing, to
register any such circular which does not contain the information required to be given
under clause ( a) or which sets out such information in a manner likely to give a false
impression, and communicate such refusal to the parties within thirty days of the application.
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Tribunal against an order of the Registrar refusing to
register any circular under sub-section ( 1).
(3) The director who issues a circular which has not been presented for registration
and registered under clause (c) of sub-section (1), shall be punishable with fine which shall
not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
210. The books and papers of a company which has been amalgamated with, or
whose shares have been acquired by, another company under this Chapter shall not be
disposed of without the prior permission of the Central Government and before granting
such permission, that Government may appoint a person to examine the books and papers
or any of them for the purpose of ascertaining whether they contain any evidence of the
commission of an offence in connection with the promotion or formation, or the management
of the affairs, of the transferor company or its amalgamation or the acquisition of its shares.
211. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Act, the liability in respect of
offences committed under this Act by the officers in default, of the transferor company prior
to its merger, amalgamation or acquisition shall continue after such acquisition, merger or
amalgamation.
CHAPTER XVI
P
REVENTION OF OPPRESSION AND MISMANAGEMENT
212. (1) Any member of a company who complains that—
(a) the affairs of the company have been or are being conducted in a manner
prejudicial to public interest or in a manner prejudicial or oppressive to him or any
other member or members; or
(b) the material change, not being a change brought about by, or in the interests
of, any creditors, including debenture holders or any class of shareholders of the
company, has taken place in the management or control of the company, whether by
an alteration in the Board of Directors, or manager, or in the ownership of the
company’s shares, or if it has no share capital, in its membership, or in any other
manner whatsoever, and that by reason of such change, it is likely that the affairs of
the company will be conducted in a manner prejudicial to its interests or its members
or any class of members,
may apply to the Tribunal, provided such member has a right to apply under section 215, for
an order under this Chapter.
Registration
of offer of
Schemes
involving
transfer of
shares.
Preservation
of books and
papers of
amalgamated
companies.
Liability of
the officers in
respect of
offences
committed
prior to
amalgamation,
transfer, etc.
Application to
Tribunal for
relief in cases
of oppression,
etc.

108
(2) The Central Government, if it is of the opinion that the affairs of the company are
being conducted in a manner prejudicial to public interest, it may itself apply to the Tribunal
for an order under this Chapter.
213. (1) If, on any application made under section 212, the Tribunal is of the opinion—
(a) that the company’s affairs have been or are being conducted in a manner
prejudicial or oppressive to any member or members or prejudicial to public interest;
and
(b) that to wind up the company would unfairly prejudice such member or
members, but that otherwise the facts would justify the making of a winding up order
on the ground that it was just and equitable that the company should be wound up,
the Tribunal may, with a view to bringing to an end the matters complained of, make such
order as it thinks fit.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers under sub-section (1), an order
under that sub-section may provide for —
(a) the regulation of the conduct of the affairs of the company in future;
(b) the purchase of the shares or interests of any members of the company by
other members thereof or by the company;
(c) in the case of a purchase of its shares by the company as aforesaid, the
consequent reduction of its share capital;
(d) restrictions on the transfer of the shares of the company;
(e) the termination, setting aside or modification, of any agreement, howsoever
arrived at, between the company and the managing director, any other director or
manager, upon such terms and conditions as may, in the opinion of the Tribunal, be
just and equitable in the circumstances of the case;
(f) the termination, setting aside or modification of any agreement between the
company and any person other than those referred to in clause ( e):
Provided that no such agreement referred to in clause (e) or clause (f) shall be
terminated, set aside or modified except after due notice and after obtaining the
consent of the party concerned;
(g) the setting aside of any transfer, delivery of goods, payment, execution or
other act relating to property made or done by or against the company within three
months before the date of the application under this section, which would, if made or
done by or against an individual, be deemed in his insolvency to be a fraudulent
preference;
(h) removal of the managing director, manager or any of the directors of the
company;
(i) the manner in which the managing director or manager of the company may
be appointed subsequent to an order removing the existing managing director or
manager of the company made under clause (h);
(j) appointment of such number of persons as directors, who may be required
by the Tribunal to report to the Tribunal on such matters as the Tribunal may direct;
(k) imposition of costs as may be deemed fit by the Tribunal;
(l) any other matter for which, in the opinion of the Tribunal, it is just and
equitable that provision should be made.
(3) A certified copy of the order of the Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall be filed by
the company with the Registrar within thirty days of the order of the Tribunal.
Powers of
Tribunal.

109
(4) The Tribunal may, on the application of any party to the proceeding, make any
interim order which it thinks fit for regulating the conduct of the company’s affairs upon
such terms and conditions as appear to it to be just and equitable.
(5) Where an order of the Tribunal under sub-section (1) makes any alteration in the
memorandum or articles of a company, then, notwithstanding any other provision of this
Act, the company shall not have power, except to the extent, if any, permitted in the order, to
make, without the leave of the Tribunal, any alteration whatsoever which is inconsistent
with the order, either in the memorandum or in the articles.
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the alterations made by the order in
the memorandum or articles of a company shall, in all respects, have the same effect as if
they had been duly made by the company in accordance with the provisions of this Act and
the said provisions shall apply accordingly to the memorandum or articles so altered.
(7) A certified copy of every order altering, or giving leave to alter, a company’s
memorandum or articles, shall within thirty days after the making thereof, be filed by the
company with the Registrar who shall register the same.
(8) Where any default is made in complying with the provisions of sub-section ( 5),
the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but
which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in
default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or
with fine which shall not be less than twenty- five thousand rupees but which may extend
to one lakh rupees, or with both.
214. (1) Where an order made under section 213 terminates, sets aside or modifies an
agreement such as is referred to in sub-section ( 2) of that section, —
(a) such order shall not give rise to any claims whatever against the company
by any person for damages or for compensation for loss of office or in any other
respect either in pursuance of the agreement or otherwise;
(b) no managing director or other director or manager whose agreement is so
terminated or set aside shall, for a period of five years from the date of the order
terminating or setting aside the agreement, without the leave of the Tribunal, be
appointed, or act, as the managing director or other director or manager of the company:
Provided that the Tribunal shall not grant leave under this clause unless notice
of the intention to apply for leave has been served on the Central Government and
that Government has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the
matter.
(2) Any person who knowingly acts as a managing director or other director or
manger of a company in contravention of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1), and every other
director who is knowingly a party to such contravention, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to
five lakh  rupees, or with both.
215. (1) The following members of a company shall have the right to apply under
section 212, namely:—
(a) in the case of a company having a share capital, not less than one hundred
members of the company or not less than one-tenth of the total number of its members,
whichever is less, or any member or members holding not less than one-tenth of the
issued share capital of the company, subject to the condition that the applicant or
applicants have paid all calls and other sums due on their shares;
(b) in the case of a company not having a share capital, not less than one-fifth
of the total number of its members:
Consequence
of termination
or
modifications
of certain
agreements.
Right to apply
under section
212.

110
Provided that the Tribunal may, on an application made to it in this behalf,
waive all or any of the requirements specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) so as to
enable the members to apply under section 212.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, where any share or shares are
held by two or more persons jointly, they shall be counted only as one member.
(2) Where any members of a company are entitled to make an application under sub-
section (1), any one or more of them having obtained the consent in writing of the rest, may
make the application on behalf and for the benefit of all of them.
216. (1) Any one or more members or class of members or one or more creditors or any
class of creditors may, if they are of the opinion that the management or control of the affairs
of the company are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the company
or its members or creditors, file an application before the Tribunal on behalf of the members
and creditors for seeking all or any of the following orders, namely:—
(a) to restrain the company from committing an act which is ultra vires the
articles or memorandum of the company;
(b) to restrain the company from committing breach of any provision of the
company’s memorandum or articles;
(c) to declare a resolution altering the memorandum or articles of the company
as void if the resolution was passed by suppression of material facts or obtained by
misstatement to the members or creditors;
(d) to restrain the company and its directors from acting on such resolution;
(e) to restrain the company from doing an act which is contrary to the provisions
of this Act or any other law for the time being in force;
(f) to restrain the company from taking action contrary to any resolution passed
by the members.
(2) Any order passed by the Tribunal shall be binding on the company and all its
members and creditors.
(3) Any company which fails to comply with an order passed by the Tribunal under
this section shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but
which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in
default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years
and with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
217. Sections 386 to 390 (both inclusive) shall apply in relation to a fraudulent
application made to the Tribunal under section 212 or section 216.
CHAPTER XVII
R
EGISTERED V ALUERS
218. Where under any provision of this Act, valuation is required to be made in
respect of any property, stocks, shares, debentures, securities or goodwill (hereinafter in
this Chapter referred to as the assets) or net worth of a company or its assets, it shall be
valued by a person registered as a valuer under this Chapter and appointed by the audit
committee or in its absence by the Board of Directors of that company.
219. (1) The Central Government shall maintain a register to be called as the register
of valuers in which it shall enter the names and addresses of persons registered under sub-
section (2) as valuers.
Class action.
Liability for
making
fraudulent
application.
Valuation by
registered
valuers.
Registration
of valuers.

111
(2) Any Chartered Accountant, Cost and Works Accountant, Company Secretary or
other persons possessing such qualifications as may be prescribed may apply to the Central
Government in the prescribed form for being registered as a valuer under this section:
Provided that no company or body corporate shall be eligible to apply.
(3) Every application under sub-section (2) shall be accompanied by such fee as may
be prescribed, containing a declaration to the effect that the applicant shall—
(a) make an impartial and true valuation of any assets which may be required to
be valued;
(b) make the valuation in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed, and
(c) shall not undertake valuation of any assets in which he has a direct or
indirect interest or becomes so interested at any time during the valuation of the
assets.
220. (1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of section 219, by an order,
appoint a committee of experts consisting of such number of qualified persons holding
such qualifications as may be prescribed.
(2) The committee appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall scrutinise the applications
received under sub-section (2) of section 219 and recommend suitable names for the purpose
of inclusion in the register of valuers.
221. (1) No person, either alone or in partnership with any other person, shall practise,
describe or project himself as a registered valuer for the purposes of this Act or permit
himself to be so described or projected unless he is registered as a valuer, or, as the case
may be, he and all his partners are so registered under this Chapter.
(2) The report of valuation of any assets by a registered valuer shall be submitted in
the prescribed form and be verified in the prescribed manner.
(3) A registered valuer shall  not charge at a rate exceeding the rate as may be prescribed
in this behalf.
222. Where any person who is registered as a valuer under section 219 or who has
made an application for registration as a valuer under that section is, at any time thereafter,—
(a) sentenced to a term of imprisonment for any offence; or
(b) in a case where he is a member of any association or institute having as its
object the control, supervision, regulation or encouragement of the profession of
accountancy, cost and works accountants or company secretaries or such other
profession as the Central Government may specify in this behalf by notification,
found guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity, by such association or
institute,
he shall immediately after such conviction or finding intimate the particulars thereof to the
Central Government.
223. (1) The Central Government may remove the name of any person from the register
of valuers where it is satisfied, after giving that person a reasonable opportunity of being
heard and after such further inquiry, if any, as it thinks fit,—
(a) that his name has been entered in the register by error or on account of
misrepresentation or suppression of a material fact; or
(b) that he has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to a term of
imprisonment or has been guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity which, in
the opinion of the Central Government, renders him unfit to be kept in the register.
(2) The Central Government may on application and on sufficient cause being shown,
restore to the register the name of any person removed therefrom.
Appointment
of committee
of experts.
Practice as
registered
valuers.
Furnishing of
Particulars in
certain cases.
Removal and
restoration of
names of
valuers from
register.

112
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the Central
Government shall, once in three years, review the performance of all the registered valuers
and may remove the name of any person from the register of valuers where it is satisfied,
after giving that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after such further
inquiry, if any, as it thinks fit to make, that his performance is such that his name should not
remain on the register of valuers.
(4) The inquiry to be made under this section shall be made by such officer and he
shall, for the purpose of such inquiry, have such powers, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER  XVIII
R
EMOVAL OF NAMES OF COMPANIES FROM THE REGISTER
224. (1) Where the Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that —
(a) a company has failed to commence its business within one year of its
incorporation;
(b) the subscribers to the memorandum have not paid the subscription which
they had undertaken to pay within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the
date of incorporation of a company and a declaration under sub-section (1) of section
10 to this effect has not been filed within one hundred and eighty days of its
incorporation; or
(c) a company is not carrying on any business or operation for a period of one
year and has not made any application within such period for obtaining the status of
a dormant company under section 413,
he shall send a notice to the company and all the directors of the company, of his intention
to remove the name of the company from the register and requesting them to send their
representations along with copies of the relevant documents, if any, within a period specified
in the notice.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), a company by a special
resolution or consent of seventy-five per cent. members in terms of share capital may also
file an application in the prescribed manner to the Registrar for removing the name of the
company from the register on all or any of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) and the
Registrar shall, on receipt of such application, cause a public notice to be sent in the
prescribed manner:
Provided that in the case of a company regulated under a special Act, approval of the
regulatory body constituted or established under that Act shall also be obtained and enclosed
with the application.
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall apply to a company registered under section 4.
(4) A notice issued under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be published in the
prescribed manner and also in the Official Gazette for the information of the general public.
(5) At the expiry of the time mentioned in the notice, the Registrar may, unless cause
to the contrary is shown by the company, strike its name off the register, and shall publish
notice thereof in the Official Gazette, and on the publication in the Official Gazette of this
notice, the company shall stand dissolved.
(6) The Registrar, before passing an order under sub-section (5), shall satisfy himself
that sufficient provision has been made for the realisation of all amount due to the company
and for the payment or discharge of its liabilities and obligations by the company within a
reasonable time and, if necessary, obtain necessary undertakings from the managing director,
director or other persons in charge of the management of the company:
Provided that notwithstanding the undertakings referred to in this sub-section, the
assets of the company shall be made available for the payment or discharge of all its
Power of
Registrar to
remove name
of a company
from register.

113
liabilities and obligations even after the date of the order removing the name of the company
from the register.
(7) The liability, if any, of every director, manager or other officer who was exercising
any power of management, and of every member of the company dissolved under sub-
section (5), shall continue and may be enforced as if the company had not been dissolved.
(8) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the Tribunal to wind up a company
the name of which has been struck off the register.
225. (1) An application under sub-section (2) of section 224 on behalf of a company
shall not be made if, at any time in the previous three months, the company—
(a) has changed its name;
(b) has traded or otherwise carried on business;
(c) has made a disposal for value, of property or rights held by it, immediately
before cesser of trade or otherwise carrying on of business, for the purpose of disposal
for gain in the normal course of trading or otherwise carrying on of business;
(d) has engaged in any other activity except the one which is necessary or
expedient for the purpose of making an application under that section, or deciding
whether to do so, or concluding the affairs of the company, or complying with any
statutory requirement;
(e) has made an application to the Tribunal for the sanctioning of a compromise
or arrangement and the matter has not been finally concluded; or
(f) is being wound up under Chapter XX, whether voluntarily or by the Tribunal.
(2) If a company files an application under sub-section (2) of section 224 in violation
of sub-section (1), it shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
(3) An application filed under sub-section ( 2) of section 224 shall be withdrawn by
the company or rejected by the Registrar as soon as conditions under sub-section ( 1) are
brought to his notice.
226. Where a company stands dissolved under section 224, it shall on and from the
date mentioned in the notice under sub-section ( 5) of that section cease to operate as a
company and the Certificate of Incorporation issued to it shall be deemed to have been
cancelled from such date except for the purpose of realising the amount due to the company
and for the payment or discharge of the liabilities or obligations of the company.
227. (1) Where it is found that an application by a company under sub-section (2) of
section 224 has been made with the object of evading the liabilities of the company or with
the intention to deceive the creditors or to defraud any other persons, the persons in charge
of the management of the company shall, notwithstanding that the company has been
notified as dissolved, be jointly and severally liable to any person or persons who had
incurred loss or damage as a result of the company being notified as dissolved.
(2) Without prejudice to any action under sub-section ( 1), the Registrar may also
recommend prosecution of the persons responsible for the filing of an application under
that sub-section.
228. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Registrar notifying a company as
dissolved under section 224, may file an appeal to the Tribunal within a period of three years
from the date of the order of the Registrar and if the Tribunal is of the opinion that the
removal of the name of the company from the register is not justified in view of the absence
of any of the grounds on which the order was passed by the Registrar, it may order restoration
of the name of the company in the register:
No application
under section
224 in certain
situations.
Effect of a
company
notified as
dissolved.
Fraudulent
application
for removal of
name.
Appeal to
Tribunal.

114
Provided that before passing any order under this section, the Tribunal shall give a
reasonable opportunity of making representations and of being heard to the Registrar, the
company and all the persons concerned.
(2) A copy of the order passed by the Tribunal shall be filed by the company with the
Registrar within thirty days from the date of the order and on receipt of the order, the
Registrar shall cause the name of the company to be restored in the register and shall issue
a fresh Certificate of Incorporation.
(3) If a company, or any member or creditor thereof, feels aggrieved by the company
having its name struck off the register, the Tribunal on an application made by the company,
member or creditor before the expiry of twenty years from the publication in the Official
Gazette of the notice under sub-section (5) of section 224 may, if satisfied that the company
was, at the time of its name being struck off, carrying on business or in operation or
otherwise it is just that the name of the company be restored to the register, order the name
of the company to be restored to the register, and the Tribunal may, by the order, give such
other directions and make such provisions as deemed just for placing the company and all
other persons in the same position as nearly as may be as if the name of the company had
not been struck off the register.
CHAPTER XIX
R
EVIVAL AND REHABILITATION OF SICK COMPANIES
229. (1) Where on a demand by the secured creditors of a company representing fifty
per cent. or more of its outstanding amount of debt, the company has failed to pay the debt
within thirty days of the service of the notice of demand or to secure or compound it to the
reasonable satisfaction of the creditors, any secured creditor may file an application to the
Tribunal in the prescribed manner along with the relevant evidence for such default, non-
repayment or failure to offer security or compound it, for a determination that the company
be declared as a sick company.
(2) The applicant under sub-section ( 1) may along with an application under that
sub-section or at any stage of the proceedings thereafter, make an application for the stay
of any proceedings for the winding up of the company or for execution, distress or the like
against any properties and assets of the company or for the appointment of a receiver in
respect thereof and that no suit for the recovery of any money or for the enforcement of any
security against the company shall lie or be proceeded with.
(3) The Tribunal may pass an order in respect of an application under sub-section (2)
which shall be operative for a period of one hundred and twenty days.
(4) The company referred to in sub-section ( 1) may also file an application to the
Tribunal on one or more of the grounds specified in that sub-section.
(5) Where an application under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section (4) has been filed,—
(a) the company shall not dispose of or otherwise enter into any obligations
with regard to, its properties or assets except as required in the normal course of
business;
(b) the Board of Directors shall not take any steps likely to prejudice the interests
of the creditors.
(6) The Tribunal shall, within sixty days of the receipt of an application under
sub-section (1) or sub-section ( 4), determine whether the company is a sick company or
not:
Provided that no such determination shall be made in respect of an application under
sub-section (1) unless the company has been given notice of the application and a reasonable
opportunity to reply to the notice within thirty days of the receipt thereof.
Determination
of sickness.

115
230. (1) On the determination of a company as a sick company by the Tribunal under
section 229, any secured creditor of that company or the company may make an application
to the Tribunal for the determination of the measures that may be adopted with respect to
the revival and rehabilitation of such company:
Provided that where the financial assets of the sick company had been acquired by
any securitisation company or reconstruction company under sub-section ( 1) of section 5
of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002, no such application shall be made without the consent of three-fourths
of the secured creditors in value of the amount outstanding against financial assistance
disbursed to the sick company.
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by —
(a) audited financial statements of the company relating to the immediately
preceding financial year,
(b) such particulars and documents, duly authenticated in such manner, along
with such fee as may be prescribed, and
(c) a draft scheme of revival and rehabilitation of the company in such manner
as may be prescribed:
Provided that where the sick company has no draft scheme of revival and
rehabilitation to offer, it shall file a declaration to that effect along with the application.
(3) An application under sub-section ( 1) shall be made to the Tribunal within sixty
days from the date of determination of the company as a sick company by the Tribunal
under section 229.
231. (1) On the receipt of an application under section 230, the Tribunal shall, not later
than seven days from such receipt thereof, —
(a) fix a date for hearing not later than ninety days from date of the receipt;
(b) appoint an interim administrator to convene a meeting of creditors of the
company in accordance with the provisions of section 232 to be held not later than
forty-five days from receipt of the order of the Tribunal appointing him to consider
whether on the basis of the particulars and documents furnished with the application
made under section 230, the draft scheme, if any, filed along with such application or
otherwise and any other material available, it is possible to revive and rehabilitate the
sick company and such other matters, which the interim administrator may consider
necessary for the purpose and to submit his report to the Tribunal within sixty days
from the date of the order:
Provided that where no draft scheme is filed by the company and a declaration
has been made to that effect by the Board of Directors, the Tribunal may direct the
interim administrator to take over the management of the company; and
(c) issue such other directions to the interim administrator as the Tribunal may
consider necessary to protect and preserve the assets of the sick company and for its
proper management.
(2) Where an interim administrator has been directed to take over the management of
the company, the directors and the management of the company shall extend all possible
assistance and cooperation to the interim administrator to manage the affairs of the company.
232. (1) The interim administrator shall appoint a committee of creditors with such
number of members as he may determine, but not exceeding seven, and as far as possible a
representative each of every class of creditors should be represented in the committee.
(2) The holding of the meeting of the committee of creditors and the procedure to be
followed at such meetings, including the appointment of its Chairman, shall be decided by
the interim administrator.
Application
for revival and
rehabilitation.
Appointment
of interim
administrator.
Committee of
creditors.
54 of 2002.

116
(3) The interim administrator may direct any promoter, director or any key managerial
personnel to attend any meeting of the committee of creditors and to furnish such information
as may be considered necessary by the interim administrator.
233. On the date of hearing fixed by the Tribunal and on consideration of the report
of the interim administrator filed under sub-section ( 1) of section 231, if the Tribunal is
satisfied that the creditors representing three-fourths in value of the amount outstanding
against the sick company present and voting have resolved that—
(a) it is not possible to revive and rehabilitate such company, the Tribunal shall
record such opinion and order that the proceedings for the winding up of the company
be initiated; or
(b) by adopting certain measures the sick company may be revived and
rehabilitated, the Tribunal shall appoint a company administrator for the company
and cause such administrator to prepare a scheme of revival and rehabilitation of the
sick company:
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit, appoint an interim administrator
as the company administrator.
234. (1) The interim administrator or the company administrator, as the case may be,
shall be appointed by the Tribunal from a panel maintained by the Central Government
consisting of the names of advocates, company secretaries, chartered accountants, cost
and works accountants and such other professionals as may, by notification, be specified
by the Central Government.
(2) The terms and conditions of the appointment of interim and company administrators
shall be such as may be ordered by the Tribunal.
(3) The Tribunal may direct the company administrator to take over the assets or
management of the company and for the purpose of assisting him in the management of the
company, the company administrator may, with the approval of the Tribunal, engage the
services of suitable expert or experts.
235. (1) The company administrator shall perform such functions as the Tribunal may
direct.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the company administrator
may cause to be prepared with respect to the company —
(a) a complete inventory of —
(i) all assets and liabilities of whatever nature;
(ii) all books of accounts, registers, maps, plans, records, documents of
title and all other documents of whatever nature;
(b) a list of shareholders and a list of creditors showing separately in the list of
creditors, the secured creditors and unsecured creditors;
(c) a valuation report in respect of the shares and assets in order to arrive at the
reserve price for the sale of any industrial undertaking of the company or for the
fixation of the lease rent or share exchange ratio;
(d) an estimate of the reserve price, lease rent or share exchange ratio;
(e) pro forma accounts of the company, where no up-to-date audited accounts
are available; and
(f) a list of workmen of the company and their dues referred to under
sub-section (3) of section 300.
Order of
Tribunal.
Appointment
of
administrator.
Powers and
duties of
company
administrator.

117
236. (1) The company administrator shall prepare or cause to be prepared a scheme of
revival and rehabilitation of the sick company after considering the draft scheme filed along
with the application under section 230.
(2) A scheme prepared in relation to any sick company under sub-section ( 1) may
provide for any one or more of the following measures, namely:—
(a) the financial reconstruction of such sick company;
(b) the proper management of such sick company by any change in, or by
taking over, the management of such sick company;
(c) the amalgamation of —
(i) such sick company with any other company; or
(ii) any other company with such sick company;
(d) takeover of the sick company by a solvent company;
(e) the sale or lease of a part or whole of any asset or business of such sick
company;
(f) the rationalisation of managerial personnel, supervisory staff and workmen
in accordance with law;
(g) such other preventive, ameliorative and remedial measures as may be
appropriate;
(h) repayment or rescheduling or restructuring of the debts or obligations of
the company to any of its creditors or class of creditors;
(i) such incidental, consequential or supplemental measures as may be necessary
or expedient in connection with or for the purposes of the measures specified in
clauses (a) to (h).
237. (1) The scheme prepared by the company administrator under section 236 shall
be placed before the creditors of the sick company in a meeting convened for their approval
by the company administrator within the period of sixty days from his appointment, which
may be extended by the Tribunal up to a period not exceeding one hundred twenty days.
(2) The company administrator shall convene separate meetings of secured and
unsecured creditors of the sick company and if the scheme is approved by the unsecured
creditors representing one-fourth in value of the amount owed by the company to such
creditors and the secured creditors, representing three-fourths in value of the amount
outstanding against financial assistance disbursed by such creditors to the sick company,
the company administrator shall submit the scheme before the Tribunal for sanctioning the
scheme:
Provided that where the scheme relates to amalgamation of the sick company with
any other company, such scheme shall, in addition to the approval of the creditors of the
sick company under this sub-section, be laid before the general meeting of both the
companies for approval by their respective shareholders and no such scheme shall be
proceeded with unless it has been approved, with or without modification, by a special
resolution passed by the shareholders of that company.
(3) On the receipt of the scheme under sub-section (2), the Tribunal shall within sixty
days therefrom, after satisfying that the scheme had been validly approved in accordance
with this section, pass an order sanctioning such scheme.
(4) Where a sanctioned scheme provides for the transfer of any property or liability of
the sick company to any other company or person or where such scheme provides for the
transfer of any property or liability of any other company or person in favour of the sick
company, then, by virtue of, and to the extent provided in, the scheme, on and from the date
Scheme of
revival and
rehabilitation.
Sanction of
scheme.

118
of coming into operation of the sanctioned scheme or any provision thereof, the property
shall be transferred to, and vest in, and the liability shall become the liability of, such other
company or person or, as the case may be, the sick company.
(5) The sanction accorded by the Tribunal under sub-section (3) shall be conclusive
evidence that all the requirements of the scheme relating to the reconstruction or amalgamation
or any other measure specified therein have been complied with and a copy of the sanctioned
scheme certified in writing by an officer of the Tribunal to be a true copy thereof shall in all
legal proceedings be admitted as evidence.
(6) A copy of the sanctioned scheme referred to in sub-section (3) shall be filed with
the Registrar by the sick company within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of
a copy thereof.
238. On and from the date of the coming into operation of the sanctioned scheme or
any provision thereof, the scheme or such provision shall be binding on the sick company
and the transferee company or, as the case may be, the other company and also on the
shareholders, creditors and guarantors of the said companies.
239. (1) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of effective implementation of the scheme,
have power to enforce, modify or terminate any contract or agreement or any obligation
pursuant to such agreement or contract entered into by the company with any other person.
(2) The Tribunal may, if it deems necessary or expedient so to do, by order in writing,
authorise the company administrator appointed under section 234 to implement a sanctioned
scheme till its successful implementation on such terms and conditions as may be specified
in the order and may for that purpose require him to file periodic reports on the implementation
of the sanctioned scheme.
(3) Where the whole or substantial assets of the undertaking of the sick company are
sold under a sanctioned scheme, the sale proceeds shall be applied towards implementation
of the scheme in such manner as the Tribunal may direct.
(4) Where it is difficult to implement the scheme for any reason or the scheme fails
due to non-implementation of obligations under the scheme by the parties concerned, the
company administrator authorised to implement the scheme and where there is no such
administrator, the company, the secured creditors, or the transferee company in a case of
amalgamation, may make an application before the Tribunal for modification of the scheme
or to declare the scheme as failed, as the case may be, and request it that the company may
be wound up.
(5) The Tribunal shall, within thirty days of presentation of an application under sub-
section (4), pass an order for modification of the scheme or, as the case may be, declaring
the scheme as failed and pass an order for the winding up of the company if three-fourths
in value of the secured creditors consent to the modification of the scheme or winding up of
the company.
(6) Where an application under sub-section ( 4) has been made before the Tribunal
and such application is pending before it, such application shall abate, if the secured
creditors representing not less than three-fourths in value of the amount outstanding against
financial assistance disbursed to the sick company have taken any measures to recover
their secured debt under sub-section (4) of section 13 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.
240. (1) If the scheme is not approved by the creditors in the manner specified in sub-
section (2) of section 237, the company administrator shall submit a report to the Tribunal
and the Tribunal shall order for the winding up of the sick company.
(2) On the passing of an order under sub-section ( 1), the Tribunal shall conduct the
proceedings for winding up of the sick company in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter XX.
Scheme to be
binding.
Implementation
of the scheme.
Winding up of
company on
report of
company
administrator.
54 of 2002.

119
241. (1) If, in the course of the scrutiny or implementation of any scheme or proposal
including the draft scheme or proposal, it appears to the Tribunal that any person who has
taken part in the promotion, formation or management of the sick company or its undertaking,
including any past or present director, manager or officer or employee of the sick company—
(a) has misapplied or retained, or become liable or accountable for, any money
or property of the sick company; or
(b) has been guilty of any misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance or breach
of trust in relation to the sick company,
it may, by order, direct him to repay or restore the money or property, with or without
interest, as it thinks just, or to contribute such sum to the assets of the sick company or the
other person, entitled thereto by way of compensation in respect of the misapplication,
retainer, misfeasance, malfeasance, nonfeasance or breach of trust as the Tribunal thinks
just and proper:
Provided that such direction by the Tribunal shall be without prejudice to any other
legal action that may be taken against the person.
(2) If the Tribunal is satisfied on the basis of the information and evidence in its
possession with respect to any person who is or was a director or an officer or other
employee of the sick company, that such person by himself or along with others had
diverted the funds or other property of such company for any purpose other than the
purposes of the company or had managed the affairs of the company in a manner highly
detrimental to the interests of the company, the Tribunal shall, by order, direct the public
financial institutions, scheduled banks and State level institutions not to provide, for a
maximum period of ten years from the date of the order, any financial assistance to such
person or any firm of which such person is a partner or any company or other body corporate
of which such person is a director, by whatever name called, or to disqualify the said
director, promoter, manager from being appointed as a director in any company registered
under this Act for a maximum period of six years.
(3) No order shall be made by the Tribunal under this section against any person
unless such person has been given a reasonable opportunity for making his submissions.
242. Whoever violates the provisions of this Chapter or any scheme, or any order, of
the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal or makes a false statement or gives false evidence
before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, or attempts to tamper the records of reference
or appeal filed under this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
243. No appeal shall lie in any court or other authority and no civil court shall have
any jurisdiction in respect of any matter in respect of which the Tribunal or the Appellate
Tribunal is empowered by or under this Chapter and no injunction shall be granted by any
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or proposed to be taken in pursuance
of any power conferred by or under this Chapter.
244. (1) There shall be formed for the purposes of rehabilitation, revival and
liquidation of sick companies, a Fund to be called the Rehabilitation and Insolvency Fund.
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund—
(a) any amount given as grants by the Central Government for the purposes of
this Fund,
(b) any amount given to the Fund from any other source,
(c) any income from investment of the amount in the Fund, and
(d) any amount deposited by the companies as contribution to the Fund.
(3) A company that has contributed any amount to the Fund shall, in the event of
proceedings initiated in respect of such company under this Chapter or Chapter XX, may
Power of
Tribunal to
assess damages
against
delinquent
directors, etc.
Punishment
for certain
offences.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Rehabilitation
and
Insolvency
Fund.

120
make an application to the Tribunal for withdrawal of funds not exceeding the amount
contributed by it, for making payments to workmen, protecting the assets of the company
or meeting the incidental costs during proceedings.
(4) The Fund shall be managed by an independent administrator to be appointed by
the Central Government in the manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER XX
W
INDING UP
245. (1)The winding up of a company may be either—
(a) by the Tribunal, or
(b) voluntary.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Act, the provisions of this Act
with respect to winding up shall apply to the winding up of a company in any of the modes
specified under sub-section ( 1).
Part I
Winding up by the Tribunal
246. (1) A company may be wound up by the Tribunal,—
(a) if the company is unable to pay its debts;
(b) if the company has, by special resolution, resolved that the company be
wound up by the Tribunal;
(c) if the company has acted against the interests of the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
decency or morality;
(d) if the Tribunal has ordered the winding up of the company under Chapter
XIX;
(e) if on an application made by the Registrar or any other person authorised by the
Central Government by notification under this Act, the Tribunal is of the opinion that the
affairs of the company have been conducted in a fraudulent manner or the company was
formed for fraudulent and unlawful purpose or the persons concerned in the formation or
management of its affairs have been guilty of fraud, misfeasance or misconduct in connection
therewith and that it is proper that the company be wound up;
(f) if the company has made a default in filing with the Registrar its financial
statements or annual returns for immediately preceding five consecutive financial
years; or
(g) if the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and equitable that the company
should be wound up.
(2) A company shall be deemed to be unable to pay its debts,—
(a) if a creditor, by assignment or otherwise, to whom the company is indebted
for an amount exceeding one lakh rupees then due, has served on the company, by
causing it to be delivered at its registered office, by registered post or otherwise, a
demand requiring the company to pay the amount so due and the company has failed
to pay the sum within twenty-one days after the receipt of such demand or to provide
adequate security or re-structure or compound the debt to the reasonable satisfaction
of the creditor;
(b) if any execution or other process issued on a decree or order of any court or
tribunal in favour of a creditor of the company is returned unsatisfied in whole or in
part; or
Modes of
winding up.
Circumstances
in which a
company may
be wound up by
Tribunal.

121
(c) if it is proved to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that the company is unable
to pay its debts, and, in determining whether a company is unable to pay its debts, the
Tribunal shall take into account the contingent and prospective liabilities of the
company.
247. (1) A petition to the Tribunal for the winding up of a company shall be presented
by—
(a) the company,
(b) any creditor or creditors, including any contingent or prospective creditor
or creditors,
(c) any contributory or contributories,
(d) all or any of the persons specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) together,
(e) the Registrar,
(f) any person authorised by the Central Government in that behalf, or
(g) in a case falling under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 246, by the
Central Government or a State Government.
(2) A secured creditor, the holder of any debentures, whether or not any trustee or
trustees have been appointed in respect of such holders, and the trustee for the holders of
debentures, shall be deemed to be creditors within the meaning of clause (b) of sub-section
(1).
(3) A contributory shall be entitled to present a petition for the winding up of a
company, notwithstanding that he may be the holder of fully paid-up shares, or that the
company may have no assets at all or may have no surplus assets left for distribution
among the shareholders after the satisfaction of its liabilities, and shares in respect of which
he is a contributory or some of them were either originally allotted to him or have been held
by him, and registered in his name, for at least six months during the eighteen months
immediately before the commencement of the winding up or have devolved on him through
the death of a former holder.
(4) The Registrar shall be entitled to present a petition for winding up under sub-
section (1) on any of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of section 246, except on the
ground specified in clause ( d) of that sub-section:
Provided that the Registrar shall not present a petition on the ground that the company
is unable to pay its debts unless it appears to him either from the financial condition of the
company as disclosed in its balance sheet or from the report of an inspector appointed
under section 183 that the company is unable to pay its debts:
Provided further that the Registrar shall obtain the previous sanction of the Central
Government to the presentation of a petition:
Provided also that the Central Government shall not accord its sanction under the
preceding proviso, unless the company concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity
of making representations.
(5) A petition filed by the company for winding up before the Tribunal shall be
admitted only if accompanied by a statement of affairs in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
(6) Before a petition for winding up of a company presented by a contingent or
prospective creditor is admitted, the leave of the Tribunal shall be obtained for the admission
of the petition and such leave shall not be granted, unless in the opinion of the Tribunal
there is a prima facie case for the winding up of the company and until such security for
costs has been given as the Tribunal thinks reasonable.
Petition for
winding up.

122
248. (1) The Tribunal may, on receipt of a petition for winding up under section 247
pass any of the following orders, namely:—
(a) dismiss it, with or without costs;
(b) make any interim order as it thinks fit;
(c) appoint a provisional liquidator of the company till the making of a winding
up order;
(d) make an order for the winding up of the company with or without costs; or
(e) any other order as it thinks fit:
Provided that an order under this sub-section shall be made within ninety days from
the date of presentation of the petition:
Provided further that before appointing a provisional liquidator under clause (c), the
Tribunal shall give notice to the company and afford a reasonable opportunity to it to make
its representations, if any, unless for special reasons to be recorded in writing, the Tribunal
thinks fit to dispense with such notice:
Provided also that the Tribunal shall not refuse to make a winding up order on the
ground only that the assets of the company have been mortgaged for an amount equal to or
in excess of those assets, or that the company has no assets.
(2) Where a petition is presented on the ground that it is just and equitable that the
company should be wound up, the Tribunal may refuse to make an order of winding up, if
it is of the opinion that some other remedy is available to the petitioners and that they are
acting unreasonably in seeking to have the company wound up instead of pursuing that
other remedy.
249. (1) Where a petition for winding up is filed before the Tribunal by any person
other than the company, the Tribunal shall, if satisfied that a prima facie case for winding
up of the company is made out, by an order direct the company to file its objections along
with a statement of its affairs in such form and manner as may be prescribed within thirty
days of the order:
Provided that the Tribunal may direct the petitioner to deposit such security for costs
as it may consider reasonable as a precondition to issue directions to the company.
(2) A company, which fails to file the statement of affairs as referred to in sub-section
(1), shall forfeit the right to oppose the petition and such directors and officers of the
company as found responsible for such non-compliance, shall be punishable as per the
provision of sub-section ( 4).
(3) The directors and other officers of the company, in respect of which an order for
winding up is passed by the Tribunal under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 248,
shall, within sixty days of such order, submit, at the cost of the company, the books of
accounts of the company completed and audited up to the date of the order, to such
liquidator and in the manner specified by the Tribunal.
(4) Where a contravention of this section occurs, the directors and other officers of
the company who are responsible for such contravention shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees, or with both.
250. (1) For the purposes of winding up of a company by the Tribunal, there shall be
a Company Liquidator who shall be appointed by the Tribunal at the time of the passing of
the order of winding up.
(2) The provisional liquidator or the Company Liquidator, as the case may be, shall be
appointed from a panel maintained by the Central Government consisting of the names of
chartered accountants, advocates, company secretaries, cost and works accountants or
Powers of
Tribunal.
Directions for
filing
statement of
affairs.
Company
Liquidators
and their
appointments.

123
firms or bodies corporate having such chartered accountants, advocates, company
secretaries, cost and works accountants and such other professionals as may be notified
by the Central Government or from a firm or a body corporate of persons having a combination
of such professionals as may be prescribed and having at least ten years’ experience in
company matters and such other qualifications as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may remove the name of any person or firm or body
corporate from the panel maintained under sub-section ( 2) on the grounds of misconduct,
fraud, misfeasance, breach of duties or professional incompetence:
Provided that the Central Government before removing him or it from panel shall give
him or it a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(4) The terms and conditions of appointment of a liquidator and the fee payable to him
shall be specified by the Tribunal on the basis of task required to be performed, experience,
qualification and size of the company.
(5) On appointment as provisional liquidator or Company Liquidator, as the case may
be, such liquidator shall file a declaration in the prescribed form disclosing conflict of
interest or lack of independence in respect of his appointment, if any, with the Tribunal and
such obligation shall continue throughout the term of his or its appointment.
(6) While passing a winding up order, the Tribunal may appoint a provisional liquidator,
if any, appointed under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 248, as the Company Liquidator
for the conduct of the proceedings for the winding up of the company.
251. (1) The Tribunal may, on a reasonable cause being shown and for reasons to be
recorded in writing, remove the provisional liquidator or the Company Liquidator, as the
case may be, as liquidator of the company on any of the following grounds, namely:—
(a) misconduct,
(b) fraud or misfeasance,
(c) professional incompetence or failure to exercise due care and diligence in
performance of the powers and functions;
(d) inability to act as liquidator,
(e) conflict of interest or lack of independence during the term of his appointment
that would justify removal.
(2) In the event of death, resignation or removal of the liquidator under this section,
the Tribunal may transfer the work assigned to him to another Company Liquidator for
reasons to be recorded in writing.
(3) Where the Tribunal is of the opinion that any liquidator is responsible for causing
any loss or damage to the company due to fraud or misfeasance or failure to exercise due
care and diligence in the performance of his powers and functions, the Tribunal may recover
or cause to be recovered such loss or damage from the liquidator and pass such other
orders as it may think fit.
(4) The Tribunal shall, before passing any order under this section, provide a
reasonable opportunity of hearing to the liquidator.
252. (1) Where the Tribunal makes an order for the winding up of a company, it shall,
within a period not exceeding fifteen days from the date of passing of the order, cause
intimation thereof to be sent to the Company Liquidator and the Registrar.
(2) On receipt of the copy of the winding up order, the Registrar shall make an
endorsement to that effect in his records relating to the company and notify in the Official
Gazette that such an order has been made.
Removal and
replacement of
liquidator.
Winding up
order to be
communicated
to Registrar.

124
(3) The winding up order shall be deemed to be a notice of discharge to the officers,
employees and workmen of the company, except when the business of the company is
continued.
253. The order for the winding up of a company shall operate in favour of all the
creditors and all contributories of the company as if it had been made out on the joint
petition of creditors and contributories.
254. (1) When a winding up order has been passed or a provisional lquidator has
been appointed, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be commenced, or if pending at the
date of the winding up order, shall be proceeded with, by or against the company, except
with the leave of the Tribunal and subject to such terms as the Tribunal may impose:
Provided that any application to the Tribunal seeking leave under this section shall
be disposed of by the Tribunal within sixty days.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to any proceeding pending in appeal before
the Supreme Court or a High Court.
255. The Tribunal shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, have jurisdiction to entertain, or dispose of,—
(a) any suit or proceeding by or against the company;
(b) any claim made by or against the company, including claims by or against
any of its branches in India;
(c) any application made under section 204;
(d) any scheme submitted under section 237;
(e) any question of priorities or any other question whatsoever, whether of law
or fact, which may relate to or arise in the course of the winding up of the company,
whether such suit or proceeding has been instituted, or such claim or question has arisen or
arises or such application has been made or such scheme has been submitted, before or
after the winding up order is made.
256. (1) Where the Tribunal has made a winding up order or appointed a Company
Liquidator, such Liquidator shall, within sixty days from the order, submit to the Tribunal, a
report containing the following particulars, namely:—
(a) the nature and details of the assets of the company including their location
and value, stating separately the cash balance in hand and in the bank, if any, and the
negotiable securities, if any, held by the company:
Provided that the valuation of the assets shall be obtained from registered
valuers for this purpose;
(b) amount of capital issued, subscribed and paid up;
(c) the existing and contingent liabilities of the company including names,
addresses and occupations of its creditors, stating separately the amount of secured
and unsecured debts, and in the case of secured debts, particulars of the securities
given, whether by the company or an officer thereof, their value and the dates on
which they were given;
(d) the debts due to the company and the names, addresses and occupations of
the persons from whom they are due and the amount likely to be realised on account
thereof;
(e) guarantees, if any, extended by the company;
(f) list of contributories and dues if any payable by them and details of any
unpaid call;
Effect of
winding up
order .
Stay of suits,
etc., on
winding up
order.
Jurisdiction of
Tribunal.
Submission of
report by
Company
Liquidator.

125
(g) details of trade marks and intellectual properties, if any, owned by the
company;
(h) details of subsisting contracts, joint ventures and collaborations, if any;
(i) details of holding and subsidiary companies, if any;
(j) details of legal cases filed by or against the company; and
(k) any other information which the Tribunal may direct or the Company
Liquidator may consider necessary to include.
(2) The Company Liquidator shall include in his report the manner in which the
company was promoted or formed and whether in his opinion any fraud has been committed
by any person in its promotion or formation or by any officer of the company in relation to
the company since the formation thereof and any other matters which, in his opinion, it is
desirable to bring to the notice of the Tribunal.
(3) The Company Liquidator shall also make a report on the viability of the business
of the company or the steps which, in his opinion, are necessary for maximising the value of
the assets of the company.
(4) The Company Liquidator may also, if he thinks fit, make any further report or
reports.
(5) Any person describing himself in writing to be a creditor or a contributory of the
company shall be entitled by himself or by his agent at all reasonable times to inspect the
report submitted in accordance with this section and take copies thereof or extracts therefrom
on payment of the prescribed fee.
257. ( 1) The Tribunal shall, on consideration of report of Company Liquidator,
fix a time limit within which the entire proceedings shall be completed and the company
dissolved:
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is of the opinion, at any stage of the proceedings,
or on examination of the reports submitted to it by the Company Liquidator and after
hearing the Company Liquidator, creditors or contributories, that it will not be advantageous
or economical to continue the proceedings, revise the time limit within which the entire
proceedings shall be completed and the company dissolved.
(2) The Tribunal may, on examination of the reports submitted to it by the Company
Liquidator and after hearing the Company Liquidator, creditors or contributories, order sale
of the company as a going concern or its assets or part thereof:
Provided that the Tribunal may, where it considers fit, appoint a Sale Committee
comprising such creditors, promoters and officers of the company as the Tribunal may
decide to assist the Company Liquidator in sale under this sub-section.
(3) Where a report is received from the Company Liquidator or the Central Government
or any person that a fraud has been committed in respect of the company, the Tribunal shall,
without prejudice to the process of winding up, order for investigation under section 183,
and on consideration of the report of such investigation it may pass order and give directions
under sections 314 to 317.
(4) The Tribunal may order such steps as may be necessary to protect, preserve or
enhance the value of the assets of the company.
(5) The Tribunal may pass such other order or give such other directions as it considers
fit.
258. (1) Where a winding up order has been made or where a provisional liquidator
has been appointed, the liquidator shall, on the order of the Tribunal, forthwith take into his
custody or under his control all the property, effects and actionable claims to which the
Directions of
Tribunal on
report of
Company
Liquidator.
Custody of
company’s
properties.

126
company is or appears to be entitled to and take such steps and measures, as may be
necessary, to protect and preserve the properties of the company.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), all the property and effects
of the company shall be deemed to be in the custody of the Tribunal from the date of the
order for the winding up of the company.
(3) On an application by the Company Liquidator or otherwise, the Tribunal may, at
any time after the making of a winding up order, require any contributory for the time being
on the list of contributories, and any trustee, receiver, banker, agent, officer or other employee
of the company, to pay, deliver, surrender or transfer forthwith, or within such time as the
Tribunal directs, to the Company Liquidator, any money, property or books and papers in
his custody or under his control to which the company is prima facie entitled.
259. (1) The promoters, directors, officers and employees, past and present, of the
company shall extend full co-operation to the Company Liquidator in discharge of his
functions and duties.
(2) Where any person, without reasonable cause, fails to discharge his obligations
under sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which
the default continues, or with both.
260. (1) As soon as may be after the passing of a winding up order by the Tribunal,
the Tribunal shall settle a list of contributories, cause rectification of register of members in
all cases where rectification is required in pursuance of this Act and shall cause the assets
of the company to be applied for the discharge of its liability:
Provided that where it appears to the Tribunal that it would not be necessary to make
calls on or adjust the rights of contributories, the Tribunal may dispense with the settlement
of a list of contributories.
(2) In settling the list of contributories, the Tribunal shall distinguish between those
who are contributories in their own right and those who are contributories as being
representatives of, or liable for the debts of, others.
(3) While settling the list of contributories, the Tribunal shall include every present
and past member who shall be liable to contribute to the assets of the company to an
amount sufficient for payment of the debts and liabilities and the costs, charges and expenses
of winding up, and for the adjustment of the rights of the contributories among themselves,
subject to the following conditions, namely:—
(a) a past member shall not be liable to contribute if he has ceased to be a
member for the preceding one year or more before the commencement of the winding
up;
(b) a past member shall not be liable to contribute in respect of any debt or
liability of the company contracted after he ceased to be a member;
(c) no past member shall be liable to contribute unless it appears to the Tribunal
that the present members are unable to satisfy the contributions required to be made
by them in pursuance of this Act;
(d) in the case of a company limited by shares, no contribution shall be required
from any past or present member exceeding the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares
in respect of which he is liable as such member;
(e) in the case of a company limited by guarantee, no contribution shall be
required from any past or present member exceeding the amount undertaken to be
contributed by him to the assets of the company in the event of its being wound up
but if the company has a share capital, such member shall be liable to contribute to the
Directors,
officers and
employees to
co-operate
with
Company
Liquidator.
Settlement of
list of
contributories
and
application of
assets.

127
extent of any sum unpaid on any shares held by him as if the company were a
company limited by shares.
261.  In the case of a limited company, any director or manager, whether past or
present, whose liability is unlimited under the provisions of this Act, shall, in addition to his
liability, if any, to contribute as an ordinary member, be liable to make a further contribution
as if he were at the commencement of winding up, a member of an unlimited company:
Provided that —
(a) a past director or manager shall not be liable to make such further
contribution, if he has ceased to hold office for a year or upwards before the
commencement of the winding up;
(b) a past director or manager shall not be liable to make such further contribution
in respect of any debt or liability of the company contracted after he ceased to hold
office;
(c) subject to the articles of the company, a director or manager shall not be
liable to make such further contribution unless the Tribunal deems it necessary to
require the contribution in order to satisfy the debts and liabilities of the company,
and the costs, charges and expenses of the winding up.
262. (1) The Tribunal may, while passing an order of winding up of a company, direct
that there shall be, a committee of inspection for the company to advise the Company
Liquidator and to report to the Tribunal on such matters as the Tribunal may direct.
(2) A committee of inspection appointed by the Tribunal shall consist of not more
than twelve members, being creditors and contributories of the company or such other
persons in such proportion as the Tribunal may, keeping in view the circumstances of the
company under liquidation, direct.
(3) The Company Liquidator shall convene a meeting of creditors and contributories,
as ascertained from the books and documents, of the company within thirty days from the
date of order of winding up for enabling the Tribunal to determine the persons who may be
members of the committee of inspection.
(4) The committee of inspection shall have the right to inspect the books of account
and other documents, assets and properties of the company under liquidation at a reasonable
time.
(5) The provisions relating to the convening of the meetings, the procedure to be
followed thereat and other matters relating to conduct of business by the committee shall
be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The meeting of committee of inspection shall be chaired by the Company Liquidator.
263. (1) The Company Liquidator shall make periodical reports to the Tribunal and in
any case make a report at the end of each quarter with respect to the progress of the winding
up of the company in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Tribunal may, on an application by the Company Liquidator, review the orders
made by it and make such modifications as it thinks fit.
264. (1) The Tribunal may, at any time after making a winding up order on an application
of creditors or any other person, if satisfied, make an order that it is just and fair that an
opportunity to revive and rehabilitate the company be provided staying the proceedings
for such time not exceeding one hundred and eighty days and on such terms and conditions
as it thinks fit:
Provided that an order under this sub-section shall be made by the Tribunal only on
an application made to it enclosing a scheme for rehabilitation after three-fourth of secured
creditors and one-half of unsecured creditors in value of the company have resolved at a
Obligations of
directors and
managers.
Committee
of inspection.
Submission of
periodical
reports to the
Tribunal.
Power of
Tribunal on
application
for stay of
winding up.

128
meeting convened by each class of creditors by giving their consent in writing to the
scheme.
(2) The Tribunal may, while passing the order under sub-section ( 1), require the
applicant to furnish such security as to costs as it considers fit.
(3) Where an order under sub-section (1) is passed by the Tribunal, the provisions of
Chapter XIX shall be followed in respect of the consideration and sanction of the scheme of
revival of the company.
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Tribunal may at any
time after making a winding up order, on receipt of application of Company Liquidator, make
an order staying the winding up proceedings or any part thereof, for such time and on such
terms and conditions as it thinks fit.
(5) The Tribunal may, before making an order, on any application under this section,
require the Company Liquidator to furnish to it a report with respect to any facts or matters
which are in his opinion relevant to the application.
(6) A copy of every order made under this section shall forthwith be forwarded by the
Company Liquidator to the Registrar who shall make an endorsement of the order in his
books and records relating to the company.
265. (1) Subject to directions by the Tribunal, if any, in this regard, the Company
Liquidator, in a winding up by the Tribunal, shall have the power—
(a) to carry on the business of the company so far as may be necessary for the
beneficial winding up of the company;
(b) to do all acts and to execute, in the name and on behalf of the company, all
deeds, receipts, and other documents, and for that purpose, to use, when necessary,
the company’s seal;
(c) to sell the immovable and movable property and actionable claims of the
company by public auction or private contract, with power to transfer such property
to any person or body corporate, or to sell the same in parcels;
(d) to sell the whole of the undertaking of the company as a going concern;
(e) to raise on the security of the assets of the company, any money required;
(f) to institute or defend any suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding, civil or
criminal, in the name and on behalf of the company;
(g) to invite and settle claim of creditors and distribute sale proceeds in
accordance with priorities established by this Act;
(h) to inspect the records and returns of the company on the files of the Registrar
or any other authority;
(i) to prove rank and claim in the insolvency of any contributory for any balance
against his estate, and to receive dividends in the insolvency, in respect of that
balance, as a separate debt due from the insolvent, and rateably with the other separate
creditors;
(j) to draw, accept, make and endorse any bill of exchange, hundi or promissory
note in the name and on behalf of the company, with the same effect with respect to
the liability of the company as if the bill, hundi, or note had been drawn, accepted,
made or endorsed by or on behalf of the company in the course of its business;
(k) to take out, in his official name, letters of administration to any deceased
contributory, and to do in his official name any other act necessary for obtaining
payment of any money due from a contributory or his estate which cannot be
conveniently done in the name of the company, and in all such cases, the money due
Powers and
duties of
Company
Liquidator.

129
shall, for the purpose of enabling the Company Liquidator to take out the letters of
administration or recover the money, be deemed to be due to the Company Liquidator
himself;
(l) to obtain any professional assistance, and for protection of the assets of the
company appoint an agent to do any business which the Company Liquidator is
unable to do himself;
(m) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary for the winding up
of the company and distribution of its assets; and
(n) to apply to the Tribunal for such orders or directions as may be necessary
for the winding up of the company.
(2) The exercise of powers by the Company Liquidator under sub-section (1) shall be
subject to the overall control of the Tribunal.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), the Company Liquidator shall
perform such duties as the Tribunal may specify in this behalf.
266. (1) The Company Liquidator may, with the sanction of the Tribunal, appoint one
or more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal
practitioners or such other professionals as may be necessary to assist him in the performance
of his duties and functions under the Act.
(2) Any person appointed under this section shall disclose forthwith to the Tribunal
in the prescribed form any conflict of interest or lack of independence in respect of his
appointment.
267. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Company Liquidator shall, in the
administration of the assets of the company and the distribution thereof among its creditors,
have regard to any directions which may be given by the resolution of the creditors or
contributories at any general meeting or by the committee of inspection.
(2) Any directions given by the creditors or contributories at any general meeting
shall, in case of conflict, be deemed to over ride any directions given by the committee of
inspection.
(3) The Company Liquidator—
(a) may summon meetings of the creditors or contributories, whenever he thinks
fit, for the purpose of ascertaining their wishes; and
(b) shall summon such meetings at such times, as the creditors or contributories,
as the case may be, may, by resolution, direct, or whenever requested in writing to do
so by not less than one-tenth in value of the creditors or contributories, as the case
may be.
(4) Any person aggrieved by any act or decision of the Company Liquidator may
apply to the Tribunal, and the Tribunal may confirm, reverse or modify the act or decision
complained of and make such further order as it thinks just in the circumstances.
268. (1) The Company Liquidator shall keep proper books in such manner as may be
prescribed in which he shall cause entries or minutes to be made of proceedings at meetings
and of such other matters as may be prescribed.
(2) Any creditor or contributory may, subject to the control of the Tribunal, inspect
any such books, personally or through his agent.
269. (1) The Company Liquidator shall maintain proper and regular books of accounts
including accounts of receipts and payments made by him in such form and manner as may
be prescribed.
Provision for
professional
assistance to
Company
Liquidator.
Books to be
kept by
Company
Liquidator.
Audit of
Company
Liquidator’s
accounts .
Exercise and
control of
Company
Liquidator’s
powers.

130
(2) The Company Liquidator shall, at such times as may be prescribed but not less
than twice in each year during his tenure of office, present to the Tribunal an account of the
receipts and payments as such liquidator in the prescribed form in duplicate, which shall be
verified by a declaration in the prescribed form and manner.
(3) The Tribunal shall cause the accounts to be audited in such manner as it thinks fit,
and for the purpose of the audit, the Company Liquidator shall furnish the Tribunal with
such vouchers and information as the Tribunal may require, and the Tribunal may, at any
time, require the production of, and inspect, any books of account kept by the Company
Liquidator.
(4) When the accounts of the company have been audited, one copy thereof shall be
filed by the Company Liquidator with the Tribunal, and the other copy shall be delivered to
the Registrar and it shall be open to inspection by any creditor, contributory or person
interested.
(5) Where an account referred to in sub-section (4) relates to a Government company,
the Company Liquidator shall forward a copy thereof—
(a) to the Central Government, if that Government is a member of the Government
company; or
(b) to any State Government, if that Government is a member of the Government
company; or
(c) to the Central Government and any State Government, if both the
Governments are members of the Government company.
(6) The Company Liquidator shall cause the accounts when audited, or a summary
thereof, to be printed, and shall send a printed copy of the accounts or summary thereof by
post to every creditor and every contributory:
Provided that the Tribunal may dispense with the compliance of the provisions of this
sub-section in any case it deems fit.
270. (1) The Tribunal may, at any time after passing of a winding up order, pass an
order requiring any contributory for the time being on the list of contributories to pay, in the
manner directed by the order, any money due to the company, from him or from the estate of
the person whom he represents, exclusive of any money payable by him or the estate by
virtue of any call in pursuance of this Act.
(2) The Tribunal, in making such an order, may,—
(a) in the case of an unlimited company, allow to the contributory, by way of
set-off, any money due to him or to the estate which he represents, from the company,
on any independent dealing or contract with the company, but not any money due to
him as a member of the company in respect of any dividend or profit; and
(b) in the case of a limited company, allow to any director or manager whose
liability is unlimited, or to his estate, such set-off.
(3) In the case of any company, whether limited or unlimited, when all the creditors
have been paid in full, any money due on any account whatever to a contributory from the
company may be allowed to him by way of set-off against any subsequent call.
271. The Tribunal may, at any time after the passing of a winding up order, and either
before or after it has ascertained the sufficiency of the assets of the company,—
(a) make calls on all or any of the contributories for the time being on the list of
the contributories, to the extent of their liability, for payment of any money which the
Tribunal considers necessary to satisfy the debts and liabilities of the company, and
Power of
Tribunal to
make calls.
Payment of
debts by
contributory
and extent of
set-off.

131
the costs, charges and expenses of winding up, and for the adjustment of the rights of
the contributories among themselves; and
(b) make an order for payment of any calls so made.
272. The Tribunal shall adjust the rights of the contributories among themselves and
distribute any surplus among the persons entitled thereto.
273. The Tribunal may, in the event of the assets of a company being insufficient to
satisfy its liabilities, make an order for the payment out of the assets, of the costs, charges
and expenses incurred in the winding up, in such order of priority inter se as the Tribunal
thinks just.
274. (1) The Tribunal may, at any time after the appointment of a provisional liquidator
or the passing of a winding up order, summon before it any officer of the company or person
known or suspected to have in his possession any property or books or papers, of the
company, or known or suspected to be indebted to the company, or any person whom the
Tribunal thinks to be capable of giving information concerning the promotion, formation,
trade, dealings, property, books or papers, or affairs of the company.
(2) The Tribunal may examine any officer or person so summoned on oath concerning
the matters aforesaid, either by word of mouth or on written interrogatories, and may, in the
former case, reduce his answers to writing and require him to sign them.
(3) The Tribunal may require any officer or person so summoned to produce any
books and papers relating to the company in his custody or power, but, where he claims any
lien on books or papers produced by him, the production shall be without prejudice to such
lien, and the Tribunal shall have power to determine all questions relating to that lien.
(4) The Tribunal may direct the liquidator to file before it a report in respect of property,
debt, etc., of the company in possession of other persons.
(5) If Tribunal finds that—
(a) a person is indebted to the company, the Tribunal may order him to pay to
the provisional liquidator or, as the case may be, the liquidator at such time and in
such manner as the Tribunal may consider just, the amount in which he is indebted, or
any part thereof, either in full discharge of the whole amount or not, as the Tribunal
thinks fit, with or without costs of the examination;
(b) a person is possessing any property belonging to the company, the Tribunal
may order him to deliver to the provisional liquidator or, as the case may be, the
liquidator, that property or any part thereof, at such time, in such manner and on such
terms as to the Tribunal may consider just.
(6) If any officer or person so summoned fails to appear before the Tribunal at the time
appointed without a reasonable cause, the Tribunal may impose an appropriate cost.
(7) Every order made under sub-section (5) shall be executed in the same manner as
decrees for the payment of money or for the delivery of property under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.
(8) Any person making any payment or delivery in pursuance of an order made under
sub-section (5) shall by such payment or delivery be, unless otherwise directed by such
order, discharged from all liability whatsoever in respect of such debt or property.
275. (1) Where an order has been made for the winding up of a company by the
Tribunal, and the Company Liquidator has made a report to the Tribunal under this Act,
stating that in his opinion a fraud has been committed by any person in the promotion or
formation of the company, or by any officer of the company in relation to the company since
its formation, the Tribunal may, after considering the report, direct that such person or
officer shall attend before the Tribunal on a day appointed by it for that purpose, and be
Adjustment of
rights of
contributories.
Power to order
costs.
Power to
summon
persons
suspected of
having
property of
company, etc.
5 of 1908.
Power to
order
examination
of promoters,
directors, etc.

132
examined as to the promotion or formation or the conduct of the business of the company
or as to his conduct and dealings as an officer thereof.
(2) The Company Liquidator shall take part in the examination, and for that purpose
he or it may, if specially authorised by the Tribunal in that behalf, employ such legal
assistance as may be sanctioned by the Tribunal.
(3) The person shall be examined on oath and shall answer all such questions as the
Tribunal may put, or allow to be put, to him.
(4) A person ordered to be examined under this section —
(a) shall, before his examination, be furnished at his own cost with a copy of the
Company Liquidator’s report; and
(b) may at his own cost employ chartered accountants or company secretaries
or cost accountants or legal practitioners entitled to appear before the Tribunal under
section 393, who shall be at liberty to put to him such questions as the Tribunal may
consider just for the purpose of enabling him to explain or qualify any answers given
by him.
(5) If any such person applies to the Tribunal to be exculpated from any charges made
or suggested against him, it shall be the duty of the Company Liquidator to appear on the
hearing of such application and call the attention of the Tribunal to any matters which
appear to the Company Liquidator to be relevant.
(6) If the Tribunal, after considering any evidence given or hearing witnesses called
by the Company Liquidator, allows the application made under sub-section (5), the Tribunal
may order payment to the applicant of such costs as it may think fit.
(7) Notes of the examination shall be taken down in writing, and shall be read over to
or by, and signed by, the person examined, and may thereafter be used in evidence against
him, and shall be open to the inspection by any creditor or contributory at all reasonable
times.
(8) The Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, adjourn the examination from time to time.
(9) An examination under this section may, if the Tribunal so directs, be held before
any person or authority authorised by the Tribunal.
(10) The powers of the Tribunal under this section as to the conduct of the examination,
but not as to costs, may be exercised by the person or authority before whom the examination
is held in pursuance of sub-section ( 9).
276. At any time either before or after passing a winding up order, if the Tribunal is
satisfied that a contributory or a person having property, accounts or papers of the company
in his possession is about to quit India or otherwise to abscond, or is about to remove or
conceal any of his property, for the purpose of evading payment of calls or of avoiding
examination respecting the affairs of the company, the Tribunal may cause—
(a) the contributory to be arrested and kept in custody until such time as the
Tribunal may order; and
(b) his books and papers and movable property to be seized and safely kept
until such time as the Tribunal may order.
277. (1) When the affairs of a company have been completely wound up, the Company
Liquidator shall make an application to the Tribunal for dissolution of such company.
(2) The Tribunal shall on an application filed by the Company Liquidator under sub-
section ( 1) or when the Tribunal is of the opinion that it is just and reasonable in the
circumstances of the case that an order for the dissolution of the company should be made,
make an order that the company be dissolved from the date of the order, and the company
shall be dissolved accordingly.
Arrest of
person trying
to quit India
or abscond.
Dissolution of
company by
Tribunal.

133
(3) A copy of the order shall, within thirty days from the date thereof, be forwarded by
the Company Liquidator to the Registrar who shall record in the register relating to the
company a minute of the dissolution of the company.
(4) If the Company Liquidator makes a default in forwarding a copy as aforesaid, he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day
during which the default continues.
278. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the operation or enforcement of any order
made by any Court in any proceedings for the winding up of a company immediately before
the commencement of this Act and an appeal against such order shall be filed before such
authority competent to hear such appeals before such commencement.
PART II
Voluntary Winding Up
279.  A company may be wound up voluntarily,—
(a) if the company in general meeting passes a resolution requiring the company
to be wound up voluntarily as a result of the expiry of the period for its duration, if
any, fixed by its articles or on the occurrence of any event in respect of which the
articles provide that the company should be dissolved; or
(b) if the company passes a special resolution that the company be wound up
voluntarily.
280. ( 1) Where it is proposed to wind up a company voluntarily, its director or
directors, or in case the company has more than two directors, the majority of its directors,
shall, at a meeting of the Board, make a declaration verified by an affidavit to the effect that
they have made a full inquiry into the affairs of the company and they have formed an
opinion that the company has no debt or whether it will be able to pay its debts in full from
the proceeds of assets sold in voluntary winding up.
(2) A declaration made as aforesaid shall have no effect for the purposes of this Act,
unless —
(a) it is made within the five weeks immediately preceding the date of the
passing of the resolution for winding up the company and it is delivered to the
Registrar for registration before that date;
(b) it contains a declaration that the company is not being wound up to defraud
any person or persons;
(c) it is accompanied by a copy of the report of the auditors of the company
prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Act, on the profit and loss account
of the company for the period commencing from the date up to which the last such
account was prepared and ending with the latest practicable date immediately before
the making of the declaration and the balance sheet of the company made out as on
that date which would also contain a statement of the company’s assets and liabilities
on that date; and
(d) where there are any assets of the company, it is accompanied by a report of
the valuation of the assets of the company prepared by a registered valuer.
(3) Where the company is wound up in pursuance of a resolution passed within a
period of five weeks after the making of the declaration, but its debts are not paid or
provided for in full, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is shown, that the director or
directors did not have reasonable grounds for his or their opinion under sub-section ( 1).
(4) Any director of a company making a declaration under this section without having
reasonable grounds for the opinion that the company will be able to pay its debts in full
from the proceeds of assets sold in voluntary winding up shall be punishable with
Appeals from
orders made
before
commence-
ment of Act.
Circumstances
in which
company may
be wound up
voluntarily.
Declaration of
solvency in
case of
proposal to
wind up
voluntarily.

134
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to
five years or with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may
extend to three lakh rupees, or with both.
281. (1) The company shall also along with the calling of meeting of the company at
which the resolution for the voluntary winding up is to be proposed, cause a meeting of its
creditors either on the same day or on the next day and shall cause a notice of such meeting
to be sent by registered post to the creditors with the notice of the meeting of the company
under section 279.
(2) The Board of Directors of the company shall—
(a) cause to be presented a full statement of the position of the company’s
affairs together with a list of creditors of the company, if any, copy of declaration
under section 280 and the estimated amount of the claims before such meeting; and
(b) appoint one of the directors to preside at the meeting.
(3) Where two-thirds in value of creditors of the company are of the opinion that—
(a) it is in the interest of all parties that the company be wound up voluntarily,
the company shall be wound up voluntarily; or
(b) the company will not be able to pay for its debts in full from the proceeds of
assets sold in voluntary winding up and pass a resolution that it will be in interest of
all parties if the company is wound up under the supervision of the Tribunal, the
company shall within fourteen days thereafter file an application before the Tribunal.
(4) Notice of any resolution passed at a creditors’ meeting in pursuance of this
section shall be given by the company to the Registrar within ten days of the passing
thereof.
(5) Where any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the
company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees
but which may extend to two lakh rupees and any director or directors who are in default
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with
fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh
rupees, or with both.
282. (1) Where a company has passed a resolution for voluntary winding up and a
resolution under sub-section ( 3) of section 281 is passed, it shall within fourteen days of
the passing of the resolution give notice of the resolution by advertisement in the Official
Gazette and also in some newspaper circulating in the district where the registered office or
the principal office of the company is situate.
(2) If any default is made in complying with sub-section (1), the company and every
officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues.
283. A voluntary winding up shall be deemed to commence on the date of passing of
the resolution for voluntary winding up under section 279.
284. In the case of a voluntary winding up, the company shall from the commencement
of the winding up cease to carry on its business except as far as required for the beneficial
winding up of its business.
285. (1) The company in its general meeting, where a resolution of voluntary winding
up is passed, shall appoint a Company Liquidator from the panel prepared by the Central
Government for the purpose of winding up its affairs and distributing the assets of the
company and recommend the fee to be paid to the Company Liquidator.
Meeting of
creditors.
Publication of
resolution to
wind up
voluntarily.
Commence-
ment of
voluntary
winding up.
Effect of
voluntary
winding up.
Appointment
of Company
Liquidator.

135
(2) Where the creditors have passed a resolution for winding up the company under
sub-section (3) of section 281, the appointment of Company Liquidator under this section
shall be effective only after it is approved by the majority of creditors in value of the
company:
Provided that where such creditors do not approve the appointment of such Company
Liquidator, creditors shall appoint another Company Liquidator.
(3) The creditors while approving the appointment of Company Liquidator appointed
by the company or appointing the Company Liquidator of their own choice, as the case may
be, pass suitable resolution with regard to the fee of the Company Liquidator.
(4) On appointment as Company Liquidator, such liquidator shall file a declaration in
the prescribed form disclosing conflict of interest or lack of independence in respect of his
appointment, if any, with the company and the creditors and such obligation shall continue
throughout the term of his or its appointment.
286. (1) A Company Liquidator appointed under section 285 may be removed by the
company where his appointment has been made by the company and, by the creditors,
where the appointment is approved or made by such creditors.
(2) Where a Company Liquidator is sought to be removed under this section, he shall
be given a notice in writing stating the grounds of removal from his office by the company
or the creditors, as the case may be.
(3) Where three-fourth members of the company or three-fourth of creditors in value,
as the case may be, after consideration of the reply, if any, filed by the Company Liquidator,
in their meeting decide to remove the Company Liquidator, he shall vacate his office.
(4) If a vacancy occurs by death, resignation, removal or otherwise in the office of
any Company Liquidator appointed under section 285, the company or the creditors, as the
case may be, fill the vacancy in the manner specified in that section.
287. (1) The company shall give notice to the Registrar of the appointment of a
Company Liquidator along with the name and particulars of the Company Liquidator, of
every vacancy occurring in the office of Company Liquidator, and of the name of the
Company Liquidator appointed to fill every such vacancy within ten days of such
appointment or the occurrence of such vacancy.
(2) Where any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the
company and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which the default continues.
288. On the appointment of a Company Liquidator, all the powers of the Board of
Directors and of the managing or whole-time directors and manager, if any, shall cease,
except for the purpose of giving notice of such appointment of the Company Liquidator to
the Registrar.
289. (1) The Company Liquidator shall perform such functions and discharge such
duties as determined from time to time by the company or the creditors, as the case may be.
(2) The Company Liquidator shall settle the list of contributories, which shall be
prima facie evidence of the liability of the persons named therein to be contributories.
(3) The Company Liquidator shall call general meetings of the company for the purpose
of obtaining the sanction of the company by ordinary or special resolution, as the case may
require, or for any other purpose he may consider necessary.
(4) The Company Liquidator shall maintain regular and proper books of account in
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed and the members and creditors and any
officer authorised by the Central Government may inspect such books of account.
Power to
remove and
fill vacancy
of Company
Liquidator.
Notice of
appointment
of Company
Liquidator to
be given to
Registrar.
Cesser of
Board’s
powers on
appointment
of Company
Liquidator.
Powers and
duties of
Company
Liquidator in
voluntary
winding up.

136
(5)The Company Liquidator shall pay the debts of the company and shall adjust the
rights of the contributories among themselves.
(6) The Company Liquidator shall observe due care and diligence in the discharge of
his duties.
(7) If the Company Liquidator fails to comply with the provisions of this section he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
290. Where there are no creditors of a company, such company in its general meeting
and, where a meeting of creditors is held under section 281, such creditors may appoint
such committees as considered appropriate to supervise the voluntary liquidation and
assist the Company Liquidator in discharging his or its functions.
291. (1) The Company Liquidator shall report quarterly on the progress of winding up
of the company in such form and manner as may be prescribed to the members and creditors
and shall also call a meeting of the members and the creditors as and when necessary but at
least one meeting each of creditors and members in every quarter and apprise them of the
progress of the winding up of the company in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) If the Company Liquidator fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section (1),
he shall be punishable, in respect to each such failure, with fine which may extend to ten
lakh rupees.
292.  (1) Where a report is received from the Company Liquidator that a fraud has
been committed by any person in respect of the company, the Tribunal shall, without
prejudice to the process of winding up, order for investigation under section 183 and on
consideration of the report of such investigation, the Tribunal may pass such order and
give such directions under this Chapter as it may consider necessary including the direction
that such person shall attend before the Tribunal on a day appointed by it for that purpose
and be examined as to the promotion or formation or the conduct of the business of the
company or as to his conduct and dealings as officer thereof or otherwise.
(2) The provisions of section 275 shall apply mutatis mutandis in relation to any
examination directed under sub-section (1).
293.  ( 1) As soon as the affairs of a company are fully wound up, the Company
Liquidator shall prepare a report of the winding up showing that the property and assets of
the company have been disposed of and its debt fully discharged or discharged to the
satisfaction of the creditors and thereafter call a general meeting of the company for the
purpose of laying the final winding up accounts before it and giving any explanation
therefor.
(2) The meeting referred to in sub-section (1) shall be called by the Company Liquidator
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) If the majority of the members of the company after considering the report of the
Company Liquidator are satisfied that the company shall be wound up, they may pass a
resolution for its dissolution.
(4) Within two weeks after the meeting, the Company Liquidator shall—
(a) send to the Registrar—
(i) a copy of the final winding up accounts of the company and shall make
a return in respect of each meeting and of the date thereof, and
(ii) copies of the resolutions passed in the meetings; and
(b) file an application along with his report under sub-section (1) in such manner
as may prescribed before the Tribunal for passing an order of dissolution of the
company.
Appointment
of
committees.
Company
Liquidator to
submit report
on progress of
winding up.
Report of
Company
Liquidator to
Tribunal for
examination
of persons.
Final
dissolution of
company.

137
(5) If the Tribunal is satisfied, after considering the report of the Company Liquidator
that the process of winding up has been fair and just, the Tribunal shall pass an order
dissolving the company within sixty days of the receipt of the application under sub-
section (4).
(6) The Company Liquidator shall file a copy of the order under sub-section (5) with
the Registrar within thirty day.
(7) The Registrar, on receiving the copy of the order passed by the Tribunal under
sub-section (5), shall forthwith publish a notice in the Official Gazette that the company is
dissolved.
(8) Where the Company Liquidator fails to comply with the provisions of this section,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
294. (1) Where a company (the transferor company) is proposed to be, or is in the
course of being, wound up voluntarily and the whole or any part of its business or property
is proposed to be transferred or sold to another company (the transferee company), the
Company Liquidator of the transferor company may, with the sanction of a special resolution
of the company conferring on him either a general authority or an authority in respect of any
particular arrangement,—
(a) receive, by way of compensation wholly or in part for the transfer or sale,
shares, policies, or other like interest in the transferee company, for distribution among
the members of the transferor company; or
(b) enter into any other arrangement whereby the members of the transferor
company may, in lieu of receiving cash, shares, policies or other like interest or in
addition thereto, participate in the profits of, or receive any other benefit from, the
transferee company:
Provided that no such arrangement shall be entered into without the consent of the
secured creditors.
(2) Any transfer, sale or other arrangement in pursuance of this section shall be
binding on the members of the transferor company.
(3) Any member of the transferor company who did not vote in favour of the special
resolution and expresses his dissent therefrom in writing addressed to the Company
Liquidator and left at the registered office of the company within seven days after the
passing of the resolution, may require the liquidator either—
(a) to abstain from carrying the resolution into effect; or
(b) to purchase his interest at a price to be determined by agreement or the
registered valuer.
(4) If the Company Liquidator elects to purchase the member’s interest, the purchase
money, raised by him in such manner as may be determined by a special resolution, shall be
paid before the company is dissolved.
295.  Subject to the provisions of this Act as to overriding preferential payments
under section 301, the assets of a company shall, on its winding up, be applied in satisfaction
of its liabilities pari passu and, subject to such application, shall, unless the articles otherwise
provide, be distributed among the members according to their rights and interests in the
company.
296. (1) Any arrangement other than the arrangement referred to in section 294 entered
into between the company which is about to be, or is in the course of being wound up and
its creditors shall be binding on the company and on the creditors if it is sanctioned by a
special resolution of the company and acceded to by the creditors who hold three-fourths
in value of the total amount due to all the creditors of the company.
Power of
Company
Liquidator to
accept shares,
etc., as
consideration
for sale of
property of
company.
Arrangement
when binding
on company
and creditors.
Distribution
of property of
company.

138
(2) Any creditor or contributory may, within three weeks from the completion of the
arrangement, apply to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may thereupon amend, vary, confirm or
set aside the arrangement.
297. (1) The Company Liquidator or any contributory or creditor may apply to the
Tribunal—
(a) to determine any question arising in the course of the winding up of a
company; or
(b) to exercise as respects the enforcing of calls, the staying of proceedings or
any other matter, all or any of the powers which the Tribunal might exercise if the
company were being wound up by the Tribunal.
(2) The Company Liquidator or any creditor or contributory may apply to the Tribunal
for an order setting aside any attachment, distress or execution put into force against the
estate or effects of the company after the commencement of the winding up.
(3) The Tribunal, if satisfied on an application under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section
(2) that the determination of the question or the required exercise of power or the order
applied for will be just and beneficial, may allow the application on such terms and conditions
as it thinks fit or may make such other order on the application as it thinks fit.
(4) A copy of an order staying the proceedings in the winding up, made under this
section, shall forthwith be forwarded by the company, or otherwise as may be prescribed, to
the Registrar, who shall make a minute of the order in his books relating to the company.
298. All costs, charges and expenses properly incurred in the winding up, including
the fee of the Company Liquidator, shall, subject to the rights of secured creditors, if any, be
payable out of the assets of the company in priority to all other claims.
PART III
Provisions applicable to every mode of winding up
299. In every winding up, subject, in the case of insolvent companies, to the application
in accordance with the provisions of this Act of the law of insolvency, all debts payable on
a contingency, and all claims against the company, present or future, certain or contingent,
ascertained or sounding only in damages, shall be admissible to proof against the company.
300. (1) In the winding up of an insolvent company, the same rules shall prevail and
be observed with regard to—
(a) debts provable;
(b) the valuation of annuities and future and contingent liabilities; and
(c) the respective rights of secured and unsecured creditors,
as are in force for the time being under the law of insolvency with respect to the estates of
persons adjudged insolvent:
Provided that the security of every secured creditor shall be deemed to be subject to
a pari passu charge in favour of the workmen to the extent of the workmen’s portion therein,
and, where a secured creditor, instead of relinquishing his security and proving his debts,
opts to realise his security,—
(i) the liquidator shall be entitled to represent the workmen and enforce such
charge;
(ii) any amount realised by the liquidator by way of enforcement of such charge
shall be applied rateably for the discharge of workmen’s dues; and
(iii) so much of the debts due to such secured creditor as could not be realised
by him or the amount of the workmen’s portion in his security, whichever is less, shall
rank pari passu with the workmen’s dues for the purposes of section 301.
Power to
apply to
Tribunal to
have questions
determined,
etc.
Costs of
voluntary
winding up.
Debts of all
descriptions
to be admitted
to proof.
Application of
insolvency
rules in
winding up of
insolvent
companies. 

139
(2) All persons who in any such case would be entitled to prove and receive dividends
out of the assets of the company, may come in under the winding up, and make such claims
against the company as they respectively are entitled to make by virtue of this section:
Provided that if a secured creditor, instead of relinquishing his security and proving
his debts, proceeds to realise his security, he shall be liable to pay his portion of the
expenses incurred by the liquidator, including a provisional liquidator, if any, for the
preservation of the security before its realisation by the secured creditor.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, the portion of expenses incurred
by the liquidator for the preservation of a security which the secured creditor shall be liable
to pay shall be the whole of the expenses less an amount which bears to such expenses the
same proportion as the workmen’s portion in relation to the security bears to the value of
the security.
(3) For the purposes of this section, section 301 and section 302,—
(a)  “workmen’’, in relation to a company, means the employees of the company,
being workmen within the meaning of clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947;
(b) “workmen’s dues’’, in relation to a company, means the aggregate of the
following sums due from the company to its workmen, namely:—
(i) all wages or salary including wages payable for time or piece work and
salary earned wholly or in part by way of commission of any workman in respect
of services rendered to the company and any compensation payable to any
workman under any of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947;
(ii) all accrued holiday remuneration becoming payable to any workman
or, in the case of his death, to any other person in his right on the termination of
his employment before or by the effect of the winding up order or resolution;
(iii) unless the company is being wound up voluntarily merely for the
purposes of reconstruction or amalgamation with another company or unless
the company has, at the commencement of the winding up, under such a contract
with insurers as is mentioned in section 14 of the Workmen’s Compensation
Act, 1923, rights capable of being transferred to and vested in the workmen, all
amount due in respect of any compensation or liability for compensation under
the said Act in respect of the death or disablement of any workman of the
company;
(iv) all sums due to any workman from a provident fund, a pension fund,
a gratuity fund or any other fund for the welfare of the workmen, maintained by
the company;
(c) “workmen’s portion’’, in relation to the security of any secured creditor of a
company, means the amount which bears to the value of the security the same proportion
as the amount of the workmen’s dues bears to the aggregate of the amount of workmen’s
dues and the amount of the debts due to the secured creditors.
Illustration
The value of the security of a secured creditor of a company is Rs.1,00,000. The total
amount of the workmen’s dues is Rs.1,00,000. The amount of the debts due from the company to
its secured creditors is Rs.3,00,000. The aggregate of the amount of workmen’s dues and the
amount of debts due to secured creditors is Rs.4,00,000. The workmen’s portion of the security
is, therefore, one-fourth of the value of the security, that is Rs.25,000.
301. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act or
any other law for the time being in force, in the winding up of a company,—
14 of 1947.
Overriding
preferential
payments.
14 of 1947.
8 of 1923.

140
(a) workmen’s dues, and
(b) debts due to secured creditors to the extent such debts rank under
clause (iii) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 300 pari passu with such dues,
shall be paid in priority to all other debts.
(2) The debts payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid in full, unless the assets are
insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions.
302. (1) In a winding up, subject to the provisions of section 301, there shall be paid
in priority to all other debts,—
(a) all revenues, taxes, cesses and rates due from the company to the Central or
a State Government or to a local authority at the relevant date, and having become
due and payable within the twelve months immediately before that date;
(b) all wages or salary including wages payable for time or piece work and
salary earned wholly or in part by way of commission of any employee in respect of
services rendered to the company and due for a period not exceeding four months
within the twelve months immediately before the relevant date, subject to the condition
that the amount payable under this clause to any workman shall not exceed such
amount as may be prescribed;
(c) all accrued holiday remuneration becoming payable to any employee, or in
the case of his death, to any other person claiming under him, on the termination of
his employment before, or by the winding up order, or, as the case may be, the
dissolution of the company;
(d) unless the company is being wound up voluntarily merely for the purposes
of reconstruction or amalgamation with another company, all amount due in respect
of contributions payable during the twelve months immediately before the relevant
date by the company as the employer of any persons under the Employees’ State
Insurance Act, 1948 or any other law for the time being in force;
(e) unless the company has, at the commencement of winding up, under such a
contract with any insurer as is mentioned in section 14 of the Workmen’s Compensation
Act, 1923, rights capable of being transferred to and vested in the workmen, all
amount due in respect of any compensation or liability for compensation under the
said Act in respect of the death or disablement of any employee of the company:
Provided that where any compensation under the said Act is a weekly payment,
the amount payable under this clause shall be taken to be the amount of the lump sum
for which such weekly payment could, if redeemable, be redeemed, if the employer
has made an application under that Act;
(f) all sums due to any employee from a provident fund, a pension fund, a
gratuity fund or any other fund for the welfare of the employees, maintained by the
company; and
(g) the expenses of any investigation held in pursuance of sections 184 and
187, in so far as they are payable by the company.
(2) Where any payment has been made to any employee of a company on account of
wages or salary or accrued holiday remuneration, himself or, in the case of his death, to any
other person claiming through him, out of money advanced by some person for that purpose,
the person by whom the money was advanced shall, in a winding up, have a right of priority
in respect of the money so advanced and paid, up to the amount by which the sum in
respect of which the employee or other person in his right would have been entitled to
priority in the winding up has been reduced by reason of the payment having been made.
Preferential
payments.
34 of 1948.
8 of 1923.

141
(3) The debts enumerated in this section shall—
(a) rank equally among themselves and be paid in full, unless the assets are
insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions; and
(b) so far as the assets of the company available for payment to general creditors
are insufficient to meet them, have priority over the claims of holders of debentures
under any floating charge created by the company, and be paid accordingly out of
any property comprised in or subject to that charge.
(4) Subject to the retention of such sums as may be necessary for the costs and
expenses of the winding up, the debts under this section shall be discharged forthwith so
far as the assets are sufficient to meet them, and in the case of the debts to which priority is
given by clause (d) of sub-section (1), formal proof thereof shall not be required except in so
far as may be otherwise prescribed.
(5) In the event of a landlord or other person distraining or having distrained on any
goods or effects of the company within three months immediately before the date of a
winding up order, the debts to which priority is given by this section shall be a first charge
on the goods or effects so distrained on or the proceeds of the sale thereof:
Provided that, in respect of any money paid under any such charge, the landlord or
other person shall have the same rights of priority as the person to whom the payment is
made.
(6) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) any remuneration in respect of a period of holiday or of absence from work
through sickness or other good cause shall be deemed to be wages in respect of
services rendered to the company during that period;
(b) the expression “accrued holiday remuneration” includes, in relation to any
person, all sums which, by virtue either of his contract of employment or of any
enactment including any order made or direction given thereunder, are payable on
account of the remuneration which would, in the ordinary course, have become payable
to him in respect of a period of holiday, had his employment with the company
continued until he became entitled to be allowed the holiday;
(c) the expression “employee” does not include a workman; and
(d) the expression “relevant date” means—
(i) in the case of a company being wound up by the Tribunal, the date of
appointment or first appointment of a provisional liquidator, or if no such
appointment was made, the date of the winding up order, unless, in either case,
the company had commenced to be wound up voluntarily before that date; and
(ii) in any other case, the date of the passing of the resolution for the
voluntary winding up of the company.
303. (1) Where a company has given preference to a person who is one of the
company’s creditors or a surety or guarantor for any of the company’s debts or other
liabilities, and the company does anything or suffers anything done which has the effect of
putting that person into a position which, in the event of the company going into liquidation,
will be better than the position he would have been in if that thing had not been done prior
to six months of making winding up application, the Tribunal, if satisfied, may order as it
may think fit for restoring the position to what it would have been if the company had not
given that preference.
(2) If the Tribunal is satisfied that there is a preference transfer of property, movable
or immovable, or any delivery of goods, payment, execution made, taken or done by or
against a company within six months before making winding up application, the Tribunal
Fraudulent
preference.

142
may order as it may think fit and may declare such transaction invalid and restore the
position.
304. Any transfer of property, movable or immovable, or any delivery of goods, made
by a company, not being a transfer or delivery made in the ordinary course of its business
or in favour of a purchaser or encumbrance in good faith and for valuable consideration, if
made within a period of one year before the presentation of a petition for winding up by the
Tribunal or the passing of a resolution for voluntary winding up of the company, shall be
void against the Company Liquidator.
305. Any transfer or assignment by a company of all its properties or assets to
trustees for the benefit of all its creditors shall be void.
306. (1) Where a company is being wound up and anything made, taken or done after
the commencement of this Act is invalid under section 303 as a fraudulent preference of a
person interested in property mortgaged or charged to secure the company’s debt, then
without prejudice to any rights or liabilities arising, apart from this provision, the person
preferred shall be subject to the same liabilities, and shall have the same rights, as if he had
undertaken to be personally liable as a surety for the debt, to the extent of the mortgage or
charge on the property or the value of his interest, whichever is less.
(2) The value of the interest of the person preferred shall be determined as at the date
of the transaction constituting the fraudulent preference, as if the interest were free of all
encumbrances other than those to which the mortgage or charge for the company’s debt
was then subject.
(3) On any application made to the Tribunal with respect to any payment on the
ground that the payment was a fraudulent preference of a surety or guarantor, the Tribunal
shall have jurisdiction to determine any questions with respect to the payment arising
between the person to whom the payment was made and the surety or guarantor and to
grant relief in respect thereof, notwithstanding that it is not necessary so to do for the
purposes of the winding up, and for that purpose, may give leave to bring in the surety or
guarantor as a third party as in the case of a suit for the recovery of the sum paid.
(4) The provisions of sub-section ( 3) shall apply mutatis mutandis  in relation to
transactions other than payment of money.
307. Where a company is being wound up, a floating charge on the undertaking or
property of the company created within the twelve months immediately preceding the
commencement of the winding up, shall, unless it is proved that the company immediately
after the creation of the charge was solvent, be invalid, except for the amount of any cash
paid to the company at the time of, or subsequent to the creation of, and in consideration
for, the charge, together with interest on that amount at the rate of five per cent. per annum
or such other rate as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf in the Official
Gazette.
308. (1) Where any part of the property of a company which is being wound up
consists of—
(a) land of any tenure, burdened with onerous covenants;
(b) shares or stocks in companies;
(c) any other property which is unsaleable or is not readily saleable by reason
of the possessor thereof being bound either to the performance of any onerous act or
to the payment of any sum of money; or
(d) unprofitable contracts,
the Company Liquidator may, notwithstanding that he has endeavoured to sell or has taken
possession of the property or exercised any act of ownership in relation thereto or done
anything in pursuance of the contract, with the leave of the Tribunal and subject to the
Transfers not
in good faith to
be void.
Certain
transfers to
be void.
Liabilities and
rights of
certain
persons
fraudulently
preferred.
Effect of
floating
charge.
Disclaimer of
onerous
property.

143
provisions of this section, by writing signed by him, at any time within twelve months after
the commencement of the winding up or such extended period as may be allowed by the
Tribunal, disclaim the property:
Provided that where the Company Liquidator had not become aware of the existence
of any such property within one month from the commencement of the winding up, the
power of disclaiming the property may be exercised at any time within twelve months after
he has become aware thereof or such extended period as may be allowed by the Tribunal.
(2) The disclaimer shall operate to determine, as from the date of disclaimer, the rights,
interest, and liabilities of the company in or in respect of the property disclaimed, but shall
not, except so far as is necessary for the purpose of releasing the company and the property
of the company from liability, affect the rights, interest or liabilities of any other person.
(3) The Tribunal, before or on granting leave to disclaim, may require such notices to
be given to persons interested, and impose such terms as a condition of granting leave, and
make such other order in the matter as the Tribunal considers just.
(4) The Company Liquidator shall not be entitled to disclaim any property in any case
where an application in writing has been made to him by any person interested in the
property requiring him to decide whether he will or will not disclaim and the Company
Liquidator has not, within a period of twenty-eight days after the receipt of the application
or such extended period as may be allowed by the Tribunal, give notice to the applicant that
he intends to apply to the Tribunal for leave to disclaim, and in case the property is a
contract, if the Company Liquidator after such an application as aforesaid does not within the
said period or extended period disclaim the contract, he shall be deemed to have adopted it.
(5) The Tribunal may, on the application of any person who is, as against the Company
Liquidator, entitled to the benefit or subject to the burden of a contract made with the
company, make an order rescinding the contract on such terms as to payment by or to either
party of damages for the non-performance of the contract, or otherwise as the Tribunal
considers just, and any damages payable under the order to any such person may be
proved by him as a debt in the winding up.
(6) The Tribunal may, on an application by any person who either claims any interest
in any disclaimed property or is under any liability not discharged under this Act in respect
of any disclaimed property, and after hearing any such persons as it thinks fit, make an order
for the vesting of the property in, or the delivery of the property to, any person entitled
thereto or to whom it may seem just that the property should be delivered by way of
compensation for such liability as aforesaid, or a trustee for him, and on such terms as the
Tribunal considers just, and on any such vesting order being made, the property comprised
therein shall vest accordingly in the person named therein in that behalf without any
conveyance or assignment for the purpose:
Provided that where the property disclaimed is of a leasehold nature, the Tribunal
shall not make a vesting order in favour of any person claiming under the company, whether
as under-lessee or as mortgagee or holder of a charge by way of demise, except upon the
terms of making that person—
(a) subject to the same liabilities and obligations as those to which the company
was subject under the lease in respect of the property at the commencement of the
winding up; or
(b) if the Tribunal thinks fit, subject only to the same liabilities and obligations
as if the lease had been assigned to that person at that date,
and in either event as if the lease had comprised only the property comprised in the vesting
order, and any mortgagee or under-lessee declining to accept a vesting order upon such
terms shall be excluded from all interest in and security upon the property, and, if there is no
person claiming under the company who is willing to accept an order upon such terms, the

144
Tribunal shall have power to vest the estate and interest of the company in the property in
any person liable, either personally or in a representative character, and either alone or
jointly with the company, to perform the lessee’s covenants in the lease, free and discharged
from all estates, encumbrances and interests created therein by the company.
(7) Any person affected by the operation of a disclaimer under this section shall be
deemed to be a creditor of the company to the amount of the compensation or damages
payable in respect of such effect, and may accordingly prove the amount as a debt in the
winding up.
309. (1) In the case of a voluntary winding up, any transfer of shares in the company,
not being a transfer made to or with the sanction of the Company Liquidator, and any
alteration in the status of the members of the company, made after the commencement of the
winding up, shall be void.
(2) In the case of a winding up by the Tribunal, any disposition of the property,
including actionable claims, of the company, and any transfer of shares in the company or
alteration in the status of its members, made after the commencement of the winding up,
shall, unless the Tribunal otherwise orders, be void.
310. (1) Where any company is being wound up by the Tribunal,—
(a) any attachment, distress or execution put in force, without leave of the
Tribunal against the estate or effects of the company, after the commencement of the
winding up; or
(b) any sale held, without leave of the Tribunal of any of the properties or
effects of the company, after such commencement,
shall be void.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any proceedings for the recovery of any tax
or impost or any dues payable to the Government.
311. (1) If any person, being a past or present officer of a company which, at the time
of the commission of the alleged offence, is being wound up, whether by the Tribunal or
voluntarily, or which is subsequently ordered to be wound up by the Tribunal or which
subsequently passes a resolution for voluntary winding up,—
(a) does not, to the best of his knowledge and belief, fully and truly disclose to
the Company Liquidator all the property, movable and immovable, of the company,
and how and to whom and for what consideration and when the company disposed of
any part thereof, except such part as has been disposed of in the ordinary course of
the business of the company;
(b) does not deliver up to the Company Liquidator, or as he directs, all such part
of the movable and immovable property of the company as is in his custody or under
his control and which he is required by law to deliver up;
(c) does not deliver up to the Company Liquidator, or as he directs, all such
books and papers of the company as are in his custody or under his control and
which he is required by law to deliver up;
(d) within the twelve months immediately before the commencement of the
winding up or at any time thereafter,—
(i) conceals any part of the property of the company to the value of one
thousand rupees or more, or conceals any debt due to or from the company;
(ii) fraudulently removes any part of the property of the company to the
value of one thousand rupees or more;
(iii) conceals, destroys, mutilates or falsifies, or is privy to the concealment,
destruction, mutilation or falsification of, any book or paper affecting or relating
to, the property or affairs of the company;
Transfers,
etc., after
commencement
of winding up
to be void.
Certain
attachments,
executions,
etc., in
winding up by
Tribunal to be
void.
Offences by
officers of
companies in
liquidation.

145
(iv) makes, or is privy to the making of, any false entry in any book or
paper affecting or relating to, the property or affairs of the company;
(v) fraudulently parts with, alters or makes any omission in, or is privy to
the fraudulent parting with, altering or making of any omission in, any book or
paper affecting or relating to the property or affairs of the company;
(vi) by any false representation or other fraud, obtains on credit, for or on
behalf of the company, any property which the company does not subsequently
pay for;
(vii) under the false pretence that the company is carrying on its business,
obtains on credit, for or on behalf of the company, any property which the
company does not subsequently pay for; or
(viii) pawns, pledges or disposes of any property of the company which
has been obtained on credit and has not been paid for, unless such pawning,
pledging or disposing of is in the ordinary course of the business of the company;
(e) makes any material omission in any statement relating to the affairs of the
company;
(f) knowing or believing that a false debt has been proved by any person under
the winding up, fails for a period of one month to inform the Company Liquidator
thereof;
(g) after the commencement of the winding up, prevents the production of any
book or paper affecting or relating to the property or affairs of the company;
(h) after the commencement of the winding up or at any meeting of the creditors
of the company within the twelve months next before the commencement of the
winding up, attempts to account for any part of the property of the company by
fictitious losses or expenses; or
(i) is guilty of any false representation or other fraud for the purpose of obtaining
the consent of the creditors of the company or any of them, to an agreement with
reference to the affairs of the company or to the winding up,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years
but which may extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees:
Provided that it shall be a good defence if the accused proves that he had no intent to
defraud or to conceal the true state of affairs of the company or to defeat the law.
(2) Where any person pawns, pledges or disposes of any property in circumstances
which amount to an offence under sub-clause ( viii) of clause (d) of sub-section (1), every
person who takes in pawn or pledge or otherwise receives the property, knowing it to be
pawned, pledged, or disposed of in such circumstances as aforesaid, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend
to five years and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “officer” includes
any person in accordance with whose directions or instructions the directors of the company
have been accustomed to act.
312. If any person, being at the time of the commission of the alleged offence an
officer of a company including a company which is subsequently ordered to be wound up
by the Tribunal or which subsequently passes a resolution for voluntary winding up,—
(a) has, by false pretences or by means of any other fraud, induced any person
to give credit to the company;
Penalty for
frauds by
officers.

146
(b) with intent to defraud creditors of the company or any other person, has
made or caused to be made any gift or transfer of or charge on, or has caused or
connived at the levying of any execution against, the property of the company; or
(c) with intent to defraud creditors of the company, has concealed or removed
any part of the property of the company since the date of any unsatisfied judgment or
order for payment of money obtained against the company or within two months
before that date,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than one year but which
may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but
which may extend to three lakh rupees.
313. (1) Where a company is being wound up and if it is shown that proper books of
account were not kept by the company throughout the period of two years immediately
preceding the commencement of the winding up, or the period between the incorporation of
the company and the commencement of the winding up, whichever is shorter, every officer
of the company who is in default shall, unless he shows that he acted honestly and that in
the circumstances in which the business of the company was carried on, the default was
excusable, be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than one year but
which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees
but which may extend to three lakh rupees.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), it shall be deemed that proper books of
account have not been kept in the case of any company, if there have not been kept—
(a) such books of account as are necessary to exhibit and explain the
transactions and financial position of the business of the company, including books
containing entries made from day-to-day in sufficient detail of all cash received and
all cash paid; and
(b) where the business of the company has involved dealings in goods,
statements of the annual stock takings and, except in the case of goods sold by way
of ordinary retail trade, of all goods sold and purchased, showing the goods and the
buyers and the sellers thereof in sufficient detail to enable those goods and those
buyers and sellers to be identified.
314. (1) If in the course of the winding up of a company, it appears that any business
of the company has been carried on with intent to defraud creditors of the company or any
other persons or for any fraudulent purpose, the Tribunal, on the application of the Official
Liquidator, or the Company Liquidator or any creditor or contributory of the company, may,
if it thinks it proper so to do, declare that any past or present director, manager, or officer of
the company or any persons who were knowingly parties to the carrying on of the business
in the manner aforesaid shall be personally responsible, without any limitation of liability,
for all or any of the debts or other liabilities of the company as the Tribunal may direct:
Provided that on the hearing of an application under this sub-section, the Official
Liquidator or the Company Liquidator, as the case may be, may himself give evidence or call
witnesses.
(2) Where the Tribunal makes any such declaration, it may give such further directions
as it thinks proper for the purpose of giving effect to that declaration and in particular,
(a) make provision for making the liability of any such person under the
declaration a charge on any debt or obligation due from the company to him, or on
any mortgage or charge or any interest in any mortgage or charge on any assets of the
company held by or vested in him, or any person on his behalf, or any person claiming
as assignee from or through the person liable or any person acting on his behalf;
(b) make such further order as may be necessary for the purpose of enforcing
any charge imposed under this sub-section.
Liability
where proper
accounts not
kept.
Liability for
fraudulent
conduct of
business.

147
(3) Where any business of a company is carried on with such intent or for such
purpose as is mentioned in sub-section (1), every person who was knowingly a party to the
carrying on of the business in the manner aforesaid, shall be punishable with imprisonment
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees.
(4) This section shall apply, notwithstanding that the person concerned may be
punishable under any other law for the time being in force in respect of the matters on the
ground of which the declaration is to be made.
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,
(a) the expression “assignee” includes any person to whom or in whose favour,
by the directions of the person liable, the debt, obligation, mortgage or charge was
created, issued or transferred or the interest was created, but does not include an
assignee for valuable consideration, not including consideration by way of marriage,
given in good faith and without notice of any of the matters on the ground of which
the declaration is made;
(b) the expression “officer” includes any person in accordance with whose
directions or instructions the directors of the company have been accustomed to act.
315. (1) If in the course of winding up of a company, it appears that any person who
has taken part in the promotion or formation of the company, or any past or present director,
manager, Company Liquidator or officer of the company—
(a) has misapplied, or retained, or become liable or accountable for, any money
or property of the company; or
(b) has been guilty of any misfeasance or breach of trust in relation to the
company,
the Tribunal may, on the application of the Official Liquidator, or the Company Liquidator, or
of any creditor or contributory, made within the period specified in that behalf in sub-
section (2), inquire into the conduct of the person, director, manager, Company Liquidator
or officer aforesaid, and order him to repay or restore the money or property or any part
thereof respectively, with interest at such rate as the Tribunal considers just, or to contribute
such sum to the assets of the company by way of compensation in respect of the
misapplication, retainer, misfeasance or breach of trust, as the Tribunal considers just.
(2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be made within five years from the date
of the winding up order, or of the first appointment of the Company Liquidator in the
winding up, or of the misapplication, retainer, misfeasance or breach of trust, as the case
may be, whichever is longer.
(3) This section shall apply, notwithstanding that the matter is one for which the
person concerned may be punishable under this Act or any other law for the time being in
force.
316. Where a declaration under section 314 or an order under section 315 is or may be
made in respect of a firm or body corporate, the Tribunal shall also have power to make a
declaration under section 314, or pass an order under section 315, as the case may be, in
respect of any person who was at the relevant time a partner in that firm or a director of that
body corporate.
317. (1) If it appears to the Tribunal in the course of a winding up by the Tribunal, that
any past or present officer, or any member, of the company has been guilty of any offence
in relation to the company, the Tribunal may, either on the application of any person interested
in the winding up or suo motu, direct the liquidator to prosecute the offender or to refer the
matter to the Registrar.
Power of
Tribunal to
assess damages
against
delinquent
directors, etc.
Liability
under sections
314 and 315
to extend to
partners or
directors in
firms or
companies.
Prosecution
of delinquent
officers and
members of
company.

148
(2) If it appears to the Company Liquidator in the course of a voluntary winding up
that any past or present officer, or any member, of the company has been guilty of any
offence in relation to the company under this Act, he shall forthwith report the matter to the
Registrar and shall furnish to him such information and give to him such access to and
facilities for inspecting and taking copies of any books and papers, being information or
books and papers in the possession or under the control of the Company Liquidator and
relating to the matter in question, as the Registrar may require.
(3) Where any report is made under sub-section (2) to the Registrar, he,—
(a) if he thinks fit, may apply to the Central Government for an order to make
further inquiry into the affairs of the company by any person designated by him and
for conferring on such person all the powers of investigation as are provided under
this Act;
(b) if he considers that the case is one in which a prosecution ought to be
instituted, shall report the matter to the Central Government, and that Government
may, after taking such legal advice as it thinks fit, direct the Registrar to institute
prosecution:
Provided that no report shall be made by the Registrar under this clause without first
giving the accused person a reasonable opportunity of making a statement in writing to the
Registrar and of being heard thereon.
(4) If it appears to the Tribunal in the course of a voluntary winding up that any past
or present officer, or any member, of the company has been guilty as aforesaid, and that no
report with respect to the matter has been made by the Company Liquidator to the Registrar
under sub-section (2), the Tribunal may, on the application of any person interested in the
winding up or suo motu, direct the Company Liquidator to make such a report, and on a
report being made, the provisions of this section shall have effect as though the report had
been made in pursuance of the provisions of sub-section ( 2).
(5) When any prosecution is instituted under this section, it shall be the duty of the
liquidator and of every officer and agent of the company past and present to give all
assistance in connection with the prosecution which he is reasonably able to give.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “agent”, in relation
to a company, shall be deemed to include any banker or legal adviser of the company and
any person employed by the company as auditor.
(6) If any person fails or neglects to give assistance required by sub-section ( 5), he
shall be liable to pay fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees.
318. (1) The Company Liquidator may—
(a) with the sanction of the Tribunal, when the company is being wound up by
the Tribunal; and
(b) with the sanction of a special resolution of the company and prior approval
of the Tribunal, in the case of a voluntary winding up,—
(i) pay any class of creditors in full;
(ii) make any compromise or arrangement with creditors or persons
claiming to be creditors, or having or alleging themselves to have any claim,
present or future, certain or contingent, against the company, or whereby the
company may be rendered liable; or
(iii) compromise any call or liability to call, debt, and liability capable of
resulting in a debt, and any claim, present or future, certain or contingent,
ascertained or sounding only in damages, subsisting or alleged to subsist
Company
Liquidator to
exercise
certain
powers
subject to
sanction.

149
between the company and a contributory or alleged contributory or other debtor
or person apprehending liability to the company, and all questions in any way
relating to or affecting the assets or liabilities or the winding up of the company,
on such terms as may be agreed, and take any security for the discharge of any
such call, debt, liability or claim, and give a complete discharge in respect
thereof.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), in the case of a winding
up by the Tribunal, the Central Government may make rules to provide that the Company
Liquidator may, under such circumstances, if any, and subject to such conditions, restrictions
and limitations, if any, as may be prescribed, exercise any of the powers referred to in sub-
clause (ii) or sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) without the sanction of the
Tribunal.
(3) Any creditor or contributory may apply in the manner prescribed to the Tribunal
with respect to any exercise or proposed exercise of powers by the Company Liquidator
under this section, and the Tribunal shall after giving a reasonable opportunity to such
applicant and the Company Liquidator, pass such orders as it may think fit.
319. (1) Where a company is being wound up, whether by the Tribunal or voluntarily,
every invoice, order for goods or business letter issued by or on behalf of the company or
a Company Liquidator of the company, or a receiver or manager of the property of the
company, being a document on or in which the name of the company appears, shall contain
a statement that the company is being wound up.
(2) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the company,
and every officer of the company, the Company Liquidator and any receiver or manager,
who wilfully authorises or permits the default, shall be punishable with fine which shall not
be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees.
320. Where a company is being wound up, all books and papers of the company and
of the Company Liquidator shall, as between the contributories of the company, be prima
facie evidence of the truth of all matters purporting to be recorded therein.
321. (1) At any time after the making of an order for the winding up of a company by
the Tribunal, any creditor or contributory of the company may inspect the books and
papers of the company only in accordance with, and subject to such rules as may be
prescribed.
(2) Nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall be taken as excluding or restricting any rights
conferred by any law for the time being in force—
(a) on the Central Government or a State Government,
(b) on any authority or officer thereof, or
(c) on any person acting under the authority of any such Government or of any
such authority or officer.
322. (1) When the affairs of a company have been completely wound up and it is
about to be dissolved, its books and papers and those of the Company Liquidator may be
disposed of as follows:—
(a) in the case of winding up by the Tribunal, in such manner as the Tribunal
directs; and
(b) in the case of voluntary winding up, in such manner as the company by
special resolution with the prior approval of the creditors directs.
(2) After the expiry of five years from the dissolution of the company, no responsibility
shall devolve on the company, the Company Liquidator, or any person to whom the custody
of the books and papers has been entrusted, by reason of any book or paper not being
forthcoming to any person claiming to be interested therein.
Statement that
a company is
in liquidation.
Books and
papers of
company to be
evidence.
Inspection of
books and
papers by
creditors and
contributories.
Disposal of
books and
papers of
company.

150
(3) The Central Government may, by rules,—
(a) prevent for such period as the Central Government thinks proper the
destruction of the books and papers of a company which has been wound up and of
its Company Liquidator; and
(b) enable any creditor or contributory of the company to make representations
to the Central Government in respect of the matters specified in clause ( a) and to
appeal to the Tribunal from any order which may be made by the Central Government
in the matter.
(4) If any person acts in contravention of any such rules or of any direction of the
Central Government thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with
both.
323. (1) If the winding up of a company is not concluded within one year after its
commencement, the Company Liquidator shall, unless he is exempted from so doing either
wholly or in part by the Central Government, within two months of the expiry of such year
and thereafter until the winding up is concluded, at intervals of not more than one year or at
such shorter intervals, if any, as may be prescribed, file a statement in the prescribed form
and containing the prescribed particulars duly audited, by a person qualified to act as
auditor of the company, with respect to the proceedings in, and position of, the liquidation,—
(a) in the case of a winding up by the Tribunal, with the Tribunal; and
(b) in the case of a voluntary winding up, with the Registrar :
Provided that no such audit as is referred to in this sub-section shall be necessary
where the provisions of section 269 apply.
(2) When the statement is filed with the Tribunal under clause (a) of sub-section (1),
a copy shall simultaneously be filed with the Registrar and shall be kept by him along with
the other records of the company.
(3) Where a statement referred to in sub-section (1) relates to a Government company
in liquidation, the Company Liquidator shall forward a copy thereof—
(a) to the Central Government, if that Government is a member of the Government
company;
(b) to any State Government, if that Government is a member of the Government
company; or
(c) to the Central Government and any State Government, if both the
Governments are members of the Government company.
(4) Any person stating himself in writing to be a creditor or contributory of the
company shall be entitled, by himself or by his agent, at all reasonable times, on payment of
the prescribed fee, to inspect the statement referred to in sub-section ( 1), and to receive a
copy thereof or an extract therefrom.
(5) Any person fraudulently stating himself to be a creditor or contributory under
sub-section (4) shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence under section 182 of the Indian
Penal Code, and shall, on the application of the Company Liquidator, be punishable
accordingly.
(6) If a Company Liquidator fails to comply with any of requirements of this section,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day
during which the failure continues.
(7) If a Company Liquidator makes wilful default in causing the statement referred to
in sub-section ( 1) audited by a person who is not qualified to act as an auditor of the
Information
as to pending
liquidations.
45 of 1860.

151
company, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
324. Every Official Liquidator shall, in such manner and at such times as may be
prescribed, pay the moneys received by him as Official Liquidator of any company, into the
public account of India in the Reserve Bank of India.
325. (1) Every Company Liquidator of a company shall, in such manner and at such
times as may be prescribed, deposit the monies received by him in his capacity as such in a
scheduled bank to the credit of a special bank account opened by him in that behalf:
Provided that if the Tribunal considers that it is advantageous for the creditors or
contributories or the company, it may permit the account to be opened in such other bank
specified by it.
(2) If any Company Liquidator at any time retains for more than ten days a sum
exceeding five thousand rupees or such other amount as the Tribunal may, on the application
of the Company Liquidator, authorise him to retain, then, unless he explains the retention to
the satisfaction of the Tribunal, he shall—
(a) pay interest on the amount so retained in excess, at the rate of twelve per
cent. per annum and also pay such penalty as may be determined by the Registrar;
(b) be liable to pay any expenses occasioned by reason of his default; and
(c) also be liable to have all or such part of his remuneration, as the Tribunal
may consider just, disallowed, or may also be removed from his office.
326. Neither the Official Liquidator nor the Company Liquidator of a company shall
deposit any monies received by him in his capacity as such into any private banking
account.
327. (1) Where any company is being wound up and the liquidator has in his hands
or under his control any money representing—
(a) dividends payable to any creditor but which had remained unpaid for six
months after the date on which they were declared, or
(b) assets refundable to any contributory which have remained undistributed
for six months after the date on which they become refundable,
the liquidator shall forthwith deposit the said money into a separate special account to be
known as the Company Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account maintained
in a scheduled bank.
(2) The liquidator shall, on the dissolution of the company, pay into the Company
Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account any money representing unpaid
dividends or undistributed assets in his hands at the date of dissolution.
(3) The liquidator shall, when making any payment referred to in sub-sections (1) and
(2), furnish to such officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf, a statement
in the prescribed form, setting forth, in respect of all sums included in such payment, the
nature of the sums, the names and last known addresses of the persons entitled to participate
therein, the amount to which each is entitled and the nature of his claim thereto, and such
other particulars as may be prescribed.
(4) The liquidator shall be entitled to a receipt from the scheduled bank for any money
paid to it under sub-sections (1) and (2), and such receipt shall be an effectual discharge of
the Company Liquidator in respect thereof.
Official
Liquidator to
make
payments into
public account
of India.
Company
Liquidator to
deposit into
scheduled
bank.
Liquidator not
to deposit
monies into
private
banking
account.
Company
Liquidation
Dividend and
Undistributed
Assets
Account.

152
(5) Where a company is being wound up voluntarily, the Company Liquidator shall,
when filing a statement in pursuance of sub-section (1) of section 323, indicate the sum of
money which is payable under sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section during the six months
preceding the date to which the said statement is prepared, and shall, within fourteen days
of the date of filing the said statement, pay that sum into the Company Liquidation Dividend
and Undistributed Assets Account.
(6) Any person claiming to be entitled to any money paid into the Company Liquidation
Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account, whether paid in pursuance of this section or
under the provisions of any previous company law apply to the Tribunal for an order for
payment thereof, and the Tribunal, if satisfied that the person claiming is entitled, may make
an order for the payment to that person of the sum due:
Provided that before making such an order, the Tribunal shall cause a notice to be
served on such officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf, calling on the
officer to show cause within one month from the date of the service of the notice why the
order should not be made.
(7) Any money paid into the Company Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets
Account in pursuance of this section, which remains unclaimed thereafter for a period of
fifteen years, shall be transferred to the general revenue account of the Central Government,
but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred under sub-section (6) and shall be
dealt with as if such transfer had not been made and the order, if any, for payment on the
claim will be treated as an order for refund of revenue.
(8) Any liquidator retaining any money which should have been paid by him into the
Company Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account under this section shall—
(a) pay interest on the amount so retained at the rate of twelve per cent. per
annum and also pay such penalty as may be determined by the Registrar:
Provided that the Central Government may in any proper case remit either in part or in
whole the amount of interest which the liquidator is required to pay under this clause;
(b) be liable to pay any expenses occasioned by reason of his default; and
(c) where the winding up is by the Tribunal, also be liable to have all or such
part of his remuneration, as the Tribunal may consider just, to be disallowed, and to
be removed from his office by the Tribunal.
328. (1) If any Company Liquidator who has made any default in filing, delivering or
making any return, account or other document, or in giving any notice which he is by law
required to file, deliver, make or give, fails to make good the default within fourteen days
after the service on him of a notice requiring him to do so, the Tribunal may, on an application
made to it by any contributory or creditor of the company or by the Registrar, make an order
directing the Company Liquidator to make good the default within such time as may be
specified in the order.
(2) Any order under sub-section (1) may provide that all costs of and incidental to the
application shall be borne by the Company Liquidator.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the operation of any enactment imposing
penalties on a Company Liquidator in respect of any such default as aforesaid.
329. (1) In all matters relating to the winding up of a company, the Tribunal may—
(a) have regard to the wishes of creditors or contributories of the company, as
proved to it by any sufficient evidence;
(b) if it thinks fit for the purpose of ascertaining those wishes, direct meetings
of the creditors or contributories to be called, held and conducted in such manner as
the Tribunal may direct; and
Liquidator to
make returns,
etc.
Meetings to
ascertain
wishes of
creditors or
contributories.

153
(c) appoint a person to act as chairman of any such meeting and to report the
result thereof to the Tribunal.
(2) When ascertaining the wishes of creditors, regard shall be had to the value of each
creditor’s debt.
(3) When ascertaining the wishes of contributories, regard shall be had to the number
of votes which may be cast by each contributory.
330. (1) Any affidavit required to be sworn under the provisions, or for the purposes,
of this Chapter may be sworn—
(a) in India before any court, tribunal, judge or person lawfully authorised to
take and receive affidavits; and
(b) in any other country before any court, judge or person lawfully authorised
to take and receive affidavits in that country or before an Indian diplomatic or consular
officer.
(2) All tribunals, judges, Justices, commissioners and persons acting judicially in
India shall take judicial notice of the seal, stamp or signature, as the case may be, of any
such court, tribunal, judge, person, diplomatic or consular officer, attached, appended or
subscribed to any such affidavit or to any other document to be used for the purposes of
this Chapter.
331. (1) Where a company has been dissolved, whether in pursuance of this Chapter
or of section 203 or otherwise, the Tribunal may at any time within two years of the date of
the dissolution, on application by the Company Liquidator of the company or by any other
person who appears to the Tribunal to be interested, make an order, upon such terms as the
Tribunal thinks fit, declaring the dissolution to be void, and thereupon such proceedings
may be taken as if the company had not been dissolved.
(2) It shall be the duty of the person on whose application the order was made, within
thirty days after the making of the order or such further time as the Tribunal may allow, to file
a certified copy of the order with the Registrar who shall register the same, and if such
person fails so to do, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees for every day during which the default continues.
332. (1) Where, before the presentation of a petition for the winding up of a company
by the Tribunal, a resolution has been passed by the company for voluntary winding up,
the winding up of the company shall be deemed to have commenced at the time of the
passing of the resolution, and unless the Tribunal, on proof of fraud or mistake, thinks fit to
direct otherwise, all proceedings taken in the voluntary winding up shall be deemed to have
been validly taken.
(2) In any other case, the winding up of a company by the Tribunal shall be deemed
to commence at the time of the presentation of the petition for the winding up.
333. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 1963 or in any other
law for the time being in force, in computing the period of limitation specified for any suit or
application in the name and on behalf of a company which is being wound up by the
Tribunal, the period from the date of commencement of the winding up of the company to a
period of one year immediately following the date of the winding up order shall be excluded.
PART IV
Official Liquidators
334. (1) For the purposes of this Act, so far as it relates to the winding up of companies
by the Tribunal, the Central Government may appoint as many Official Liquidators as it
may consider necessary and may also appoint Joint, Deputy or Assistant Official Liquidators
to assist him in discharge of his functions.
Court, tribunal
or person,
etc., before
whom
affidavit may
be sworn.
Powers of
Tribunal to
declare
dissolution of
company
void.
Commencement
of winding up
by Tribunal.
Exclusion of
certain time
in computing
period of
limitation.
36 of 1963
Appointment
of Official
Liquidator.

154
(2) The liquidators appointed under sub-section (1) shall be whole-time officers of
the Central Government.
(3) The salary and other allowances of the Official Liquidator, Joint Official
Liquidator, Deputy Official Liquidator, Assistant Official Liquidator shall be paid by the
Central Government.
335. (1) The Official Liquidator shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as
the Central Government may prescribe.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Official Liquidator
may—
(a) exercise all or any of the powers as may be exercised by a Company Liquidator
under the provisions of this Act;
(b) conduct inquiries or investigations, if directed by the Tribunal or the Central
Government in respect of matters arising out of winding up proceedings; and
(c) maintain such statistics, information and records as may be prescribed relating
to companies under winding up.
336. (1) Where the company to be wound up under this Chapter has assets of book
value not exceeding one crore rupees, the Tribunal may order it to be wound up by summary
procedure provided under this Part.
(2) Where an order under sub-section ( 1) is made the Tribunal shall appoint the
Official Liquidator as the liquidator of the company.
(3) The Official Liquidator shall forthwith take into his custody or control all assets,
effects and actionable claims to which the company is or appears to be entitled.
(4) The Official Liquidator shall, within thirty days of appointment, submit a report to
the Tribunal in such manner and form as may be prescribed including a report whether in his
opinion, any fraud has been committed in promotion, formation or management of the
affairs of the company or not.
(5) On receipt of the report under sub-section (4), if the Tribunal is satisfied that any
fraud has been committed by the promoters, directors or any other officer of the company,
it may direct further investigation into the affairs of the company and that a report shall be
submitted within such time as may be specified.
(6) After considering the investigation report under sub-section (5), the Tribunal may
order that winding up may be proceeded under Part I of this Chapter or under the provision
of this Part.
337. (1) The Official Liquidator shall expeditiously dispose of all the assets within
sixty days of his appointment.
(2) The Official Liquidator shall serve a notice within thirty days of his appointment
calling upon the debtors of the company or the contributories, as the case may be, to
deposit within thirty days with him the amount payable to the company.
(3) Where any debtor does not deposit the amount under sub-section (2), the Tribunal
may pass such orders as it thinks fit.
(4) The amount recovered by the Official Liquidator shall be deposited in accordance
with the provisions of section 324.
338. (1) The Official Liquidator within thirty days shall call upon the creditors of the
company to prove their claims in the manner prescribed within thirty days of the receipt of
such call.
(2) The Official Liquidator shall prepare a list of claims of creditors in the manner as
Powers and
functions of
Official
Liquidator.
Summary
procedure for
liquidation.
Sale of assets
and recovery
of debts due to
company.
Settlement of
claims of
creditors by
Official
Liquidator.

155
may be prescribed and each creditor shall be communicated of the claims accepted or
rejected for reasons to be recorded in writing.
339. (1) Any creditor aggrieved by the decision of the Official Liquidator under
section 338 may file an application before the Tribunal within thirty days.
(2) The Tribunal may after calling the report from the Official Liquidator either dismiss
the application or modify the decision of the Official Liquidator.
(3) The Official Liquidator shall make payment to the creditors whose claims have
been accepted.
340. (1) The Official Liquidator shall submit a final report to the Tribunal when he is
satisfied that the company is finally wound up.
(2) The Tribunal on receipt of such report shall order that the company be dissolved.
(3) Where an order is made under sub-section (2) by the Tribunal, the Registrar shall
strike off the name of the company from the register of companies and publish a notification
to this effect.
CHAPTER XXI
C
OMPANIES INCORPORATED OUTSIDE INDIA
341.  Where not less than fifty per cent. of the paid-up share capital, whether equity
or preference or partly equity and partly preference, of a foreign company is held by one or
more citizens of India or by one or more companies or bodies corporate incorporated in
India, or by one or more citizens of India and one or more companies or bodies corporate
incorporated in India, whether singly or in the aggregate, such company shall comply with
the provisions of this Chapter and such other provisions of this Act as may be prescribed
with regard to the business carried on by it in India as if it were a company incorporated in
India.
342. (1) Every foreign company shall, within thirty days of the establishment of its
place of business in India, deliver to the Registrar for registration—
(a) a certified copy of the charter, statutes, or memorandum and articles, of the
company or other instrument constituting or defining the constitution of the company
and, if the instrument is not in the English language, a certified translation thereof in
the English language;
(b) the full address of the registered or principal office of the company;
(c) a list of the directors and secretary of the company containing such particulars
as may be prescribed;
(d) the name and address or the names and addresses of one or more persons
resident in India authorised to accept on behalf of the company service of process
and any notices or other documents required to be served on the company; and
(e) the full address of the office of the company in India which is to be deemed
its principal place of business in India.
(2) Every foreign company existing at the commencement of this Act shall, if it has not
delivered to the Registrar before such commencement, the documents and particulars
specified in sub-section ( 1) of section 592 of the Companies Act, 1956, continue to be
subject to the obligation to deliver those documents and particulars in accordance with that
Act.
(3) Where any alteration is made or occurs in the documents delivered to the Registrar
under this section, the foreign company shall, within thirty days of such alteration, deliver
to the Registrar for registration, a return containing the particulars of the alteration in the
prescribed form.
Appeal by
creditor.
Order of
dissolution of
company.
Application of
Act to foreign
companies.
Documents,
etc., to be
delivered to
Registrar by
foreign
companies.
1 of 1956.

156
343. (1) Every foreign company shall, in every calendar year,—
(a) make out a balance sheet and profit and loss account in such form, containing
such particulars and including or having annexed or attached thereto such documents,
including, in particular, documents relating to every subsidiary company of the foreign
company, as under the provisions of this Act it would, if it had been a company within
the meaning of this Act, have been required to make out and lay before the company
in general meeting; and
(b) deliver a copy of those documents to the Registrar:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, direct that, in the case of
any foreign company or class of foreign companies, the requirements of clause (a) shall not
apply, or shall apply subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in
that notification.
(2) If any such document as is mentioned in sub-section ( 1) is not in the English
language, there shall be annexed to it a certified translation thereof in the English language.
(3) Every foreign company shall send to the Registrar along with the documents
required to be delivered to him under sub-section (1), a copy of a list in the prescribed form
of all places of business established by the company in India as at the date with reference
to which the balance sheet referred to in sub-section ( 1) is made out.
344. Every foreign company shall—
(a) conspicuously exhibit on the outside of every office or place where it carries
on business in India, the name of the company and the country in which it is
incorporated, in letters easily legible in English characters, and also in the characters
of the language or one of the languages in general use in the locality in which the
office or place is situate;
(b) cause the name of the company and of the country in which the company is
incorporated, to be stated in legible English characters in all business letters, bill-heads
and letter paper, and in all notices, and other official publications of the company; and
(c) if the liability of the members of the company is limited, cause notice of that
fact—
(i) to be stated in every such prospectus issued and in all business
letters, bill-heads, letter paper, notices, advertisements and other official
publications of the company, in legible English characters; and
(ii) to be conspicuously exhibited on the outside of every office or place
where it carries on business in India, in legible English characters and also in
legible characters of the language or one of the languages in general use in the
locality in which the office or place is situate.
345. Any process, notice, or other document required to be served on a foreign
company shall be deemed to be sufficiently served, if addressed to any person whose name
and address have been delivered to the Registrar under section 342 and left at, or sent by
post to, the address which has been so delivered to the Registrar or by electronic mode.
346. (1) The provisions of section 64 shall apply mutatis mutandis to a foreign company.
(2) The provisions of section 82 shall, subject to such exceptions, modifications and
adaptations as may be made therein by rules made under this Act, apply to a foreign
company as they apply to a company incorporated in India.
(3) The provisions of section 116 shall apply to a foreign company to the extent of
requiring it to keep at its principal place of business in India the books of account referred
to in that section, with respect to monies received and spent, sales and purchases made,
and assets and liabilities, in the course of or in relation to its business in India.
Accounts of
foreign
company.
Display of
name, etc.,
of foreign
company.
Debentures,
annual
return,
registration
of charges,
books of
account and
their
inspection.
Service on
foreign
company.

157
(4) The provisions of Chapter VI shall apply mutatis mutandis to charges on properties
which are created or acquired by any foreign company.
(5) The provisions of Chapter XIV shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Indian business
of a foreign company as they apply to a company incorporated in India.
347. There shall be paid to the Registrar for registering any document required by the
provisions of this Chapter to be registered by him, such fee and with additional fee, if any,
as may be prescribed.
348. For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(a) the expression “certified” means certified in the prescribed manner to be a
true copy or a correct translation;
(b) the expression “director”, in relation to a foreign company, includes any
person in accordance with whose directions or instructions the Board of Directors of
the company is accustomed to act; and
(c) the expression “place of business” includes a share transfer or share
registration office.
349. (1) No person shall issue, circulate or distribute in India any prospectus offering
to subscribe for securities of a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India,
whether the company has or has not established, or when formed will or will not establish,
a place of business in India, unless the prospectus is dated and signed, and
(a) contains particulars with respect to the following matters, namely:—
(i) the instrument constituting or defining the constitution of the
company;
(ii) the enactments or provisions by or under which the incorporation of
the company was effected;
(iii) address in India where the said instrument, enactments or provisions,
or copies thereof, and if the same are not in the English language, a certified
translation thereof in the English language;
(iv) the date on which and the country in which the company would be or
was incorporated; and
(v) whether the company has established a place of business in India
and, if so, the address of its principal office in India; and
(b) states the matters specified under section 23:
Provided that sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of clause (a) of this sub-section shall not
apply in the case of a prospectus issued more than two years after the date at which the
company is entitled to commence business.
(2) Any condition requiring or binding an applicant for securities to waive compliance
with any requirement imposed by virtue of sub-section (1), or purporting to impute him with
notice of any contract, documents or matter not specifically referred to in the prospectus,
shall be void.
(3) No person shall issue to any person in India a form of application for securities of
such a company or intended company as is mentioned in sub-section (1), unless the form is
issued with a prospectus which complies with the provisions of this Chapter and such
issue does not contravene the provisions of section 350:
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply if it is shown that the form of application
was issued in connection with a bona fide invitation to a person to enter into an underwriting
agreement with respect to securities.
Fee for
registration of
documents.
Interpretation.
Dating of
prospectus and
particulars to
be contained
therein.

158
(4) This section shall not apply—
(a) to the issue to existing members or debenture holders of a company of a
prospectus or form of application relating to securities of the company, whether an
applicant for securities will or will not have the right to renounce in favour of other
persons; and
(b) except in so far as it requires a prospectus to be dated, to the issue of a
prospectus relating to securities which are or are to be in all respects uniform with
securities previously issued and for the time being dealt in or quoted on a recognised
stock exchange, but, subject as aforesaid, this section shall apply to a prospectus or
form of application whether issued on or with reference to the formation of a company
or subsequently.
(5) Nothing in this section shall limit or diminish any liability which any person may
incur under any law for the time being in force in India or under this Act apart from this
section.
350. (1) No person shall issue, circulate or distribute in India any prospectus offering
for subscription in securities of a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside
India, whether the company has or has not been established, or when formed will or will not
establish, a place of business in India,—
(a) if, where the prospectus includes a statement purporting to be made by an
expert, he has not given, or has before delivery of the prospectus for registration
withdrawn, his written consent to the issue of the prospectus with the statement
included in the form and context in which it is included, or there does not appear in the
prospectus a statement that he has given and has not withdrawn his consent as
aforesaid; or
(b) if the prospectus does not have the effect, where an application is made in
pursuance thereof, of rendering all persons concerned bound by all the provisions of
sections 28 and 35, so far as applicable.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a statement shall be deemed to be included in a
prospectus, if it is contained in any report or memorandum appearing on the face thereof or
by reference incorporated therein or issued therewith.
351. No person shall issue, circulate or distribute in India any prospectus offering for
subscription in securities of a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India,
whether the company has or has not established, or when formed will or will not establish,
a place of business in India, unless before the issue, circulation or distribution of the
prospectus in India, a copy thereof certified by the chairman and two other directors of the
company as having been approved by resolution of the managing body has been delivered
for registration to the Registrar and the prospectus states on the face of it that a copy has
been so delivered, and there is endorsed on or attached to the copy, any consent to the
issue of the prospectus required by section 350 and such documents as may be prescribed.
352. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government may make rules applicable for—
(a) the offer of Indian Depository Receipts;
(b) the requirement of disclosures in prospectus or letter of offer issued in
connection with Indian Depository Receipts;
(c) the manner in which the Indian Depository Receipts shall be dealt with in a
depository mode and by custodian and underwriters; and
(d) the manner of sale, transfer or transmission of Indian Depository Receipts,
by a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India, whether the company has
or has not established, or will or will not establish, any place of business in India.
Provisions as
to expert’s
consent and
allotment.
Registration of
prospectus.
Offer of
Indian
Depository
Receipts.

159
353. (1) The provisions of sections 29 to 31 (both inclusive) shall apply to the issue
of a prospectus by a company incorporated outside India under section 351 as they apply
to prospectus issued by an Indian company.
(2) The provisions of Chapter XX shall apply mutatis mutandis for closure of the
place of business of a foreign company in India as if it were a company incorporated in
India.
354. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 353, where a foreign company
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter, the company shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh
rupees and in the case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine which may extend to
fifty thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues and every officer
who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which
may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
355.  Any failure by a company to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall
not affect the validity of any contract, dealing or transaction entered into by the company
or its liability to be sued in respect thereof, but the company shall not be entitled to bring
any suit, claim any set-off, make any counter-claim or institute any legal proceeding in
respect of any such contract, dealing or transaction, until the company has complied with
the provisions of this Act applicable to it.
CHAPTER XXII
G
OVERNMENT COMPANIES
356. (1) Where the Central Government is a member of a Government company, the
Central Government shall cause an annual report on the working and affairs of that company
to be—
(a) prepared within three months of its annual general meeting before which the
comments given by the Comptroller and Auditor-General and the audit report are
placed under the proviso to sub-section ( 6) of section 126; and
(b) as soon as may be after such preparation, laid before both Houses of
Parliament together with a copy of the audit report and any comments upon or
supplement to the audit report, made by the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(2) Where in addition to the Central Government, any State Government is also a
member of a Government Company, that State Government shall cause a copy of the annual
report prepared under sub-section ( 1) to be laid before the House or both Houses of the
State Legislature together with a copy of the audit report and the comments upon or
supplement to the audit report referred to under sub-section ( 1).
(3) Where the Central Government is not a member of a Government company, every
State Government which is a member of that company, or where only one State Government
is a member of the company, that State Government shall cause an annual report on the
working and affairs of the company to be—
(a) prepared within the time specified in sub-section (1) ; and
Application of
sections 29 to
31 and Chapter
XX.
Punishment for
contravention.
Company’s
failure to
comply with
provisions of
this Chapter
not to affect
validity of
contracts, etc.
Annual
reports on
Government
companies.

160
(b) as soon as may be after such preparation, laid before the House or both
Houses of the State Legislature with a copy of the audit report and comments upon or
supplement to the audit report referred to under sub-section ( 1).
(4) The provisions of this section shall, so far as may be, apply to a Government
company in liquidation as they apply to any other Government company.
357. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, the Central Government may, by
notification, direct that any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply, or shall apply with
such exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may be specified in that notification, to
any Government company.
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (1) shall be
laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses
agree in making any modification in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or,
as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by
both the Houses.
CHAPTER XXIII
R
EGISTRATION OFFICES AND FEES
358. (1) For the purposes of exercising such powers and discharging such functions
as are conferred on the Central Government by or under this Act or under the rules made
thereunder and for the purposes of registration of companies under this Act, the Central
Government shall, by notification, establish such number of offices at such places as it
thinks fit, specifying their jurisdiction.
(2) The Central Government may appoint a Director General of Registration, such
number of Registrars, Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Registrars as it considers
necessary for the registration of companies under this Act, and the powers and duties that
may be exercisable by such officers shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The terms and conditions of service, including the salaries payable to persons
appointed under sub-section (2), shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Central Government may direct a seal or seals to be prepared for the
authentication of documents required for, or connected with, the registration of companies.
359. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
any document reproducing or derived from returns and documents filed by a company with
the Registrar on paper or in electronic form or stored on any electronic data storage device
or computer readable media by the Registrar, and authenticated by the Registrar or any
other officer empowered by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed,
shall be deemed to be a document for the purposes of this Act and the rules made thereunder
and shall be admissible in any proceedings thereunder without further proof or production
of the original as evidence of any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of
which direct evidence is admissible.
360. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, and without
prejudice to the provisions contained in section 6 of the Information Technology Act, 2000
the Central Government may make rules so as to require from such date as may be prescribed
in the rules that –
(a) such applications, balance sheet, prospectus, return, declaration,
memorandum, articles, particulars of charges, or any other particulars or document as
may be required to be filed or delivered under this Act or rules made thereunder, shall
be filed in the electronic form and authenticated in such manner as may be prescribed;
Power to
modify Act
in its
application
to
Government
companies.
Registration
offices.
Admissibility
of certain
documents as
evidence.
Provisions
relating to
filing of
applications,
documents,
inspection,
etc., in
electronic
form.
21 of 2000.

161
(b) such document, notice, any communication or intimation, as may be required
to be served or delivered under this Act, in the electronic form and authenticated in
such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) such applications, balance sheet, prospectus, return, register, memorandum,
articles, particulars of charges, or any other particulars or document and return filed
under this Act or rules made thereunder shall be maintained by the Registrar in the
electronic form and registered or authenticated, as the case may be, in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(d) such inspection of the memorandum, articles, register, index, balance sheet,
return or any other particulars or document maintained in the electronic form, as is
otherwise available for inspection under this Act or rules made thereunder, may be
made by any person through the electronic form in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e)  such fees, charges or other sums payable under this Act or rules made
thereunder shall be paid through the electronic form and in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(f) the Registrar shall register change of registered office, alteration of
memorandum or articles, prospectus, issue Certificate of Incorporation, register such
document, issue such certificate, record notice, receive such communication as may
be required to be registered or issued or recorded or received, as the case may be,
under this Act or rules made thereunder or perform duties or discharge functions or
exercise powers under this Act or rules made thereunder or do any act which is by this
Act directed to be performed or discharged or exercised or done by the Registrar in
the electronic form in such manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the rules
made under this section shall not relate to imposition of fines or other pecuniary
penalties or demand or payment of fees or contravention of any of the provisions of
this Act or punishment therefor.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, frame a scheme to carry out the
provisions of sub-section ( 1) through the electronic form.
361. The Central Government may also provide in the rules made under section 360
that the electronic form for the purposes specified in that section shall be exclusive, or in the
alternative or in addition to the physical form, therefor.
362. The Central Government may provide such value added services through the
electronic form and levy such fee thereon as may be prescribed.
363. All the provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000 relating to the electronic
records, including the manner and format in which the electronic records shall be filed, in so
far as they are not inconsistent with this Act, shall apply in relation to the records in
electronic form specified under section 360.
364. (1) Any document, required to be submitted, filed, registered or recorded, or any
fact or information required or authorised to be registered under this Act, shall be submitted,
filed, registered or recorded within the time specified in the relevant provision on payment
of such fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that any document, fact or information may be submitted, filed, registered or
recorded, after the time specified in relevant provision for such submission, filing, registering
or recording, within a period of two hundred and seventy days from the date by which it
should have been submitted, filed, registered or recorded, as the case may be, on payment
of such additional fee as may be prescribed.
Application of
provisions of
Information
Technology
Act, 2000.
Provision of
value added
services
through
electronic
form.
21 of 2000.
Fee for filing,
etc.
Electronic
form to be
exclusive,
alternative or
in addition.

162
(2) Where a company fails or commits any default to submit, file, register or record
any document, fact or information under sub-section ( 1) before the expiry of the period
specified in the proviso to that sub-section with additional fee, the company and its officers
who are in default, shall, without prejudice to the liability for payment of fee and additional
fee, be liable for the action or liability provided under this Act for such failure or default.
365. All fees, charges, and other sums received by any Registrar, Additional, Joint,
Deputy, or Assistant Registrar, or any other officer of the Central Government in pursuance
of any provision of this Act shall be paid into the public account of India in the Reserve
Bank of India.
CHAPTER XXIV
C
OMPANIES TO FURNISH INFORMATION OR STATISTICS
366. (1) The Central Government may, by order, require companies generally, or any
class of companies, or any company, to furnish such information or statistics with regard to
their or its constitution or working, and within such time, as may be specified in the order.
(2) Every order under sub-section ( 1) shall be published in the Official Gazette and
may be addressed to companies generally or to any class of companies, in such manner, as
the Central Government may think fit and the date of such publication shall be deemed to be
the date on which requirement for information or statistics is made on such companies or
class of companies, as the case may be.
(3) For the purpose of satisfying itself that any information or statistics furnished by
a company in pursuance of any order under sub-section ( 1) is correct and complete, the
Central Government may by order require such company to produce such records or
documents in its possession or allow inspection thereof by such officer or furnish such
further information as that Government may consider necessary.
(4) If any company fails to comply with an order made under sub-section (1) or sub-
section ( 3), or knowingly furnishes any information or statistics which is incorrect or
incomplete in any material respect, the company shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and every officer who is in default, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend
to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both.
(5) Where a foreign company carries on business in India, all references to a company
in this section shall be deemed to include references to the foreign company in relation, and
only in relation, to such business.
CHAPTER XXV
N
IDHIS
367. (1) In this section, “Nidhi” means a company which has been incorporated with
the object of cultivating the habit of thrift and savings amongst its members, receiving
deposits from, and lending to, its members only, for their mutual benefit, and which the
Central Government has, by notification, declared to be a Nidhi.
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided, the Central Government may, by notification,
direct that any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply, or shall apply with such
exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified in that notification, to any
Nidhi.
(3)  A copy of every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be
after it is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
(4)  A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (2), shall be
laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
Fees, etc., to be
credited into
public account.
Power of
Central
Government
to direct
companies to
furnish
information or
statistics.
Power to
modify Act in
its application
to Nidhis.

163
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses
agree in making any modification in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or,
as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by
both the Houses.
CHAPTER XXVI
N
ATIONAL COMPANY LAW TRIBUNAL AND APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
368.  In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal;
(b) “Judicial Member” means a member of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal
appointed as such and includes the President or the Chairperson, as the case may be;
(c) “Member” means a member, whether Judicial or Technical of the Tribunal or
the Appellate Tribunal, and includes the President or the Chairperson, as the case
may be;
(d) “President” means the President of the Tribunal;
(e) “Technical Member” means a Member of the Tribunal or the Appellate
Tribunal appointed as such.
369. The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute, with effect from
such date as may be specified therein, a Tribunal to be known as the “National Company
Law Tribunal” consisting of a President and such number of Judicial and Technical
members, as the Central Government may deem necessary, to be appointed by it by
notification, to exercise and discharge such powers and functions as are, or may be,
conferred on it by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force.
370.(1) The President shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court for
five years.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member unless he—
(a) has for at least ten years been a member of the Indian Legal Service or the
Indian Company Law Service (Legal Branch), or held any equivalent post in the
Central Government or a State Government, out of which at least three years of
service in the pay-scale which is not less than the pay-scale of the Joint Secretary to
the Government of India; or
(b) has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of India; or
(c) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court.
Explanation.—For the purposes of clauses ( b) and ( c),—
(i) in computing the period during which a person has held a judicial
office in the territory of India, there shall be included any period, after he has
held any judicial office, during which the person has been an advocate of a
High Court or has held the office of a member of any other tribunal or any post
under the Central Government or any State Government, requiring special
knowledge of law;
(ii) in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate
of a High Court, there shall be included any period, after he became an advocate,
during which the person has held any judicial office or the office of a member of
any other tribunal or any post under the Central Government or any State
Government, requiring special knowledge of law.
Definitions.
Constitution
of National
Company Law
Tribunal.
Qualifications
of President
and Members
of Tribunal.

164
 (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member unless he—
(a) has for at least ten years been a member of the Indian Company Law Service
(Accounts Branch), or held any equivalent post in the Central Government or a State
Government, out of which at least three years of service in the pay-scale which is not
less than the pay-scale of the Joint Secretary to the Government of India; or
(b) is or has been a Joint Secretary to the Government of India under the Central
Staffing Scheme, or has held any other post under the Central Government or a State
Government carrying pay-scale which is not less than the pay-scale of the Joint
Secretary to the Government of India, for at least three years and has adequate
knowledge of and experience in dealing with matters relating to companies; or
(c) is or has been in practice as a Chartered Accountant for at least twenty
years; or
(d) is or has been in practice as a Cost Accountant for at least twenty years; or
(e) is or has been in practice as a Company Secretary for at least twenty years;
or
(f) is a person of ability, integrity and standing having special knowledge and
experience, for not less than twenty years, in law, finance, banking management,
industrial administration, economics, labour matters, or such other disciplines related
to management, conduct of affairs, revival, rehabilitation and winding up of companies.
371. The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute, with effect from
such date as may be specified therein, an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the “National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal” consisting of a Chairperson and such number of Judicial
and Technical Members, not exceeding eleven, as the Central Government may deem fit, to
be appointed by it by notification, for hearing appeals against the orders of the Tribunal.
372. (1) The Chairperson shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme
Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court.
(2) A Judicial Member shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court or
is a Judicial Member of the Tribunal, for five years.
(3) A Technical Member shall be a person of ability, integrity and standing having
special knowledge and experience, for not less than twenty-five years, in law, finance,
banking management, industrial administration, economics, labour matters, or such other
disciplines related to management, conduct of affairs, revival, rehabilitation and winding up
of companies.
373. (I) The President of the Tribunal and the Chairperson and the Judicial Members
of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed after consultation with the Chief Justice of
India.
(2) The Members of the Tribunal and the Technical Members of the Appellate Tribunal
shall be appointed on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of –
(a) Chief Justice of India or his nominee; Chairperson,
(b) Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs; Member,
(c) Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice; Member, and
(d) two other Secretaries to the Government of India to be nominated by the
Central Government; Members.
(3) The Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs shall be the Convener of the Selection
Committee.
(4) The Selection Committee shall determine its procedure for recommending persons
under sub-section ( 2).
Constitution
of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Qualifications
of
Chairperson
and Members
of Appellate
Tribunal.
Selection of
Members of
Tribunal and
Appellate
Tribunal.

165
(5) No appointment of the Members of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall be
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or any defect in the constitution of the Selection
Committee.
374. (1) A Member of the Tribunal shall hold office as such until he attains,—
(a) in the case of the President, the age of sixty seven years;
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-five years.
(2) A Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hold office as such until he attains,—
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of seventy years;
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-seven years.
375. The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Members
of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowance nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Members shall be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.
376. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the President or
the Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior-most Member
shall act as the President or the Chairperson, as the case may be, until the date on which a
new President or Chairperson appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill
such vacancy enters upon his office.
(2) When the President or the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing
to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member shall discharge the functions
of the President or the Chairperson, as the case may be, until the date on which the President
or the Chairperson resumes his duties.
377. The President, the Chairperson or any Member may, by notice in writing under
his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign from his office:
Provided that the President, the Chairperson or the Member shall continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice by the Central
Government or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or
until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.
378. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of
India, remove from office the President, the Chairperson or any Member, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such President,
Chairperson or Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as such President, Chairperson or Member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest:
Provided that the President, the Chairperson or the Member shall not be removed on
any of the grounds specified in clauses (b) to (e) without giving him a reasonable opportunity
of being heard.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the President, the
Chairperson or the Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by
the Central Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry
Term of
office of
President,
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Salary,
allowances
and other
terms and
conditions of
service of
Members.
Acting
President and
Chairperson
of Tribunal
and Appellate
Tribunal.
Resignation of
Members.
Removal of
Members.

166
made by a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India on a reference
made to him by the Central Government in which such President, Chairperson or Member
had been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.
(3) The Central Government shall, after consultation with the Supreme Court, make
rules to regulate the procedure for the inquiry on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity referred to in sub-section ( 2).
379. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Tribunal and the
Appellate Tribunal, provide the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be,
with such officers and other employees as may be necessary for the exercise of the powers
and discharge of the functions of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal.
(2) The officers and other employees of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall
discharge their functions under the general superintendence and control of the President,
or as the case may be, the Chairman or any other Member to whom powers for exercising
such superintendence and control are delegated by him.
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and
other employees of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be
prescribed.
380. (1) There shall be constituted such number of Benches of the Tribunal, as may,
by notification, be specified by the Central Government.
(2) The Principal Bench of the Tribunal shall be at New Delhi which shall be presided
over by the President of the Tribunal.
(3) The powers of the Tribunal shall be exercisable by Benches consisting of two
Members out of whom one shall be a Judicial Member and the other shall be a Technical
Member:
Provided that it shall be competent for the Members of the Tribunal authorised in this
behalf to function as a Bench consisting of a single Member and exercise the powers of the
Tribunal in respect of such class of cases or such matters pertaining to such class of cases,
as the President may, by general or special order, specify:
Provided further that if at any stage of the hearing of any such case or matter, it
appears to the Member that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard
by a Bench consisting of two Members, the case or matter may be transferred by the
President, or, as the case may be, referred to him for transfer, to such Bench as the President
may deem fit.
(4) The President shall, for the disposal of any case relating to rehabilitation,
restructuring, reviving or winding up, of companies, constitute one or more Special Benches
consisting of three or more Members, of which at least one of them shall necessarily be a
Judicial Member.
(5) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point or points, it shall be
decided according to the majority, if there is a majority, but if the Members are equally
divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and the case shall be
referred by the President for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other
Members of the Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion
of the majority of Members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
381. (1) The Tribunal may, after giving the parties to any proceeding before it, a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such orders therein as it thinks fit.
(2) The Tribunal may, at any time within two years from the date of the order, with a
view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, amend any order passed by it, and
shall make such amendment, if the mistake is brought to its notice by the parties:
Staff of
Tribunal and
Appellate
Tribunal.
Benches of
Tribunal.
Orders of
Tribunal.

167
Provided that no such amendment shall be made in respect of any order against which
an appeal has been preferred under this Act.
(3) The Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under this section to all the
parties concerned.
382. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Tribunal may prefer an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal.
(2) No appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal from an order made by the Tribunal
with the consent of parties.
(3) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within a period of forty-five days
from the date on which a copy of the order of the Tribunal is made available to the person
aggrieved and shall be in such form, and accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period of forty-five days from the date aforesaid, but within a further period not
exceeding forty-five days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the appeal within that period.
(4) On the receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal shall,
after giving the parties to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such
orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed
against.
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the Tribunal
and the parties to appeal.
383. Every proceeding presented before the Tribunal and every appeal filed before
the Appellate Tribunal shall be dealt with and disposed of by it as expeditiously as possible
and every endeavour shall be made by the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case
may be, for the disposal of the proceeding or appeal within three months from the date of
commencement of the proceeding before the Tribunal or the filing of the appeal before the
Appellate Tribunal.
384. Any person aggrieved by any order of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal
to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the order of the
Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of law arising out of such order:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a
further period not exceeding sixty days.
385. (1) The Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall not, while disposing of any
proceeding before it or, as the case may be, an appeal before it, be bound by the procedure
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of
natural justice, and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made
thereunder, the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate their own
procedure.
(2) The Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging
their functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence
Appeal from
orders of
Tribunal.
Expeditious
disposal by
Tribunal and
Appellate
Tribunal.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Procedure
before
Tribunal and
Appellate
Tribunal.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.

168
Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or
document from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte;
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any
order passed by it e x parte; and
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) Any order made by the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal may be enforced by that
Tribunal in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a court in a suit pending therein,
and it shall be lawful for the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal to send for execution of its
orders to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,—
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of the
company is situate; or
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, the person concerned
voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.
(4) All proceedings before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to
be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of
section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall be
deemed to be civil courts for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
386. The Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall have the same jurisdiction, powers
and authority in respect of contempt of themselves as the High Court has and may exercise,
for this purpose, the powers under the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971,
subject to the modifications that—
(a) the reference therein to a High Court shall be construed as including a
reference to the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal; and
(b) the reference to Advocate-General in section 15 of the said Act shall be
construed as a reference to such Law Officers as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf.
387. The Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal may, by general or special order, direct,
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, any of its officers or
employees or any other person authorised by it to inquire into any matter connected with
any proceeding or, as the case may be, appeal before it and to report to it in such manner as
may be specified in the order.
388. The President, Members, officers and other employees of the Tribunal and the
Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
389. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Tribunal, the
President, Member, officer or other employee, or against the Appellate Tribunal, the
Chairperson, Member, officer or other employee or liquidator or any other person authorised
by the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal for the discharge of any function under this Act
in respect of any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by any act which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
390. (1) The Tribunal may, in any proceeding relating to a sick company or winding
up of any other company, in order to take into custody or under its control all property,
books of account or other documents, request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
Chief Judicial Magistrate or the District Collector within whose jurisdiction any such property,
books of account or other documents of such sick or other company, are situate or found,
1 of 1872.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
Power to
punish for
contempt. 70 of 1971.
Delegation of
powers.
Members,
officers, etc.,
to be public
servants.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
45 of 1860.
Power to seek
assistance of
Chief
Metropolitan
Magistrate,
etc.

169
to take possession thereof, and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate
or the District Collector, as the case may be, shall, on such request being made to him,—
(a) take possession of such property, books of account or other documents;
and
(b) cause the same to be entrusted to the Tribunal or other person authorised
by it.
(2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of sub-section (1), the
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the District Collector may take
or cause to be taken such steps and use or cause to be used such force as may, in his
opinion, be necessary.
(3) No act of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate or the
District Magistrate done in pursuance of this section shall be called in question in any court
or before any authority on any ground whatsoever.
391. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter which the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal is empowered to determine
by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no injunction shall be
granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act or any other law for the time being
in force by the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal.
392. No act or proceeding of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall be questioned
or shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the
constitution of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.
393. A party to any proceeding or appeal before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal,
as the case may be, may either appear in person or authorise one or more chartered
accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any other
person to present his case before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.
394. The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 shall, as far as may be, apply to
proceedings or appeals before Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.
395. On the date of the constitution of the Tribunal,—
(a) all matters, proceedings or cases pending before the Board of Company Law
Administration (hereinafter in this section referred to as the Company Law Board)
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 10E of the Companies Act, 1956, immediately
before such date shall stand transferred to the Tribunal and the Tribunal shall dispose
of such matters, proceedings or cases in accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(b) any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Company Law Board
made before such date may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the
date of communication of the decision or order of the Company Law Board to him on
any question of law arising out of such order:
Provided that the High Court may if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing an appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a
further period not exceeding sixty days;
(c) all proceedings under the Companies Act, 1956, including proceedings relating
to arbitration, compromise, arrangements and reconstruction and winding up of
companies, pending immediately before such date before any District Court or High
Court, shall stand transferred to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may proceed to deal
with such proceedings either de novo or from the stage before their transfer:
Civil court not
to have
jurisdiction.
Vacancy in
Tribunal or
Appellate
Tribunal not
to invalidate
acts or
proceedings.
Right to legal
representation.
Limitation.
Transfer of
certain
pending
proceedings.
36 of 1963.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.

170
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any proceedings for the winding
up of a company subject to the supervision of court pending before any District Court or
High Court immediately before such date, and such proceedings shall, after such date,
continue to be dealt with by the District Court or the High Court, as the case may be, and—
(i) the company shall be wound up in the same manner and with the same
incidents, and
(ii) any appeal against any order of the District Court or the High Court shall lie
to the competent court to which appeal would have lain,
as if the Companies Act, 1956 had continued to be in force.
CHAPTER XXVII
S
PECIAL COURTS
396. (1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of providing speedy trial of
offences under this Act, by notification, establish as many special courts as may be necessary.
(2) A special court shall consist of a single judge who shall be appointed by the
Central Government with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court within
whose jurisdiction the judge to be appointed is working.
(3)  A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of a special court
unless he is, immediately before such appointment, holding office of a Sessions Judge or
an Additional Sessions Judge.
397. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973,—
(a) all offences under this Act shall be triable only by the special court established
for the area in which the registered office of the company in relation to which the
offence is committed or where there are more special courts than one for such area, by
such one of them as may be specified in this behalf by the High Court concerned;
(b) where a person accused of, or suspected of the commission of, an offence
under this Act is forwarded to a Magistrate under sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A)
of section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, such Magistrate may authorise
the detention of such person in such custody as he thinks fit for a period not exceeding
fifteen days in the whole where such Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate and seven
days in the whole where such Magistrate is an Executive Magistrate:
Provided that where such Magistrate considers that the detention of such person
upon or before the expiry of the period of detention is unnecessary, he shall order such
person to be forwarded to the special court having jurisdiction;
(c) the special court may exercise, in relation to the person forwarded to it under
clause (b), the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a case may
exercise under section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in relation to an
accused person who has been forwarded to him under that section; and
(d) a special court may, upon perusal of the police report of the facts constituting
an offence under this Act or upon a complaint in that behalf, take cognizance of that
offence without the accused being committed to it for trial.
(2) When trying an offence under this Act, a special court may also try an offence
other than an offence under this Act with which the accused may, under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 be charged at the same trial.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
special court may, if it thinks fit, try in a summary way any offence under this Act which is
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years:
Establishment
of special
courts.
Offences
triable by
special courts. 2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
1 of 1956.

171
Provided that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial, no sentence of
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year shall be passed:
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary
trial, it appears to the special court that the nature of the case is such that the sentence of
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other
reason, undesirable to try the case summarily, the special court shall, after hearing the
parties, record an order to that effect and thereafter recall any witnesses who may have
been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in accordance with the procedure for
the regular trial.
398. The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers conferred
by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on a High Court, as if
a special court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court of
Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.
399. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall apply to the proceedings before a special court and for the purposes
of the said provisions, the special court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the
person conducting a prosecution before a special court shall be deemed to be a Public
Prosecutor.
400. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, every
offence under this Act shall be deemed to be non-cognizable within the meaning of the said
Code.
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any office under this Act which is alleged to
have been committed by any company or any officer thereof, except on the complaint in
writing of the Registrar, a shareholder of the company, or of a person authorised by the
Central Government in that behalf:
Provided that the court may take cognizance of offences relating to issue and transfer
of securities and non-payment of dividend on a complaint in writing by a person authorised
by the Securities and Exchange Board of India:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a prosecution by a
company of any of its officers.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
where the complainant under sub-section (1) is the Registrar or a person authorised by the
Central Government, the presence of such officers before the Court trying the offences
shall not be necessary unless the court requires his personal attendance at the trial.
(4) The provisions of sub-section ( 2) shall not apply to any action taken by the
liquidator of a company in respect of any offence alleged to have been committed in respect
of any of the matters in Chapter XX or in any other provision of this Act relating to winding
up of companies.
Explanation.—A liquidator of a company shall not be deemed to be an officer of the
company within the meaning of sub-section (1).
401. Any offence committed under this Act, which is triable by a special court shall,
until a special court is established, be tried by a Court of Session exercising jurisdiction
over the area, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the powers of the High
Court under section 407 of the Code to transfer any case or class of cases taken cognizance
by a Court of Session under this section.
402. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
any offence punishable under this Act, not being an offence punishable with imprisonment
only or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, either before or after the institution of
Appeal and
revision.2 of 1974.
Application of
Code to
proceedings
before a special
court.
2 of 1974.
Offences to be
non-
cognizable.
2 of 1974.
Transitional
provisions.
2 of 1974.
Composition
of certain
offences.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

172
any prosecution, be compounded by the aggrieved person or persons with the permission
of the court having jurisdiction to try the offence.
403. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
the Central Government may appoint generally, or for any case, or in any case, or for any
specified class of cases in any local area, one or more persons, as company prosecutors for
the conduct of prosecutions arising out of this Act and the persons so appointed as company
prosecutors shall have all the powers and privileges conferred by the Code on Public
Prosecutors appointed under section 24 of the Code.
404. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
the Central Government may, in any case arising under this Act, direct any company
prosecutor or authorise any other person either by name or by virtue of his office, to
present an appeal from an order of acquittal passed by any Court, other than a High Court,
and an appeal presented by such prosecutor or other person shall be deemed to have been
validly presented to the appellate court.
405. The provisions of section 250 of the Code shall apply mutatis mutandis  to
accusation without reasonable cause before the special court or the Court of Session.
406. The Court imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the whole or any part
thereof shall be applied in or towards payment of the costs of the proceedings, or in or
towards the payment of a reward to the person on whose information the proceedings were
instituted.
CHAPTER XXVIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
407. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, if in any return, report, certificate, balance
sheet, prospectus, statement or other document required by or for the purposes of any of
the provisions of this Act, any person makes a statement,—
(a) which is false in any material particulars, knowing it to be false; or
(b) which omits any material fact, knowing it to be material,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
408. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, if any person intentionally gives false
evidence—
(a) upon any examination on oath or solemn affirmation, authorised under this
Act; or
(b) in any affidavit, deposition or solemn affirmation, in or about the winding up
of any company under this Act, or otherwise in or about any matter arising under this
Act,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not less than three years
but which may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
409. If a company or any other person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act
or the rules made thereunder, or any condition, limitation or restriction subject to which any
approval, sanction, consent, confirmation, recognition, direction or exemption in relation to
any matter has been accorded, given or granted, and for which no penalty or punishment is
provided elsewhere in this Act, the company and every officer of the company who is in
Power of
Central
Government to
appoint
company
prosecutors.
2 of 1974.
Appeal against
acquittal.
Compensation
for
accusation
without
reasonable
cause.
Application of
fines.
Punishment
for false
statements.
Punishment
for false
evidence.
Punishment
where no
specific
penalty or
punishment is
provided.
2 of 1974.

173
default or such other person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, and where the contravention is a continuing one, with a further fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees for every day after the first during which the contravention
continues.
410. In case a company or any officer who is in default repeats the default, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment as provided, but in case of defaults for which fine is provided
either along with or exclusive of imprisonment, with fine which shall be twice the amount of
fine for such default.
411. (1) If any officer or employee of a company—
(a) wrongfully obtains possession of any property, including cash of the
company; or
(b) having any such property including cash in his possession, wrongfully
withholds it or knowingly applies it for the purposes other than those expressed or
directed in the articles and authorised by this Act,
he shall, on the complaint of the company or of any creditor or contributory thereof, be
punishable with fine which shall be not less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to
five lakh rupees.
(2) The Court trying an offence under sub-section (1) may also order such officer or
employee to deliver up or refund, within a time to be fixed by it, any such property or cash
wrongfully obtained or wrongfully withheld or knowingly misapplied, or in default, to undergo
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years.
412. If any person or persons trade or carry on business under any name or title of
which the word “Limited” or the words “Private Limited” or the letters and word “OPC
Limited” or any contraction or imitation thereof is or are the last word or words, that person
or each of those persons shall, unless duly incorporated with limited liability, be punishable
for using that name or title with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which
may extend to five lakh rupees.
413. (1) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette,
appoint as many officers of the Central Government, not below the rank of Registrar, as
adjudicating officers for adjudging penalty under the provisions of this Act in the manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall while appointing adjudicating officers, specify
their jurisdiction in the order under sub-section (1).
(3) The Adjudicating Officer may, by an order impose the penalty on the company and
the officer who is in default stating any non-compliance or any default under the relevant
provision of the Act.
(4) The Adjudicating Officer shall, before imposing any penalty, give a reasonable
opportunity of being heard to such company and the officer who is in default.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the adjudicating officer under sub-
section (4) may prefer an appeal to the Regional Director having jurisdiction in the matter.
(6) Every appeal under sub-section (5) shall be filed within sixty days from the date on
which the copy of the order made by the adjudicating officer is received by the aggrieved
person and shall be in such form, manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be
prescribed.
(7) The Regional Director may, after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity
of being heard, pass such order as he thinks fit confirming, modifying or setting aside the
order appealed against.
Punishment in
case of
repeated
default.
Punishment
for wrongful
withholding of
property.
Punishment
for improper
use of
“Limited”,
“Private
Limited” or
“OPC
Limited”.
Adjudication
of penalties.

174
(8) (i) where company does not pay the penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer
or the Regional Director within a period of ninety days from the date of the receipt of the
copy of the order, it shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five
thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(ii) where an officer in default does not pay the penalty within a period of ninety days
from the date of the receipt of the copy of the order, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
which may extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
414. (1) Where a company is formed and registered under this Act for a future project
or to hold an asset or intellectual property and has no significant accounting transaction,
such a company or an inactive company may make an application to the Registrar in such
manner as may be prescribed for obtaining the status of a dormant company.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “inactive company” means a company which has not been carrying on any
business or operation, or has not made any significant accounting transaction during
the last two financial years, or has not filed financial statements and annual returns
during the last two financial years;
(ii) “significant accounting transaction” shall not include payment of fees by a
company to the Registrar, payments made by it to fulfil the requirements of this Act or
any other law and payments for maintenance of its office and records.
(2) The Registrar on consideration of the application allow the status of a dormant
company to the applicant and issue a certificate in such form as may be prescribed to that
effect.
(3) The Registrar shall maintain a register of dormant companies in such form as may
be prescribed.
(4) In case of a company which has not filed financial statements or annual returns for
two financial years consecutively, the Registrar shall issue a notice to that company and
enter the name of such company in the register maintained for dormant companies.
(5) A dormant company shall have such minimum number of directors, file such
documents and pay such annual fee as may be prescribed to the Registrar to retain its
dormant status in the register and may become an active company on an application made
in this behalf accompanied by such documents and fee as may be prescribed.
(6) The Registrar shall strike off the name of a dormant company from the register of
dormant companies, which has failed to comply with the requirements of this section.
415. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government
or any officer of Government or any other person in respect of anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made
thereunder, or in respect of the publication by or under the authority of the Government or
such officer, of any report, paper or proceedings.
416. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Registrar, any officer of Government or any other person shall not be compelled to
disclose to any court, tribunal or other authority the source from where he got any information
which—
(a) has led the Central Government to order an investigation under section 183;
or
(b) is or has been material or relevant in connection with such investigation.
Dormant
company.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Non-disclosure
of information
in certain cases.

175
417. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to such conditions,
limitations and restrictions as may be specified therein, delegate any of its powers or
functions under this Act other than the power to make rules to such authority or officer as
may be specified in the notification.
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be
after it is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
418. (1) Where the Central Government or the Tribunal is required or authorised by
any provision of this Act—
(a) to accord approval, sanction, consent, confirmation or recognition to or in
relation to, any matter;
(b) to give any direction in relation to any matter; or
(c) to grant any exemption in relation to any matter,
then, in the absence of anything to the contrary contained in that provision or any other
provision of this Act, the Central Government or the Tribunal may accord, give or grant
such approval, sanction, consent, confirmation, recognition, direction or exemption, subject
to such conditions, limitations or restrictions as it may think fit to impose and may, in the
case of a contravention of any such condition, limitation or restriction, rescind or withdraw
such approval, sanction, consent, confirmation, recognition, direction or exemption.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every application which may be, or is
required to be, made to the Central Government or the Tribunal under any provision of this
Act—
(a) in respect of any approval, sanction, consent, confirmation or recognition
to be accorded by that Government or the Tribunal to, or in relation to, any matter;
(b) in respect of any direction or exemption to be given or granted by that
Government or the Tribunal in relation to any matter ; or
(c) in respect of any other matter,
shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that different fees may be prescribed for applications in respect of different
matters or in case of applications by different classes of companies.
419. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
(a) where any application required to be made to the Central Government under
any provision of this Act in respect of any matter is not made within the time specified
therein, that Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, condone the
delay; and
(b) where any document required to be filed with the Registrar under any
provision of this Act is not filed within the time specified therein, the Central
Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, condone the delay.
420. The Central Government shall cause a general annual report on the working and
administration of this Act to be prepared and laid before each House of Parliament within
one year of the close of the year to which the report relates.
421. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, the Central Government may, by
notification, direct that any of the provisions of Chapters III, IV , VII and IX to XIII of this Act
shall not apply, or shall apply with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may
be specified in that notification, to private company, One Person Company and small company
or any of them.
Delegation by
Central
Government
of its powers
and functions.
Powers of
Central
Government
or Tribunal to
accord
approval, etc.,
subject to
conditions and
to prescribe
fees on
applications.
Condonation
of delays in
certain cases.
Annual report
by Central
Government.
Power to
modify
certain
provisions of
Act in their
application to
private
company, One
Person
Company and
small
company.

176
(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (1), shall be
laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses
agree in making any modification in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or,
as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by
both the Houses.
422. (1) No association or partnership consisting of more than such number of persons
as may be prescribed shall be formed for the purpose of carrying on any business that has
for its object the acquisition of gain by the association or partnership or by the individual
members thereof, unless it is registered as a company under this Act or is formed under any
other law for the time being in force:
Provided that the number of persons which may be prescribed under this sub-section
shall not exceed one hundred.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to—
(a) a Hindu undivided family carrying on any business; or
(b) an association or partnership, if it is formed by professionals who are
governed by special Acts.
(3) Every member of an association or partnership carrying on business in
contravention of sub-section (1) shall be personally liable for all liabilities incurred in such
business and shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
423. (1)The Companies Act, 1956 and the Registration of Companies (Sikkim) Act,
1961 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the repealed enactments) shall stand repealed:
Provided that the provisions of Part IX A of the Companies Act, 1956 shall be applicable
mutatis mutandis to a producer company in a manner as if the Companies Act, 1956 has not
been repealed:
Provided further that until the constitution of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal,
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 in regard to the jurisdiction, powers, authority
and functions of the Board of Company Law Administration and Court shall continue to
apply as if the Companies Act, 1956 has not been repealed .
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal under sub-section ( 1) of the repealed enactments,—
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken,
including any rule, notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued or any
appointment or declaration made or any direction given or any proceeding taken or
any penalty or fine imposed under the repealed enactments shall, insofar as it is not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provisions of this Act;
(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), any order, rule, notification, regulation,
appointment, conveyance, mortgage, deed, document or agreement made, fee directed,
resolution passed, direction given, proceeding taken, instrument executed or issued,
or thing done under or in pursuance of any repealed enactment shall, if in force at the
commencement of this Act, continue to be in force, and shall have effect as if made,
directed, passed, given, taken, executed, issued or done under or in pursuance of this
Act;
(c) any person appointed to any office under or by virtue of any repealed
enactment shall be deemed to have been appointed to that office under or by virtue of
this Act;
Prohibition
of association
or
partnership
of persons
exceeding
certain
number.
Repeal of
certain
enactments
and savings.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.

177
(d) the offices existing on the commencement of this Act for the registration of
companies shall continue as if they have been established under the provisions of
this Act;
(e) the incorporation of companies registered under the repealed enactments
shall continue to be valid and the provisions of this Act shall apply to such companies
as if they were registered under this Act;
(f) all registers and all funds constituted and established under the repealed
enactments shall be deemed to be registers and funds constituted or established
under the corresponding provisions of this Act;
(g) any prosecution instituted under the repealed enactments and pending
immediately before the commencement of this Act before any Court shall, subject to
the provisions of this Act, continue to be heard and disposed of by the said Court;
(h) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under the
Companies Act, 1956 shall continue to be proceeded with as if such inspection,
investigation or inquiry has been ordered under the corresponding provisions of this
Act.
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice
the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect
of repeal of the repealed enactments as if the Registration of Companies (Sikkim) Act, 1961
were also a Central Act.
424. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 422, the Board of Company
Law Administration constituted under the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter in this section
referred to as the Company Law Board) shall stand dissolved on the constitution of the
Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal.
(2) The persons holding the offices of Chairman, Vice- Chairman and Members, and
officers and other employees of the Company Law Board immediately before the constitution
of the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall vacate their respective offices on such
constitution and no such Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members and officers or other
employees shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the premature termination of the
term of his office or of any contract of service, if any:
Provided that every officer or other employee, who had been appointed on deputation
basis to the Company Law Board, shall, on such dissolution, stand reverted to his parent
cadre, Ministry or Department, as the case may be:
Provided further that every officer and other employee of the Company Law Board,
employed on regular basis by that Board, shall become, on and from such dissolution the
officer and other employee, respectively, of the Central Government with the same rights
and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like benefits as would have been admissible
to him if he had continued to serve that Board and shall continue to do so unless and until
his employment in the Central Government is duly terminated or until his remuneration,
terms and conditions of employment are duly altered by that Government:
Provided also that notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, any officer or other employee who
becomes an officer or other employee of the Central Government under the preceding
proviso shall not be entitled to any compensation under this Act or under any other law for
the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other
authority:
Provided also that where the Company Law Board has established a provident fund,
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of the officers and other
employees employed in that Board, the monies relatable to the officers and other employees
who have become officers or employees of the Central Government shall, out of the monies
Dissolution of
Company Law
Board and
consequential
provision.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1897.
1 of 1956.
14 of 1947.

178
standing to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare fund or other
fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government and such monies which
stand so transferred shall be dealt with by that Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
425. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years
from the date of commencement of section 1 of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
426. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
Central Government may make rules for all or any of the matters which by this Act are
required to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be or may be
made by rules.
(3) Any rule made under sub-section ( 1) may provide that a contravention thereof
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and where the
contravention is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every day after the first during which such contravention continues.
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under sub-section (1) shall be laid as
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), was enacted with the
object to consolidate and amend the law relating to companies and certain other associations.
Simultaneously, Companies Act, 1913, then in force, was repealed.
2. Many changes have taken place in the national and international economic
environment since the enactment of the said Act. This has made the economy more diverse,
complex and dynamic. In this milieu, the corporate form of organization is increasingly
emerging as the preferred vehicle for economic and commercial activity and has contributed
significantly to the growth of the Indian economy and the emergence of service, information
and knowledge-based enterprises. The number of companies has expanded from 30,000 in
1956 to nearly 7.5 lakh companies functioning as of date. Companies are now mobilising
resources at a scale unimaginable even a decade ago, continuously entering into and bringing
new activities into the fold of the Indian economy, exporting a wide range of goods and
services and providing increasing employment opportunities.
3. The expansion and growth of the Indian economy has also generated considerable
interest in the international investing community. However, there is a need for sustaining
growth in a globalised and competitive environment. The increasing options and avenues
for international business, trade and capital flows have made it imperative for the growing
Indian economy to note only to harness its entrepreneurial and economic resources efficiently
but also to be competitive in attracting investment to sustain the impressive growth recorded
by it in recent years. Many investors are also looking towards the statutory and regulatory
framework for the corporate sector in the country while deciding on their investment options.
Modernisation of corporate regulation, governing various aspects of setting up of enterprises,
structures for sharing of risk and reward, their governance and accountability to stakeholders,
financial procedures and responsibility for disclosures, procedures for rehabilitation,
liquidation and winding up is, therefore, critical to the perceptions of investors and determining
their business and investment decisions.
4. In the background of the above developments and recognising that the competitive
and technology driven business environment today require the corporate entities to be
provided greater autonomy of operation and innovation with reasonable process requirements
and compliance costs, a need was felt to help sustain the growth of the Indian corporate
sector by enabling a new legal framework that would be compact, amenable to clear
interpretation, and respond in a timely and appropriate manner to meet the requirements of
ever evolving economic activities and business models, while fostering a positive environment
for investment and growth. In addition, there is also a need to avoid overlapping and conflicts
of jurisdiction in the area of sectoral regulations. Therefore piecemeal re-engineering of the
corporate regulatory framework was not considered adequate to enable the systemic changes
required. Hence, a comprehensive review of the Companies Act, 1956, and introduction of a
revised statutory framework in the form of a new Companies Bill has been considered essential
to achieve the desired reform.
5. In the above backdrop, the review of the Companies Act, 1956 and drafting of a new
Companies Bill was taken up by the Government on the basis of a detailed consultative
process. A 'Concept Paper on new Company Law' was placed on the website of the Ministry
on 4th August, 2004. The inputs received were put to a detailed examination in the Ministry.
The Government also constituted an Expert Committee on Company Law under the
Chairmanship of Dr. J.J. Irani on 2nd December, 2004 to make recommendations in respect of
new Company Law. The Committee included representatives from concerned Departments
and Ministries, Professional Institutes and trade bodies and individual experts as members
or special invitees. The Committee deliberated extensively on various issues and submitted
its report to the Government on 31st May, 2005. After considering the report of the Committee
179

180
and other inputs received from time-to-time, the Government took up the exercise of comprehensive
review of the Companies Act, 1956. Broadly the objective of the review was to—
(i) retain desirable features of the existing framework, segregate substantive law
from the procedures to enable a clear framework for good corporate governance that
addresses the concerns of all stakeholders equitably;
(ii) revise the law so as to enable a compact statute that is amenable to easy
understanding and interpretation;
(iii) enable greater flexibility in procedural aspects so that with the change of
time the procedural framework, to be prescribed through rules, may be amended without
amendment of the substantive enactment;
(iv) establish a climate that encourages setting up of businesses and their growth
while enabling measures to protect the interests of stakeholders and investors, including
small investors, through legal basis for sound corporate governance practices and
effective enforcement;
(v) provide a framework for responsible self-regulation through determination of
corporate matters through decisions by shareholders, in the background of clear
accountability for such decisions, obviating the need for a regime based on Government
approvals;
(vi) address the practical concerns of small businesses so that people may deal
with and invest in companies with confidence, promote international competitiveness
of Indian businesses and provide them with the flexibility to meet the challenges of the
global economy;
(vii) incorporate international practices based on the models suggested by the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL); and
(viii) provide for a reasonable and appropriate framework for enforcement of the
law that enables proper investigation and imposition of appropriate sanctions
comprising of penalties for non-compliance and punishment for violation of the law
and for fraudulent  conduct, keeping in view the experience resulting from past stock
market scams and concerns expressed by Joint Parliamentary Committees thereon.
6. In the light of the above objective the present Bill, inter alia, provides for:—
(i) the basic principles for all aspects of internal governance of  corporate entities
and a framework for their regulation, irrespective of their area of operation, from
incorporation to liquidation and winding up, in a single, comprehensive, legal framework
to be administered by the Central Government. In doing so, the Bill also seeks to
harmonise  the Company law framework  with the sectoral regulation;
Reduction of Government Control over internal Corporate Processes;
(ii) articulation of shareholders democracy with protection of the rights of minority
stakeholders,  responsible self-regulation with adequate disclosures and accountability.
Reduction of Government control over internal corporate processes;
(iii) easy transition of companies operating under the Companies Act, 1956, to
the new framework as also from one type of company to another. Freedom with regard
to the numbers and layers of  subsidiary companies  that a company may have, subject
to disclosures in respect of their relationship and transactions or dealings between
them;
(iv) a new entity in the form of One-Person Company (OPC) while empowering
Government to provide a simpler compliance regime for small companies. Retention of
the concept of Producer Companies, while providing a more stringent regime
for companies with charitable objects to check misuse;

181
(v) application of the successful e-Governance initiative of the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs (MCA-21) to all the processes involved in meeting compliance
obligations. Company processes may also be carried out through electronic mode;
(vi) speedy incorporation process, with detailed declarations and disclosures
about the promoters, directors, etc., at the time of  incorporation itself. Every company
director would be required to  acquire a unique Director identification number;
(vii) relaxation of restrictions  limiting the number of partners in entities such as
partnership firms, banking companies, etc., to a maximum 100, with no ceiling as to
professional associations regulated by Special Acts;
(viii) duties and liabilities of the directors and every company to have at least
one director resident in India. The Bill also  provides for independent directors to be
appointed on the Boards of such companies as may be prescribed, along with attributes
determining independence. The requirement to appoint  independent directors, where
applicable, to listed public companies is a minimum of one-third of the total number of
directors. For other public companies, the requirement and number may be prescribed
through rules;
(ix) statutory  recognition to audit, remuneration and stakeholders relationship
committees of the Board and the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), the Chief Financial
Officer (CFO) and the Company Secretary to be as Key Managerial Personnel (KMP);
(x)  companies not  to be allowed to raise deposits from the public except on the
basis of permission available to them through other Special Acts. The Bill prohibits
insider trading by company directors or Key Managerial Personnel and declares it as
an offence with criminal liability;
(xi) recognition of both accounting and auditing standards. The role, rights and
duties of the auditors defined so as to maintain integrity and independence of the
audit process. Consolidation of financial statements of subsidiaries with those of
holding companies is proposed to be made mandatory;
(xii) a single forum for approval of mergers and acquisitions along with a shorter
merger process for holding and wholly owned subsidiary companies or between two
or more small companies as well as recognition of cross border merges. Concept of
deemed approval also provided in certain situations;
(xiii) a framework for enabling fair valuations in companies for various purposes.
Appointment of valuers is proposed to be made by audit committee or in its absence
by the Board of Directors;
(xiv) claim of an investor over a dividend or a benefit from a security not claimed
for more than a period of seven years not to be extinguished, and Investor Education
and Protection Fund (IEPF) to be administered by a statutory authority;
(xv) shareholders associations or group of shareholders to be enabled to take
legal action in case of any fraudulent  action on the part of company and to take part in
investor protection activities and 'Class Action Suits';
(xvi) a revised framework for regulation of insolvency, including rehabilitation,
liquidation and winding up of companies and the process to be completed in a time
bound manner;
(xvii) consolidation of fora for dealing with rehabilitation of companies, their
liquidation and winding up in the single forum of National Company Law Tribunal with
appeal to National Company Law Appellate Tribunal with suitable transitional
provisions. The nature of the Rehabilitation and Revival Fund proposed in the

182
Companies (Second Amendment) Act, 2002 to be replaced by Rehabilitation and
Insolvency Fund with voluntary contributions linked to entitlements to draw money in
a situation of insolvency;
(xviii) a more effective regime for inspections and investigations of companies
while laying down the maximum as well as minimum quantum of penalty for each
offence with suitable deterrence for repeated defaults. Company is identified as a
separate entity for imposition of monetary penalties from the officers in default. In case
of fraudulent activities, provisions for recovery and disgorgement have been included;
(xix) levy of additional fee in a non-discretionary manner for procedural non-
compliance, such as late filing of statutory documents, to be enabled through rules.
Defaults of procedural nature to be penalised by levy of monetary penalties by the
adjudicating officers not below the level of Registrars. The appeals against orders of
adjudicating officers to lie with suitably designated higher authorities;
(xx) special Courts to deal with offences under the Bill. Company matters such as
mergers and amalgamations, reduction of capital, insolvency including rehabilitation,
liquidations and winding up are proposed to be dealt with by the National Company
Law Tribunal.
7. In view of the extensive changes made in the Companies Act, 1956, it has been
considered necessary to repeal the said Act and enact the Companies Bill, 2008.
8. The Notes on clauses explain, in detail, provisions of the Bill.
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI;
The  13th October,  2008. PREM CHAND GUPTA.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1. —  It has been made flexible to enforce various sections on different dates
and different states. Sub-clause (4) makes position clear as to application of this Act.
Clause 2. — This clause corresponds to section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
defines various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3. — This clause corresponds to section 12 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide minimum number of persons to form a public, private or One Person Company
for any lawful purpose, by subscribing their names to the memorandum.  Memorandum of
One Person Company shall indicate the name of a person who shall become member, in the
event of death, disability or otherwise of the single member.   The companies formed under
this clause may be limited by shares or limited by guarantee or an unlimited company.
Clause 4. — This clause corresponds to section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
empowers the Central Government to register an association as limited company having
charitable objects to promote commerce, art, science, sports, education, research, social
welfare, religion, charity, etc.  without adding to its name the words ‘Limited’, ‘Private Limited’
or ‘OPC Limited’.  The profit or any income of the company shall be used for promoting the
objects of the company.  Payment of dividend to members is prohibited.  The Central
Government shall issue license on such terms and conditions as shall be prescribed by it for
registration of such companies and these companies shall be subject to certain exemptions
and restrictions. The conditions imposed, the Central Government may revoke the license
and order the company to be wound up or amalgamated with another company having
similar objects. A firm may be allowed to become a member of such company.
Clause 5 —This clause corresponds to sections 13, 14 and 20 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide for the requirements with respect to memorandum of a company.
The memorandum shall mention the name of  a company, State in which the registered office
of the company is to be situated, objects for which the company is proposed to be
incorporated, liability of members, etc.
Clause 6.— This  clause corresponds to sections 26, 27, 28 and 29 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide the contents and model of articles of association. The articles
may contain an entrenchment provision also.
Clause 7.—    This clause corresponds to section 33 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for the procedure to be followed for incorporation of a company.
Memorandum and articles of association duly signed, a declaration in a prescribed form to
the effect that the requirements of the Act in respect of registration have been complied with,
affidavit from the subscribers to the memorandum and from the first directors, to the effect,
that they are not convicted and have not been found guilty of any fraud or misfeasance, etc.
under this Act during the last five years, complete details of name, address of the company,
particulars of every subscriber and the persons named as first directors shall be given to the
Registrar. Thereafter, the Registrar of companies shall register the company and issue a
Certificate of Incorporation and allot a Corporate Identity Number. The persons furnishing
false information in this connection shall be liable for punishment and the company which is
registered shall be liable for winding up on the order of Tribunal.
Clause 8. — This clause corresponds to section 34 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for the effect of registration of a company.  The clause provides that from
the date of incorporation, the subscribers become the members of the company.  The company
shall be a body corporate with a name, capable of exercising all the functions of an incorporated
company under this Act and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power
to acquire, hold and dispose of property, to contract, to sue and be sued, by the said name.
183

Clause 9. — This clause corresponds to section 36 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for the effect of memorandum and articles whereby the memorandum and
articles shall be binding on the company and the members to the extent as if they respectively
had been signed by the company and by each member.  All moneys payable by members to
the company shall be debt due from him to the company.
Clause 10. — This clause corresponds to section 149 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the company having a share capital shall not commence business or
exercise any borrowing powers unless a declaration is filed with Registrar by a director or
subscriber that every subscriber to the memorandum has paid the value of shares taken by
him, and the company has filed with the Registrar the verification of its registered office.  The
Registrar of companies may remove the name of the company if Registrar has reasonable
cause to believe that the company is not carrying on business or operations and is not filing
declaration within 180 days of the date of incorporation.
Clause 11. —  This clause corresponds to sections 146 and 147 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that from the date of incorporation and at all times thereafter, a
company shall have a registered office capable of receiving and acknowledging all
communications and notices addressed to it. In case of any change of the registered office,
the company has to give notice to the Registrar of companies within a stipulated time. Any
change of registered office outside the local limits of any city, town or village shall be done
only with the approval of members through special resolution.
Clause 12. — This clause corresponds to section 16 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company may alter the provisions of its memorandum with approval
of the members through special resolution. No alteration shall have any effect unless it is
registered with the Registrar. Where there is change in the name of a company, the Registrar
shall issue a fresh certificate of incorporation. Any alteration of the memorandum relating to
the place of registered office from one State to another shall be effective only with the
approval of the Central Government on an application filed to it.  A copy of the order to this
effect has to be filed with the Registrar.
Clause 13. — This clause corresponds to section 31 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for alteration of articles. A company may alter its articles including alterations
having effect of conversion of a private company or a One Person Company into a public
company or a One Person Company or a public company into private company with the
approval of members through special resolution and approved by the Tribunal.  A copy of
order of Tribunal shall be filed with the Registrar together with a printed copy of the altered
articles.
Clause 14. —  This clause corresponds to section 40 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that every alteration made in the memorandum or articles of a company shall
be noted in every copy of the memorandum and articles of association.
Clause 15. — This clause corresponds to section 22 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Central Government to give direction to the company to rectify its
name if the name registered is identical with or too nearly resembles the name, by which a
company in existence has been previously registered, or the name is identical with or too
nearly resembling to a registered trade mark.
Clause 16. — This clause corresponds to section 39 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that every company shall on being so requested by a member, send copies
of memorandum, and articles of association, agreement or resolution on payment of fees.
Clause 17. —  This clause corresponds to section 32 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to  provide that a company may re-register itself in same or any other class of companies
by altering its memorandum and articles of association. The re-registration shall not affect
any debts, liabilities, obligations or contracts incurred or entered into by the company.
184

185
Clause 18. —  This clause corresponds to section 42 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that subsidiary company shall not hold shares in its holding company and
no holding company shall allot or transfer its shares to any of its subsidiary companies and
any such allotment or transfer of shares of a company to its subsidiary company shall be
void.
Clause 19. — This clause corresponds to section 51, 52 and 53 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide for the mode in  which documents may be served on the company,
on the members and also on the Registrars.
Clause 20. — This clause corresponds to section 54 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for authentication of documents, proceedings and contracts, etc.
Clause 21. — This clause corresponds to section 47 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for execution of bills of exchange, hundi, promissory notes and other
deeds.  A company may, by writing under its common seal, authorise any person as its
attorney to execute deeds on company’s behalf.  Deed signed by such an attorney on behalf
of the company and under his seal shall bind the company and have same effect as if it were
made under its common seal.
Clause 22. — This clause corresponds to section 55A of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the powers relating to issue, transfer and trading of securities and
nonpayment of dividend by listed companies or those companies which intend to get their
securities listed on any stock exchange in India, be administered by the Securities and
Exchange Board of India.
Clause 23. — This clause corresponds to section 56 and Schedule II of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide for the matters to be stated and information to be given in the
prospectus. Prospectus shall not be issued before the date of its publication. No statement
of an expert shall be included in the prospectus unless he is engaged or interested in formation
of a company and has given his written consent to the issue of prospectus before the
delivery of a copy of the prospectus to the Registrar for registration. Registrar shall register
the prospectus only after the registration requirements are complied with.  Prospectus is to
be issued within ninety days from the date of delivery of prospectus to the Registrar.  In case,
a prospectus is issued by a company in contravention of the provision of this section, the
company shall be punishable with fine.
Clause 24. — This clause corresponds to section 67 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company may make an offer or invitation to the public to subscribe for
securities.  A statement indicating the salient features of the offer or invitation has to be filed
with the Registrar of companies for registration.
Clause 25. —  This clause corresponds to section 66 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that where an advertisement of any prospectus of a company is published,
it shall specify therein the contents of memorandum as regards to the objects, the liability of
members and the amount of share capital, the names of the signatories and the number of
shares subscribed by them and also its capital structure, etc.
Clause 26. — This clause corresponds to section 60A of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that any class or classes of companies prescribed by the Securities and
Exchange Board of India may file a shelf prospectus with the Registrar of companies at the
stage of the first offer of securities for a period of one year.  No further issue of prospectus
is required in respect of a second or subsequent offer of securities included in such prospectus
for a period of one year.  Company shall also file information memorandum on new charges
created, of any change in financial position with the Registrar of companies prior to the issue
of a second or subsequent offer under shelf prospectus.
Clause 27. — This clause corresponds to section 60B of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for issue of redherring prospectus prior to issue of a prospectus. A company
proposing to issue a red herring prospectus shall file it with Registrar at least three days prior
to the opening of the subscription list and the offer.

186
Clause 28. — This clause corresponds to sub-section (3) of section 56 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that every form of application issued for purchase of any
securities of a company shall be accompanied by an abridged prospectus.
Clause 29. — This clause corresponds to section 63 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
provides for criminal liability for misstatements in prospectus.  The person who authorises
the issue of such prospectus shall be punishable with fine and imprisonment.
Clause 30. — This clause corresponds to section 62 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that in case any person subscribes for securities on the basis of misleading
statements or inclusion or omission of any matter in the prospectus resulting in  any loss or
damage, the person who has authorised the issue of such prospectus or a director, promoter,
whosoever is liable, shall have to compensate every person who has sustained such loss or
damage.
Clause 31. —  This clause corresponds to section 68 of Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that such persons who fraudulently induces persons to invest money by
making statement which is false, deceptive, misleading or deliberately conceals any facts,
shall be punishable with imprisonment and with fine.
Clause 32. —  This is a new clause which seeks to provide that a suit may be filed or
any other action may be taken by any person, group of persons or any association of
persons who have been affected by any misleading statement or the inclusion or omission of
any matter in the prospectus.
Clause 33. — This clause corresponds to section 68A of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that those persons who applies in fictitious name or makes multiple
applications or otherwise induce companies to allot shares in fictitious name, shall be
punishable with imprisonment and with fine.  The clause further provides that Court may
order disgorgement of any gains and seizure and disposal of such securities.
Clause 34. — This clause corresponds to section 69 of the Companies Act, 1956
prohibiting allotment of securities where the minimum amount has not been subscribed, the
amount is to be refunded to all the applicants within a given time frame.
Clause 35. —  This clause corresponds to section 73 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that prospectus has to mention the name of the stock exchange where the
securities are to be dealt with. Any allotment without permission of the stock exchange shall
be void.  All moneys received on application from the public for subscription to the securities
shall be kept in a separate bank account. After allotment of shares, a return shall be filed with
the Registrar.  In case of default, the company and every officer of the company who is in
default shall be punishable with fine or with imprisonment or with both. A company may pay
commission to any person in connection with the subscription to its securities.
Clause 36. — This is a new clause which provides that a company may issue depository
receipts to be dealt with in a depository mode in any foreign country.
Clause 37. —  This clause corresponds to section 85 and seeks to provide that there
shall be two kinds of share capital namely equity share capital and preference share capital.
Preferential share capital carries a preferential right with respect to payment of dividend and
also for repayment of capital at the time of winding up.
Clause 38. —  This clause corresponds to section 82 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the shares and debentures are movable property transferable in a
manner provided in the articles of a company.
Clause 39. — This clause corresponds to section 83 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that every share in a company having a share capital shall be distinguished
by appropriate number.  This clause does not apply to shares held in by the depository.

187
Clause 40. —  This clause corresponds to section 84 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a certificate issued by a company shall be prima facie evidence of the
title of the person to such shares. It provides the manner for issuance of duplicate share
certificate and the particulars to be entered in the register of members.
Clause 41. — This clause corresponds to section 87 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that every member who is a holder of equity share shall have the right to
vote on every resolution placed before the company.  His voting right on a poll shall be in
proportion to his share in the paid up equity share capital of the company.  Every member of
a company who is holding preference shares shall have a right to vote only on such resolutions
which directly affect the rights attached to his preference shares.
Clause 42. — This clause corresponds to section 106 and 107 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that where share capital is divided into different classes of shares,
the rights attached to any class of shares may be varied with the written consent of the
holders of not less than three-fourths of the issued shares or by special resolution.  Where
the holders of ten per cent. of the issued share capital did not consent to such variation, they
may apply to Tribunal.
Clause 43. — This clause corresponds to section 91 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide  that where any calls for further share capital are made on the shares of a
class, such call shall be made on uniform basis on all shares falling under that class.
Clause 44. —  This clause corresponds to section 92 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company can accept from any member the whole or a part of the
amount remaining unpaid on any shares without being called up and he will not be entitled
to any voting rights on the amount paid by him unless amount has been called up.
Clause 45. — This clause corresponds to section 93 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company, if authorised by its articles, pay dividends in proportion to
the amount paid up on each share.
Clause 46. — This clause corresponds to section 78 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company shall transfer the amount received by it as share premium to
share premium account and state the means in which the amount in the account can be
applied.  Provisions on reduction of share capital shall apply to share premium account.
 Clause 47. — This clause corresponds to section 79 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that generally companies are prohibited from issuing shares at a discount
except in the case of issue of sweat equity shares.
Clause 48. — This clause corresponds to section 79A of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that on fulfilling certain conditions, a company may issue sweat equity
shares of a class of shares already issued.  The rights, limitations, restrictions and provisions
applicable to equity shares shall be applicable to sweat equity shares and holders of such
shares rank pari passu with other equity shareholders.
Clause 49. — This clause corresponds to section 80 and 80A of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that no company limited by shares shall issue irredeemable
preference shares.  A company may issue preference shares for a period not exceeding
twenty years.  However, for infrastructural project preference shares can be issued for more
than twenty years.
Clause 50. — This clause corresponds to section 108, 109B and 110 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that transfer of securities/interest of a member not to be
registered except on production of instrument of transfer duly stamped, dated and executed.
In case of loss of the instrument, the company may register the transfer in terms of indemnity.
Where an application relates to partly paid up shares, the transfer shall not be registered
unless a notice is issued to the transferee.  In case of refusal of transfer of shares, transferee
may appeal to the Tribunal.

188
Clause 51. — This clause corresponds to section 116 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide penalty for a person who deceitfully personates the owner of any share or
interest.
Clause 52. — This clause corresponds to sub-section's ( 1) and (2) of section 111 of
the Companies Act, 1956 and seeks to provide for that if a company without sufficient cause
refuses to register the transfer of shares, appeal against such refusal shall lie to the National
Company Law Tribunal.
Clause 53. — This clause corresponds to section 111A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that if the name of any person has been entered in or has been omitted
from the register of members without sufficient cause, the member or the person aggrieved
may appeal to The Tribunal or to a competent court outside India in respect of foreign
members or debenture holders.  The Tribunal may either dismiss the appeal or direct for
rectification of register, transfer or transmission.  The Tribunal may also direct to pay damages
to the aggrieved party.
Clause 54. — This clause corresponds to section 148 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that where any notice, advertisement or other official publication, or any
business letter, etc., of a company contains a statement of the amount of the authorised
capital of the company, such notice, advertisement or other official publication, or such
letters billhead or letter paper shall also state the subscribed and paid up capital.
Clause 55. — This clause corresponds to section 94 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a limited company having a share capital may alter its capital clause of
memorandum in its general meeting.
Clause 56. — This clause corresponds to section 81 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company having a share capital can increase its subscribed capital by
the issue of further shares to its existing members, to employees through employee’s stock
option or to the general public, after having the shares valued by registered valuers.   This
does not include conversion of debentures or loans into shares of the company.
Clause 57. — This clause corresponds to sections 95 and 97 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide for the companies to give notice to Registrar of alteration or
increase of share capital along with an altered memorandum.
Clause 58. — This clause corresponds to section 32 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that an unlimited company having a share capital may be reregistered as a
limited company by increasing the nominal amount of each share.  This clause further provides
that the company can not call unpaid portion of share capital except in the event of winding
up.
Clause 59. — This clause corresponds to sections 100 to 105 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that on the confirmation by the Tribunal a limited company may
reduce its share capital and alter its memorandum accordingly.  This clause further provides
that the Tribunal shall give notice to the Central Government and to the SEBI and consider
the representations received in this behalf.  The company shall deliver a certified copy of the
order of the Tribunal to the Registrar who shall issue a certificate to this effect to the
company.  The clause does not apply to buy back of its own securities.
Clause 60. — This clause corresponds to section 77 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the restrictions on purchase by companies or giving loans to others for
purchase of its own shares.  This clause further provides that the company’s right to redeem
any preference shares issued by it is not affected by such restriction.
Clause 61. — This clause corresponds to section 77A of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company may purchase its own shares out of its free reserves, the
securities premium account or from the proceeds of the issue of any shares or other specified
securities. The clause provides for the conditions to be fulfilled for buy-back of securities.

189
Every buy-back should be completed within one year from the date of passing of the special
resolution.  A declaration of solvency has to be filed by the company to the Registrar and
SEBI before the buy-back is proposed.  After completion of buy-back a return has to be filed
with ROC and Securities and Exchange Board of India. After buying back, the company shall
physically destroy all the shares.
Clause 62. — This clause corresponds to section 77AA of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that in case of buy-back of shares out of free reserves, a sum equal to
the nominal value of the shares so purchased shall be transferred to capital redemption
reserve account.
Clause 63. — This clause corresponds to section 77B of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to prohibit buy-back through any subsidiary company, through any investment
company or through such company which has defaulted in making repayment of deposits,
interest thereon, redemption of debentures, payment of dividend, etc.
Clause 64. — This clause corresponds to sections 117, 117A, 117B and 117C of the
Companies Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that a company may issue debentures with an
option to convert into shares at the time of redemption but cannot issue debentures with
voting rights.  On issue of debentures, the company shall create a Debenture Redemption
Reserve Account.  The company shall not issue prospectus to more than five hundred
persons without appointing a debenture trustee.  The duty of the debenture trustee is to
protect the interest of the debenture holders and redress their grievances.  This clause
further provides that in the event of the failure of the company in making repayment of
maturity value of debentures or to pay interest, the tribunal may, on an application, pass
such order to make the payment to the matured debenture holders and interest due thereon.
Clause 65. — This clause corresponds to section 109A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that every share holder or debenture holder may appoint a  nominee or
a joint nominee who shall be the owner of the instrument in the event of death of the holder
or the joint holder unless the nomination is varied or cancelled.
Clause 66. —  This clause corresponds to section 58A of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that no company shall invite, accept or renew deposits from public.  It can
do so only from members of the company subject to fulfillment of certain conditions. In case
of failure to repay the deposit or interest thereon the Tribunal may order for repayment or pay
for any loss or damage incurred by him.
Clause 67. —  This is a new clause which seeks to provide that the deposit accepted
before this Act comes  into force by the company or any interest due thereon shall be repaid
within one year.  Extension of time for repayment may be granted by the Tribunal on an
application.
Clause 68. —  This new clause seeks to provide that in case the company fails to pay
the deposit or any interest thereon and it is proved that the deposits had been accepted with
intent to defraud the depositors, every officer who was responsible for acceptance of deposits
shall be personally responsible, without any limitation of liability for all losses or damages
incurred by the depositors.
Clause 69. —  This clause correspond to section 125 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company creating a charge within or outside India, shall, register the
said charge with the Registrar within thirty days.  The Registrar after registering the charge,
shall issue a certificate of registration.  The liquidator or any other creditor shall not take into
account any charge created unless registered with the Registrar.
Clause 70. —  This new clause seeks to provide that where a company fails to register
the charge, the person in whose favour the charge is created may apply to the Registrar for
registration of charges.
Clause 71. —  This clause corresponds to section 127 and 135 of the Companies Act,

190
1956 and seeks to provide that the requirement of registering the charge created by a company
shall also apply to a company acquiring any property subject to charge or any modification
in terms and conditions of any charge already registered.
Clause 72. —  This clause corresponds to section 126 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that any person acquiring a property, assets undertaking for which a charge
is already registered, it would be deemed that he has complete knowledge of charge from the
date the charge is registered.
Clause 73. —  This clause corresponds to section 130 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Registrar shall, in respect of every company, keep a register
containing particular of charges so registered.  The register shall be open for inspection on
payment of fee.
Clause 74. —  This clause corresponds to section 138 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company shall intimate to Registrar about the payment or satisfaction
in full of any charge so registered.  The Registrar shall issue notice to holder of the charge
calling a show cause why payment or satisfaction should not be recorded and in case of no
reply, the memorandum of satisfaction shall be entered in the register of charges.
Clause 75. —  This clause corresponds to section 137 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that if a person obtains an order for the  appointment of a receiver or a
person to manage the property subject to charge, he shall give notice to the company and
the Registrar about such an order.  The person appointed as receiver shall also give notice to
the company and the Registrar on his ceasing to hold such appointment.
Clause 76. —  This clause corresponds to section 143 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that every company shall keep a register of charges at its registered office
and this register shall be open for inspection during business hours by members without fee
and by any other person with fee.
Clause 77. —  This clause corresponds to section 142 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for the penal provisions for contravening any of the provisions of the
chapter or where the charge on company’s property is not registered within 180 days of its
creation.
Clause 78. —  This clause corresponds to sections 150, 151 and 152 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that every company shall keep and maintain the register of
members, register of debenture holders and register of any other security holders.  This
clause further provides that every register shall include an index of the name.   A company, if
authorized by its articles, may keep a foreign register outside India.  This clause also provides
that a company shall file with the Registrar, the particulars and situation of place where the
register is to be kept and any changes in the situation of such place.
Clause 79. —  This clause corresponds to section 187C of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that a declaration is to be given to the company by any person who is
a member but not holding the beneficial interest in such shares.  Further, the person holding
beneficial interest shall declare the nature of his interest and other particulars on those
shares to the company.  Any changes in the beneficial interest is also to be declared.  This
clause also provides that the company shall make a note of all the declaration made to it and
file a return with Registrar.
Clause 80. —  This clause corresponds to section 187D of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Central Government may appoint one or more competent
persons to investigate and report as to the beneficial ownership.
Clause 81. —  This clause corresponds to section 154 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company may close the register of members, debenture holders and
other security holders for rectification by giving minimum seven days notice.
Clause 82. —  This clause corresponds to section 159 of the Companies Act, 1956 and

191
seeks to provide that every company shall prepare an annual return containing certain
particulars such as registered office, principal business activities, particulars of holding,
subsidiary and associate companies, its shares, debentures and other securities, members,
promoters, etc.  The annual return shall be signed both by a director and a company secretary.
Where there is no company secretary or in case of listed companies, the return shall be
signed by the Company Secretary in whole-time practice and file the same with the Registrar.
Company secretary in practice shall also be punished if he certifies otherwise than in
conformity of this section or rules.
Clause 83. —  This clause corresponds to section 163 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that register of members, and copies of annual returns, debenture holders
and any other security holders shall be kept at the registered office and can also be kept at
any place other than registered office where more than one-tenth of total members reside, if
approved by special resolution. This clause further provides that the registers and the
indices shall be open to inspection and any member can take extracts during any business
hours without payment of any fee and other persons can also get with payment of fee.  The
Central Government may by order direct inspection of documents and to have an extractor
copy of such registers by any person.
Clause 84. —  This clause corresponds to section 164 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the register indices and copies of annual returns shall be prima facie
evidence of any matter.
Clause 85. —  This clause corresponds to section 166 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for that every company other than One Person Company in addition to any
other meeting shall hold a general meeting as its annual general meeting.  There should not
be a gap of more than fifteen months between two annual general meetings.  This clause
further provides that first annual general meeting shall be held within a period of nine months
from the closing of first financial year and within a period of six months in all other cases.
This clause also provides that annual general meeting shall be called on any day which is not
a National Holiday and may be held either at registered office of a company or at some other
place where the registered office of the company is situated.   The Central Government may
exempt any company from this compliance.
Clause 86. —  This clause corresponds to section 167 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that in case of any default in holding annual general meeting of a company,
the Tribunal on the application of any member of the company, call or direct the calling of an
annual general meeting. The Tribunal may also direct that one member of the company
present in person or by proxy shall be deemed to constitute a meeting.
Clause 87. —  This clause corresponds to section 186 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that if for any reason, it is impracticable to call a meeting of a company other
than an annual general meeting the Tribunal shall have the power to order for calling the
meeting either suo motu or on the application of any director of the company or of any
member of a company.
Clause 88. —  This clause corresponds to section 168 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that if any default is made in holding a meeting of the company or in
complying with any directions of the Central Government, or Tribunal, the company and
every officer of the company shall be punishable with fine.
Clause 89. —  This clause corresponds to section 169 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Board may call an extraordinary general meeting on its own or on a
request from such number of members holding not less than one-tenth of paid up capital of
the company.   In case of company not having a share capital, such number of members
having not less than one-tenth of the total voting power of all the members call an extraordinary
general meeting.  In case the Board does not call the meeting within twenty-one days

192
requisitionists may call the meeting.   This clause further provides that any reasonable
expenses incurred by the requisitionists shall be reimbursed.
Clause 90. —  This clause corresponds to sections 171 and 172 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that general meeting may be called by giving at least 21 days’
notice to all members, legal representative of any deceased member or the assignees of the
insolvent members, the auditors and directors in writing or through electronic mode.  A
shorter notice may also be given with the consent of ninety-five per cent. of the members
entitled to vote.
Clause 91. —  This clause corresponds to section 173 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a statement setting out all the material facts concerning each item of
special business to be transacted at a general meeting, shall be annexed to the notice calling
such meeting. This clause further provides for all the businesses that shall be deemed to be
special. In case of non-disclosure or insufficient disclosure in any statement made by director,
manager or other key managerial personnel which results into any benefit for themselves or
their relatives, shall have to be compensated.
Clause 92. —  This clause corresponds to section 174 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that unless the articles of the company provide for a larger number, five
members personally present in case of a public company and two members personally present
in case of a private company shall be the quorum for a meeting.  This clause further provides
that if the quorum is not present within half-an-hour, the meeting shall stand adjourned for
the next week at the same time and place or such other time and place as decided by the
Board.  However, the meeting called by requisitionist shall stand cancelled in the absence of
quorum.  In case of adjournment or of change of day, time and place of meeting, the company
shall give not less than three days’ notice to the members where quorum is not present in the
adjourned meeting also, the members present shall be the quorum.
Clause 93. —  This clause corresponds to section 175 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that members shall elect one among themselves to be the chairman by show
of hands.  The clause further provides that if a poll is demanded on the election of the
Chairman, the Chairman elected by show of hands shall continue to be the Chairman of the
meeting until some other person is elected as Chairman as a result of poll.
Clause 94. —  This clause corresponds to section 176 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a member who is entitled to attend and vote can appoint another
person as a proxy to attend and vote at the meeting on his behalf, in writing or by electronic
mode. However, proxy shall not have the right to speak at a meeting and shall not be entitled
to vote except on poll.
Clause 95. —  This clause corresponds to section 181 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that no member shall exercise any voting right in respect of any shares
registered in his name on which any calls or other sums presently payable by him have not
been paid or on which company has exercised any right or lien.  No member can be prohibited
from exercising his voting right on any other ground.
Clause 96. —  This clause corresponds to section 177 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that at general meeting, a resolution put to vote shall, unless a poll is
demanded or the voting is carried out electronically, be decided on a show of hands. A
declaration by the Chairman and an entry in the minutes book is conclusive evidence that
resolution is passed.
Clause 97. —  This is a new clause and it provides that a member may exercise his vote
at a meeting by electronic means.
Clause 98. —  This clause corresponds to section 179 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that before or on declaration of result of the voting on any resolution by a
show of hands, the Chairman of the meeting on his own or on demand made by members
order for a poll.  This Clause further provides that the demand for poll may be withdrawn by

193
the persons who made the demand. The  Chairman of the meeting shall appoint scrutiniser
for observing the poll process and votes given on poll and to report thereon.  The result of
the poll shall be deemed to be the decision of the meeting on the resolution. The Chairman
shall regulate the manner in which poll shall be taken.
Clause 99. —  This clause corresponds to section 192A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Central Government may declare items of business that can be
transacted only by postal ballot and also in respect of any item of business other than
ordinary business and any business in respect of which directors or auditors have a right to
be heard at any meeting may also be transacted through postal ballot.
Clause 100. — This clause corresponds to section 188 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company shall, on requisition in writing of such number of members,
give notice or circulate statement on proposed resolution to members intended to be moved
in the meeting. The statement need not be circulated if the Central Government declare that
the right conferred is being abused to secure needless publicity for defamatory matters. The
Central Government may also direct the requisitionists to pay the cost incurred to the company.
Clause 101. — This clause corresponds to section 187A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that President of India or the Governor of a State, if he is a member of a
company, may appoint such person as he thinks fit, to act as his representative at any
meeting and to vote by proxy and postal ballot as member of the company.
Clause 102. — This clause corresponds to section 187 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that where a body corporate is a member or a creditor of the company and
it authorise any person as its representative at any meeting of the company or any class of
members of the company or at any meeting of creditors of the company, such representative
shall be entitled to exercise the same rights and powers including right to vote by proxy and
by postal ballot on behalf of the body corporate which he represents.
Clause 103. — This clause corresponds to section 189 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a resolution shall be an ordinary resolution if the votes cast in favour
of the resolution exceeds the votes, if any, cast against the resolution by the members.  A
resolution shall be special when it is duly specified in the notice, calling the general meeting
and votes casted in favour is three times the votes cast against the resolution.
Clause 104. —  This clause corresponds to Section 190 of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that where a special notice is required of any resolution, notice of the
intention to move such resolution is to be given by such numbers of member as may be
prescribed.
Clause 105.  —   This clause corresponds to Section 191 of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that where a resolution is passed at an adjourned meeting, the resolution
shall be treated as passed on the day it was actually passed and not on any earlier date.
Clause 106.  —    This clause corresponds to Section 192 of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that a copy of every resolution and an agreement together with a
explanatory statement shall be filed with the Registrar within 30 days of its passing.  The
Registrar shall register the same and in case of any default, every officer who is in default
including the liquidator shall be liable with fine.
Clause 107.  —    This clause corresponds to Sections 193, 194 and 197 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that every Company shall prepare, sign and keep minutes of
proceedings of every General Meeting, including the meeting called by the requisitionists
and all proceedings of meeting of any class of share holders or creditors or Board of Directors
or Committee of the Board and also resolution passed by postal ballot.  In case of meeting of
Board of Directors or of a committee of Board, the minutes shall contain name of the directors
present and also name of dissenting director or a director who has not concurred the resolution.
The Chairman shall exercise his absolute discretion in respect of inclusion or non-inclusion
of the matters which is regarded as defamatory of any person, irrelevant or detrimental to

194
company’s interest in the minutes.  Minutes kept shall be evidence of the proceedings
recorded in a meeting.  This clause also seeks to provide that every company shall observe
secretarial standards with respect to general and Board meeting.
Clause 108.  — This clause corresponds to Section 196 of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the minutes book of general meetings shall be kept at the registered
office of a Company and shall be open for inspection to members during business hours
without any charge.  A member shall be entitled for a copy of any minutes subject to payment
of fees.   The copy should be made available to him within seven days of his making request.
Where the company refuses inspection or fails to furnish a copy of minutes within specified
time, the Central Government is empowered in the matter and the company and every officer
of the company shall be punishable with fine.
Clause 109.  — This new clause seeks to provide that every listed company shall
prepare a report on each annual general meeting including the confirmation to the effect that
the meeting was convened, held and conducted as per the provision of the Act and the rules
made thereunder.  A copy of this report shall be filed with the Registrar.
Clause 110. —  This clause corresponds to section 205 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that  dividend shall be declared by a company for any financial year at a
general meeting out of the profits for that year or any previous year or years arrived at after
providing for depreciation or out of money provided by the Central Government or a State
Government for the payment of dividend.  However, before the declaration of any dividend
certain percentage of profit shall be transferred to the reserves of the company.  In case of
inadequacy of profits or loss or absence of profit in any financial year dividend can be
declared and paid out of accumulated profits transferred to reserves by passing Board
resolution unanimously and special resolution in annual general meeting. The clause provides
for the manner of providing depreciation.  The Board may declare interim dividend out of
profits.  The amount of dividend shall be deposited in a schedule bank in separate account
within five days. Dividend shall be paid by cheque or warrant or in any electronic mode to the
shareholders entitled to the payment of dividend.  No dividend can be declared in the event
of failure to repay the deposits accepted by company. Capitalization of profits for issuing
bonus shares is not prohibited.
Clause 111. — This clause corresponds to section 205A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that where the dividend is not paid or claimed within thirty days, the
company shall, within seven days, transfer the total unpaid or unclaimed amount to a unpaid
dividend account to be opened by the company in a scheduled bank.  In case of any default
in transferring the amount, the company shall be liable to pay interest on the amount as has
not been transferred.  The amount remaining unpaid or unclaimed for seven years shall be
transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund.   A statement of such amount is
required to be sent to the Authority administrating the Fund.
Clause 112. —  This clause corresponds to section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Central Government shall establish a fund to be called the
Investor Education and Protection Fund.  Fund shall be utilised for refund of unclaimed
dividends, application monies due for refund and interest thereon, the promotion of investors’
education, awareness and protection.  To administer the fund, the Central Government shall
constitute an authority consisting of Chairperson, maximum of seven members and
Administrator.  Accounts would be audited by Comptroller and Auditor General and the
audit report along with duly certified accounts to be forwarded to the Central Government.
The authority shall prepare its annual report and the annual report along with audit report to
be laid before each House of Parliament by the Central Government.
Clause 113. — This clause seeks to provide that all amount lying in the existing fund,
i.e. Investor Education and Protection Fund as per section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956
shall stand credited to the Investor Education and Protection Fund established under this
section.

195
Clause 114. — This clause corresponds to section 206A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that where any instrument of transfer of shares is not registered, the
amount of dividend shall be transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account and to keep in
abeyance the rights to any right shares or bonus shares.
Clause 115. — This clause corresponds to section 207 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that where the dividend has been declared but has not been paid or the
warrants have not been posted, every director who is knowingly party to the default shall be
punishable with imprisonment up to two years with fine and the company shall be liable to
pay interest of 18 per cent. p.a. thereon.
Clause 116. — This clause corresponds to section 209 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that every company shall prepare and keep at its registered office books of
accounts and other relevant books and papers which give a true and fair view of the state of
the affairs of the company and its branch offices. However, if Board decides to keep books
and other papers at such other place in India, a notice to this effect shall be given to the
Registrar and relevant paper can also be kept in electronic mode.  For branch offices of the
company in India or outside, it shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of this
section, if summarised returns are sent periodically to the registered office.  The books of
accounts and other books and papers maintained by the company shall be open for inspection
by any director.  A person duly authorised by the Board can only inspect books of accounts
of subsidiaries companies.
This clause further provides that books of accounts of every company shall be kept
for eight years.   In case, an investigation has been ordered, the Central Government shall
have power to ask the company to keep the books of accounts for a period longer than eight
years.
Clause 117. — This clause corresponds to section 210 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the financial statements shall give a true and fair view of the state of
affairs of the company and shall comply with accounting standards. The financial statement
shall be laid in the annual general meeting of that financial year.  In case of subsidiary
companies, the company shall prepare a consolidated statement of all subsidiaries and lay
before the annual general meeting.  The Central Government shall have the power to exempt
a class or classes of companies from any of the requirement of this section.
Clause 118. — This clause corresponds to section 210 A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Central Government may by notification constitute an advisory
committee to be called the National Advisory Committee on Accounting and Auditing
Standards to advise the Central Government on accounting and auditing policies and
standards for adoption.  The clause further provides for the members who shall constitute
the Advisory Committee.  The members of the Advisory Committee shall be entitled to fees,
travelling, conveyance and other allowances. The Advisory Committee in consultation with
ICAI shall make recommendations to the Central Government on the matters relating to
accounting and auditing policies and standards.
Clause 119. — This clause corresponds to section 211(3C) of the Companies Act, 1956
and it seeks to provide that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Advisory
Committee, notify the Accounting standard or standards for adoption by companies.
Clause 120. — This clause corresponds to sections 215, 216 and 217 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that the financial statement including consolidated financial
statements should be approved by the Board of Directors before they are signed and submitted
to auditors for their report.  The auditor’s report is to be attached to every financial statement.
A report by the Board of Directors containing details on the matters specified including
directors responsibility statement shall be annexed to every financial statement laid before
company.

196
The Board’s report and every annexure has to be duly signed.    A signed copy of every
financial statement shall be circulated, issued or published along with all notes or documents,
the auditor’s report and Board report.
Clause 121. — This clause corresponds to section 219 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a copy of financial statement, auditor’s report along with annexures/
attachments shall be sent to every member, every trustee for the debenture holder, and all
other persons who are so entitled. A specific manner of circulation may be prescribed by the
Central Govt. All the members, trustees, etc. are allowed to inspect the financial statements
and auditor’s report etc. at the registered office of the company during any business hours.
Clause 122. — This clause corresponds to section 220 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that copies of all financial statements and all such documents which are
annexed to the financial statement and adopted at the annual general meeting shall be filed
with Registrar. In case a company does not hold an annual general meeting in any year, a
statement of facts and reasons has to be filed with the Registrar. This clause further provides
that in case the accounts are not adopted at annual general meeting or in adjourned meeting,
the un-adopted accounts shall be filed with the Registrar and the Registrar shall take them in
his records as provisional till the final accounts are filed.
Clause 123. — This clause corresponds to section 224 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company shall appoint an individual or a firm as an auditor at annual
general meeting subject to his written consent and  shall hold office till conclusion of next
annual general meeting.  A notice of appointment should be filed with the Register. The
Comptroller and Auditor General of India appoints auditor of Government Companies failing
which Central Government/State Government appoints auditor on the request of the company.
First auditor is appointed by Board within 30 days of incorporation and in case of failure to
appoint, the members at a general meeting shall appoint and Comptroller and Auditor General
of India shall appoint auditor of Government companies failing which Board shall appoint
first auditor and in case of failure Central Government/State Government will appoint.  The
clause further provides for the provisions relating to the casual vacancy, resignation,
reappointment and removal of auditor. The  Tribunal is empowered to change the auditor in
case of any fraud by him.
Clause 124. — This clause corresponds to section 224(1B) and 226 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide for appointment of only Chartered Accountant in practice as
auditors.  The clause further provides for the persons who are not eligible for appointment as
an auditor of a company.  An auditor who is disqualified subsequent to his appointment, has
to vacate office.
Clause 125. — This clause corresponds to section 224 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for remuneration of auditors of the company.  The remuneration is to be
fixed in the general meeting. The Clause further defines the term ‘remuneration’.
Clause 126. — This clause corresponds to section 227 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for the powers and duties of auditors.  Every auditor can access books of
accounts, vouchers and seek such information and explanation from the company and enquire
such matters as he consider necessary.  In case of financial statements, auditor of holding
company can access records of subsidiaries. The auditor has to make a report to the members
on that accounts, financial statement or other documents required to be laid in general
meeting give a true and fair view of the state of the company’s affairs and such other matters
as may be prescribed.  The report shall state reasons for negative and qualified remarks.  The
clause also provides the manner in which audit report of a Government company shall be
finalised by the Comptroller and Auditor General.  This clause also provides to notify the
auditing standard by the Central Government.
Clause 127. — This is a new clause and it seeks to provide that an auditor can do such
services as approved by the Board or audit committee. The clause further provides for the
services which the auditor cannot perform.

197
Clause 128. — This clause corresponds to section 229 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that its auditor’s report can be signed by the person appointed as an auditor
of the company.  He shall also sign or certify any other document of the company.
Clause 129. — This clause corresponds to section 231 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that auditor or his representative, qualified to be an auditor, shall get all the
notices of general meetings and shall attend the same and be heard on any part of the
business concerning him as the auditor.
Clause 130. — This clause corresponds to sections 232 and 233 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide for the penalties for contravention of provisions of the clauses
123 to 129.  In case an auditor knowingly or willfully contravenes he shall be punishable with
imprisonment or with fine or with both.  The Auditor is also required to refund remuneration
received by him to company and for any damages to the company or to any person suffered
due to misleading or incorrect statements of particulars made in his report.
Clause 131. — This clause corresponds to section 233B of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to empower Central Government after consultation with regulatory body to direct
certain companies to include in the books of accounts particulars relating to utilisation of
material or labour or to such other items of cost.  The Central Government may direct the
audit of cost records of the company by Cost Accountant in practice appointed by Board
and on such remuneration as determined by the members.  The clause further provides that
the qualifications, disqualifications, rights, duties and obligations as apply to auditor shall
also be applicable to cost auditor as well.  The Central Government may call for further
information and explanation if necessary after considering cost audit report.
Clause 132. — This clause corresponding to some of the provisions of sections 252,
253 and 259 of the Companies Act, 1956 and some new provisions. It seeks to provide that
every company shall have a Board of Directors and prescribes the minimum and maximum
number of directors. The clause also seeks to provide that every company shall have at least
one director who would be ordinarily resident in India. The clause further provides the
conditions for appointment of independent director. The clause also seeks to define the
terms ‘independent director’ and ‘nominee director’ and seeks to provide that an Independent
Director shall not be entitled to any remuneration, other than sitting fee, reimbursement of
expenses for participation in Board meeting and profit related commission and stock options
as approved by the members.
Clause 133. — This clause corresponds to some of the provisions of sections 254 to
256 and 264 of the Act and some new provisions and seeks to provide the manner in which
the directors including the first directors shall be appointed by a company. The clause seeks
to provide that other than first directors, the directors shall be appointed in general meetings.
The clause further provides for the provisions of DIN and provide that every director would
obtain DIN from the Central Government before he acts as a director in any company. Every
proposed director shall furnish his DIN, a declaration that he is not disqualified to become a
director and a consent to hold office as director before he is appointed. Further in case of
independent directors, the Board shall give a report in the General meeting that every
independent directors appointed fulfils the conditions specified for his appointment. The
clause also provides for the manner in which rotation of directors shall take place.
Clause 134. — This clause corresponds to section 266A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that every individual intending to be appointed as director shall make
an application for allotment of Director Identification Number (DIN) to the Central Government
along with fee.
Clause 135. — This clause corresponds to section 266B of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Central Government shall allot Director Identification Number
(DIN) to the applicant within one month from the receipt of the application.

198
Clause 136. — This clause corresponds to section 266C of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that no individual, who has already been allotted a Director Identification
Number shall apply, obtain or possess another Director Identification Number.
Clause 137. — This clause corresponds to section 266D of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that every existing director shall, intimate his Director Identification
Number within one month of its receipt to the company or all companies wherein he is a
director.
Clause 138. — This clause corresponds to section 266E of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that every company shall furnish the Director Identification Numbers
of all its directors to the Registrar or any other officer or authority as specified by the Central
Government.
Clause 139. — This clause corresponds to section 266F of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that every person or company, while furnishing any return, information
or particulars shall mention the Director Identification Number in such return, information or
particulars.
Clause 140. — This clause corresponds to section 266G of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that if any individual or director, or a company contravenes any of the
provisions, every such individual or director or the company, in default, shall be punishable
with fine and where the contravention is a continuing one, with a further fine.
Clause 141. — This clause corresponds to section 257 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a person, not being a retiring director shall be eligible for appointment
as a director at any general   meeting.  The clause further provides the manner in which the
persons other than retiring director can stand for directorship and the company shall inform
its members of the candidature of a person for the office of director.
Clause 142. — This clause corresponds to sections 260, 262 and 313 of the Companies
Act, 1956 and contains some new provisions. It seeks to provide the provisions for the
appointment of additional director, alternate director and nominee director.  The Board if
authorised by articles may appoint any person, other than a person who fails to get appointed
as a director in a general meeting, as an additional director at any time. The clause further
seeks to provide that the Board may, if so authorised by its articles or by a resolution passed
by the company, appoint a person, to act as an alternate director for a director during his
absence for a period of not less than three months from India. The clause also seeks to
provide that only a person, who is qualified to be appointed as an independent director, shall
be eligible to be appointed as an alternate director in place of an independent director . The
clause provides that an alternate director shall not hold office larger than permissible and
shall vacate the office if and when the director in whose place he has been appointed returns
to India. The clause further provides that in the case of a public company or a private
company which is a subsidiary of a public company, the casual vacancy may be filled by the
Board of Directors at a meeting of the Board. The clause also provides that any person so
appointed shall hold office up to the date up to which the director in whose place he is
appointed would have held office if it had not been vacated.
Clause 143. — This clause corresponds to section 263 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that at a general meeting of a company, a motion for the appointment of two
or more persons as directors by a single resolution shall not be moved unless a proposal to
move such a motion has first been agreed to at the meeting without any vote being cast
against it.
Clause 144. — This clause corresponds to section 265 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the  articles  of a  company  may  provide  for the appointment of not less
than two-thirds of the total number of the directors in accordance with   the   principle   of
proportional   representation.

199
Clause 145. — This clause corresponds to section 274 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the circumstances and situations under which a person shall not be eligible
for appointment as a director of a company. The clause further provides for the situations in
which a director shall not be eligible to be re-appointed as a director of that company or
appointed in other public company for a period of five years. The clause also provides that
a private company may by its articles provide for any other disqualifications in addition to
those specified in this clause.
Clause 146.— This clause corresponds to section 275 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that no person, shall hold office as a director, in more than fifteen public
limited companies at the same time.
Clause 147.— This is a new clause and seeks to provide that a director of a company
shall act in accordance with the company’s articles. It further seeks to provide for the various
duties of directors. In case of contravention, director is punishable with fine and if a director
is found guilty of making any undue gain either to himself or to his relatives, partners or
associates he shall also be liable to pay an amount, equal to that gain, to the company.
Clause 148. — This clause corresponds to section 283 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the grounds and circumstances under which the office of a director shall
become vacant. The clause further provides that where a person acts as a director after he is
aware that the office of director held by him has become vacant on account of any
disqualification, he shall be punishable with fine.  Where all the directors vacate their offices
under any of the disqualifications, the promoter or, in his absence, the Central Government
shall appoint the required number of directors who shall hold office till the directors are
appointed in the general meeting. The clause also provides that a private company may
provide for any other ground for vacation of office.
Clause 149. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide that a director may resign
from his office by giving a notice in writing and the Board shall, on receipt of such notice
intimate the Registrar and place such resignation in the subsequent general meeting of the
company. The clause further provides for the date on which the notice of resignation shall
take effect.  The clause seeks to provide that where the number of directors is reduced below
the quorum fixed, the continuing director or director(s) shall be deemed to constitute the
quorum.
Clause 150. — This clause corresponds to section 284 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company may, by ordinary resolution remove a director  (not being   a
director appointed by the Tribunal under section 213).  Special notice shall be required of any
resolution, to remove a director or to appoint somebody in place of a director so removed.
The clause further provides that the director shall   be entitled to   be   heard on the resolution
at the meeting. A vacancy created by the removal of a director may be filled   by the appointment
of another director in his place by the meeting at which he is removed. The clause seeks to
provide that the director who was removed from office shall not be re-appointed as a director
by the Board of Directors.
Clause 151. — This clause corresponds to section 303 and 307 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that every company shall keep at its registered office a register
containing particulars of its directors and the key managerial personnel including the details
of securities held by each of them in the company or its holding, subsidiary or associate
companies. A return containing particulars and documents of appointment or any change in
the directors and the key managerial personnel shall be filed with the Registrar.
Clause 152. —This clause corresponds to section 304 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
also seeks to provide the manner in which register shall be open for inspection. The members
shall take extracts therefrom and obtain copies thereof free of cost. The clause seeks to
provide that if any inspection as provided in this clause is refused, or if any copy required

200
thereunder is not sent within thirty days from the date of receipt of such request, the Registrar
shall on an application made to him order immediate inspection and supply of copies required
thereunder.
Clause 153. — This clause corresponds to sub-section (3) of section 303 of the
Companies Act, 1956 and  seeks to provide that where  a  company  or any director or any
employee contravenes  any  of the provisions of this Chapter, it shall be punishable with fine.
Clause 154. — This clause corresponds to section 285 and 286 of the Companies Act,
1956  and seeks to provide that every company shall hold the first meeting of the Board of
Directors within thirty days of the date of its incorporation and hold a minimum number of
four meetings of its Board of Directors every year. The participation of directors in a meeting
of the Board may be either in person or through video conferencing or such other electronic
means. The clause further provides that a notice of the meeting of Board shall be given to
every director at his address registered with the company. The meeting of the Board may be
called at shorter notice to transact urgent business where at least one independent director,
if any, shall be present.
Clause 155. — This clause corresponds to section 287 and 288 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that the quorum for a meeting of the Board of Directors of a
company shall be one-third of its total strength or two directors, whichever is higher, and the
directors participating by video conferencing or other electronic means shall be counted for
quorum. It further provides that where the number of interested directors exceeds, or is equal
to, two-thirds of the total strength of the Board,  the   number of directors who are not
interested and present at the meeting, being not less than two, shall be the quorum. The
clause further provides that the meeting shall stand adjourned if it could not be held for want
of quorum.
Clause 156. — This clause corresponds to section 289 of the Companies Act, 1956  and
seeks to provide that no resolution shall be deemed to have been duly passed by the Board
or by a committee thereof by circulation unless the resolution has been circulated in draft, to
all the directors, or members of the committee at their addresses in India, and has been
approved  by a  majority.  The clause also provides that such a resolution shall be noted and
made part of minutes at a subsequent meeting.
Clause 157. — This clause corresponds to section 290 of the Companies Act, 1956  and
seeks to provide that any act done by a person as a director shall not be invalid if it is
subsequently discovered that his appointment was invalid.  The clause further provides that
nothing shall be given validity to any act done by the director after his appointment has been
noticed by the company to be invalid or to have terminated.
Clause 158. — This clause contains some provisions of section 292A of the Companies
Act, 1956 and contains some new provisions and seeks to provide the requirement and
manner of constituting audit, remuneration, stakeholders relationship committees of the
Board. The clause also provides for the requirements in respect of such committees.
The Audit Committee shall consist of a minimum of three directors with independent
directors forming a majority and at least one director having financial knowledge.
The Chairman of an Audit Committee shall be an independent director.
Remuneration Committee shall consist of non-executive directors   as appointed by the
Board out of which at least one shall be an independent director. Such Remuneration
Committee shall determine the company’s policies relating to the remuneration of the directors,
key managerial personnel and such other employees as may be decided by the Committee.
The clause further provides that the Board having a combined membership of the
shareholders, debenture holders and other security holders of more than one thousand at
any time during a financial year shall constitute a stakeholders relationship committee which
shall consist of a chairman who is a non-executive director and such other members of the

201
Board as decided by the Board. Stakeholders Relationship Committee shall consider and
resolve the grievances of stakeholders.
Clause 159. — This clause corresponds to sections 291 and 292 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that the Board of Directors shall be entitled to exercise all such
powers, and to do all such acts and things, as the company is authorised to exercise and do
except those that are to be exercised or done by the company in general meeting.  The clause
further specifies the powers to be exercised by the Board of Directors on behalf of the
company.
Clause 160. — This clause corresponds to section 293 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for the powers of the Board of Directors of a company to be exercised only
with the consent of the company by a special resolution.
Clause 161. — This clause corresponds to section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956.
It seeks to provide the manner and limits up to which a company shall be able to contribute
the amount to any political party or to any person for a political purpose. The clause further
provides the manner in which every company shall disclose in its profit and loss account any
amount so contributed by it during any financial year.
Clause 162. — This clause corresponds to section 299 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the manner and periodicity in which every director shall make disclosures of
his concern or interest in any company or bodies corporate, firms, or other association of
individuals. It also seeks to provide that every director of a company who is concerned or
interested in a contract or arrangement shall disclose the nature of his concern or interest at
the meeting of the Board and shall not participate in such meeting. The clause further
provides that a contract or arrangement entered into by the company without disclosure or
with participation by a director who is so concerned or interested shall be voidable at the
option of the company.
Clause 163. — This clause corresponds to section 295 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the circumstances and manner in which a company shall advance any loan
to any of its directors or to any other person in whom he is interested or give any guarantee
or provide any security in connection with any loan taken by him or such other person.
Clause 164. — This clause corresponds to section 372A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide the manner in which and limits up to which a company shall give any
loan or give any guarantee or provide security in connection with a loan to any other body
corporate or person or acquire    by   way   of   subscription, purchase or otherwise, the
securities of   any   other   body   corporate.  The clause further provides that the companies
as providing or associating loans shall disclose in financial statements full particulars of the
loans given investments made or guarantees or securities provided.  The clause also provides
for the manner in which registers will be kept by a company to record transactions and the
manner in which such registers shall be available for inspection. The clause exempts certain
categories of companies from the provisions of this clause.
Clause 165. — This clause corresponds to section 49 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that all investments made or held by a company in any property, security or
other asset shall be made and held by it in its own name. It also seeks to provide that the
company may hold any shares in its subsidiary company in the name of any nominee of the
company, if it is necessary to ensure that the number of members of the subsidiary company
is not reduced below the statutory limit. The clause further provides that where any securities
in which investments have been made by a company are not held by it in its own name, the
company shall maintain a register containing such particulars and such register shall be
open for inspection.
Clause 166. — This clause corresponds to section 297 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the manner in which contracts or arrangements by a company with related
parties shall be made and disclosed. It provides for the matter that requires the consent of

202
Board of Directors of company or prior approval by special resolution.  It seeks to provide
that every such contract or arrangement shall be referred to in the Board’s Report to the
shareholders along with the justification. It also  provide that where any contract or
arrangement is entered into by a director or any other employee, without complying with the
provisions and if it is not ratified by the approving authority, such contract or arrangement
shall be voidable at the option of the Board.
Clause 167. — This clause corresponds to section 301 of the Companies Act, 1956  and
seeks to provide the particulars and the manner in which such particulars shall be entered by
the company in the registers of contracts or arrangements in which directors are concerned
or interested. It further provides that the register kept under this clause shall be kept at the
registered office of the company and open for inspection.  The register shall also be produced
at every annual general meeting of the company and shall remain open and accessible during
the meeting to any person having the right to attend the meeting.
Clause 168. — This clause corresponds to section 302 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that every company shall keep at its registered office a copy of contract of
service entered into by it with a managing or whole-time director or where such a contract is
not in writing, a written memorandum setting out its terms shall be kept. It also provides that
copies of such contract and the memorandum shall be open to inspection by any member.
The provisions of this clause shall not apply to any private company.
Clause 169. — This clause corresponds to section 319 and 320 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide the circumstances and manner in which a director   of  a   company
shall receive any payment by way of compensation for loss of office or as consideration for
retirement from office, etc. It further provides that where   a   director   of   a   company
receives payment of any amount in contravention of this clause or the proposed payment is
made before it is approved by the meeting, the amount so received by the director shall be
deemed to have been received by him in trust for the company.
Clause 170. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide for the manner in respect of
regulation of arrangements between a company and its directors in respect of acquisition of
assets for consideration other than cash. The clause provides that such arrangements shall
require prior approval by a resolution in general meeting and if the director or connected
person is a director of its holding company, approval is required to be obtained by passing
a resolution in general meeting of the holding company. The clause also provides the
circumstances when an arrangement entered into by a company or its holding company in
contravention of the provisions is voidable at the instance of the company.
Clause 171. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide for the manner in which
certain transactions or contracts are entered between a one person company and its sole
member.  It seeks to provide that where a One Person Company Limited by shares or by
guarantee enters into a contract with the sole member of the company who is also director,
the company shall, unless the contract is in writing, ensure that the terms of the contract or
offer are contained in a memorandum or are recorded in the minutes of the first Board meeting
held after entering into the contract and every such contract shall be informed to the Registrar.
Clause 172. — This is a new clause and seeks to prohibit whole-time director or any of
its key managerial personnel from buying certain kinds of future contracts in relation to
securities of the company.  It further provides that where whole-time director or key managerial
personnel acquires any securities in contravention of this clause he shall, surrender such
securities and the company shall not register the same in his name in the register and if they
are in dematerialised form, it shall inform the depository not to record such acquisition.
Clause 173. — This is a new clause and seeks to prohibit directors or key managerial
person of the company shall deal in securities of a company, or counsel about, procure or
communicate, directly or indirectly, any unpublished price-sensitive information to any
person.

203
Clause 174. — This clause corresponds to sections 197A, 267, 269, 317, 384, 385 of the
Companies Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that no company shall appoint or employ a
managing director and manager at the same time and further that no company shall appoint
or reappoint any person as its managing director, whole-time director or manager for a term
exceeding five years at a time. It also provides that no   company   shall   appoint   any   firm,
body corporate, or other association as its manager. The clause also provide the
disqualification in respect of appointment of key managerial personnel. It also seeks to
provide the manner in which a managing director, whole-time director or manager shall be
appointed.
Clause 175. — This clause corresponds to section 309 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
contains some new provisions  providing that remuneration to managerial personnel can be
paid either by way of a monthly payment or at a specified percentage of the net profits, or
partly by monthly payment and partly by the percentage of net profits. It further provides
that where any insurance is taken by a  company on behalf of its managing director, whole-
time director, manager, Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer or Company Secretary
for indemnifying any of them against any  liability in  respect of any  negligence, default, etc.,
for which  they  may  be  guilty, the premium paid on such insurance shall not be treated as
part of the remuneration payable to any such personnel.
Clause 176. — This clause corresponds to section 309 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the kind of remuneration which can be paid to a director who is neither a
whole-time director nor a managing director of a company. It provides that such a director
can be paid fee for attending meetings of the Board or committees thereof. It further seeks to
provide that such a director can be paid profit-related commission with the prior approval of
members by a special resolution. The clause further provides that where any director draws
or receives any sum as remuneration in excess of the amount, he shall refund such sum to the
company.
Clause 177. — This clause corresponds to section 318 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the circumstances and manner in which any managing or whole-time director
or manager, shall be entitled to receive payment by way of compensation for loss of office, or
as consideration for retirement from office or in connection with such loss or retirement. The
clause also specify the quantum of such compensation.
Clause 178. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide that every company belonging
to such class or description of companies, as prescribed by the Central Government, shall
have whole-time key managerial personnel. It also seeks to provide that a whole-time key
managerial personnel shall not hold office in more than one company at the same time except
that of a director if company permits him in this regard.
Clause 179. — This clause corresponds to section 209A and 234 of the Companies
Act, 1956  and seeks to empower Registrar of Companies to call for any information, explanation
or documents and to inspect books of accounts of the company etc. The Company and its
officers shall furnish the information or explanation in documents within the specified time.
Where the Registrar is satisfied on the basis of information in documents that the business
of the company is conducted in a fraudulent manner, he may, order an inquiry. Further, the
Central Government too can order for an inquiry by the Registrar or by an inspector appointed
by it.
Clause 180. — This clause corresponds to section 209A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide the procedure to be adopted for inspection or inquiries to be made by
the Registrar or Inspector. Every director, officer or employee shall be bound to provide the
information or the documents called for. It empowers the Registrar and Inspector with the
powers of the Civil Court under Code of Civil Procedures, 1908 for summoning, examining on
oath, inspection of books and other documents, etc.
Clause 181. — This clause corresponds to section 209A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Registrar or Inspector shall submit a report to the Central

204
Government after inspection of books of accounts or the examining any person as the case
may be and will include his recommendations for further investigation if necessary duly
supported  by reasons or documents.
Clause 182. — This clause corresponds to section 234A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide for seizure of documents by the Registrar if he has reasonable ground
to believe that the same is likely to be destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified, etc., with the
permission of special court.  The Registrar has to return the seized documents within 180
days to the company from whose custody the documents were seized.
Clause 183. — This clause corresponds to section 235 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Central Government to order an  investigation into the affairs of a
company either on the  report of Registrar or on special resolution passed by a company or
in public interest. Further, this clause also empowers Court/Tribunal to order that the affairs
of a company ought to be investigated. For the purpose of investigation, the Central
Government has the power to appoint Inspector(s) and seek report.
Clause 184. — This clause corresponds to section 237 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal to order an investigation by the Central Government in case
an application is made by at least 100 members or by member having 1/10
th of total voting
power or 1/5th of the members in case of company with no share capital seek an investigation
into the affairs of the company or on an application suggesting fraud, misfeasance or
misconduct or when any information is withheld.  This clause further empowers the Central
Government to appoint Inspector(s) and seek report.
Clause 185. — This clause corresponds to section 236 and 245 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that the company or the applicants has to give security for
payment of the costs and expenses of the investigation and shall deposit a maximum amount
of Rs. 25 lakhs towards the cost of investigation. It provides that on completion of
investigation, the cost of investigation shall be worked out and notice thereof shall be
served on the company for payment of such amount within specified time.  The amount so
paid shall be a charge on property and recoverable accordingly.
Clause 186. — This clause corresponds to section 238 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide bar on firm, body corporate or other association for an appointment as
Inspector under section 183 or 184 of the Act.
Clause 187. — This clause corresponds to section 247 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Central Government to appoint one or more Inspectors to investigate
and report on the membership of the company.  Such an investigation shall include any
arrangement or understanding observed in practice relevant for the purpose of investigation.
Clause 188. — This clause corresponds to section 240 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that it shall be the duty of all officer and employees of the company which
is under investigation to produce books and papers and give all assistance to the Inspector.
The clause provides for the powers of the Inspector.  The Inspector may examine any person
on oath and notes of such examination shall be taken in writing. However, in case of failure
to the furnish information or to appear for examination on oath, the offence is punishable
with imprisonment and fine.  The Central Government may notifying the foreign states with
whom a reciprocal arrangement to assist any inspection have been made.
Clause 189. —  This clause corresponds to section 239 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Inspector to investigate the affairs of any other body corporate where
such corporate is or has been holding or subsidiary or have same Managing Director or
Manager or where Board of Directors act on the directions of such company, then subject to
prior approval of the Central Government, can investigation into the affairs of such body
corporate or Managing Director or Manager, etc., be done.
Clause 190. — This clause corresponds to section 240A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to deal with seizure of documents by the Inspector when he has reasonable

205
ground to believe that they are likely to be destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified, etc. The
Inspector has to return the seized documents after conclusion of investigation. It empowers
the Inspector to conduct search, seize books or papers in terms of the provisions of the code
of Criminal Procedure 1973.
Clause 191. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide that where in connection with
inquiry or investigation into the affairs of the company or a reference by the Central
Government or on complaint by any person that transfer or disposal of funds, properties or
assets is likely to take place which is pre-judicial to the interest of company, then Tribunal
may order for a period freezing such transfer, removal or disposal of assets for a period of
three year.
Clause 192. — This clause corresponds to section 250 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for imposition of restrictions by the Tribunal in connection with investigation
on the securities of the company for a period not exceeding three years.
Clause 193. — This clause corresponds to section 235 and 246 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide for submission of the interim and final report of investigation to
the Central Government. Such a report shall be in writing or printed. The Central Government
shall forward a copy of report to the company and may furnish a copy on payment of
prescribed fee to any person who is Member of Company or creditor of company or the  body
corporate affected.  Wherever applicable, a report shall also be furnished to Court or Tribunal.
Further, such a report can be submitted as evidence in any legal proceedings.
Clause 194. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide that no suit or proceedings
shall lie in any Court or Tribunal or other authority in respect of any action initiated by the
Central Government for making an investigation or for appointment of any inspector in this
regard and no proceedings of an inspection shall be called in question or stayed by any
Court or Tribunal or any authority till such investigation report is submitted.
Clause 195. — This clause corresponds to section 242 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empowers the Central Government to prosecute such person for the offence and
cast duty on officers, employees or the company or body corporate to provide necessary
assistance in connection with the prosecution. This clause further deals with action to be
taken on the investigation report which includes winding-up , misfeasance, recovery
proceedings, etc.
Clause 196. — This clause corresponds to section 245 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that expenses of investigation shall be borne by the Central Government in
the first instance. Thereafter, it shall be borne by person so convicted on a prosecution
instituted or who is ordered to pay damages or restore the property to the extent he may be
ordered to pay the said expenses as specified by the Court.  Further, any amount which
company is liable to pay shall be the first charge on the property.
Clause 197. — This clause corresponds to section 250A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide with continuation of investigation even after voluntary winding-up or
application is pending before the Tribunal. Further, it provides that winding-up order shall
not absolve director or employee from participating in the proceedings before the Inspector
or any liability as a result of findings by Inspector.
Clause 198. — This clause corresponds to section 251 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the rights of the legal Advisers or bankers of the body corporate or other
person, not to disclose to the Tribunal or to the Central Government  or to the Inspector any
information as to the affairs of any of their customers, other than such company or body
corporate.
Clause 199. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide that the provisions of
inspection or investigation applicable to Indian Companies shall also apply mutatis mutandis
to inspection or investigation of foreign companies.

206
Clause 200. — This clause corresponds to some provisions of section 628 of the
Companies Act, 1956 and seeks to provide punishment for furnishing false statements,
mutilation or destruction of documents during the course of inspection/investigation.
Clause 201. — This clause corresponds to section 391 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide powers to Tribunal to make order on the application of the company or any
creditor or member or in case of wound-up, of liquidator for the proposed compromise or
arrangements including debt restructuring, etc., between company, its creditors and members.
An application by affidavit shall disclose all material facts relating to company, reduction of
share capital scheme of corporate debt restructuring.  Where a meeting is called, a notice
shall be sent to all creditors, members, debenture holders or by advertisement which shall be
accompanied by statement disclosing the details of compromise or management.  The order
of the Tribunal sanctioning compromises or arrangement shall be filed with the Registrar.
Takeover of companies have been included in compromises or arrangements. An aggrieved
party may appeal to the Tribunal in the event of any grievances with respect to the takeover
offer in case of companies other than listed companies.
Clause 202. — This clause corresponds to section 392 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide powers to Tribunal to enforce compromise or arrangements with creditors
and members as ordered under clause 201.  The clause also provides that, if the Tribunal is
satisfied that such compromise or arrangement cannot be implemented satisfactorily with or
without modifications, and the company is unable to pay its debts as per the scheme, it may
make an order for winding-up of the company.
Clause 203. — This clause corresponds to section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide powers to Tribunal to order for holding meeting of the creditors or the
members and to make orders on the proposed reconstruction, merger and amalgamation of
companies.  The clause provides the manner and procedure in which the meeting so ordered
by the Tribunal be held.  Where the Tribunal orders for transfer of any property or liability,
that property or liability shall be transferred to and become the liabilities of the transferee
company and any property may if the orders so directs be free of any charge by virtue of
compromises or arrangement.  Every company shall file a certified copy of the order within
thirty days with the Registrar for registration.
Clause 204. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide for merger or amalgamation
between two small companies or between a holding company and its wholly owned subsidiary
company by giving a notice of the proposed scheme inviting comments or objections by
both the transferor and the transferee company. The scheme is to be approved by the
respective members at a general meeting by passing a special resolution and by three-
fourths in value of the creditors of respective companies. Transferee Company shall file a
copy of the approved scheme with the Registrar and the Official Liquidator. If the Registrar
is of the opinion that such a scheme is not in public interest or in interest of the creditors, he
may file an application before the Tribunal stating his objections and requesting to consider
the scheme for reconstruction merger or amalgamation, etc., under clause 203. The Tribunal
may direct accordingly or it may confirm the scheme by passing such order as it deem fit. The
transferor company shall be deemed to be dissolved on registration of the scheme. This
clause also provides for effects of registration of the scheme with the Registrar.
Clause 205. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide the mode of merger or
amalgamation between registered companies and companies incorporated in the jurisdictions
of such countries as notified from time to time by the Central Government by mutual agreement.
This clause further provides that foreign company may merge or amalgamate into a company
or vice versa and the terms and conditions of the scheme of merger or amalgamation may
provide for the payment of consideration to the shareholders of the merging company in
cash or partly in cash or partly in Indian Depository Receipts.
Clause 206. — This clause corresponds to section 395 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the manner in which the transferee company shall acquire shares of the

207
shareholders dissenting from the scheme or contract as approved by the majority share-
holders holding not less than nine-tenths in value of the shares whose transfer is involved.
The transferee company shall send a copy of the notice to the transferor company together
with an instrument of transfer, to be executed and pay the consideration representing the
price payable by the transferee company for the shares. Such consideration received by
transferor company shall be paid into separate bank account and any other consideration
shall be held by company in trust and shall be disbursed to the entitled shareholders.
Clause 207. —  This clause corresponds to section 395 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the procedure and manner in which the registered holder of at least 90 per
cent shares of a company shall notify the company of their intention to buy the remaining
equity shares of minority shareholders, by virtue of an amalgamation, share exchange,
conversion of securities, etc., provison for valuation of shares have been provided by a
registered valuer.
Clause 208.—  This clause corresponds to section 396 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide power to Central Government to provide for amalgamation of two or more
companies in public interest by passing an order to be notified in the Official Gazette. Every
member or creditor or debenture holder shall have same interest or rights against transferee
company as he had in original company and where the interest or right is less than his
interest or right, he shall be entitled to compensation by transferee company.  Any aggrieved
person may approach Tribunal for redressal of grievances.
Clause 209.— This clause seeks to provide mode of registration of offer of schemes or
contract involving the transfer of shares. Every circular containing such offer and
recommendation and containing a statement shall be accompanied by requisite information
and must be registered with the Registrar before issue.  The Registrar may refuse to register
any such circular which does not contain the requisite information. This clause further seeks
to provide that power to appeal shall lie with Tribunal in the event of refusal of registration
of offer of scheme by Registrar of companies.
Clause 210.— This clause corresponds to section 396A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that no company which has been amalgamated or whose shares has
been acquired by another company to dispose of its books of accounts and papers without
the prior permission of the Central Government.  The Government may appoint  a person to
examine books and papers to as certain whether they contain any evidence of commission of
offence in connection with promotion, formation, management, etc., of the company.
Clause 211.— This clause seeks to provide that the liability in respect of offences
committed by the officers in default of Transferor Company prior to its merger/amalgamation/
acquisition shall continue after such merger or amalgamation/acquisition.
Clause 212.— This clause corresponds to section 397 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the circumstances in which an application may be made to the Tribunal by
any member of a company or by the Central Government for relief in cases of oppression and
mismanagement in the affairs of the company.
Clause 213.— This clause corresponds to sections 398, 402, 403 and  404 of the
Companies Act, 1956 and seeks to provide for powers of Tribunal to pass an order with a
view to bring to an end the matters complained of oppression and mis-management.  The
clause provides that a certified copy of order of Tribunal shall be filed with the Registrar.  The
Tribunal may make any interim order as it thinks just and equitable.  Where Tribunal’s order
require alteration of articles, a certified copy of the same be filed with the Registrar.
Clause 214. — This clause corresponds to section 407 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for consequence of termination or modifications of certain agreements by
an order passed by the Tribunal. Such order shall not give rise to any claims against the
company by any person for damages or compensation for loss of office.  Further,    no such
managing director or director or  manager whose agreement is so terminated shall be appointed
for a period of five years from the date of the order without the leave of the Tribunal.

208
Clause 215.— This clause corresponds to section 399 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the  members of a company not less than one hundred in number or
one-tenth of the total number of members of issued shares and in case of company without
share capital not less than one-fifty of the total number of its members can file an application
to the Tribunal for relief  in cases of oppression and mis-management. The clause further
provides that the Tribunal may waive all or any of the requirements specified therein.
Clause 216.— This is a new clause and seeks to provide that any one or more members
or one or more creditors may file an application before the Tribunal on behalf of the members
and creditors if they are of the opinion that the management or control of the affairs of
company are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the company or its
members or creditors and to restrain the company from oppression and mis-management.
The order passed by the Tribunal shall be binding on the company and all its members and
creditors.
Clause 217. — This clause seeks to provide that clauses 386 to 390 (both inclusive)
relating to power to punish for contempt of the  Tribunal, etc.,  shall apply in relation to a
fraudulent application made to the Tribunal for oppression and mis-management.
Clause 218.— This is a new clause and seeks to provide that valuation  in respect of
any property, stocks, shares, debentures, securities, goodwill or net worth of a company or
its assets shall be valued by a person registered as a valuer,  appointed by the audit committee
or in its absence by the Board of Directors of the company.
Clause 219.—  This is a new clause and seeks to provide the procedure for registration
as valuer. The Central Government shall maintain a register called the register of valuers in
which the names and addresses of persons registered as valuers are to be recorded.  It also
provides that a Chartered Accountant, Cost and Works Accountant, Company Secretary or
other persons possessing prescribed qualifications may apply to the Central Government to
be registered as a valuer. The clause further provides that no company or body corporate
shall be eligible to apply as registered valuer.
Clause 220.— This is a new clause seeking to provide powers to the Central Government
for appointment of a committee of experts to recommend suitable names for the purpose of
inclusion in the register of valuers.
Clause 221.—This is a new clause seeking to restricts a person to practice, describe or
project himself as a registered valuer unless he is registered as a valuer.   Further, the clause
seeks to provide for submission of the report of valuation of any assets by a registered
valuer.  The registered valuer shall not charge at a rate exceeding the rate prescribed.
Clause 222.— This is a new clause and seeks to provide  that a registered valuer or a
person  who has made an application for registration as a valuer is sentenced to a term of
imprisonment for any offence or found guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity,
shall immediately after such conviction or finding intimate the particulars thereof to the
Central Government.
Clause 223. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide the circumstances under
which the name of a valuer may be removed from the register or restored in the register by the
Central Government. The Central Government shall review the performance of all registered
valuers once in three years and may remove the name of any person after giving opportunity
of being heard.
Clause 224.  — This clause corresponds to section 560 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the circumstances under which the Registrar shall send a notice to the
company and all the directors of the company of his intention to remove the name of the
company from the register. The clause further provides that a company by a special resolution
or with the consent of seventy-five per cent. members in terms of share capital may also file
an application to the Registrar for removing the name of the company from the register.
Where company is regulated under special law, approval of the regulatory body constituted,
shall also be obtained and enclosed with application.

209
The clause further seeks to provide that at the expiry of the time mentioned in the
notice, the Registrar may strike the name of the company off the register, and on the publication
in the Official Gazette of this notice, the company shall stand dissolved. However, the Registrar,
before passing an order shall satisfy himself that sufficient provision has been made for the
realisation of all amount due to the company and for the payment or discharge of its liabilities
and obligations by the company within a reasonable time. The liability of every director,
manager or other officer exercising any power of management and every member of company
dissolved shall continue and may be enforced as if company had not been dissolved.
Clause 225. — This is a new clause and seeks to provide certain situations in which no
application be made by the company for removing its name from the register.  It further
provides penalty if a company files an application in violation of the conditions prescribed.
An application filed by a company for removing its name shall be withdrawn by the company
or rejected by the Registrar as soon as conditions when no application for removing name of
the company from register is brought to his notice.
Clause 226. — This clause corresponds to sub-section ( 5) of section 560 of the
Companies Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that where a company is dissolved it shall cease
to operate as a company and the Certificate of Incorporation is deemed to have been cancelled
except for the purpose of realising the amount due to the company and for the payment or
discharge of the liabilities or obligations of the company.
Clause 227. —  This is a new  clause and  seeks to provide penalty in case fraudulent
application is made for removal of name of the company from the register with the object of
evading the liabilities of the company or with the intention to deceive the creditors or to
defraud any other persons. Further, the Registrar may also recommend prosecution against
the persons responsible for the filing such applications.
Clause 228.—  This clause corresponds to sub-section ( 6) of section 560 of the
Companies Act, 1956 and  seeks to provide that any person, company, any member or
creditor aggrieved by an order of the Registrar notifying a company as dissolved can file an
appeal to the Tribunal within 3 years for restoration of the name of the company in the
register.  If Tribunal is of the opinion that removal of name is not justified or in the absence
of any ground, may order for restoration of the name.  The company shall file the copy of
order with Registrar and the Registrar shall restore the name and issue a fresh Certificate of
Incorporation.  The clause further provides that where the name of the company is struck off
from the register, the name of the company may be restored, if the Tribunal is satisfied  that
the company was carrying on business or operates or otherwise and it is just to restore the
name of company to the registration before the expiry of twenty years.
Clause 229. — This clause corresponds to section 424A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide the manner in which a company be declared sick.  In case a company
fails to pay its debt, the creditor may file an application to the Tribunal for determination that
the company be declared as a sick company. An applicant may at any time apply for stay of
proceedings of winding-up.  The Tribunal may pass an order on the application. The company
at its own may also file an application to the Tribunal for declaring it as a sick company. After
filing application before the Tribunal the company shall not dispose of its assets except as
required in the normal course of business and the Board of Directors shall not take any steps
likely to prejudice the interests of the creditors. The Tribunal shall determine whether the
company is sick or not within sixty days.
Clause 230.— This clause corresponds to section 424 B of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that any secured creditor of sick company may make an application to
the Tribunal for the determination of the measures that may be adopted with respect to the
revival and rehabilitation of such company.  This clause further provides for certain conditions
to be fulfilled in case the financial assets of the sick company had been acquired as per the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Securities Interest

210
Act, 2002.  An application shall be accompanied by audited financial statements of the
company and a draft scheme of revival and rehabilitation of the company along with fee.
Clause 231.— This is a new clause and seeks to provide  that the Tribunal shall fix a
date of  hearing not later than ninety days from date of the receipt of an application and
appoint an interim administrator to convene a meeting of creditors of the company to ascertain
whether it is possible to revive and rehabilitate the sick company. In case, no draft scheme is
filed by the company, the Tribunal may direct the interim administrator to take over the
management of the company to protect and preserve the assets of the sick company and for
its proper management.
Clause 232.— This is a new clause and seeks to provide that the interim administrator
shall appoint a committee of creditors having not more than seven members including a
representative of secured creditor, if any. The interim administrator may direct any promoter,
director or any other key managerial personnel to attend any meeting of the committee of
creditors and to furnish such information as considered necessary by the interim administrator.
Clause 233.— This is a new clause and  seeks to provide that if  the Tribunal  is
satisfied with   the report of the interim administrator wherein the creditors representing
three-fourths in value of the amount outstanding against the sick company present and
voting have resolved that it is  not possible to revive and rehabilitate such company, the
Tribunal shall order that the proceedings for the winding-up of the company be initiated; or
shall appoint a company administrator for the company and advice  such administrator to
prepare a scheme of revival and rehabilitation of the sick company.  The Tribunal may,
appoint an interim administrator as the company administrator.
Clause 234.— This is a new clause and  seeks to provide that the interim administrator
or company administrator shall be  appointed by the Tribunal from a panel of advocates,
company secretaries, chartered accountants, cost and works accountants, etc. The Tribunal
may direct the company administrator to take over the assets or management of the company
to assist him in the management of the company.  The company administrator may engage
the services of experts.
Clause 235.— This clause corresponds to section 424H of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the company administrator shall prepare   a complete inventory of
all assets and liabilities, all books of account, a list of shareholders and creditors, a valuation
report in respect of the shares and assets in order to arrive at the reserve price for the sale of
any industrial undertaking of the company or for the fixation of the lease rent or share
exchange ratio, proforma accounts of company where audited accounts are not available and
a list of workmen of the company.
Clause 236.— This clause corresponds to section 424D of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the company administrator shall prepare a scheme of revival and
rehabilitation of the sick company.  The clause further provides for the various measures to
be considered while preparing the scheme.
Clause 237.— This clause corresponds to section 424D of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the scheme prepared by the company administrator will be placed
before the separately convened meetings of secured and unsecured creditors of the sick
company. If the scheme is approved by the unsecured and secured creditors, the company
administrator shall submit the scheme before the Tribunal for sanctioning the scheme. Where
the scheme relates to amalgamation of the sick company with any other company, such
scheme shall be laid before the general meetings of the companies for approval by its
shareholders and separately in the meetings of secured and unsecured creditors. On the
receipt of the scheme, the Tribunal after satisfying that the scheme had been validly approved
pass an order sanctioning such scheme. The sanction accorded by the Tribunal shall be
conclusive evidence and a copy of the sanctioned scheme shall be filed with the Registrar by
the sick company.

211
Clause 238.— This clause corresponds to section 424D(10) of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that on and from the date of the coming into operation of the
sanctioned scheme, its provisions shall be binding on the sick company and the transferee
company and also on the shareholders, creditors and guarantors of the said companies.
Clause 239.— This clause corresponds to section 424 G of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Tribunal for effective implementation of the scheme may
authorise the company administrator to implement a sanctioned scheme. Where it is difficult
to implement the scheme for any reason or the scheme fails due to non- implementation of
obligations by the parties concerned, the company administrator or in his absence, the
company, the secured creditors, or the transferee company in a case of amalgamation, may
make an application before the Tribunal for modification of the scheme or to declare the
scheme as failed, as the case may be, and may request   that the company may be wound-up.
The Tribunal shall, pass an order for modification of the scheme or declaring the scheme as
failed and pass an order for the winding-up of the company.
Clause 240.— This is a new clause and seeks to provide that if the scheme is not
approved by the creditors in the manner specified, the company administrator shall submit a
report to the Tribunal and the Tribunal shall order for the winding-up of the sick company.
Clause 241.— This clause corresponds to section 424 K of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provides that if it appears to the Tribunal in the course of scrutiny or
implementation of any scheme that any person who has taken part in the promotion, formation
or management of the sick company or its undertaking has misapplied or retained, or become
liable or accountable for, any money or property of the sick company; or has been guilty of
any misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance or breach of trust in relation to the sick
company, the Tribunal may by order, direct him to repay or restore the money or property,
with or without interest, as it thinks just, or to contribute to the assets of the sick company.
Further, if the Tribunal is satisfied on the basis of the information and evidence with respect
to any person who by himself or along with others had diverted the funds or property or had
managed the affairs of the company in a manner highly detrimental to the interests of the
company, the Tribunal shall, direct the public financial institutions, scheduled banks and
State level institutions not to provide, any financial assistance to such person or any firm of
which such person is a partner or any company or other body corporate of which such
person is a director or to disqualify a person from being appointed as a director for a period
of six years.
Clause 242.— This clause corresponds to section 424L of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide the punishment  if any person violates the provisions relating to the
revival and rehabilitation of sick companies or any scheme, or any order, of the Tribunal or
the Appellate Tribunal or makes a false statement or gives false evidence or attempts to
tamper the records of reference or appeal filed under this Act.
Clause 243.— This is a new clause and  seeks to provide that no appeal shall lie and no
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or
proposed to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Chapter.  Further,
no civil court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of matter which Tribunal or Appellate
Tribunal is empowered.
Clause 244.— This clause corresponds to section 441C of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that a Fund to be called the Rehabilitation and Insolvency Fund shall
be formed for the purposes of rehabilitation, revival and liquidation of sick companies.  The
clause provides for the amounts to be credited to the Fund.  The Fund shall be managed by
an independent administrator to be appointed by the Central Government.  The fund can be
utilised only by the companies who contributed to the fund to the extent to its contribution
for making payment to the workmen protecting the assets of company, etc.
Clause 245.— This clause corresponds to section 425 of the Companies Act, 1956.
The clause seeks to provide two modes of winding-up such as by the Tribunal or voluntary.

212
Clause 246.— This clause corresponds to sections 433 and 434 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide the circumstances under which a company may be wound-up by
the Tribunal.  The clause further seeks to define the circumstances when a company is
deemed to be unable to pay its debts.
Clause 247.—This clause corresponds to section 439 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to authorise the persons or authority who can file or present a petition to the Tribunal
for the winding-up of a company.  This clause further seeks to authorise a secured creditor,
holder of any debenture and trustee for the holders of debentures and contributory to file the
petition for winding-up of a company.  The clause restricts the Registrar from making petition
for winding-up on the grounds that the company is unable to pay debts.  A petition filed by
the company for winding-up shall be accompanied by a statement of affairs of the company.
Clause 248.— This clause corresponds to section 443 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide  the time within which the Tribunal is required to pass an order either
dismissing the petition for winding-up or make an order for winding-up; or make any interim
order or appoint a provisional liquidator.  The clause further provided that when a petition is
presented on just and equitable ground, the Tribunal may refuse it if it is of the opinion that
any other remedy is available.
Clause 249.— This clause corresponds to section 439A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to empower the Tribunal to direct the company to file its objections along with a
statement of its affairs when a petition is made by a person other than the company.  Failure
to file the statement of affairs will forfeit the right to oppose the petition and the directors and
officers as found responsible for such non-compliance, shall be punishable.  The clause
further seeks to provide punishment to the directors and other officers of the company who
have contravened the provisions of this clause such as non filing of the statement of affairs
and completed and audited books of accounts of the company.
Clause 250.— This clause corresponds to sections 448, 449 and 450 of the Companies
Act, 1956. This clause seeks to provide for the appointment of provisional liquidator or the
company liquidator for the purpose of winding-up of a company from a panel of professionals
maintained by the Central Government. Such professionals must be having atleast ten years
of experience in company matters or such other qualifications.    The clause also empowers
the Central Government to remove the name of a person from the panel of professionals on
the ground of misconduct, fraud, etc., after giving him an opportunity of being heard.  The
clause further provides that the Tribunal shall specify the terms and conditions and fee
payable to the liquidator.
Clause 251.— This is a new clause and seeks to prescribe the grounds on which the
Tribunal may remove the provisional liquidator or the company liquidator as liquidator of the
company.  In case of death, resignation or removal, the Tribunal may transfer the work
assigned to another company liquidator after recording the reasons in writing.  The clause
also authorises the Tribunal to recover such loss or damage from the liquidator who fails to
perform his duty after providing him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 252.— This clause corresponds to sections 444 and 445 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide for the order of Tribunal for the winding-up of a company to the
Company Liquidator and the Registrar within a period of fifteen days from the date of
passing of such order.  The Registrar on receipt of orders make an endorsement of it in its
record and notify the same in the Official Gazette.  The order of the Tribunal would be deemed
to be a notice of discharge to the officers, employees and workmen of the company except
when the business of the company is continued.
Clause 253.— This clause corresponds to section 447 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the winding-up order shall operate in favour of all the creditors and
contributories of the company.

213
Clause 254.— This clause corresponds to section 446 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that on passing of winding-up order or appointment of provisional liquidator,
all suits, etc., by or against the company be stayed except with the leave of the Tribunal.  The
clause further seeks to provide for the time frame within which an application seeking leave
is to be disposed of by the Tribunal.  However, this provision shall not apply to any
proceedings pending in appeal before the Supreme Court or a High Court.
Clause 255.— This clause seeks to provide the jurisdiction of Tribunal to entertain or
dispose of any suit or proceedings or claim by or against the company and also to entertain
or dispose of any question of law arising before or after winding-up.
Clause 256.— This clause corresponds to section 455 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for submission of report containing the particulars of the nature and details
of assets of the company, amount of  issued, subscribed and paid-up capital, etc., to the
Tribunal by Company Liquidator within sixty days from the date of order of the Tribunal.
The clause also seeks to provide that the company liquidator shall  include in his report the
manner in which the company was promoted or formed and whether any fraud has been
committed by any person in its promotion or formation. The company liquidator shall also
report on  the viability of the business of the company or the steps which are necessary for
maximising the values of the assets of the company.  The clause also entitle the creditor or a
contributory of the company to inspect the report submitted and to take copies thereof or
extracts therefrom on payment of the fee.
Clause 257.— This is a new clause and seeks to empower the Tribunal to consider the
report of Company Liquidator and fix a time limit or revise the time limit already fixed within
which the entire proceedings shall be completed and the company dissolved.  The clause
further seeks to empower the Tribunal to order for sale of assets of the company or appointment
of sale committee to assist the company liquidator in sale.   The clause seeks to empower the
Tribunal, to order for investigation where a report is received from the Company Liquidator
or the Central Government or any person that a fraud has been committed in respect of the
company and also order such steps as may be necessary to protect, preserve or enhance the
value of the assets of the company.
Clause 258.— This clause corresponds to section 456 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to cast duty upon provisional liquidator or the liquidator on the order of the Tribunal
to take into his custody all the property, effects and actionable claims to which the company
is entitled to and take such steps and measures, as may be necessary, to protect and preserve
the properties of the company.  This clause further provides that all the property and effects
of the company shall be deemed to be in the custody of the Tribunal from the date of the
order for the winding-up of the company.  This clause also provides for filing of an application
by the company liquidator seeking directions of the Tribunal with regard to surrender or
transfer of any money, property, books and papers by any trustee, receiver, banker, agent,
officer or other employee of the company.
Clause 259.— This is a new clause and seeks to provide for co-operation by the
promoters, directors, officers and employees, past and present, of the company to the Company
Liquidator in discharge of his functions and duties.  This clause further seeks to provide that
if any of the aforesaid person fails to discharge his obligations, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment or with fine or with both.
Clause 260.— This clause corresponds to section 467 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for settlement of list of contributories, rectification of register of members,
to make calls on or adjust the rights of contributories, etc. This clause further provides for
adoption of procedure by the Tribunal while settling the list and rights of contributories.
Clause 261.— This is a new clause and seeks to put obligations on directors and
managers of limited company whose liability is unlimited, to contribute in addition to his
liability to contribute as an ordinary member.  The clause further provides for the exemptions

214
when a past Director or manager shall not be liable to make further contribution as if he were
at the commencement of winding-up, a member of an unlimited company.
Clause 262.— This clause corresponds to sections 464 and 465 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide for the constitution of a committee of inspection by the Tribunal
to advise the Company Liquidator and to report to the Tribunal on matters as the Tribunal
may direct.  This clause further provides the maximum number of members being creditors or
contributories and other persons as directed by Tribunal, who can become members of the
committee.  The clause also seeks to direct company liquidator to convene a meeting of the
creditors and contributories to ascertain the composition of the Committee of inspection.  It
finally seeks to provide that the meeting of committee of inspection shall be chaired by the
Company Liquidator.
Clause 263.— This is a new clause and seeks to provide that the Company Liquidator
shall make quarterly reports to the Tribunal with respect to the progress of the winding-up of
the company. The clause further provides that the Tribunal may, on an application by the
Company   Liquidator, review the orders made by it and make such modifications as it thinks
fit.
Clause 264.— This clause corresponds to section 466 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal to stay the proceedings of winding-up for such time not
exceeding one hundred and eighty days and on after satisfying itself that it is fair and just to
revive and rehabilitate the company.  The clause provides that before making an order, the
Tribunal may require the company liquidator to furnish a report of any relevant facts or
matter.  The clause further cast duty upon the Company Liquidator to forward a copy of
every order to the Registrar who shall make an endorsement of the order in the books and
records relating to the company.
Clause 265.— This clause corresponds to section 457 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the powers exercisable by the Company Liquidator viz. power to carry on
the business of the company, to sell the movable and immovable property of the company, to
defend or institute any suit, to raise any money on the security of assets of the company, etc.
The clause finally provides that the company liquidator shall perform the duties as may be
specified by the Tribunal.
Clause 266.— This clause corresponds to section 459 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to allow the Company Liquidator, with the sanction of the Tribunal, to appoint chartered
accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or such other
professionals as may be necessary to assist him in the performance of his duties and functions.
The clause further seeks for disclosure by the person to the Tribunal of any conflict of
interest or lack of independence in respect of his appointment.
Clause 267. — This clause corresponds to section 460 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to allow Company Liquidator to administer the distribution of assets among its creditors
in accordance with the directions given by the resolution of the creditors or contributories at
any general meeting or by the committee of inspection.  In case of conflict, the directions
given by the creditors or contributories at any general meeting are deemed to override any
directions given by the committee of inspection.  The clause further seeks to empower the
Company Liquidator to summon general meetings of the creditors or contributories.  Any
person aggrieved by any act or decision of the Company Liquidator may apply to the
Tribunal who may confirm, reverse or modify the act or decision and make such further order
as it think just in the circumstances.
Clause 268.— This clause corresponds to section 461 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the company liquidator shall keep proper books and make necessary
entries.  He shall also prepare the minutes of the proceedings at meetings.  The clause further
provides that the books may be inspected by any creditor or contributory or through his
agent.

215
Clause 269.— This clause corresponds to section 462 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for the maintenance of books of account by the Company Liquidator. The
Company Liquidator shall present to the Tribunal a receipt and payments account in duplicate
duly verified by a declaration, twice in each year during his tenure of office.   It also seeks for
filing of copy of such audited accounts with the Registrar and the Tribunal.  This clause
further seeks to provide that the Company Liquidator shall send the printed copy of the
audited accounts to every creditor and every contributory.  This clause also provides for
forwarding a copy of accounts to Central or State Government in case of a Government
Company.
Clause 270.— This clause corresponds to section 469 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the contributory shall contribute any amount due by him.  This clause
further provides in case of an unlimited company, contributory can set off any amount
payable to him by the company.  A director or manager can similarly set off the amount when
their liability is unlimited in a limited company.  This clause finally provides that such set off
facility shall also be given to a contributory after all the creditors have been repaid in full
irrespective of whether the company is limited or unlimited.
Clause 271.— This clause corresponds to section 470 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Tribunal may, at any time after the passing of a winding up order,
make calls on all or any of the contributories to the extent of their liability, for payment of any
money which the Tribunal considers necessary to satisfy the debts and liabilities of the
company.
Clause 272.— This clause corresponds to section 475 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal to adjust the rights of the contributories among themselves
and distribute any surplus among the persons entitled.
Clause 273.— This clause corresponds to section 476 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal to order for payment out of the assets, of the costs, charges
and expenses incurred in winding up in order of priority, when the assets of the company are
insufficient to satisfy its liabilities.
Clause 274.— This clause corresponds to section 477 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal to summon and examining before it any officer of the company
or person known or suspected to have in his possession any property or books or papers, of
the company, or known or suspected to be indebted to the company or capable of giving
information relating to formation, promotion or affairs of the company.  This clause further
provides that the Tribunal may direct the Liquidator to file before it a report in respect of
property, debt, etc., of the company in possession of other persons.  It also seeks to empower
Tribunal to impose an appropriate cost if any officer or person so summoned fails to appear
before the Tribunal at the appointed time without a reasonable cause.
Clause 275.— This clause corresponds to section 478 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal to order examination of  any person on the report made by the
Company Liquidator that in his opinion, a fraud has been committed by such person in
promotion or formation or the conduct of the business of the company.  The person shall be
examined on oath and shall answer all the questions as put by the Tribunal.  It also seeks to
provide that any creditor or contributories may also take part in the examination either
personally or by any agent with the permission of the Tribunal.  It provides that company
liquidator shall take part in the examination and undertake such legal assistance as may be
sanctioned by the Tribunal.
Clause 276.— This clause corresponds to section 479 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Tribunal may pass an order at any time either before or after passing
a winding up order, to arrest a contributory or any person having property, accounts or
papers who is about  to abscond or quit India or is about to remove or conceal any of his
property, for the purpose of evading payment of calls or to avoid examination of affairs of the

216
company.  It further seeks to provide that the books and papers and movable property shall
be seized and kept safely until Tribunal orders.
Clause 277.— This clause corresponds to section 481 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Company Liquidator shall make an application to the Tribunal for
dissolution of a company which has been completely wound up . The Tribunal shall make an
order that the company be dissolved from the date of the order, and the company shall be
dissolved accordingly.  A copy of the order shall be filed by the Company Liquidator within
thirty days with the Registrar who shall record in the register.  This clause further seeks to
provide punishment with fine for failure on the part of Liquidator in forwarding copy to
Registrar.
Clause 278.— This clause corresponds to section 483 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the provisions contained in Chapter XX shall have no effect in case of
any order made by any Court in any proceedings for the winding up of a company immediately
before the commencement of this Act and an appeal against such order shall be filed before
such authority competent to hear such appeals before the commencement of the Act.
Clause 279.— This clause corresponds to section 484 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the circumstances for voluntarily winding up of a company.  This clause
provides that the company may be wound up if the company passes a resolution requiring
the company to be wound up voluntarily as a result of the expiry of the period for its
duration, if any, fixed by its articles or on the occurrence of any event in respect of which the
articles provide that the company should be dissolved.  Alternatively, the company may be
voluntarily wound up by passing a special resolution.
Clause 280.— This clause corresponds to section 488 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for making declaration of solvency by the company director at least five
weeks before the date of passing of resolution to winding up of the company and delivered
to the Registrar for registration.  The declaration shall be accompanied by a copy of auditor's
report on the Profit and Loss Account and Balance Sheet of the company and a copy of
report by registered valuer on the assets of the company.  This clause further seeks to
provide that where the declaration of the directors proved to be wrong, such directors shall
be punishable with imprisonment or with fine or with both.
Clause 281.— This clause corresponds to section 500 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for calling of meeting of the company and its creditors at which the resolution
for the voluntary winding up is to be proposed.  This  clause provides that where two-thirds
creditors are of the opinion that the company be wound up voluntarily, it shall be wound up
voluntarily and where they pass a resolution that the company be wound up by Tribunal, an
application be filed with the Tribunal.  The resolution so passed at a creditors meeting is
required to be filed with the Registrar within ten days of the passing thereof.
Clause 282.— This clause corresponds to section 485 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for publication of resolution to wind up voluntarily by advertisement in the
Official Gazette and also in some newspaper circulating in the district where the registered
office or the principal office of the company is situated.
Clause 283.— This clause corresponds to section 486 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to give effect that the date of commencement of voluntary winding up shall be the date
of passing of the resolution for the same.
Clause 284.— This clause corresponds to section 487 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to restrict the company to carry on the business except to the extent necessary for its
beneficial winding up.
Clause 285.— This clause corresponds to section 502 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that in case of voluntary winding up, the company shall appoint a Company
Liquidator in general meeting from panel prepared by the Central Government.  In case

217
creditors do not approve the appointment of such Company Liquidator, creditors shall appoint
another Company Liquidator.  This clause further seeks to provide for filing of a declaration
by such Liquidator disclosing conflict of interest or lack of independence in respect of his
appointment, if any, with the company and the creditors and such obligation shall continue
throughout the term of appointment.
Clause 286.— This clause corresponds to section 492 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for removal of Liquidator by the Company or creditor where the appointment
has been made by company or creditor respectively.  This clause also seeks to provide for
vacation of office by Liquidator and appointment of Company Liquidator in case of vacancy
occuring as a result of death, resignation, removal or otherwise.
Clause 287.— This clause corresponds to section 493 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for giving of notice to the Registrar of the appointment of a Company
Liquidator along with the name and particulars of the Company Liquidator.
Clause 288.— This clause corresponds to section 491 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that on the appointment of a Company Liquidator, all the powers of the
Board of directors and of the managing or whole-time directors and manager, if any, shall
cease, except for the purpose of giving notice of such appointment to the Registrar.
Clause 289.— This clause corresponds to section 512 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide  the powers and duties of a liquidator in a voluntary winding up such as
settlement of the list of contributories, call general meetings of the company for the purpose
of obtaining the sanction of the company by ordinary or special resolution, maintain regular
and proper books of account, pay the debts of the company and shall adjust the rights of the
contributories among themselves and observe due care and diligence in the discharge of his
duties.
Clause 290.— This clause corresponds to section 503 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for appointment of committee by the creditors or by the company in general
meeting to supervise the voluntary liquidation and assist the Company Liquidator in
discharging his or its functions.
Clause 291.— This clause corresponds to section 508 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for submission of quarterly report on progress of winding up of company
by the Company Liquidator.  The clause further provides that a meeting of the members and
the creditors be called as and when necessary but at least one meeting each of creditors and
members be held in every quarter and apprise them of the progress of the winding up of the
company.  This clause further seeks to provide punishment with a fine, if the Company
Liquidator fails to comply with the provisions of this clause.
Clause 292.— This clause corresponds to section 519 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal to consider the report of the Company Liquidator and order
for investigation, if the report specifies that a fraud has been committed by any person in
respect of the company.  It also seeks for examination and attendance of any person indulging
in the promotion or formation or the conduct of business of the company.
Clause 293.— This clause corresponds to section 509 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for preparation of report by the Company Liquidator regarding winding up
of company showing that the property and assets of the company have been disposed of
and its debt are fully discharged or discharged to the satisfaction of the creditors and call a
general meeting of the company for the purpose of laying the final winding up accounts
before it, and passing of resolution for company’s dissolution.  Company Liquidator is
required to file the report along with copy of the final winding up accounts and resolution
passed in the meeting with the Registrar.  It also seeks to provide for filing of application by
the Liquidator with the Tribunal with the request for passing of order dissolving the company
and the Tribunal shall pass such order within sixty days from the date of receipt of such
application.  It further seeks to provide for filing of the order of Tribunal with the Registrar

218
within thirty days.  This clause seeks to cast duty upon the Registrar for publication of a
notice in the Official Gazette that the company is dissolved.
Clause 294.—This clause corresponds to section 494 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Company Liquidator of the transferor company to accept shares, etc.,
by way of compensation wholly or in part for sale of property, etc., of the company where the
transferor company is proposed to be wound up voluntarily and the whole or any part of its
business or property is proposed to be transferred or sold to the transferee company. This
clause further seeks to provide that the Liquidator may abstain from carrying the resolution
into effect or to purchase his interest at a price to be determined by agreement or the
registered valuer, where any member of the transferor company did not vote in favour of the
special resolution and expresses his dissent in writing addressed to the Company Liquidator
within seven days after passing of the resolution.  It also seeks to provide that if  the
Company Liquidator elects to purchase the member’s interest, the purchase money, raised
by him in such manner as may be determined by a special resolution, shall be paid before the
company is dissolved.
Clause 295.—This clause corresponds to section 511 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for distribution of property of the company on its winding up in satisfaction
of its liabilities pari passu unless the articles of the company otherwise provides.
Clause 296.—This clause corresponds to section 517 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower Tribunal to amend, vary, confirm or set aside the arrangement entered into
between a company and its creditors.  The arrangement as aforesaid shall be sanctioned by
a special resolution and also by the creditors holding three-fourths in value of debt.
Clause 297.—This clause corresponds to section 518 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to allow Company Liquidator or any contributory or creditor to apply to the Tribunal
for determination of any question arising in the course of winding up of a company or in
respect of the enforcing of calls, the staying of proceedings or any other matter.  The
Tribunal may pass an order staying the proceedings in the winding up forthwith to the
Registrar who shall make a minute of the order in his books relating to the company.
Clause 298.—This clause corresponds to section 520 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for the payment of all costs, charges and expenses properly incurred in the
winding up, including the fee of the Company Liquidator out of the assets of the company in
priority to all other claims.
Clause 299.—This clause corresponds to section 528 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide to admit all debts payable on a contingency, and all claims against the
company, present or future, certain or contingent, ascertained or sounding only in damages
as proof against the company.
Clause 300.—This clause corresponds to section 529 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for application of insolvency rules in winding up of insolvent companies
with regard to debts, valuation of annuities, etc.  This clause further seeks to provide that the
liquidator shall enforce such charge on the security of secured creditors representing
workmen’s portion therein.  Any person entitled to any dividend may make his claim.
Clause 301.—This clause corresponds to section 529A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that workmen’s dues and debts due to secured creditors shall be paid
in priority to all other debts.
Clause 302.—This clause corresponds to section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for payment of various outstanding claims or dues which will be paid in
priority of other debts such as all revenues, taxes, cesses due to the Central Government or
State Government, all wages as salary for the time work or payable by way of commission,
amount due under Employees State Insurance Act and Workmen’s Compensation Act, sum
due under provident, pension and gratuity fund.  The debts mentioned in this clause shall be

219
paid in full forthwith.  If the goods of the company being distain by any person, such debts
shall be given first priority.
Clause 303.—This clause corresponds to section 531 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal, after satisfying itself, to declare the transaction relating to
preference transfer of property, movable or immovable, or any delivery of goods, payment,
execution  made, taken or done by or against a company within six months before making
winding up application as invalid and restore the position.
Clause 304.—This clause corresponds to section 531A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to empower the Tribunal to declare any transfer of property, movable or immovable,
or any delivery of goods, etc. made by a company within a period of one year before the
presentation of a petition for winding up, as void against the Company Liquidator being
such transfer was not in good faith.
Clause 305.—This clause corresponds to section 532 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for declaration of any transfer or assignment by a company of all its
properties or assets to trustees for the benefit of all its creditors as void.
Clause 306.—This clause corresponds to section 533 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide protection to the creditor of a company which is being wound up and where
the creditor or the person preferred has been paid by the company with the fraudulent motive
on the part of the company to relieve from liability or reduce the liability of a person who has
stood surety or guarantee to the creditor on behalf of the company.
Clause 307.—This clause corresponds to section 534 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to prohibit companies which are in insolvent condition from creating any floating
charges on their assets, with a view to securing past liabilities.  It also empowers the Central
Government to prescribe by rules regarding the rate of floating charge.
Clause 308.—This clause corresponds to section 535 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide to save an insolvent company’s assets from further losses and enable the
company liquidator to get rid of onerous property by disclaiming it.  This clause further
seeks to provide the time schedule within which the company liquidator and Tribunal are
required to complete such actions as necessary.  The Tribunal before or on granting leave to
disclaim may require such notices to be given to persons interested and impose such terms
and conditions of granting leave, and make such other order in the matter as the Tribunal
considers just.
Clause 309.—This clause corresponds to section 536 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Company Liquidator in voluntary winding up to sanction transfers
after winding up and declare any alteration in the status of members of the company made
after the commencement of the winding up as void. This clause further seeks to provide
declaration of any disposition of the property, etc., as void, if the same is made without the
order of the Tribunal in the case of a winding up by the Tribunal.
Clause 310.—This clause corresponds to section 537 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to prohibit any attachment, sale, distress, etc., without leave of the Tribunal against
the estate or effects of the company, after the commencement of the winding up.  This clause
provides for non-applicability of above provisions to the proceedings for recovery of any
tax or impost or any dues payable to the Government.
Clause 311.—This clause corresponds to section 538 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that if any past or present officer of the company commits certain offences,
such as not delivering movable and immovable property of the company, not delivers books
and papers of the company, not giving true disclosures, guilty of fraud, etc., shall be punishable
with imprisonment or with fine or with both.   The clause further provides punishment to any
person who pawns, pledges or disposes of any property in circumstances which amount to

220
an offence and who takes or otherwise receives the property, knowing it to be pawned, etc.,
shall be punishable with imprisonment or with fine or with both.
Clause 312.—This clause corresponds to section 540 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that if any person who is found to have given false pretences or by means
of any other fraud, induced any person to give credit to the company, to defraud the creditors,
conceal or removed any part of the property is punishable with imprisonment or with fine or
with both.
Clause 313.—This clause corresponds to section 541 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that a company is being wound up should keep proper books of account
throughout the period of two years immediately preceding the commencement of the winding
up.
Clause 314.—This clause corresponds to section 542 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that for frauds by past or present officers and liability for fraudulent conduct
of business is punishable with imprisonment or with fine or with both.  This clause further
seeks to confer power upon Tribunal to fix the responsibility of erring directors or officer of
the company for fraudulent conduct of business.
Clause 315.—This clause corresponds to section 543 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to confer power upon the Tribunal to assess the damages against delinquent directors,
manager, liquidator or officer of the company for misapplication, retainer, misfeasance or
breach of trust.
Clause 316.—This clause corresponds to section 544 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to confer power upon the Tribunal to extend the liability of partners or directors of the
company under clause 314 relating to fraudulent conduct of business or under clause 315
relating to misfeasance or breach of trust.
Clause 317.—This clause corresponds to section 545 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal to prosecute the delinquent officers and members of the
company for being guilty of offence in relation to the company.
Clause 318.—This clause corresponds to section 546 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Company Liquidator shall exercise general powers of winding up of
the company’s affairs relating to compromising, setting, and collecting debts and paying out
claims etc., subject to the sanction of the Tribunal.
Clause 319.—This clause corresponds to section 547 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that in case of every invoice, business letters, etc., issued by the company
after the winding up of the company shall contain a statement that the company is wound up.
Clause 320.—This clause corresponds to section 548 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the books and papers of the company be prima facie evidence of the
truth of all matters purporting to be recorded therein, in case a company is wound up.
Clause 321.—This clause corresponds to section 549 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for inspection of books and papers relating to winding up of a company by
the creditors and contributories.  It finally provides that the above provisions shall not
exclude or restrict any right conferred by any law on the Central Government or State
Government or any officer or authority of the Government.
Clause 322.—This clause corresponds to section 550 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for disposal of books and papers after the affairs of a company have been
completely wound up and it is about to be dissolved.  It further provides that no responsibility
shall be imposed upon regarding the books and papers after expiry of five years from the
dissolution of the company.  It also seeks to empower the Central Government to prescribe
by rules the period, form and manner of retention of such books and papers of company
which has been wound up.

221
Clause 323.—This clause corresponds to section 551 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for furnishing of information or statement where the winding up of a
company is not concluded within one year after its commencement and duly audited by a
person qualified to act as auditor of the company, within two months after the expiry of the
year.  Such statement shall be filed periodically.  It also seeks to empower the Central
Government to prescribe by rules such form and manner in which the statement is to be filed
by the Company Liquidator.
Clause 324.—This clause corresponds to section 552 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for making payments into the Public Accounts of India in the Reserve Bank
of India by the Official Liquidator.
Clause 325.—This clause corresponds to section 553 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Company Liquidator shall make payments into a scheduled Bank
and credit it into a Special Bank Account known as the Company Liquidation Account
opened by him of the monies received by him as liquidator.  The clause finally provide for
payment of interest and penalty, in case, of the Liquidators retains any specified sum for
more than the prescribed period.
Clause 326.—This clause corresponds to section 554 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the funds of the company in winding up shall not be kept in private
sector banks.
Clause 327.—This clause corresponds to section 555 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that unpaid dividends and undistributed assets of the companies being
wound up which are in the hands of the Liquidator shall be paid by the Liquidator into the
Company Liquidation Dividend and Undistributed Assets Account.  The clause also seeks
to provide that the above provisions shall also be applied in case of dissolution of a company.
It also seeks to provide that the Liquidator shall forthwith furnish a statement to the Central
Government. This clause also seeks to provide that the Liquidator shall be given a receipt
from the Reserve Bank of India for the money paid by him.  This clause also seeks to provide
that the Tribunal may pass an order for the payment of required sum to the claimant out of the
said account.
Clause 328.—This clause corresponds to section 556 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that if the Company Liquidator fails to make good the defaults committed by
him within fourteen days from the date of service of notice on him.  The Tribunal may make
an order to make good the default on request by any creditor, contributory, etc.
Clause 329.—This clause corresponds to section 557 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal, in all matters relating to winding up of a company, to ascertain
the wishes of creditors or contributories by calling their meetings.
Clause 330.—This clause corresponds to section 558 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for filing affidavit before any court, Tribunal, Judge or person lawfully
authorised to receive affidavits in India and in any other country, as the case may be.
Clause 331.—This clause corresponds to section 559 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Tribunal to declare dissolution of company void on an application
made by the Company Liquidator of the company or by any other person at any time within
two years from the date of dissolution.  It also seeks to provide for filing of order of the
Tribunal, with the Registrar who shall register the same and if such person fails so to do, he
shall be punishable with fine.
Clause 332.—This clause corresponds to section 441 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that where before the presentation of petition for winding up by Tribunal,
a resolution for voluntary winding up has been passed, the proceedings of voluntary winding
up of a company shall commence from the date of passing of the resolution, unless the
Tribunal, on proof of fraud or mistake, thinks otherwise.  It also seeks to provide that in any

222
other case, the winding up of a company by the Tribunal shall be deemed to commence at the
time of the presentation of the petition for the winding up.
Clause 333.—This clause corresponds to section 458A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that while computing the period of limitation specified for any suit or
application in the name and on behalf of a company which is being wound up by the
Tribunal, the period from the date of commencement of the winding up of the company to a
period of one year immediately following the date of the winding up order shall be excluded.
Clause 334.—This is a new clause which seeks to empower the Central Government
for appointment of as many Official Liquidators as it may consider necessary and may also
appoint Joint, Deputy or Assistant Official Liquidators to assist him in discharge of his
functions in relation to the winding up of companies by the Tribunal.  It also seeks to provide
that the salary and allowances to the Official Liquidator, etc., shall be paid by the Central
Government.
Clause 335.—This clause corresponds to section 457 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide for the powers and duties of the Official Liquidator.  The Official Liquidator
shall exercise powers such as conducting inquiries or investigations, maintaining information
and records, etc., of the companies under winding up.
Clause 336.—This is a new clause which seeks to provide for winding up of company
having assets of book value not exceeding one crore rupees through summary procedure.
This clause also seeks to empower the Tribunal to appoint Official Liquidator as the liquidator
of the company, who shall submit a report to the Tribunal indicating whether any fraud has
been committed in promotion, formation or management of affairs of the company.  It also
seeks to provide that the Tribunal if satisfied that fraud has been committed, may order for
the investigation of the affairs of the company.  The clause finally provides that the Tribunal
may order for the winding up of the company after considering the investigation report.
Clause 337.—This is a new clause which seeks to provide that the Official Liquidator
shall dispose of all the assets and collect the amount payable to the company from the
debtors and contributories. It also seeks to provide that the Official Liquidator shall deposit
the amount recovered into the public account of India in the Reserve Bank of India.
Clause 338.—This is a new clause which seeks to provide for settlement of claims of
creditors by the Official Liquidator.
Clause 339.—This is a new clause which seeks to provide that any creditor aggrieved
by the decision of the Official Liquidator may apply to the Tribunal who shall either dismiss
the application or modify order of Official Liquidator.  If the claim has been accepted, the
Official Liquidator shall make payment to the creditors.
Clause 340.—This is a new clause which seeks to provide for submission of final
report to the Tribunal by the Official Liquidator when he is satisfied that the company can be
finally wound up.  The Tribunal shall on receiving the report order for the dissolution of the
company.  After the order is passed, the Registrar shall strike off the name of the company
from the register of companies and a notification to this effect be published in the Official
Gazette.
Clause 341.—This clause corresponds to section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that where not less than 50 per cent. of the paid up capital of foreign
company is held by one or more citizens of India or one or more companies incorporated in
India or by one or more citizens and one or more companies of India, such company shall
comply with provisions as if it were a company incorporated in India.
Clause 342.—This clause corresponds to sections 592  and 593 of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide the documents which every foreign company shall deliver to the
Registrar for registration after the  establishment of their place of business in India. It also

223
seeks to provide that if any alterations are made or occur in the documents, the foreign
company shall deliver a return in this regard to the Registrar.
Clause 343.—This clause corresponds to section 594 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that every foreign company shall, in every calendar year prepare a balance
sheet and profit and loss account and shall  lay before the company in general meeting and
deliver a copy  of such  documents to the Registrar. In case such document is not in English,
a certified translation thereof in English shall also be filed. Further every foreign company
shall also file a list of the places of business in India as at the date of its balance sheet.
Clause 344.—This clause corresponds to section 595 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that every foreign company shall exhibit on the outside of every office or
place where it carries on business in India, the name of the company and the country in
which it is incorporated, in English and in local languages in general use in the locality in
which the office or place is situated. The foreign company will write its name, liability of its
members and name of the country in which it is incorporated in legible English characters in
all business letters, billheads, letter paper, and prospectus, etc.
Clause 345.—This clause corresponds to section 596 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the manner in which documents which are required to be served on a
foreign company shall be deemed to be sufficiently served.
Clause 346.—This clause corresponds to section 600 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the provisions relating to issue of debentures, preparation and filing of
annual return, preparation of books of account and manner in which they may be kept,
registration of charges and inspection and investigation of books of account shall apply
mutatis mutandis to a foreign company.
Clause 347.—This clause corresponds to section 601 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the fee which a foreign company will have to pay  to the Registrar for
registering any document.
Clause 348.—This clause corresponds to section 602 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to define the expressions “certified”, “director” and “place of business” for foreign
companies.
Clause 349.—This clause corresponds to section 603 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide the guidelines for issue of prospectus in India offering to subscribe for
securities of a company incorporated outside India.  The condition requiring or binding an
applicant for securities to waive compliance with any requirement shall be treated as void.
This clause further provides that in case of non-compliance, a director or other person
responsible for issue of prospectus shall not incur any liability by reason of non-compliance
or contravention if it is proved that he had no knowledge or contravention was an honest
mistake of fact.  This section shall not apply in case the prospectus is issued to existing
members or debenture holders of a company.
Clause 350.—This clause corresponds to section 604 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that if the prospectus includes a statement purporting to be made by an
expert, such statement must be included in the prospectus in the form and context in which
it is included and there does not appear in the prospectus, a statement that he has given and
has not withdrawn his consent.
Clause 351.—This clause corresponds to section 605 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks  to provide that a copy of the  prospectus of a company incorporated or to be
incorporated outside India certified by the Chairman and two other directors of the company
as having been approved by resolution of the managing body has to be delivered to the
Registrar for registration along with the required documents.
Clause 352.—This clause corresponds to section 605A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide rules applicable for the offer of Indian Depository Receipts, the

224
requirement of disclosures in prospectus or letter of offer issued in connection with Indian
Depository Receipts, the manner in which the Indian Depository Receipts shall be dealt with
in a depository mode and by custodian and underwriters; and the manner of sale, transfer or
transmission of Indian Depository Receipts by a company incorporated or to be incorporated
outside India.
Clause 353.—This clause corresponds to sections 606 and 607  of the Companies Act,
1956 and seeks to provide that the provisions relating to criminal and civil liability for
misstatement in a prospectus, fraudulently inducing persons to invest money shall apply  to
the issue of a prospectus by  a company incorporated or to be incorporated outside India.
Clause 354.—This clause corresponds to section 598 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that where a company fails to comply with any of the provisions relating to
companies incorporated outside India, the company shall be punishable with fine.
Clause 355.—This clause corresponds to section 599 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that any failure by a company to comply with the provisions of the Chapter
relating to companies incorporated outside India shall not affect the validity of any contract,
dealing or transaction entered into by the company or its liability to be sued in respect
thereof.  However, the company will not be entitled to bring any suit, claim, set-off, etc., until
it has complied with the provisions of this Chapter.
Clause 356.—This clause corresponds to section 619A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that where the Central Government is a member of a Government
company, it shall arrange to prepare an annual report on the working and affairs of the
company along with audit report and comments of Comptroller and Auditor General and laid
before both Houses of Parliament. It also seeks to provide that where a State Government is
a member of a Government Company, it shall also prepare an annual report along with
aforesaid enclosures and laid before both the Houses of the State Legislature.
Clause 357.—This clause corresponds to section 620 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Central Government, may notify any provisions of this Act which
shall not be applicable or shall apply with modification to any Government Company. This
clause further seeks to provide that such notification shall be laid in draft before each House
of Parliament before it is so notified and shall be subject to modification by both the Houses.
Clause 358.—This clause corresponds to section 609 of the Companies Act, 1956  and
seeks to provide that for the purpose of registration of companies, the Central Government
shall establish such number of offices at such places and with such jurisdiction as it thinks
fit. It further seeks to provide that the Central Government may appoint a Director General of
Registration, such number of Registrars, Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Registrars
as it considers necessary for the registration of companies.  This clause also provides for the
terms and conditions of service, including the salaries payable to persons aforesaid. It finally
provides that the Central Government may direct the preparation of seal or seals for
authentication of documents required in connection with the registration of companies.
Clause 359.—This clause corresponds to section 610A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to permit companies to file returns and documents on paper or in electronic form
or stored on any electronic data storage device or computer readable media by the Registrar
and further seeks to provide that such filings shall also be deemed to be a document for the
purposes of this Act and shall be admissible as evidence in any proceedings thereunder.
Clause 360.—This clause corresponds to section 610B of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules in regard to filing of various
applications, documents, returns, etc., service or delivery of any document, notice or
communication, etc., maintenance of various applications, documents and returns filed,
manner of inspection of the various documents, payment of fees, charges or other sums
payable in the electronic form and the manner in which various registry functions viz. alteration

225
of memorandum, articles, prospectus, issuing certificate of incorporation, etc., shall be
performed by Registrar in electronic form. This clause also seeks to provide that the Central
Government may notify a scheme to carry out the provisions of this clause.
Clause 361.—This is a new clause and seeks to provide that the Central Government
may provide that the electronic form shall be exclusive, or in the alternative or in addition to
the physical form.
Clause 362.—This clause corresponds to section 610D of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Central Government may provide such value added services
through the electronic form and levy fee thereon.
Clause 363.—This clause corresponds to section 610E of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that all the provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000 relating
to the electronic records, shall apply  in relation to the records in electronic form as specified
under this Act.
Clause 364.—This clause corresponds to section 611 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that any document to be filed, registered or recorded under this Act shall be
on payment of fee and charges.
Clause 365.—This clause corresponds to section 612 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that all fees, charges and other sums received by any Registrar, Additional,
Joint, Deputy, or Assistant Registrar, or any other officer of the Central Government shall be
paid into the public account of India in the Reserve Bank of India.
Clause 366.—This clause corresponds to section 615 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Central Government may order any company, to furnish such
information or statistics with regard to its constitution or working, within specified time.
Such an order shall be published in the Official Gazette. This clause further seeks to provide
that the Central Government for the purpose of satisfying itself may order such company to
produce such records or documents or allow inspection thereof or furnish such further
information as that Government may consider necessary.  This clause also seeks to provide
that where a foreign company carries on business in India, all the references in this section
shall be applicable to the foreign company as well.
Clause 367.—This clause corresponds to section 620A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Central Government may notify a company to be a Nidhi
company.  The Central Government may also notify the provisions of this Act which shall not
apply or shall to a Nidhi Company.  This clause finally provides that the notification shall be
laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 368.—This clause corresponds to section 10FD and 10FR of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide definitions of Chairperson, Judicial Members, Member,
President, Technical Member in Appellate Tribunal and Tribunal.
Clause 369.—This clause corresponds to section 10FB of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to deal with the constitution of National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT).  The
NCLT shall consist of President and such number of Judicial and Technical Members as
Central Government may deem necessary.
Clause 370.—This clause corresponds to section 10FD  of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide the qualifications of President and Members of the Tribunal.
Clause 371.—This clause corresponds to section 10FR of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to deal with the formation of the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
(NCALT) consisting of Chairperson and Judicial and Technical Members which shall not
exceed eleven.
Clause 372.—This clause corresponds to section 10FR of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that Chairperson of NCLAT shall be a judge of Supreme Court or Chief
Justice of High Court, the Judicial Member shall be a judge of High Court or Judicial Member

226
of Tribunal for 5 years. The Technical Member shall be a person having atleast experience of
25 years in banking, management, economics, etc.
Clause 373.— This clause corresponds to section 10FX of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that President of the Tribunal and Chairperson or the Judicial Members
of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed after consultation with Chief Justice of India.
Members of the Tribunal and Technical Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed
on the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of Chief Justice of India or his
nominee, Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs as Convener of Selection Committee,
Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice and two other Secretaries of the Government of
India to be nominated by the Central Government.
Clause 374.—  This clause corresponds to sections 10FE and 10FT of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide the terms of office of President, Chairperson and Members of
the Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 375.— This clause corresponds to sections 10FG and 10FW of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of Members of the Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 376.— This clause corresponds to sections 10FH and10FS of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that in the event of death, resignation, absence, etc., of the
President or Chairperson, the senior-most Member of the Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal
shall discharge the duties of President or Chairperson, as the case may be.
Clause 377.— This clause corresponds to sections 10FI and 10FU of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to deal  with the  resignation of President, Chairperson, Members. It
provides that President, Chairperson or member may address his resignation to the Central
Government.
Clause 378.— This clause corresponds to sections 10FJ and 10FV of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide the grounds for removal of the Chairperson or President or
Members of the Appellate Tribunal or Tribunal by the Central Government in consultation
with the Chief Justice of India. It provides removal on the ground of insolvency, conviction
of offence involving moral turpitude, on being mentally or physically incapable, etc. The
Central Government in consultation with the Supreme Court will regulate the procedure for
the inquiry, if any, of the alleged misbehaviour of the members.
Clause 379.— This clause corresponds to sections 10FK and 10GA of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to deal with the staff of the Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal. It provides
that the Central Government in consultation with Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal provide
the officers and staff of the Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal who shall discharge their function
under the superintendence and control of the Chairperson or President or Members, as the
case may be.
Clause 380.— This clause corresponds to section 10FL of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to deal with the number of Benches of the Tribunal. It provides that the Principal
Bench shall be at New Delhi.  Further, it provides that powers of the Principal Bench  shall be
exercised by two Members and a single Member may also function as a Bench in certain
cases. The President may for disposal of the case(s) relating to rehabilitation, restructuring
or reviving the winding up of companies may constitute Special Benches consisting of three
or more members.  Lastly, in case of difference of opinion, matter shall be decided by the
majority.
Clause  381. — This clause corresponds to section 10FM of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to deal with orders passed by the Tribunal. It provides that the Tribunal may
rectify any mistake within two years from the date of order. This clause further provides that
a copy of each order shall be sent to all the concerned parties by the Tribunal.

227
Clause 382.— This clause corresponds to section 10FQ of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to deal with appeal against the order of  the Tribunal in the Appellate Tribunal. It
provides that appeal may be filed within 45 days from the date of order and in case Appellate
Tribunal is satisfied that delay is justified then further period of 45 days is allowed.  The
Appellate Tribunal after according an opportunity of hearing may confirm, modify or set
aside order of the Tribunal and provide copy of order to the Tribunal and parties to appeal.
Clause 383.—This is a new clause which deals with expeditious disposal of cases
before Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal.   It provides that the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal
shall make every effort to dispose of cases within three months from the date of commencement
of proceedings before Tribunal or filing of appeal before Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 384.— This clause corresponds to section 10GF of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that an appeal against the order of the Appellate Tribunal shall be filed
before the Supreme Court within sixty days and in case of justified delay within a further
period of sixty days only on any question of law arising from such an order.
Clause 385.— This clause corresponds to section 10FZA  of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to deal with the procedure to be adopted by the Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal to
dispose of any proceeding. It provides that Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal shall not follow
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but would be guided by the principles of natural justice.
The Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal may regulate their own procedure.  However, while
discharging their functions, it would have the power vested with the Civil Court in respect of
any suit for summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person, examining him on oath,
etc.  Orders passed by it shall be enforced as a decree passed by the court and may be sent
for execution to the court under whose jurisdiction, the company or the person, as the case
may be, has registered office or resides respectively.
Clause 386.— This clause corresponds to section 10G  of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Tribunal or the  Appellate Tribunal shall have the same powers of
contempt as that of High Court under the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
Clause 387.— This clause deals with delegation of powers. It provides that the Tribunal
or the Appellate Tribunal may by general or special order authorise any person to inquire
into the matter connected with any proceeding and report to it.
Clause 388.— This clause corresponds to section 10FY of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the President, Chairperson, Members, Officers and employees of
the Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall be treated as public servants within the meaning
of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 389.— This clause corresponds to section 10FZ of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to deal with the protection of action taken in good faith by the President,
Chairperson, members, officers, etc., of the Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 390.—This clause corresponds to section 10FP of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to deal with the power to take the assistance of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
Chief Judicial Magistrate or the District Collector by the Tribunal for taking into custody all
property, books of account, etc. The above acts shall not be questioned in any court or
before any authority in case of a sick company or winding up of any company.
Clause 391.— This clause corresponds to section 10GB of the Companies Act, 1956.
This clause deals with exclusive jurisdiction of the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal and
provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matters that are assigned
to the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 392.— This clause corresponds to section 10GC of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that proceedings of the Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal shall not be
invalid merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy or defect in its constitution.

228
Clause 393. — This clause corresponds to section 10GD of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that a party to the proceeding may appear in person or authorise a
Chartered Accountant, Cost Accountant, Company Secretary or Legal Practitioners to present
the case before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 394. —  This clause corresponds to section 10GE of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that provisions of the Limitations Act, 1963 shall apply to the proceedings
before the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 395. — This clause corresponds to sections 10FA and 647A of the Companies
Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that on formation of Tribunal, all matters pending before CLB
shall stand transferred to the Tribunal.  Similarly, all proceedings relating to compromise,
arrangements and reconstruction and winding up of the companies pending before District
Courts and High Courts shall be transferred to the Tribunal except winding up proceedings
pending before District Courts or High Courts.
Clause 396. — This is a new clause which  deals with the establishment of Special
Courts by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court
within whose jurisdiction the Judge is to be appointed. It further provides that  person so
appointed as Judge of Special Court shall be one who immediately before such appointment
was a Session Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge.
Clause 397.— This is a new clause which seeks to provide that all offences under this
Act shall be triable by the Special Courts.  However, where an accused is produced before
Magistrate, the Magistrate may order detention of such person and if he considers the
detention unnecessary, he shall forward the case to the Special Court.  The Special Court
would have the liberty to try summary proceedings for offences punishable with imprisonment
for a term not exceeding three years although it may order for the regular trial.
Clause 398.— This is a new clause which seeks to deals with appeal and revision. It
provides that High Courts shall have the power of appeal or revision as if special courts were
Court of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.
Clause 399.— This is a new clause which deals with application of code to the
proceedings before the Special Court. It provides that Special Court shall be deemed to be a
Court of Session and the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply to
the Special Court.
Clause 400. — This clause corresponds to some of the provisions of sections 621 to
631 of the Companies Act, 1956 and seeks to provide that every offence punishable under
this Act shall be non-cognizable. Court shall take cognizance only on complaint made by
Registrar, shareholder of the company of a person authorised by Central Government.
Clause 401.— This is a new clause which deals with transitional power. It provides
that till such time Special Courts are established the existing Court of Session will continue
to exercise jurisdiction. However, it will not affect the powers of High Court to transfer any
case.
Clause 402. — This clause corresponds to section 621A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that any offence which is not punishable with imprisonment only or
imprisonment and also with fine may be compounded by the aggrieved person.
Clause 403.— This clause corresponds to section 624A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Central Governments may appoint any number of Company
Prosecutors who shall have the same powers and privileges as that of Public Prosecutor.
Clause 404.— This clause corresponds to section 624B of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that the Central Government shall have the power to direct the Company
Prosecutor or authorise any other person to appeal against the order of acquittal passed by
any court, other than a High Court.
Clause 405. — This is a new clause which deals with compensation for accusation
without reasonable cause before the Special Court or Court of Session.

229
Clause 406.— This clause corresponds to section 626 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that any fine imposed or any part thereof may be applied towards payment
of cost of proceedings or towards payment of reward to person on whose information the
proceedings were instituted.
Clause 407.—  This clause corresponds to section 628 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to deal with penalty for false statement. It provides that if in any return, report, etc., any
person who makes a false statement or omits material facts, shall be punishable with
imprisonment and with fine.
Clause 408.— This clause corresponds to section 629 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that in case of giving false evidence, the concerned person shall be liable to
imprisonment and fine.
Clause 409. — This clause corresponds to section 629A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide penalty where no specific penalty is provided elsewhere in the
Companies Act.
Clause 410.— This clause seeks to provide that if any default is repeated, it shall be
punishable with imprisonment as provided and twice the amount of fine for such default.
Clause 411.— This clause corresponds to section 630 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide penalty for wrongful procession or holding of the property of the company
by any officer or employee of company.
Clause 412.— This clause corresponds to section 631 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide punishment for improper use of the title words, ‘limited’, ‘private limited’ or
‘OPC limited’.
Clause 413.— This is a new clause which provides that Central Government may
appoint adjudicating officers for adjudging penalty under the provision of this Act.  The
company or officer shall be given an opportunity to be heard before imposing any penalty.
Aggrieved person may appeal to Regional Director.  Any person not paying penalty shall be
punished with imprisonment or fine or with both.
Clause 414.— This is a new clause and seeks to deal with  dormant company. It
provides that a dormant company shall be one which has not been carrying any business or
has not made any significant accounting transaction in the last two financial years.  Such a
company may make an application to Registrar for obtaining the status of a dormant company.
The Registrar shall maintain the register of dormant company, which shall keep the minimum
number of directors and pay annual fees. This clause further provides that in case of a
company which has not filed Balance Sheet, Profit and Loss Account or annual return for
two financial years, the Registrar shall enter the name in the register maintained for dormant
company. However, if the dormant company fails to comply with the requirements of this
clause then the Registrar shall have the power to strike off its name.
Clause 415.— This clause seeks to provide that no suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against the Government or any other person authorised by the
Government for acts done or intended to be done in good faith.
Clause 416.— This clause corresponds to section 635AA of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that no official shall be compelled to disclose to any court, tribunal or
other authority the source of any information which has lead to an order of investigation into
the affairs of the company.
Clause 417.— This clause corresponds to section 637 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to empower the Central Government to delegate any of its powers or functions to any
authority or officer by notification. It provides that any power can be delegated other than
power to make rules.  It further provides that a copy of notification shall be placed before
both the Houses of Parliament.

230
Clause 418.— This clause corresponds to section 637A of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that while according approval, sanction, consent, confirmation etc.,
giving directions or granting exemptions the Central Government or the Tribunal may impose
such conditions or restrictions as it think fit subject to the payment of fee.
Clause 419.— This clause corresponds to section 637B of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that whenever any application is to be made to Central Government or
any document is required to be filed with Registrar within specified time, the Central
Government may, after recording the reasons for delay. Condone the delay.
Clause 420.— This clause corresponds to section 638 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Central Government shall prepare annual report on the working of
the Act and laid before both the Houses of Parliament.
Clause 421.— This clause seeks to provide that in case of one person company or
small company the Central Government may by notification exempt the compliance of certain
provisions.  However, a copy of draft notification shall be laid before both the House of
Parliament.
Clause 422.— This clause corresponds to section 11 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the number of persons in any association or partnership shall not
exceed one hundred.  This clause further provides that the above restriction shall not apply
to an association or partnership, constituted by professionals.  The provision shall not
apply to Hindu Undivided Family.
Clause 423.— This clause deals with repealing of Companies Act, 1956 and Registration
of Companies (Sikkim) Act, 1961. However, the provisions relating to producer companies
shall be applicable mutatis mutandis as if Companies Act has not been repealed.  It further
provides that till the formation of Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal, the provisions of Companies
Act, 1956 with regard to Company Law Board shall continue to apply.
Clause 424.— This clause corresponds to section 10FA of the Companies Act, 1956
and seeks to provide that on the constitution of the Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal, the
Company Law Board shall stand dissolved.  It provides that consequent upon formation of
the Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal, the persons holding the office of Chairman, Vice-Chairman
or Members shall stand vacated without any compensation for premature termination.  Further,
the officials on deputation shall be reverted to their parent cadre and the officials of the
Board shall become officials of the Central Government with the same rights and privileges.
Clause 425.— This is a new clause which seeks to provide that Central Government
may remove any difficulties which may arise in giving effect to the provisions within three
years of commencement of the Act by publishing it in the Official Gazette and laying before
each House of Parliament.
Clause 426.— This clause corresponds to section 642 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
seeks to provide that the Central Government shall have the power to make rules.  Every rule
made under this clause shall be laid before both the Houses of the Parliament.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 112 provides for establishment of Investor Education and Protection Fund for
promotion of investor awareness and protection. To carry out the objectives of the Fund, the
Central Government shall constitute an Authority with such members but not exceeding
seven, as the Central Government may appoint, to administer the Fund. This clause is similar
to section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the existing Act).
Clause 118 provides for constitution of National Advisory Committee on Accounting
and Auditing Standards (NACAAS) to advise the Central Government on the formulation
and laying down of accounting and auditing policies and Accounting and Auditing standards
for adoption by companies or their auditors. The members of the Advisory Committee shall
be entitled to such fees, travelling, conveyance and other allowances as may be prescribed
in the rules. This clause is similar to section 210A of the existing Act.
Clause 183 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint inspectors to
investigate the affairs of companies. Clause 195 of the Bill empowers the Central Government
to prosecute the offenders on the basis of the report of the investigation. The expenses on
investigation, under certain circumstances are to be initially defrayed by the Central
Government out of the moneys provided by the Parliament and are ultimately recoverable
from the persons concerned. Clause 179 empowers the Registrars and the officers authorised
by the Central Government to inspect the books of account of companies. These clauses are
similar to the provisions of section 235, 242 and 209A of the existing Act.
Clause 244 empowers the Central Government to appoint an independent administrator
to manage the Rehabilitation and Insolvency Fund. This clause is similar to sections 441A to
441D of the Companies Act, 1956 with some modifications.
Clause 334 empowers Central Government to appoint Official liquidators including
Joint, Deputy or Assistant Official Liquidators who are to be the whole time officers of the
Central Governemnt, i.e., whose salary shall be paid by Central Government. Clause 334 is
similar to the provisions of section 448 of the existing Act.
Clause 358 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to set up registration offices
to appoint a Director-General of Registration and Registrars, Additional, Joint and Assistant
Registrars and to fix their salaries. Clause 358 is similar to the provisions of section 609 of the
existing Act.
Clauses 369 , 371 and 375 of the Bill provide for the constitution of the National
Company Law Tribunal and National Company Law  Appellate Tribunal respectively. These
clauses are similar to sections 10FB to 10 FG and 10FR to 10 FX  of the Companies Act, 1956.
For establishment of these institutions, the funds are already being provided by the Parliament.
Clause 396 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to establish, by notification,
such number of  Special Courts as may be necessary for the purpose of providing speedy trial
of offences under the proposed legislation. The intention under this clause is to designate
specified Judge or Judges from existing judicial set up to adjudicate on offences under the
proposed Bill.
Clause 403 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint Company
Prosecutors for the conduct of prosecutions arising out of the proposed legislation. The
Company Prosecutors already appointed under the existing Act will continue to function
under the proposed legislation.
Clause 413 of the Bill provides for appointment of adjudicating officers to impose
penalties for procedural non-compliance. The existing officers shall be notified as 'adjudicating
officers'.
231

232
The expenditure on an authority to administer Investor Education and Protection
Fund, National Advisory Committee on Accounting and Auditing Standards, inspecting
officers, administrator to manage the Rehabilitation and Insolvency Fund, appointment of
whole time Official liquidators (including Joint, Deputy or Assistant Official Liquidators),
setting up of registration offices, appoitment of Director-General of Registration and
Registrars, Additional, Joint and Assistant Registrars, constitution of National Company
Law Tribunal and National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, Special Courts, appointment
of adjudicating officers and appointment of Company Prosecutors will be met out of the
existing budgetary allocations of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
The Bill, therefore, will not involve any additional expenditure of recurring or non
recurring nature.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause (2) proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the salient features of a prospectus to be contained in abridged prospectus.
Sub-item (iv) of item (m) of sub-clause (1) of clause (2) proposes to empower the
Central Government to prescribe items of costs for a class of companies specified under
section 131.
Sub-item (i) of item (zzzg) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2 proposes to empower the
Central Government to prescribe the amount of paid-up share capital for being a small company
which shall not be more than five crore rupees.
Sub-item (ii) of item (zzzg) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2 proposes to empower the
Central Government to prescribe the amount of turnover which shall not be more than twenty
crore rupees for being a small company.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which the name of subscriber to a memorandum of a company shall be given
for complying with the requirements for registering a company under the Act.
Second proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 3 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe time and form for intimation by the sole member of a one person
company for change of name of his successor to the Registrar of Companies.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner and conditions for issuing licence to a company to be formed for charitable
objects, etc.
Item (b) of sub-clause (3) of clause 5 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe words on expressions which can be a part of name of a company only with the
previous approval of the Central Government.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 5 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form, manner and fees required for making an application to Registrar for keeping a name
reserved by a company.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 5 proposes to empower the Central government to prescribe
the fee required for serving the name for a further period of sixty days.
Sub-clause (6) of Clause 5 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form of Memorandum of Association of a company.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 6 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the matters to be contained in Article of Association of a company.
Sub-clause (6) of clause 6 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
model articles for different types of companies.
Item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 7 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the manner in which a memorandum is to be signed by all subscribers.
Item (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 7 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe form of declaration in which an advocate, Chartered Accountant, Cost Accountant
or Company Secretary or director, manager, etc., engaged in the formation of a company, shall
declare that all requirements of the Act and rules in respect of registration and the matters
precedent or incidental thereto have been complied with.
Item (e) of sub-clause (1) of clause 7 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the items for proof of identity of a subscriber to the memorandum of a company.
233

234
Item (f) of sub-clause (1) of clause 7 proposes to empower the  Central Government to
prescribe the particulars regarding proof of identity of a person who has been mentioned as
first director in the Articles of the company.
Item (g) of sub-clause (1) of clause 7 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the form and manner in which the interests of first directors of a company in other
firms or bodies corporate are to be furnished/disclosed along with their consent to act as
director.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 7 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form for certificate of incorporation to be issued by the Registrar.
Item (a) sub-clause (1) of clause 10 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe a form of declaration and manner of its verification to be filed by a director or
subscriber in respect of payment of value of shares for which they have agreed as their
subscription.
Item (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 10 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the manner in which verification of registered office shall be furnished to the
Registrar.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 11 proposes to empower the Central Government  to prescribe
the manner in which the verification of the company’s registered office is to be made.
Item (d) of sub-clause (3) of clause 11 proposes to empower the  Central Government
to prescribe the documents on which the company is to get its name printed.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 11 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner for verification of change in the situation of the company’s registered office.
Proviso of sub-clause (6) of clause 12 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe time and manner in which the company has to file the order of the Central Government
approving the alteration involving transfer of registered office of a company from one State
to another with the Registrar of each State.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 13 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which copy of altered Articles of Association are to be filed with the Registrar.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 16 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee, which members are required to pay to the company for sending a copy of the memorandum,
articles, agreements and resolutions referred to in clause 106, on his request.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 19 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the electronic modes and other modes in which the documents can be served on a company
or an officer thereof.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 19 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the electronic modes and other modes in which the documents can be served to the Registrar
or any member of the company.
Sub-item (i) of item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe such other persons whose names, etc., are to be given in prospectus.
Sub-item (ii) of item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe time for issue of allotment letters and refunds, etc., relating to issue
of securities.
Sub-item (iii) of item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribed manner of disclosure about details of monies, i.e. utilised and
unutilised out of issue.
Sub-item (v) of item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe the other persons whose consent is required for issue of prospectus.

235
Sub-item (viii) of item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the
Central Government to prescribe capital structure of the company, in prospectus.
Sub-item (ix) of item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe particulars of the terms of the present issue, in prospectus.
Sub-item (xiii) of item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the
Central Government to prescribe details of directors, proposed directors including their
appointments and remuneration and extent of their interests in the company, in prospectus.
Sub-item (i) of item (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe this in addition to reports of the auditor of the company with
respect to profit, loss, assets and liabilities of the company, in prospectus.
 Sub-item (ii) of item (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe matters relating to company’s subsidiaries, in prospectus.
Sub-item (iii) of item (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe the manner in which reports are to be made by the auditors for last
five financial years in prospectus.
Item (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 23 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe matters and reports to be included in prospectus issued by a company in addition
to information required under this section.
Second proviso of sub-section (2) of section 24, empower the Central Government to
notify public financial institutions on non-banking financial companies to whom first proviso
shall not apply.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 26 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
changes, which have occurred in the first offer of the security and the succeeding offer of
securities to be included in information memorandum.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 34 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner and time within which the minimum amount has not been subscribed within a
period of one hundred and twenty days from the date of issue of prospectus.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 34 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which a return of allotment has to be filed with the Registrar by companies.
Item (b) of  sub-clause (3) of clause 35 proposes to empower the  Central Government
to prescribe time, in which the monies received from applicant in pursuance of the prospectus,
has to be returned.
Sub-clause (6) of clause 35 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the conditions on which a company may pay commission to any person for subscription to
its securities.
Clause 36 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe conditions and
manner in which a company may issue depository receipts to be dealt in depository mode in
any foreign country.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 40 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner of issue of a share certificate or the duplicate thereof the form of such certificate
and the particulars to be entered in the register of members and other matters.
Item (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 48 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe rules for issuing sweat equity shares by unlisted companies.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 49 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
conditions for issuing and redeeming preferential shares.
First proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 49 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe infrastructure projects, for which a company may issue preferential shares for

236
more than twenty years.  It also proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the percentage of shares which shall be redeemed on an annual basis.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 50 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
share transfer form and time within which this has to be delivered to the company.
Proviso of sub-clause (1) of clause 50 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe time if, within which, the instrument of transfer of securities is not been delivered,
the company may registered the transfer of securities on the terms of indemnity.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 50 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner of notice of the application to be given by a company to the transferee in case of
transfer of partly paid shares.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 53 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form in which an application is to be made to the Tribunal for rectification of register of
members and also to notify competent court outside India in respect of foreign industries or
debenture holders residing outside India.
Item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 56 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe terms and conditions relating to the time within which the offer of shares has to be
accepted or renounced by a shareholder.
Item (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 56 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe conditions to issue shares to its employees under the scheme of employee stock
option.
Item (c) of sub-clause (1) of clause 56 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the conditions for valuation report of a registered valuer to determine the price of
shares.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 57 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form for filing notice for alteration of share capital to the Registrar.
Item (d) of sub-clause (2) of clause 61 proposes to empower the Central Government to
notify higher ratio of debt to capital and free reserves for a class or classes of companies.
Item (g) of sub-clause (2) of clause 61 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe rules for buy-back of securities by a company, which is not listed with any stock
exchange.
Sub-clause (6) of clause 61 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form of declaration of solvency by directors of a company.
Sub-clause (9) of clause 61 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
particulars to be entered in register maintained regarding securities bought back by a company.
Sub-clause (10) of clause 61 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
particulars to be filed, by a company, with Registrar of Companies and Securities and Exchange
Board of India after completion of buy-back of securities.
Explanation to clause 61 proposes to empower the Central Government to notify
securities as specified securities other than employees stock option.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 64 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
terms and conditions and class of companies which can issue secured debentures.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 64 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the conditions for governing the appointment of trustees for issue of debentures by a
company.
Sub-clause (13) of clause 64 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
rules for securing of the issue of debentures, the form of debenture trust deed, the procedure
for debenture holder to inspect trust deed and to obtain copies thereof and other related
matters.

237
Sub-clause (1) of clause 65 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which a holder of shares or debentures of a company may nominate any
person to whom his shares or debentures shall vest in the event of his death.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 65 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which joint holder of shares and debentures may nominate any person in case
of death of all the joint holders.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 65 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which a nomination is to be varied or cancelled.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 65 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which any person may be appointed and become entitled to the shares or
debentures of the company, in the event of the death of the nominee during his minority.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 66 proposes to empower the Central Government to make
rules in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India with respect to acceptance of deposits
from members.
Item (a) of sub-clause (2) of clause 66 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the form and manner in which particulars are to be contained in circular to members
of company for inviting deposits.
Item (d) of sub-clause (2) of clause 66 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the manner and limit for providing insurance against deposits.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 69 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which a charge can be created and fee to be charged thereon.
Proviso of sub-clause (1) of clause 69 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe additional fee on payment of which an application for registering charges can be
made within a period of three hundred days.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 69 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which certificate of registration of charges is to be issued by Registrar
of Companies to the company or person in whose favour the charge is created.
Clause 70 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe the form and
manner in which a person in whose favour the charge is created may apply for registration of
charge when company fails to do so and also the fee and additional fee which Registrar may
charge for such registration.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 73 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and particulars to be included in register of charges to be kept by the Registrar.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 73 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee to be paid by a person for inspecting the register of charges.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 74 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form in which a company shall intimate the Registrar of the payment or satisfaction of
charges.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 75 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
time within which a notice is to be given to the company and Registrar for appointment of a
receiver and to prescribe fee for registering particulars of the receiver, person or instrument
with the Registrar.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 76 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner of register of charges and floating charges to be kept by a company at
its registered office and the particulars to be incorporated in the Register.
Item (b) of sub-clause (2) of clause 76 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe fee for inspecting the register of charges by a person other than a member.

238
Sub-clause (1) of clause 78 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which following registers are to be maintained: —
(a) Register of members indicating separately equity and preference shares held
by each member and residing in India and outside;
(b) Register of debenture holders;
(c) Register of any other security holders.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 78 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which part of the registers referred to in sub-clause (1) of clause 78, called
“foreign register” are to be kept in any country outside of India.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 79 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form of declaration by a person to the company who does not hold the beneficial interests
in shares but whose name is there as a member in the register of members of the company,
specifying the name and other particulars of the person who holds the beneficial interest in
such shares.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 79 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
particulars to be included in declaration to the company by a person who holds or acquires
a beneficial interest in the shares of a company but whose name is not there in the register of
members of the company.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 79 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and particulars to be included therein in case of any change in a declaration made by
a person to the company who holds the beneficial interest in shares of the company and the
person whose name is there in register of members of the company but who does not hold
any beneficial interest in such shares.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 79 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form of return in which declarations are made under this section to be filed by a company
with the Registrar.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 81 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner of notice to be given to members of a company before closing the register of
members or debenture holders or any other security holders.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 82 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
form containing the particulars in respect of annual return.
Item (j) of sub-clause (1) of clause 82 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the form of annual return and other matters to be included therein.
Proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 82 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe the paid-up capital and turnover of a company or whose shares are listed on a
recognised stock exchange, shall, in addition to being signed by Managing Director and the
Company Secretary shall also be signed by a Company Secretary in whole-time practice and
to prescribe the form for such certification.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 82 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the extracts of the annual return that shall form part of the Board’s Reports.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 82 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee and additional fee for filing annual return with the Registrar.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 83 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee for inspecting the registers maintained under sub-clause (1) of clause 78 by a person who
is not a members, debenture holders of company.

239
Item (b) of sub-clause (3) of clause 83 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe fee for a copy of registers or entries or returns maintained under sub-clause (1) of
clause 78.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 89 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which a meeting may be called by the requisitionists in case the Board fails to
call the meeting.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 90 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner for calling a general meeting of the company.
Clause 94 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe the manner and
the conditions subject to which a proxy can be appointed by shareholders.
Clause 97 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe the manner in
which a member may exercise his vote at a meeting by electronic means.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 98 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which the Chairman of meeting shall get the poll process scrutinised and report
thereon.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 99 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner and matters on which a business can be transacted at a general meeting through
postal ballot.
Clause 104 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe the number of
members who can give a notice of their intention to move a resolution requiring special
notice and the manner in which such notice of the resolution shall be given.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 106 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the matters and the manner in which the resolutions passed in general meeting are to be filed
with the Registrar.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 107 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the time within which and manner in which a company shall prepare and keep minutes of
proceedings of every general meeting, meeting called by requisitionists, meeting of class of
shareholders or creditors, resolution passed by postal ballot and meetings of the Board and
any of its committees.
Sub-clause (10) of clause 107 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the secretarial standards for general and Board meetings of a company.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 108 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee for furnishing a copy of minutes of any general meeting to any member of the company.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 109 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which a report on annual general meeting shall be prepared.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 109 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee to be paid by member of a company for being furnished with copy of minutes, etc.
Item (a) of sub-clause (2) of clause 110 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe rate of depreciation on assets of the company.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 111 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form of statement to be filed by company with authority administering the fund on
transfer of unpaid money to Investor's Education and Protection Fund.
Item (g) of sub-clause (2) of clause 112 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe other amounts which shall be transferred to Investor's Education and Protection
Fund.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 112 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
rules for utilisation of Investor's Education and Protection Fund.

240
Sub-clause (5) of clause 112 proposes to empower the  Central Government to prescribe
the form in which authority shall maintain accounts and other relevant records after consulting
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
Sub-clause (8) of clause 112 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and time for preparing annual report by the authority giving a full account of its
activities during the financial year.
Second proviso of sub-clause (1) of clause 116 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe the manner in which books of account can be kept in electronic
mode.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 116 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the conditions for making inspection of books of account and other records by a director.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 117 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form of in which financial statements are to be prepared by a company at the end of each
financial year.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 118 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fees, traveling, conveyance and other allowances to the members of National Advisory
Committee on Accounting and Auditing Standards.
Proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 120 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the manner in which financial statements shall be authenticated.
Proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 121 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the net worth and turnover of companies and manner in which such company
shall circulate their Financial Statements.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 122 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner to file the financial statements with the Registrar.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 122 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner to file the financial statements where annual general meeting has not been held
along with the statement of facts and reasons for not holding the annual general meeting
with the Registrar.
Proviso of sub-clause (1) of clause 123 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the conditions for making an appointment of an auditor in a company.
Sub-item (i) of item (d) of sub-clause (3) clause 124 proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe the percentage which a person or his relative or partner should not
hold as securities of the company or its subsidiary, etc., for being eligible for appointment as
an auditor of a company.
Sub-item (iii) of item (d) of sub-clause (3) of clause 124 proposes to empower the
Central Government to prescribe the amount given by a person or his relative or partner as a
guarantee or security in connection with the indebtness of any third person to the company
or its subsidiary, or its holding or associate company or a subsidiary of such holding company
which shall disqualify a person from being appointed as an auditor of the company.
Item (e) of sub-clause (3) of clause 124 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the business relationships which if a person has with the company or its subsidiary,
or its holding or associate company, or a subsidiary of such holding company shall not be
appointed as an auditor of the company.
Item (g) of sub-clause (3) of clause 124 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the number of companies beyond which a person shall not be appointed as an
auditor of the company.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 126 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the matters, which an auditor shall inquire into as he consider necessary for the performance
of his duties.

241
Sub-clause (2) of clause 126 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the matters, which an auditor shall include in its report to the members of the company.
Item (j) of sub-clause (3) of clause 126 proposes to empower the Central Government to
prescribe additional matters to be included in auditors’ report.
Sub-clause (8) of clause 126 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the powers and duties of branch auditors or company’s auditor with reference to the audit of
branch offices of a company.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 131 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the items of cost to be included in the books of account kept by specified class of companies.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 131 proposes to empower the Central Government to specify
the manner in which audit of cost records of a company shall be conducted.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 131 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which a Cost Accountant shall be appointed in a company.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 132 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
amount of paid-up share capital for listed companies which shall be required to appoint one-
third of its total directors as independent directors. It also proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe minimum number of independent directors in case of public
companies and subsidiaries of any public company which are not listed.
Item (c) of sub-clause (5) of clause 132 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe other qualifications to be possessed by an independent director.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 133 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the time within which and manner in which consent given by a director shall be filed with the
registrar.
Sub-clause (6) of clause 133 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the procedure and principles in accordance with which directors shall retire by rotation
under such sub-clause.
Sub-clause (7) of clause 133 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the time and procedure in respect of making of appointment of director in case a company
fails to re-appoint a director or to appoint a person as a director in place of a retiring director.
Clause 134 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe the form, manner
and the fees payable in respect of application for Director Identification Number.
Clause 135 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe manner in which
Director Identification Number shall be allotted by the Central Government.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 138 proposes to empower the Central Government to specify
apart from Registrar any other authority to whom Director Identification Number may be
furnished by a company under such sub-clause.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 141 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the sum of money to be deposited in connection with proposing the candidature of a person
as a director in the company.
 Sub-clause (2) of clause 141 empower  the  Central Government to prescribe the
manner in which the company shall inform its members of the candidature of a person for
office of director.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 149 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
manner and form in which Board shall intimate Registrar in respect of notice of resignation
given by a director under this sub-clause.

242
Proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 149 of the Bill proposes to empower the Central
Government to prescribe the manner in which a director himself may forward a copy of his
resignation to the Registrar under this clause.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 150 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the procedure to be followed by a company while removing a director from his office before
the expiry of period of his office.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 151 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the particulars in respect of directors and key managerial personnel to be entered in the
register required to be kept by the company pursuant to this clause.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 151 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the particulars and documents to be contained in the return to be filed with the Registrar
under such sub-clause.
Proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 154 proposes to empower the Central Government
to issue directions by way of notifications, to the effect that provisions in respect of sub-
clause (1) shall not apply in relation to any class or description of companies or shall apply
subject to such exceptions, modifications or conditions as may be specified in the notification.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 154 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
other means of communication, which are capable of recording and recognising the
participation of the directors and of recording and storing the proceedings of such meetings,
which may be used for holding meetings of the Board.
Proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 154 proposes to empower the Central Government
to specify such matters which shall not be dealt with in a meeting of the Board through video
conferencing or other electronic means.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 158 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
class or description of companies which shall have to constitute an audit committee and a
remuneration committee of the Board.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 162 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which a director shall make disclosure in respect of companies, firms and other
bodies corporate in which he has any concern or interest.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 164 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the limits up to which such class of companies governed by section 12 of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 which may be prescribed by the Central Government, shall
give loan, or guarantee or make investments. This sub-clause also seeks to empower Central
Government to prescribe class of companies governed by section 12 of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 in respect of which limits prescribed supra would be
applicable.
Sub-clause (8) of clause 164 empower the Central Government to prescribe the particulars
which shall be included and the manner in which a register shall be kept by a company giving
loan or providing guarantee, etc.
Sub-clause (9) of clause 164 empower the Central Government to prescribe the fees
payable for taking extracts or obtaining copies of any part of register maintained under sub-
clause (8) by any company.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 165 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the particulars to be contained in the register to be kept by a company in respect of securities,
which are not held in its name.
Proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 166 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the lower limit of paid-up capital of a company or the upper limit of transactions
of a company for entering into contract or arrangement, except with the prior approval by
way of special resolution.

243
Sub-clause (1) of clause 167 proposes to empower Central Government to prescribe
particulars and manner in which register(s) in respect of contracts or arrangements to which
sub-clause (2) of clause 162 applies shall be kept by every company.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 167 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner and fees payable for inspection of register maintained under sub-clause (1).
Sub-clause (1) of clause 169 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the particulars, with reference to payment proposed to be made by transferee or person,
which are to be disclosed to members in view of provisions of such sub-clause.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 169 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
limits or priorities in respect of any payment made by a company to a managing director or
whole-time director or manager of the company by way of compensation for loss of office or
as consideration for retirement from office or in connection with such loss or retirement,
which shall not be effected by the provisions of sub-clause (1) of this clause.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 175 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which net profits of a company shall be computed for the purpose of ascertaining
the payment of remuneration to a managing or whole-time director or a manager of a company.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 178 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
class or description of companies who shall be required to have whole-time key managerial
personnel.
Item (b) of sub-clause (3) of clause 193 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe fee for furnishing a copy of the final report.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 193 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which Inspector may authenticate the report.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 201 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the other methods which shall be disclosed in the statement apart from the disclosure indicated
in the said sub-clause.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 201 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and accompanied documents in which a notice shall be sent under sub-clause (3) of
the said clause.
Sub-clause (10) of clause 201 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
rules regarding the manner, terms and conditions for takeover offer to be made.
Sub-clause (11) of clause 201 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which an aggrieved party may appeal to the Tribunal, in the event of any
grievances with respect to the takeover offer in case of unlisted companies.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 204 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which the transferee company shall file a copy of the approved scheme with
the Registrar and the Official Liquidator.
Sub-clause (10) of clause 204 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee due on revised capital for filing an application with the Registrar along with the scheme
registered and indication the revised authorised capital.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 205 proposes to empower the Central Government to notify
the names of countries to which the provisions of the Chapter shall apply.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 206 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which the notice is to be given by the transferee company to any dissenting
shareholders that the transferee company desired to acquire his share.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 207 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the rules for determining the price for buying of equity shares from the minority shareholders.

244
Sub-clause (3) of clause 207 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the rules for determining the price for buying of equity shares from the majority shareholders.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 208 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the authority for assessment of compensation to be paid to the member or creditor by the
transferee company.
Item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 209 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the information and the manner in which every circular containing the offer shall
be accompanied with.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 219 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
qualifications of persons for registration as a registered valuer other than Chartered
Accountants, Cost and Works Accountants and company secretaries and form to apply for
licensing a registered valuer.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 219 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee for filing application to the Central Government for registration as a registered valuer.
Item (b) of sub-clause (3) of clause 219 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe rules to make the valuation.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 220 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the number of experts and their minimum qualification for appointment of such experts in the
committee of experts.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 221 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
form in which valuation report shall be submitted as well as the manner of its verification.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 221 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the maximum rate which shall be charged by the registered valuer.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 223 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the enquiry officers as well as their powers.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 224 proposes to empower the Central Government to specify
the notice period for removal of name of a company.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 224 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the format of public notice to be issued by the Registrar.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 224 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which public notice shall be published by the Registrar.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 229 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which an application is to be filed to the Tribunal.
Item (b) of sub-clause (2) of clause 230 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe particular and documents and manner of authentication as well as the requisite
fee for an application to be made to Tribunal in respect of revival and rehabilitation of sick
company.
Item (c) of  sub-clause (2) of clause 230 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the draft scheme of revival and rehabilitation.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 234 proposes to empower the Central Government to notify
the name of the professionals such as advocates, Company Secretary, Chartered Accountant,
Cost and Works Accountant to be appointed as interim administrator or company administrator.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 244 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the rules regarding the manner in which the rehabilitation and insolvency fund shall be
managed.

245
Sub-clause (5) of clause 247 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which a statement of affairs is to be filed along with the petition for
winding up before the Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 249 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which the company is to file its objection along with a statement of its
affairs on receipt of orders of the Tribunal on a petition for winding up filed by any person
other than the company.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 250 proposes to empower the Central Government to maintain
a panel of professionals consisting of their names, experience and other qualifications and
also empower to notify the category/class of professionals who can be considered for
appointment as provisional liquidator.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 250 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form in which a declaration is to be filed by the provisional liquidator or company
liquidator, disclosing conflict of interest or lack of independence in respect of his appointment,
if any,  with the Tribunal.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 256 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the fee for payment of taking copies or extracts of statements to be submitted by the company
liquidator.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 262 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner relating to the convening of the meetings, the procedure to be followed
thereat and other matters relating to conduct of business by the committee of inspection.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 263 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which a periodical reports on the progress of the winding up of the
company is to be made to the Tribunal by the Company Liquidator.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 266 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form in which the person appointed to assist company liquidator shall discloser
information relating to any conflict of interest or lack of independence in respect of his
appointment.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 268 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which the Company Liquidator shall keep proper books, minutes of
the proceedings at the meeting and other matters in relation to the company under liquidation.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 269 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which the Company Liquidator shall maintain proper and regular
books of account including accounts of all receipts and payments made by him in relation to
the company under liquidation.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 269 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the following :—
(1) Number of times the Company Liquidator shall present to the Tribunal account
of receipts and payment made to the Liquidator.
(2) Form in which receipts and payments shall be presented to the Tribunal.
(3) Form of declaration and manner of its verification.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 285 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which a declaration shall be by the Company Liquidator disclosing
any conflict of interest or lack of independence in respect of his appointment with the
company and the creditors and such obligation shall continue throughout the term of his or
its appointment.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 289 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which the Company Liquidator shall maintain regular and proper

246
books of account.  This clause also empower the Central Government to authorise any
officer, apart from members and creditors and to inspect such books of account.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 291 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner of Report on the progress of winding up in which the Company Liquidator
shall present it to creditors.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 293 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which meeting of the company shall be called for the purpose of
laying the final winding up accounts.
Item (b) of sub-clause (4) of clause 293 proposes to empower the Company Liquidator
to prescribe the manner in which Company Liquidator shall file application along with his
report to tribunal for passing an order on dissolution of company.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 297 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which a copy of an order staying the proceedings in the winding up
shall be forwarded by the company to the Registrar.
Item (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 302 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the limit on amount payable on account of all wages or salary including wages
payable for time or piece work and salary earned wholly or in part by way of commission, etc.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 318 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the circumstances, conditions, restrictions and limitations under which the company liquidator
shall exercise powers without sanction of the Tribunal.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 318 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which any creditor or contributory may file application to the Tribunal on
powers exercised by company liquidator.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 321 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the rules in accordance of which any creditor or contributory of the company may inspect
the books and papers of the company.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 323 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which a statement is to be filed duly audited by a person qualified to
act as auditor of the company, in relation to company where winding up is not concluded
within one year after its commencement.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 323 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the fee on payment of which in which any creditor or contributory of the company may
inspect the statement and receive a copy thereof or an extract therfrom.
Clause 324 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe the manner and
time in which Company Liquidator shall pay the monies received by him as Liquidator of any
Government company, into the public account of India in the Reserve Bank of India.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 325 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner and time in which the Company Liquidator shall deposit the monies received by
him in his capacity as Company Liquidator in a scheduled bank to the credit of special bank
account.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 327 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner in which the liquidator shall furnish the statement indicating therein all
sums included in payment, the nature of the sums, the names and last known addresses of
the persons entitled to participate therein, the amount to which each is entitled and the
nature of his claim thereto.
Sub clause (1) of clause 335 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the power and duties of Official Liquidator.
Item (c) to sub-clause (2) of clause 335 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the statistics, information and records relating to companies under winding up,
which the Official Liquidator may maintain.

247
Sub clause (4) of clause 336 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and manner of the report to be submitted by Official Liquidator to tribunal on any
fraud which has been committed in promotion, formation or management of the affairs of the
company.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 338 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which Official Liquidator shall call upon the creditors to prove their claim.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 338 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner in which the Official Liquidator shall prepare a list of claims of creditors.
Clause 341 proposes to empower the Central Government to notify certain companies
to comply with the provisions of Chapter XXI and such other  provisions of this Act with
regard to the business carried on by it in India as if it were a company incorporated in India.
Item (c) of sub-clause (1) of clause 342 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe particulars to be contained in the list of the directors and secretary to filed by
foreign companies.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 342 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
form in which all the alteration has to be delivered by the foreign company to the Registrar for
registration.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 343 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
form in which a copy of list of all places of business established by the company in India has
to be delivered by foreign company to the Registrar.
Clause 347 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe the fee for
registering documents with the Registrar by foreign companies.
Clause 351 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe such documents
of foreign companies which has or has not established a place of business in India for the
purpose of registration of prospectus.
Clause 352 proposes to empower the Central Government to frame rules for following:—
(a) the offer of Indian Depository Receipts;
(b) the requirement of disclosures in prospectus or letter of offer issued in
connection with Indian Depository Receipts;
(c) the manner in which the Indian Depository Receipts shall be dealt with in a
depository mode and by custodian and underwriters; and
(d) the manner of sale, transfer or transmission of Indian Depository Receipts
Sub-clause (1) of clause 357 proposes to empower the Central Government to give
directions, by notification in the Official Gazette that any of the provisions of the Bill shall
not apply to any Government Company or shall apply to any Government Company with
such exception, modification and adaptation as may be specified in the notification.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 358 proposes to empower the Central Government to establish
such number of offices and at such places as it thinks fit specifying their jurisdiction for the
purpose of registration of companies under this Act.
 Sub-clause (2) of clause 358 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
power which shall be exercisable by Director General of Registration, Registrars, Additional,
Joint, Deputy and Assistant Registrars.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 358 proposes to empower the Central Government to make
rules in regard to prescribing the terms and conditions of service, including the salaries
payable to persons appointed under this clause.

248
Sub-clause (4) of clause 358 proposes to empower the Central Government to direct
preparation of seal or seals for authentication of documents required for, or connected with,
the registration of companies.
Clause 359 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe the manner of
authentication of documents filed by company in electronic form, etc., for the purpose.
Item (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 360 proposes to empower the Central Government
to make rules of filing for various application, documents and returns, etc., in electronic form
including the manner of their authentication.
Item (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 360 proposes to empower the Central Government
to make rules of service or delivery of any document, notice or communication, etc., in the
electronic form and the manner of their authentication.
Item(c) of sub-clause (1) of clause 360 proposes to empower the Central Government
to make rules for maintenance of various applications, documents and return filed with the
Registrar in the electronic form and manner of their registration or authentication.
Item (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 360 proposes to empower the Central Government
to make rules  regarding the manner of inspection of the various documents maintained in the
electronic form.
Item (e) of sub-clause (1) of clause 360 proposes to empower the Central Government
to make rules for   payment of fees, charges or other sums payable through the electronic
form.
Item (f) of sub-clause (1) of clause 360 proposes to empower the Central Government
to make rules  and the manner in which various registry functions shall be performed by
Registrar in electronic form.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 360 to empower the Central Government to frame, by notification,
a scheme to carry out the provisions of sub-clause (1) of this clause.
Clause 362 proposes to empower the Central Government to provide value added
services through electronic form and levy fee thereon.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 364 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee and charges required to be paid on account of giving, filing, registering or recording of
any document or fact under the provisions of the Act.
Proviso to sub-clause (1) of clause 364 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the additional fee for documents to be submitted, filed, registered or recorded,
on any fact or information required under this Act.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 366 proposes to empower the Central Government to issue an
order requiring any company or companies to furnish information or statistics with regard to
its or their or its constitution or working and time or to produce records or documents in its
possession or allow inspection thereof by any officer or furnish such further information as
that Government may consider necessary.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 367 proposes to empower the Central Government to give
directions, by notification in the Official Gazette that any of the provisions of the Act shall
apply to any Nidhi or shall apply to any Nidhi with such exception, modification and adaptation
as may be specified in the notification.
Clause 369 proposes to empower the Central Government to constitute by notification
a Tribunal to be known as National Company Law Tribunal and appointment of Chairperson
and judicial and technical member thereof.
Clause 371 proposes to empower the Central Government to constitute by notification
an Appellate Tribunal to be known as National Company Law Appellate Tribunal and
appointment of Chairperson and judicial and technical member thereof.

249
Clause 375 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe for salary,
allowances and other terms of conditions payable to the Members of the Tribunal/Appellate
Tribunal.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 379 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
for salary, allowances and other terms and conditions payable to the officers/employees of
the Tribunal/Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 380 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe the number of
benches of NCLT.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 382 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the form and fee for filing an appeal against the order of the Tribunal.
Item (h) of sub-clause (2) of clause 385 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe matters other than those specified in this sub-clause, in respect of which the
Tribunal and Appellate Tribunal shall be the same powers as are vested in a civil court.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 396 proposes to empower the Central Government to specify
the number of special courts to be established for the purpose of providing speedy trial of
offences under this Act.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 413 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the manner of imposing penalty by an officer not below the rank of Registrar.
Sub-clause (6) of clause 413 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
form, manner and fee for filing an appeal by the aggrieved person against the order made by
adjudicating officer.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 414 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
manner for obtaining the status of a dormant company for such companies which are registered
under this Act for a future project or to hold an asset or intellectual property and has no
significant accounting transaction or is an inactive company.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 414 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
form of certificate to be issued by Registrar allowing the status of a dormant company.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 414 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
form of register of dormant companies to be maintained by the Registrar.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 414 proposes to empower the  Central Government to prescribe
minimum number of directors, documents to be filed and annual fee to be paid to Registrar by
a dormant company to retain its dormant status and also empower the Central Government to
prescribe form of application, documents and fee to be paid to Registrar for becoming an
active company.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 418 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
fee for application to be made to the Central Government or to the Tribunal in respect of any
approval, sanction, consent, confirmation or recognition and also in respect of any direction
or exemption to be given or granted by the Government or the Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 422 proposes to empower the Central Government to prescribe
maximum number of persons for forming association or partnership unless it is registered
under this Act or is formed under any other law for the time being in force.
Proviso 4 to sub-clause (2) of clause 424 proposes to empower the Central Government
to prescribe the manner in which provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare fund or other
fund for the benefit of the officer and other employees of the Company Law Board, who has
become officers and employees of the Central Government shall be dealt with by it consequent
upon dissolution of Company Law Board.

LOK SABHA
(Shri Prem Chand Gupta, Minister of Corporate Affairs)
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to companies.
————
————
GMGIPMRND—3398LS—17.10.2008.