1
THE TYRE CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED (DISINVESTMENT
OF OWNERSHIP) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for disinvestment of Government's equity in the Tyre Corporation of India
Limited and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Inchek Tyres Limited and the National Rubber Manufacturers Limited,
engaged in the manufacture, production and distribution of articles mentioned in the First
Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, namely, tyres, tubes
and other rubber goods, were nationalised under the Inchek Tyres Limited and National
Rubber Manufacturers Limited (Nationalisation) Act, 1984 and transferred to, and vested in,
the Tyre Corporation of  India Limited, Calcutta from the 5th day of March, 1984;
A
ND WHEREAS for the purpose of securing optimum utilisation of the available facilities
for the manufacture, production and distribution of tyres, tubes and other rubber goods,
investment of large amount is necessary;
A
ND WHEREAS  it is expedient to disinvest the Government's equity in the Tyre
Corporation of India Limited, Kolkata to enable the private sector to have investment made
to ensure that the interest of general public are served by the continuance of the manufacture,
production and distribution of the aforesaid articles which are essential to the needs of the
economy of the country;
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Tyre Corporation of India Limited (Disinvestment of
Ownership) Act, 2007.
Short title.
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA
BILL NO.  57-C OF 2007
ON  23.11.2007

2
2. Where the Central Government, on the recommendations of the Board for
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises, is of the opinion that disinvestment is to be
made in the Tyre Corporation of  India Limited (hereinafter referred to as the company), it may
pass an order providing for transfer, exchange or relinquishment of shares in the company to
any person on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon.
3. (1) For the transfer to, and vesting in, any person, the shares of the company, there
shall be given to the Central Government by such person or in case such person is a company,
by such company, such consideration, having regard to the optimum valuation of land,
assets and liabilities of the company in accordance with a valuation method as specified by
the Central Government.
(2) The manner of payment of consideration for transfer of shares of the company to
the transferee shall be such as may be agreed upon between the transferor, the company and
the transferee, the person or the company, as the case may be.
4. The Central Government may, in its order made under section 2, specify that
disinvestment of shares shall be effected by one or more of the following methods as may be
specified in such order, namely:—
(a) by making a public offer or preferential allotment or private placement in
accordance with such procedure as applicable in case of any other Government
company;
(b) by directing the company to make further issue of equity capital to the
members of the public or preferential allotment or private placement, as the case may
be, in accordance with such procedure as applicable in case of the Government company.
5. ( 1) Every officer or other employee of the company, except the Chairman and
Directors, serving in its employment immediately before the disinvestment of the company
under this Act, shall continue in office or service after such disinvestment, on same terms
and conditions as would have been admissible to him if there had been no such disinvestment
and shall continue to do so until the expiry of the period of three years from the date of
disinvestments.
(2)Where an officer or other employee of the company opts under sub-section (1) not
to be in the employment or service of the company, such officer or other employee shall be
deemed to have resigned.
6.  The provisions of  this  Act shall  have effect notwith standing anything inconsistent
therewith contained in the Inchek Tyres Limited and National Rubber Manufactures Limited
(Nationalisation) Act, 1984 or any other law for the time being in force.
Disinvestment
in the
company.
Provision in
respect of
officers and
other
employees of
the company.
Manner of
disinvestment.
Payment of
consideration
for
disinvestment
in the
company.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
17 of 1984.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for disinvestment of Government's equity in the Tyre Corporation of India Limited
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(As Passed by Lok Sabha)
MGIPMRND—4775LS(S-5)—23-11-2007.