Bill No. 58 of IUf 
·THE SUPPRESSION OF IMMORAL TRAFFIC IN 
WOMEN AND GIRLS BILL, 1954 
(A~ INTRODUCED IN THE LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to prov:.de in pursuance of the International Convention signed at 
New York on the 9th day oj May, 1950 fOT the suppression of 
immoral traffic in women and girls. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic 
,nf India as follows:-
1. Short title, extent and commencement.-(l) This Act may be 
called the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 
~~~ S 
~2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) This section shall come into force at once; and the remaining 
-provisions of this Act shall come into force on such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint. 10 
2. Deflnltlons.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,-
(a) "brothel" includes any house, room, or place or any 
portion of any house, room or place, which is used for purposes 
.of prostitution for the gain of another person or for the mutual IS 
:gainof two or more prostitutes; 
(b) "girl" means a female who has not completed the age 
<of eighteen years; 
(c) "magistrate" means a District Magistrate, a Sub-Divi-
'Sional Magistrate, a Presidency Magistrate, or a Magistrate of 20 
the first class specially empowered by the State Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette. to exercise jurisdiction 
under this Act; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed 'by rules made under 
this Act; 2S 

10 
2 
(e) "prostitute" means a female who offers her body for 
promiscuous sexual intercourse for hire, whether in money or-' 
in kind; 
(f) "prostitutio'n" means the act of a female offering her 
body for promiscuous sexual intercourse for hire, whether in 
money or in kind; 
(g) "protective home" means an institution, by whatever 
name· called, in which women And girls may be kept in pursuance 
of this Act and includei-
(i) a shelter where women undertrials may be kept in' 
pursuance of this Act; and 
(ii) a corrective institution in which women and girls 
rescued and detained under this Act may be imparted such 
training and instruction and subjected to such -disciplinary 
and moral influences as are likely to conduce to their 
reformation and the prevention of offences under this Act; 
(h) "public place" means any place intended for use by, or 
accessible to, the public and includes any public conveyance; 
(i) "special police officer" means a police officer appointed 
by or on behalf of the State Government to be in charge of police 
duties within a specified area for the purpose of this Act; . 
(j) "woman" means a female who has completed the' age of 
eighteen years. 
3. Punishment for keeplng a brothel or allowblg premiles to be-
25 used as a brothel.-(l) Any person who keeps or manages, or acts or 
assists in the keeping or management of, a brothel shall be punish-
able on first conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not 
less than one year and not more than three years and also with fine 
which may extend to two thousand rupees and in the event of a 
30 second or subsequent conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term of not less than two years and not more than five years and 
also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, 
(2) Any person who-
(a) .being the tenant, lessee; occupier or person in charge of 
3~ any premises, uses, or knowingly allows any other person to. 
~ use, such premises or any part thereof as a brothel, or 
(b) being the own~r, lessor or landlord of any premises or' 
the agent of such owner, lessor or landlord, lets the same or any 
part thereof with the knowledge that the same or any part 
40 thereof is intended to be usee as a brothel, or is wilfully a part~· 
to the use of such premises or any part thereof as a brothel, 
shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to 
two thousand rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent 
conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend 
4,5 to five years and also with fine. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time 'being in forc~, on conviction of any person referred to in 
clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2) of any offence under that . 

3 
sub-section in respect of any premises, any lease or agreement under 
which such premises have been leased out or are held or occupied at 
the time of the commission of the offence, shall become void and 
inoperative with effect from the date of the said conviction . 
... Punishment forUvtDg on the earnlnp of prostltutlon.-(l) Any , 
person ovf!t the age oi-eighteen years who knowingly lives, wholly 
or in part, on the earnings of the prostitution of a woman or girl 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 10 
(2) Where any person is proved-
(a) to be living with, or to be habitually in the company 
of. a prostitute; or 
. (b) to have exercised control, direction or influence over the 
movements of a prostitute in such a manner as to show that I, 
such person is aiding, abetting or compelling her prostitution; or 
(e) to be acting as a tout or pimp on behalf of a prostitute, 
it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that such person 
is knowingly living on the earnings of prostitution of another person 
within the meaning of su'b-section (1): 20 
Provided that no such presumption shall be drawn in the case of . 
the mother of a prostitute, if the mother is infirm or over the age of 
sixty years, or in the case of a son or daughter of a prostitute, if 
the son fir daughter is below the age of twenty-one years. 
5. Procuring, inducing or importiD.&' woman or girl lor the sake 3, 
of prosUtutlon.-(l) Any person who-
(a) procures or attempts to procure a woman or girl, whether 
with or without her consent, for the purpose of prostitution; or 
(b) induces a woman or girl to go from any place, with the 
intent that she may for the purpose of prostitution become the 30 
inmate of, or frequent, a brothel; or 
(c) takes or attempts to take a woman or girl, or causes a 
woman or girl to be taken, from one place to another with a 
view to her carrying on, or being brought up to carry on, the 
business of prostitution; or 3' 
(d) causes or induces a woman or girl to can:y on the busi-
ness of prostitution; 
shall be punishable on first conviction with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term of not less than one year and "not more than two years 
aJ'ld also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and if 40 
a male person, may in addition be liable to whipping. 
(2) In the event of a second or subsequent conviction of an offence 
under this section a person shall be punishable with rigorous im-
prisonment for a term of not less than two years and not more than 
five years and also with fine which may extend to two thousand 4S 
rupees. 

4: 
(3) An offence under th!s section shall be triable-
(a) in the place from which a woman or girl is px:ocured, 
induced to go, taken or caused to be taken. or . from whIch an 
attempt to procure or take such woman or gl~l IS made; or 
(b) in the place to which she may have gone asa result of 
the inducement or to which she is taken-or caused ~ be taken 
or an attempt to take her is made. 
6. Detalnlnr a woman or &1rl In premlses where proetdtutloll Is 
carried 011.-( 1) Any person who detains any woman or girl, whether 
10 with or without her consent,-
(a) in any brothel, or 
(b) in or upon any premises with intent that she may have 
sexual intercourse with any man other than her lawful husband, 
shall be punishable on first conviction with rigorous imprisonment 
IS for a term of not less than one year and not more than two years 
and alSo with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and 
if a male person, shall in addition be liable to whipping. 
(2) On a second or su'bsequent conviction for an offence under this. 
section a person shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for 
ao a term of not less than two years and not more than five years 
and also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. 
(3) A person shall be presumed to detain a woman or girl in a 
brothel or in or upon any premises for the purpose of sexual inter-
course with a man other than her lawful husband, if such person, 
25 with intent to compel or induce her to remain there,-
(a) Withholds from her any jewellery, wearing apparel, 
money or other property belonging to her, or 
(b) threatens her with legal proceedings if she takes away 
with her any jewellery, wearing apparel, money or other pro-
30 perty lent or supplied to her by or by the direction of suck 
person. 
(4) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no suit, prosecu-
tion or other legal proceeding shall lie against such woman or girl 
at the instance of the person by whom she has been detained, for 
35 the recovery of any jewellery, wearing apparel or other property 
alleged to have been lent or supplied to or for such woman or girl 
or to have been pledged by such woman or girl or for the recovery 
of any money alleged to be payable by such woman or girl. 
'7. Prostitution In or In the vJcInlty of public places.-(l) Whoever 
40 carries on prostitution in any premises which are within a distance 
of two hundred yards of any place of public religious worship, edu-
cational institution, hostel, hospital, nursing home dr such other 
public plac~ of any kind as may be notified in this behalf by the 
Commissioner of Police or District Magistrate in the manner prescrib-
4• ed, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
.1 extend to three months. 

5 
(2) Any person who-
(a) being the keeper of any public place knowingly permits 
prostitutes for purposes of their trade to resort to or remain in 
such place; or 
(b) being the tenant, lessee, occq,pier or person in charge of , 
any premises referred to in sub-section (1) knowingly permits 
the same or any part thereof to be used for prostitution; or 
(c) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any premises 
referred ,to in sub-section (1), or the agent of such owner, lessor 
or landlord, lets the same or any part thereof with the knowledge 10 
that the same or any part thereof may be used for prostitution, 
or is wilfully a party to such use, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees, or with both. I, 
(3) On a subsequent conviction of an offence under this section 
a person shall be punishable with imprisonmeDt for a term which 
may extend to six months and also with fine which may extend to 
two hundred rupees. 
8. Seduelng or soUettlng for purpose of prostltutioD_Whoever, 20 
in any public place or within sight of, and in such manner as to be 
seen or heard from any public place, whether from' within any 
building or house or not-
(a) by words, gestllres, wilful exposure of her person (whe-
ther by sitting by a window or on the balcony of a building 
or house or in any other way), or otherwise tempts or endea- a, 
yours to tempt, Or attracts or endeavours to attract the attention 
of, any person for the purpose of prostitution; or 
(b) solicits or molests any person, or loiters or acts in such 
manner as to cause obstruction or aonoyance to persons residing 30 
nearby or passing by such public place or to offend against pub-
lic decency, for the purpose of prostitution, 
shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fiRe which may extend 
to five hundred rupees, or with both, and in the event of a second or 3' 
subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to dne year, and also with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees. • 
9. SedUftton of a girl in eustody.-(l) Any person wh,o having 
the custody, charge or care of any woman or girl, causes or aids or 40 
abets the seduction for prostitution of that woman or girl shall be 
punishable on first conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term of not less than one year and not more than three years, and also 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and, if a male 
person, may in addition be liable to whipping. 45 
(2) In the event of a" second or subsequent ~onviction of aD 
offence under this section a person shall be pUDlShable with im-
prisonment which may extend to five years and also with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees. 

6 
10. Probation of good conduct and detention -In protective home.-
'(1) (a) A person convicted for the first time of any offence under 
sub-section (2) of section 3, or under section 4, section 5, section 7 .. 
or section 8 may, having regard to his age, character, antecedents 
oS and ,the circumstances in which the offence was committed, be re-
leased by the court before which he is convicted -on probation of 
good conduct in the manner provided' in' sub-section (1) of ssction 
562 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, '1898 (Act V of 1898): 
(b) A person convicted for the first time of any offence under 
10 section 7 or section 8 may; having regard to his age, character, ante-
cedents and the circumstances in which the offence was committed, 
alsO be released with admonition in the manner provided for in sub-
section (1A) of section 562 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 
(Act V of 1898). 
I, (c) The provisions of sub-section (2), sub-section (3) and sub-
section (4) of section 562 and sectIon 563 and sectlon 564 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) shall apply to cases 
referred to in clause (a) and clause (b). 
(2) A court convicting a woman or girl of any offence under 
20 section 7 or section 8 may, when it thinks fit, having regard to the 
age, character, ,antecedents of the woman or girl and the circum-
stances in which the offence -was committed, pass in lieu of' the 
sentence of -imprisonment or fine, a sentence of detention in a pro-
tective home for a period of not less than two years and not more 
2, tllan five years. 
-(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) or any other law for the time being 
in force, no_ person convicted under sub-section (1)' of section 3 or 
under section 6 or section 9 sh,all be released on probation or with 
30 admonition. 
11. NoWieatlon of address of pPeriously convicted oflenders.-(1) 
When any person having been convicted-
(a) by a court in India of an offence punishable under this 
Act or pWlishable under section 363, section 365, section 366, 
35 section 366A, section 366B, section 367, section 368, section 370. 
section 371, section 372 or section 373 {/f the Indian Penal Code 
(Act XLV of 1860) with imprisonment for a term of two years 
or upwards; or 
• (b) 'by a court or tribunal in any other country of an offence 
",0 which would, if committed in India, have been punishable 
under this Act or under any of the aforesaid sections with like 
imprisenment for a like term, 
is within a period of five years after release from prison, again con-
victed of any offence punishable under this Act or under any of 
45' those sections with imprisonment for a term of two years or up-
wards by a court, such court may, if it thinks fit, at th'e time of 
'Passing the sentence of imprisonment 01\ such person, also order 
that his residence, and any change of, or absence from, such resi-
dence, after release be notified according to rules made under sec-
so tion 20 for a period not exceeding five years from the date of ex-
piration of that sentenj::e. . 

7 
(2) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such 
IOrder shall become void. 
(3) An order under this section may also ,be made by an Appellate 
.court or by the High Court when exercising its powers o~ revision. 
(4) Any person charged with a breach of any rule referred to in , 
;sub":section (1) may be tried by a Magistrate of competent jurisdiction 
'in the district in which the place last notified as his residence is 
:situated. 
12., Security' tor gpod beharious from habituaJ' offtmders.-(l) ':' 
-(a) When a court convicting a person of an offence under this Act Ie 
'finds that he has been habitually committing,: or attempting to 
.-commit, or abetting the commission of, that offence or any other 
<offence under this Act and the court is of opinion that it is neces-
:sary or desirable to require that person to execute a 'bond for . 'good .; 
behaviour, such court may at the time of passing the st!ntence on I, 
-the person order him to execute a bond fOJ a sum proportionate to 
his means with or without sureties for his good behaviour during 
such period not exceeding three years as it thinks fit. 
(b) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise the bond 
'so executed shall become void. ao 
(c) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate 
Court or by the High Court when exercising its powers of revision. 
(2) When a Magistrate receives infdrmation from the police or 
o{)therwise that any person within the local limits of his jurisdiction 
habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the comission 2, 
,of, any offence under this Act, such Magistrate may require such 
person to show cause ·why he should not be ordered to execute a 
bond with sureties for his good behaviour for such period not ex-
·ceeding three years as the Magistrate thinks fit and thereupon the 
provisions of sections. 112 to 126 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 30 
1898 (Act V of 1898) shall apply in such a case. 
13. Speclal pollee ofllcer and advisory body.-(l) There shall be 
for each area to be specified by the State Government in this behalf a 
5pecial police officer appointed by or on behalf of that Government 
for dealing with offences under this Act in that area. 3' 
(2) The special police officer shall not be below the rank of-
(a) an Assistant Comm.issioner of Police in the presidency 
towns of Madras and Calcutta; 
(b) a Superintendent of Polis;:e in the presidency town of 
Bombay; and 40 
(c) a Deputy ~~perintendent of Police elsewhere. 
(3) For the emcient discharge of his functions in relation to 
'offences under this Act the special police officer of an area may 
:~ssoci~te with him a non-o'fficial adviSOry body not exceeding five 
In numb~r of leading social welfare workers of that area to advise 45 
him on questions of general importance regarding the working of 
ihis Act. 

,. 
8 
It. Oftenee5 to be eogmuble.-Notwithstanding anything con-
tained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) any 
dence punishable under this Act shall 'be deemed to be a cognizable 
offence within the meaning of that Code: 
, Provided that, notwithstanding any'thing contained in that Code,-
(i) arrest without warren~ may be made only by the special 
police officer or under his direction or guidance, or subject to 
his prior approval; 
(ii) when the special police officer requires any off\cer sub-
10 ordinate to him to arrest withO\,lt warrant otherwise than in his 
presence any person _ for an offence -under this Act, he shall give 
that subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying the 
person to be arrested and the offence for which the arrest is 
being mad~; and the latter officer before arresting the person 
I, shall inform him of the substance of the order and, on being. 
required by such person, show him the order; 
(iii) any police officer specially authorised by the special. 
police officer may, if he has reason to believe that on account 
of delay involved. in obtaining the order of the special police 
20 officer, any valuable evidence relating to any offence under this 
Act is likely to be destroyed or concealed, or the person who 
has committed or is suspected to have committed the offence is· 
likely to escape, or if the name and !lddress of such a person is 
unknown or there is reason to suspect that a false name or ad-
2, dress has 'been given, arrest the person concerned without such 
order, but in such a case he shall report, as soon as may be, to 
the special police officer the arrest and the circumstances in. 
which the arrest was made. 
15. Search without warrant.-(l) Notwithstanding anything con--
3D tained in any other law for the time 'being in force, the special 
police officer may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether an 
off~nce punishable under this Act has been or is being committed. 
enter and search without a warrant any premises in which he has. 
reason to believe that any woman or girl is living in respect of 
35 whom an offence under this Act has been or is likely to be, com-
mitted or is attempted to be committed. 
(2) Before making a search under sub-section (1) the special 
police officer shaH call upon two or more respectable inhabitants--
(at least one of whom shall be a woman) of the locality in which the 
<to place to be searched is situate, to attend and witness the search,. 
and may issue an order in writing to them or any of them so to do. 
(3) AQY person who, without reasonable cause, refuses or neg-· 
lects, to attend and 'Witn~s a search under this section, when called 
upon to do so by an order in ~riting delivered or tender~d to him. 
<IS shall be deemed to have committed an offence under sectlon 187 of' 
.the Indian Penal Code (Act XL V of 1860), 
(4) The special police officer entering any premises under sub-
se~ti?n (1) s~al1 be entitled to n:move therefrom any girl, if in his 
~pml~n she IS under the age of eighteen years and is carrying on or 
SO 15 bemg made to. carry on, or attempts are -being made to make her:' 
carry on, prostitution. 

9 
(5) The special police officer, after removing the girl under sub- • 
section (4) shall. forthwith produce her before the appropriate 
Magistrate. 
(6) The special police officer and other persons taking part in, 
or attending, and witnessing a search or taking any lawful action 5 
in connection with the search shall not be liable to any civil or 
criminal proceedings against them on any ground. 
16. Rescue of glrl.-(l) Where a Magistrate has reason to believe, 
from information received from the police or otherwise, that a girl 
apparently under the age of. eighteen years, is living, or is carrymg 10' 
on, or is being made to carryon prostitution, in a brothel, or any 
other r1ace, he may direct the special police officer to eilter such 
brothe or other place and to remove therefrom such girl and prC).. 
duce her before him. 
(2) The special police officer after removing the girl shall forth- 15 
with produce her before the Magistrate iSSuing the order. 
17. Intermediate custody of girls removed under section 15 or res-
eued under sedlion 16.-(1) When the special police officer removing 
a gi~l under sub-se~tion (4) ~f section 15 or rescu~ng a g!rl under sub-
secbon (1) (jf section 16, falls to produce her munediately before 20 
the Magistrate as required by suD-section (5) of section 15 or sub-
section (2) of sect1\)n 16, he shall forthwith produce her before the 
nearest Magistrate of any class, who shall pass such orders as h_ 
deems proper for her safe custody until she is produced before the 
appropriate Magistrate. 2S 
(2) When the girl is produced before the appropriate Magistrate 
he shall cause an enquiry to be made concerning her age, and, if 
satisfied that the girl is under the age of eighteen years, may, sub-
ject to the provisions of the next sub-section, make an order that 
such girl be detained until she attains the age of twenty-one years 30 
or for such shorter period as may be specified in the order, in a 
protective home or such other custody as he: for reasons to be record-
ed in writing, shall consider suitable: 
Provided that such custody shall not be that of a person, or body 
of persons, of a religious persuasion different from that of the girl. 3' 
(3) In discharging his functions under sub-section (2), a Magis-
trate may summon a panel of five jurors, three of whom shall be 
women, to assist him; and may for this purpose keep a list of 
experienced social welfare workers, particularly lady workers, in the 
fleld of suppression of immoral traffic in women and girls. 40 
(4) If the Magistrate agrees with the opinion of the majority of 
the jurors, there shall be no appeal against his order, but if he differs 
from their opinion. he shall refer the matter to the Sessions JudRe 
whose decision shall be finaJ. -
18. Closure of brothels and eviction of offenders from the pre- 45 
mlses.-( 1) A Magistrate may. on receipt of information from the 
police or otherwise, that any house, room, place or any portion then--
of within a distance of two hundred yards of any public place re-
ferred to in sub-section. (1) of sect:on 7, is being run or used as a 

:5 
10 
brothel b'Y any person, or is being used by prostitutes for -carrying 
on their trade, issue notice on the 'owner; lessor or landlord of such 
house, room, place or portion or the agent of the owner, leSSC'r or 
landlord or on tl)e tenant, lessee, occupier of, or any other person 
in charge of such house, room, place, o~ portion, to show cause with-
in seven days of the receipt, of the notice w.hy the same should not 
be attached for improper user thereof; and if, after hearing the 
pe~son concerned, the Magistrate is satisfied that the house,. room, 
place, or portion is being USed as a brothel or for carrymg on 
:IO prostit':ltion, then the Magistrate may pass orders- . 
,15 
(a) directing eviction of the occupier within seven days of 
the passing of the order from the house, room, place, or portion; 
(b) directing that before letting it out during the period of 
one year immediately after the passing of the order, the pwner, 
lessor or landlord or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord 
shall obtain the previous approval of the Magistrate: --
Provided that, if the Magistrate finds that the owner, lessor or 
landlord as well as the ag~nt of the own~t, 'lessor ·or landlord, was 
innocen.t of the improper user of the house, rooJYl; place or'pctrtion, 
~o he may cause the same to be restored to the owner, lessor or land-
lord, or the agent of the owner, lessor or landlord, with a directi<?'l 
that the house, room, place or portion shall not be leased out, :6r 
otherwise given possession of, to or for the benefit of the' person 
who was allowing the improper user therein. 
:25 (2) A court convicting a person of any offence under section 3 
or section 7 may pass orders under sub-section (1). without further 
notice to such person to show cause as required in that sub-section. 
(3) Orders passed . by the Magistrate or court under sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2) shall not be subject to appeal and shall not be 
'lO stayed or set aside by the order of any court, civil or criminal, and 
the· said orders shall cea,se to have validity after the expiry of one 
year. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, when a Magistrate passes an oqier under sub-
,.35 section (1), or a ~ourt passes an order under sub-section (2), any 
l~ase or agreement under which the house, room, place or portion 
is occupied at the time shall become void and inoperative; 
(5) When an owner, lessor or landlord, or the agent -of such owner, 
lessor Or landlord to whom any house, room, place or any portion 
40 thereof has been restored under the proviso to sub-section (1) fails 
to comply with the .direction given under that proviso, he shall .be 
deem.ed to have committed an offence under clause (b) of sub-sec-
tion (2) of section 3 or clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 7, as the 
. case may 'be, and punished accordingly . 
... , 19. Protective homes.-(1) ,The :StatEl Government may in its dis-
cretion establish as many protective homes under this Act as it 
thinks fit and such homes, when established, shall be maintained in 
such manner as may be prescribed. ' 
(2) No person or authority either than theoState Government shall, 
:50 after the commencement of this Act, establish or maintain any 

II 
protective home except under and in accordance with the conq.itions 
of, a licence issued under this section by the State GovernmeJl.t. 
(3) The State Government may, on application made to it in this 
behalf by a person or authority, issue~o. such person or authority a 
licence in the prescribed form for establishing and maintaining or as , 
the case may be, for maintaining a protective home and a licence 
so issued may coatain such conqitions as the State Government may 
think fit to impose ·in accordance with the rules 'made "Under this 
Act: 
Provided that a person or authority maintaining any protective 10 
home at the commencement of' this Act shall be allowed a period 
of six months from such commencement to make an application for 
such licence. 
(4) • Before issuing a licence the State Government may require 
'Such officer or authority. as it may appoint for this purpose, to make IS 
a full and complete investigation in respect of applications received in 
this behalf and report to it the result of such investigation and in 
making any such investigation the officer or authority shall follow 
'Such procedure as may be prescribed. 
(5) A licence, unless sooner revoked, shall temain in force for 20 
:such period as may be specified in the licence and may, ,on applica-
tion made in this behalf at least thirty days before the date of its 
-expiration, be renewed for a like period. 
(6) Every application for the issue or renewal of a licence shall 
be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed. 2S 
(7) No licence issued or renewed under this Act shall be transfer-
.able. 
(8) Where any person or authority to whom a licence has been 
granted under this Act or any agent or servant of such person or 
authority commits a breach of any of the conditions thereof or any 30 
.of the provisions of this Act or of any of the rules made under this 
Act, or where the State Government is not satisfied with the condi-
tion, management or superintendence of any protective home. the 
State Government may, without prejudice to any other penalty which 
may have been incurred under this Act. tor reasons to be recorded 35 
revoke the licence by order in writing: 
Provided that no such order shall be made until an opportunity is 
given to the holder of the licence to show cause why the licence 
'shall not be revoked. 
(9) Where a licence in respect of a protective home has been 40 
revoked under the foregoing sub-section such protective home shall 
'cease to function from 'the date of such revocation. 
(10) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the 
. State Government may also vary or amend any licence issued or 
renewed under this Act. 45 
(11) Whoever establishes or maintains ~ protective home except 
in accordance with the provisiollS of this section, shall be punishable 
in the case of a first offence with fine ·which may extend to twa 
hundred rupees and in the case of second or subsequent offence with 

#. 
12 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
II. Trials.-No court; inferior to that of a Magistrate as defined 
iD clause (c) of section 2 shall try any offence under section 3, sec-
, tion 4, section 5, section 6, section 7 or section 8. 
n. Power to make rules.-(l) 'll1e State Government may, by 
notificatidn in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the-
10 foregoing powers, such rules may provide for-
J, 
20 
(a) the notification of any place as a public placej 
. (b) the placing in custody of womell and girls released under 
sub--section (1) of section 10 or for whose safe custody orders 
have been passed under sub-section (1) of section 17 and their 
maintenancej 
(c) the detention of women and girts under sub-section (2) 
of section 10 and iub-section (2) of section 17, and their main-
tenancej 
(d) the carrying out of the provisions of section 11 regardini 
notification of residence or change of or absence from residencp.-
by released convictsj 
(e) the delegation of authority to appoint the special police-
officer under sub-section (1) of section 13; 
(f) the carrying iIito effect of tlie provisions of section 18; 
2, (g) (i) the establishment, maintenance, management and 
" 
superintendence of protective homes and the appointment, powers 
and duties of perso.ns employed in such homes; 
(ii) the form in which an application for a licence may be· 
made and the particulars to be contained in such application; 
(iii) the procedure for the issue or renewal of a licence,. 
the time within which such licence shall be issued or renewed 
and the procedure to be followed in making a full and complete-
investigation in respect of an application for a licence; . 
(iv) the form of a licence and the conditions to be $pecified' 
therein; 
(v) the fees to be levied in respect of a licence; 
(vi) the manner in which the accounts of a protective home-
shall be maintained and audited: . 
(vii) the maintenance of registers and statements by a: 
licensee and the form of such registers and statements; 
(viii) the care, treatment, maintenance, training, instruc-
tion, coqtrol and disciwine of the inmates of protective homes; 
(i,r) the visits to and communication with such inmates; 

13 
. (x) the temporary detention of women and girls sentenced 
to detention in protective homes until arrangements are made 
for sending them to such homes; 
(.xi) the transfer of a woman or girl from one protective 
home to another; . , 
(xU) the transfer from a protective home to a prison of a 
woman or girl found to be incorrigible or exercising bad influence 
upon other inmates of the protective home and the period of 
her detention in such prison; 
. (xiii) the. g,ansfer to a protectiVe home of women or girls 10 
sentenced unaer section 7 or section 8 and the period of their 
detention in such home; 
(xiv) the discharge of inmates from a protective home either 
absolutely or subiect to conditions, and their arrest in the event 
of breach of such conditions; I, 
(xv) the grant of permission to inmates to absent themselves 
for short periods; 
(xvi) the inspection of protective homes and other institu-
tions in which women and girls may be kept. detained and 
maintained. 20 
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed .. 
(3) In making any rule under clause (e) or clause (h) of sub-
section (2) the State Government may provide that a breach thereof 
·shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred 
Tupees. 2, 
22. Aet not to be In derogation of certain other Aets.-Nothing 
in this Act shall be construed to be in derogation of the provisions 
of the Reformatory Schools Act, 1897 (VIII of 1897), or any State 
Act enacted in modi1ication of the said Act or otherwise, relating 
to juvenile offenders. 30 
23. Repeal and saviDgs.-(l) As from the date of the coming into 
force in any State of the provisions other than section 1 of this Act. 
any law in force in that State corresponding to the said provisions 
shall stand repealed. 
(2) Notwi~hstanding the repeal by this Act of any corresponding 3' 
law anything done or any action taken (including any direction 
given, any re~i~ter, rule or order made, any restrictiori imposed) 
under the provisions of such corresponding law shall in so far as such 
thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this 40 
Act as if the said provisions were in force when such thing was 
<lone or such action was taken and shall continue in force accordingly 
until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this 
Act. 

14 
STATEMENT. OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In 1950 the Government of India ratified an international con-
vention for the suppression of traffic in persons and of the exploitation 
of the prostitution of others. Under article 23 of the Constitution, 
traffic in human beings is prohibited and any contravention of the 
prohibition is an offence punishable by law. Under article 35, such a 
law has to be passed by Parliament, as soon as may be, after the com-
mencement of the Constitution. 
2. Legislation on the subject of suppression of immoral traffic 
does exist in a few States but the laws are neither uniform nor do 
they go far enough. In the remaining States there is no law OD 
the subject at all. 
a. In the circumstances, it is necessary and desirable that a Cen-
trallaw should be passed which will not only secure uniformity but 
also would be sufficiently deterrent for the purpose. Hence the pre-
sent Bill. The Bill is generally on the usual lines with penalties 
sufficiently deterrent for the purpose; lsut a special feature of the 
Bill is that it provides that no person or authority other than the 
State Governments shall establish or maintain any protective home 
except under a licence issueil by the State Governments. This will 
check the establishment of homes which are really dens for prosti-
tution~ 
K. N. KATJU . 
• NEW DELHI; 
The 22nd October, 1954. 

IS 
FINANCIALMEMORANDU.M 
Clause 13 of the Bill contemplates the appdintment by the State-
Governments of special police officers of the rank of Deputy Superin-
tendent of Police for dealing with the offences under the Billj some 
staff may be required for the special police officers. Clause 19 of th~ 
Bill empowers a State Government to establish in its dwcretidn as 
many protective homes within the State as it thinks fit for the 
reception, maintenance and training of women and girls rescued 
from brothels. As the extent and gravity of the .problems arising out 
of the evil of prostitution are likely to vary from State to State, it 
is not possible at this stage to frame an accurate estimate of the 
number of special police officers anc;~ the staff that will have to b~ 
appointed and the number of protective homes that may have to be 
established in each State. In some States, e.g., Tripura, Manipur,. 
Kutch and Andaman and Nicclbar Islands, the problem is not acute 
and there may not be anyexpenditur. e either on staff or on protective 
homes. In some other .2tates only adj~stment of the existing staff 
and designation of certain Deputy Superintendents of Police as 
"special police officers" for the purpose of this Act may be required 
and no new staff wduld have to be recruited. The provision for 
establishment of protective homes by the State Governments is 
permissive and not obligatory. To what exj;ent extra staff and pro-
tective homes under State management would be required and the 
cost involved can be properly determined only after the problems 
referred to above have been surveyed in each State. 

16 
MEMORANDUM REGARDIN"G DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The matters set out in clause 21 of the Bill on which rules may be 
-made are of an administrative kind and it is not necessary to burden 
the Bill itself with detailed provisions relating thereto. The subjects 
·()n which rules may be made relate, inter alia, to the manner in 
which women and girls may be detained and majntained in protective 
homes; the manner in which released convicts shall keep their 
changes of address notified to the proper authority; the licensing of 
protective homes and the regulation of all matters incidental thereto 
in order to ensure that protective homes are run on proper lines; the 
transfer of detained persons from one home to another and so on. 
'Clause 21(2) (a) authorises the State Governments by ·rules to 
notify any place of a kind similar to any of the publicplllces specified 
in clause 7 (1) of the Bill as a public place so as to attract the provi-
sions of that clause. It will thus be seen from an enumeration of the 
matters on which rules may be made that the rule-making power is 
:normal and is not of aR exceptional character. 

r •• 
A 
BILL 
to provide in pursuance of the International Convention signed 
at New York on the 9th day of May, 1950 for the suppres-
sion of immoral traffic in women and girls. 
- / 
(Dr. Kailas Natk Katju, 
Minister of Hom, Affairs.) 
GTl'D-·LAD-U38LS-lS-U-S4-I.7S0 