IDK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
tc 
THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLuTION) 
BILL, 1978 
,To be/As introduced in wk Sabha) 
1. Page i, line 20,-
for tr7. Disqualifications." 
read "8. Disqualifications." 
2. Page ii, line 19, against clause 32,-
for 'Contribution" read. 'Contributions" 
3. Page 10, line 17,-
Ita" re a.d lithe" -
4. Page 15, lines 7 and 8,-
..f£!: "thereinafter" ~ ''hereinafter n 
5. Page 19, against line 9, insert the marginal citation,-. 
"45 of 186(). " 
6. Page 21, line 1,-
after "Act" insert "shall" 
7. Page 22, line 24,-
after "under" insert "sub-section (1)· of" 
8. Page 24-, line 3,-
.f2!. "analyses" ~ "analysis" 
9. Page 24, line 5,-
for "of" read "or" -
10. - Page 25, line 29,-
12.! ''Pullut:i.on'' ~ ''Pollution'' 

- 2 -
11. Fage 26, line 1,-
for "ARTICLE 177" ~ "ARTICLE 117" 
12. Pf'tge 28, lines 1 and 2 from the bottom, -. 
for "provision" rc,ad "provisions" - " 
. 
13. Page 31, line 1 from the bottom,.-
for "S8.te" ~ "St8te" 
NEW DELHI; 
AJ:>ri 1 10 1278 
rnia,ltra ~O'" f900 (Sakak 

I 
'1 l' :"'!.? .'~1t 
A. IN'l'IODUCID bf LoK. Suili dlf 
BIll No. 18 0(1 ~n'. ' 
THE AIR (PREVENTIQN AND CQN:rlWLOJ' POLLUTIQN) ~, ~8 
,b'; , 
'i ARRANGEMENT 0'" CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINAItT 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extettt and coinmence~ellt. 
2. ~ftnitiops. 
I' , '"I 
CHAPTER 11 
.~. 
1 
.; . f." 
• 
~, I 
........... ,. 
. .... 
CENTRAL AND STATE BOARDS FOR THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL ot AD 
POLLUTION 
3. Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution. 
4. State Bouds for the Prev~tI9nand' Control of Water Pollution 
to be State Boards. ~r.the frevenUon ~ Control of Air Pollution. 
5. Constitution of State Boards. 
6. Central Board to exercise the powers and perform the fupc:ti9n. of 
a State Board in the Union territories. : . . . 
7. Terms and conditions of servIce of members. 
7. Disqualiftcations. 
9. Vacati. of seats by members. 
I' ~; 
10. Meetings of Board. '/ I' 
11. Constitution of com~tt.~~ 
12. Temporary association of persons wIth Board for parU~ull.r 
PtitPoses. ' . 
13. Vacancy in Board not to invalidate acts' or prOceedinga. 
14. Member.~ret8ry and oftl~er~ and other employees of state Baai'da. 
15. Delegation of powers. . '-' . 
CHAPTER III 
d 
POWERS AND }I'UNCTIONS or Bo.\aat 
1& J'uneU0III Gr' Centl'al' Board; 
17. FUnctions of State Boards. 
18. Power to give directions. 
CHAPTER- IV 
PREVENTION AND CONTROL 01' MIl POLLUTION 
19. Power to.declare. air poUutio.n control ar.,. 
20: P~wer.to. ~ve instructions for enBuriJ:lg stanflarda for emillfonfl'OID 
automobDes. .' '--- .~-

22. Persons carrying on industry, etc., not to allow emissioo of air 
pollutants in ~lnf: .t~ . ~~...., l,;,cl :~~wn by the State Board. -r,·· . 
23. FUrnishing of informatM>n to the State Board and other agenciel 
in certain cases. ,; ,': ;~,: I 
24. Power of entry and inspecfon.' :; ( I.' I 
25. Power to obtain information. 
26. P0edwe: to take St~mplthes 0f!1t~L ~r,e.~~ion, ~d ,f~ed~~, to ~,F9110W. 
In connee Ion ert:W;t u. '" ,; 
v: ~'1' f I \. , ' 
27. Reports of the result of analysis on samples taken under ieettdn '28. 
28. State Air Laboratory. ' " , j' 
29. Al)alysW. 
'1lt ' "I"",..>' , 
30. ReportS 10f analysts. 
35. Ann,u8Il report. 
36. Accounts anc\ audit. 
',t'·,\" 
I 
CHAPTER VI 
.i"r.;!",,:U • 
!q:;~:~i.\ 'I. i I'· 
: j .• ; ,~: t 
,il1 l"i:.l I). ~,~l'llbtll/ 
.~ .. .' . 
~.. t c..l!~L.i..lt"I' !It-l,nrJIJf ;;"(1 I¥', 'j! 
ClLl'IALTIES AND PROCIWUKB, .• : 
"'i:t~l~¥e to! cJinp& wi~hord~'r~ o~'di~~ti~~~!is~~d unA~~ ~:lct: 
38. Penalti~. fRr.~~~~~~ct;sf' ,,),,(":" .. , ,.' 'I;";!H "./; I,. 
39. ~a.ltv. ~tor . coiitavemioll, of ~.Dr<Wisiolll, 'tof , .~be ,¥1~', 1,1 l: ~r 1t::-I:·T-... ;Tf:r;- I,' I!'~" ~"lql..f:·' jOnt .• :-;1 >II, .11""'-•. 1'111 l. !I, . .'f"', 1 f (I "'. 
40. Offences by companies. ' I;' ,: .. :, 1 .. ," '!'.' I,.r: .' : I . 
41. Offences by Government Depadments. 
42. Protection of action taken liJ~,g~:~~ith. 
43. Cognizance of otftftM~ ~ \ II I, • " /,. '.1'1.", ; 
44. Members, oftlcers and employees of. ao.rd . ., l.be. )1mUe , ... t&. ~ 
45. Reports and returns. 
' .. 
,t, (h /': • Itl .' 
'··'1.1, 
46. Bar of jUrisdiction. 
CHAPTEIt 'VIt 1 
:t.; 
",, I,; .', ,-, lIftstI:LtAWIIotJ$ ,,: .. "'; 
" . , 
',t ~ ',; n ',"i .: ~ 
-..... 
I .1 ~ .' " 
47. Power of State Gc:J'f'tWjnteM.'td ~'~t8te ~I. " ','!~,i 
'48.1~Pecl~1 provhfdn"th"the eaS4i of 'su~ses~icm!t~f ,t~:~hir'(.~ 
~ .': . 'or i~ state Boards constituted under the' Water (l"r~tion and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. 

iii 
CLAtJlI8 
49. Dissolution of State Boards constituted under this Act. 
50. Power to amend the Schedule. 
1)1. Maintenance of register. 
52. Effeet of other laws. 
53. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
M. Power of State Government to make rules. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

BUI No. 58 of 1978 
THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the prevention, control and abatement of air poUutio-n, 
tOT the establishment, with a view to ca.rrying out the aforesaid 
purpose, of Boards for the prevention and control of air pollutiO'n, 
fOT conferring on and assigning to such Boards powers and func:· 
tions relating thereto and for matters connected therewith. 
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the 
Human Environment held in Stockholm in June, 1972, in which Inrua 
participated, to take appropriate steps for the preservation of the natural 
resources of the earth which, among other things, include the preserva-
tion of the quality of air and control of air pollution; 
AND WHBREAS it is considered necessary to implement the decisions 
aforesaid in so far as they relate to the preservation of the quality of 
air and control of air pollution; 
BE it enaC'ted by Parliament in the Twenty.ninth Year of the Republic 
JO of India as follows:-
CHAPrER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 19'78. 
I, (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification tn the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and com· 
mence. 
menlo 

Defini-
tiOOlS, 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwisE: requires,-
(a) "air pollutant" means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance 
present in the atmosphere in such concentration as may be or tend 
to be injurious to human, plant or animal life or property or environ-
~; 5 
(b) "air pollution" means the presence in the atmosphere of 
any air pollutant; 
(e) "approved appliance" means any equipment or gadget used 
for the burning 'of any combustible material and approved by the 
State Board for the purposes of this Act; 10 
(d) "approved fuel" means any fuel approved,. by the State 
Board for the purposes of this Act; 
(e) "automobile" means any vehicle powered either by internal 
combusti!on engine or by any method of generating power tv drive 
such vehicle by burning fuel; 15 
(1) ''Board'' means the Central Board or a State Board; 
(g) "Central Board" means the Central Board for the Preven-
,In I, tior:I. and: !Control of Water PollutIOn comtituted under section 3 of 
,·-·~-"'thEr Wa:t'~'r"''(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; 
... (h) 'I"hinm.ey" i~ludes any,stnlctur&"with 1m oJ>eAing or outlet ~o 
from or through which any air' pollutant may be emitted; 
A 
(i) "control equipment" mea.,ns any apparatus, device, equipment 
or system to control the quali~ and manner of emission of any air 
.' "pollutant alid includes' any: ,device ~uaed for securmg the eftfCfent 
" 
operation"of Bny industrial-'Plant; 25 
, \, . , 
';) (;) "emission" ~ns any solid or .1iquid or_ gaseous substance 
coming out of any chimney, duct or flue .or any oth,er outlet; 
• (If,) "industrial plant" means any, plant used for any industrial 
or trade PU~Poses and t'mitting any air< pollQtant into the, atroos-
,pheJ:e;" ' '.. , . 30 
(l) li~em~er~; meall:s a membe~ of the Central' Board .or·.~ '~*te 
Board. as the caSe may he, arid includes the Chairman thereof; " , 
'em) . "occui:Her", in 'relation to aqy factory ~r "'premises; means 
the person who 'ha~ I conttol over the affairs' ofthEj factdry:r or' ' "the 
premises and where the said affairs' are' entrustE!d tb a' managin~ 3S 
. 8feJU. such- ~ent shall be d~med !p, ~e the occ"pl~"qf the ,f.ctory 
'Or the premises; d -
(n) "prescribed" means' prftJC1llbed by rules made under this 
Act by the Central Government 01;, as the case may be, the State 
Government; i • 40 
'.' 
(0) "State Board" means,- . "'\., 
." 
! • I 
(i) in relation to 'astat~ in- Which the W8'ier (PreVentiODI 
8Jld, CQntrot of PQllution) A:ct. 1974.)8 in ~~rc~ allfl~. State 
Government has C911stituted· ~r ,that State a $t~~ :Qpard. for 
b of 11174, 
6 of 1974. 

8 of 1974 
6 of 197. 
6 of 1974, 
5 
. ~ I: the JilJ.leveMion .and Control of.,Water PollutiOliunder 'seetioa 4 
of that Act, the said State Board; and 
(ii) ini'elation to any other State, the State Board for the 
Pr-eventionahd: Control of Air Pollution: constituted by the 
State Government under section 5 of -this Act. 
CHAPTER II . . ... 
CBNTRAL AND STATE ~ F(i)R THE PUVEN'HON AND CONTROL OF Ala 
,,'Pou.,UTIOZ;, 'f 
, . 
3. The Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Water pollu-
lOtion, constituted : unJI~~ e;ec~i(m 3' of the Water (prevention and Control 
of PoUutiOlJ) ACt, 1&74, shaD without prejudice tQ the exertise and 
, I, }, !, J, ", " , 
perfonnance of its powers and functions under that Ad,' exercise ~be 
powers and perform the functions of the Central Board for tile Preven-
, tion 'ad Control of Air PollutiOfl under, ,this Act,- (. 
• : h • .I.., '-)1, 
15 4. In _y State. in w:hkh the Water (Prevention and Con"ol of 
Pollution) :,.&c1, 1974, is in .force and the Stat~ Gowernment has consti-
tuted for that State ~ State' Board" for' the ireventiOn aJld Control of 
Water PoUution under section 4 of that Act, such State Board shall be 
. deemed to be the State Board for the Prevention and Control of Air 
20 Pollution COIDSdtutedwader section .5 ~f this Aet abd aecQfcliagJy that 
State BOard for' tbe Pre$'elltidn and C"btrol of' Water ,Pollution ·,hall 
without prej1ldic4# 'to tile -exerdae and paformance of)ts powers aDd 
functions under that Act, exercise the powers and performj tJac ~tio_ 
of. ,the State Board for the prevention and Control of Air pollution 
25 und~r tbis Act. .' ' '! 
Central 
Board for 
the pre-
vention 
and 
Control 
of Air 
pollution . 
State 
Boards 
for the 
Pl'<!ven-
tion and 
Control of 
Water 
Pollution 
to be 
: State 
Boards· 
for the 
PrevEm- - , 
.. 
o 
. • I : 't tion and 
5. (1) In any State in which the Water (Prevention and Control of 
PoJlu~) ,Act, 1Ia,74, is not in force, . .or that Act is in force but the state 
Gov.erllputnt ~ D9t ~Utu~ _ Sta~l Board ,ffN.' ~ ~"" .. tion' and 
Control, of Water Pollution under that Act, the. State Govequil~ ,~aJl, 
30 with effect from such dat~ a~ it may, by. D~tificatiOD i in . tile I om~ 
Gazette, appoint, constitute a State Board for the Prevention and Con-
tro~ of Air Pdllution' under such n~e 8S ~y be 'spedfied in the 1I0~­
fica dOD; 'td exercise the p~ers 'Conferred Oh, a.nd perferm thefunetieAJ 
asaiped to.,. tb~t ,Qoard under this AC;t. _. 
35' .. (2) A' ~tate adard cQ~ti~ted ~imd~ tlI1s~ Act shall" coniist of ~ 
40 
4S 
fallowing'meDtherS, ,namely;...... . .. ~: " ,- " . l 
, (a.) . a Chairrri.an, ~lng a petsdn' having spki~knowledge· br 
'practleal e,xperience'; ~n '~sp~Ct of' mat~ , relatinf." to environ~en-
tal protectIon, to be nommated by the State Govehlment: .~ 
, • , ..: #I • ' ". 
. Provided, that the Chairman may be e~ther v.rJtole:.tife or pprt-. 
'time' as the' state Government may think' fit; ! • , • . • 
• L!· ", ' 
(b) such number ai officials, not exceeding five, as the State .. , 
(. Government may think fit, to be nominated by the State Govern-
. mJllt to represent that Govel:runent ; • 
(c) sUch number of persons, not e*-eedink five, as 'the: State ,I 
.00vUDment may think fit, to be nominated by the State. ,Govern-
C011troi 
of- Air 
PoUution. 
Constitu_ 
.,. tion of 
State 
Boards. 
T:,. 0, 
'/ , 
,jI 

Central 
B01lrd 
to exer-
cise the 
powers 
and per-
foI'm the 
functions 
of a State 
Board in 
the Union 
territo-
ries. 
Terms 
and con-
ditions 
of ser-
vice of 
members. 
II\en.t from amoJlgst the members of tke local authorities function-
ing within the State; 
(d) such nwnber of no~-officials, not exceeding three, as the 
State Government may think fit, to be nominated. by the State 
Government to represent the interests of agriculture, fishery or 5 
industry or trade or any other interest.s, which, in the opinion of 
that Government, ought to be represented; 
(e) two persons to represent the companies or corporations 
owne<:l, controlled or managed by the State Government, to be nomi-
nated by that Government; 10 
(f) a full-time member-secretary having practical experience 
in respect of matters relating to environmental protection and 
having administrative experience, to be appointed by the State 
Government. 
(;J) Every State Board constituted under this Act, shall be a body 15 
corp!:)rate with the name specified. by the State Government in the 
notification issued. under sub-section (1), having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire and dispose of property and to contract, and may by the said 
name sue or be sued. 20 
6. No State Board shall be constituted for a UniOit territory and in 
relation to a Union territory the Central Board shaH exereise the 
powers and perform the funchons of a State Board under this Act for 
that Union territory: 
Provided that in reiation to any Union territory the Central Board 25 
may delegate all or any of its powers and functions empowered to be per-
formed and discharged under this section to such pe.rsQn or body of 
persons as the Central Governmeut may specify. 
7. (1) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act, a member of 
a State Board constituted under 'this Act, other than the member- 30 
secretary, shall hold office for a term of three years from the! date on 
which his nominaUon is notified in the Official Gazette: 
Provided that a member shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his 
term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office. 
(2) The term of office of a member :of a State Board constituted 35 
under this Act and nominated under clause (b) or clause (e) of sub-
section (2) of section 5 shall come to· an end as soon as he ceases to 
hold the I::>flice under the State Government or, as the case may be, the 
company or corporatjon owned, controlled or managed by the State 
Government, by virtue of which he was nominated. 40 
(3) The State Government may, if it thinks fit, remove any member 
'of a State Board constituted. under this Act before the expiry of his 
term of offiCe, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against the same. 
(f)· A member of a State Board constituted under this Act, other 45 
than the member-secretary, may at any 'time :resign his office by writ-
ing UDder his hand addressed-
(0) in the case of the Chairmap, 'to the State Government; and 

5 
(b) in any other case, to the Chairman of the State Board, 
and the seat of the Chairman or such other member shall thereupon 
become vacant. 
(5) A member of a State Board constituted under this Act, other 
5 than the member-secretary, shall be deemed to have vacated his seat, 
:if he is absent without reason, sufficient in the opinion of the State 
Bolrd, from three consecutive meetings 'of the State Board or where he 
is'nominated under clause (c) of sub·section (2) of section 5, he ceases 
to be a member of the local authority and such vacation of seat shall, in 
10 either case, take effect from such date "as the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
(6) A casual vacancy in a State Board c:>nstituted under thls Act 
shall be filled by a fresh nomination and the person nominated tc fill 
the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for 
15 ,vhich the member whose place he takes was nominated 
(7) A member of a State Board constituted under this Act shall be 
eligible for re-nomination, but not for more than two terms. 
(8) The other terms and conditions of service of a member of a 
State Board constituted under this Act, other -than the Chairman and 
20 member-secretary, shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(9) The other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman of a 
State Board constituted under this Ac~ shall be such as may be prescribed. 
8. (1) No person shall be a member of a State Board constituted 
under this Act, who-
25 (4) is, or at any time has been, adjudged insolvent or has sus-
30 
35 
pended payment of his debts or has compounded with his creditors, 
or 
(b) is Of unsOund mind and has been so dec:lared by a compe-
tent eburt, or 
(c) is, or has been, convicted of an offence which, in the opinion 
of the State Government, involves moral turpitude, or 
(d) is, or at any time has been, eonvicted of an offence un~r 
this Act, or 
(e) has so abused, in the opinion of the State Government, his 
position as a member, as to render his continuance 011 the State 
Board detrimental to the interests of the general public. 
(2) No order of removal shall be made by the State Government 
un.d!erthis section unless the member concerned has been given a reason-
aDle 'oppOl1;,mityof showing cause against the same. 
40 • (3) No~withstanding anything contained in sub.section (1) ~ sub-
MCtton (7) .of seCtion 7, a member who has ~n removed 1.Jnder t1$ 
seCtion shan not be eligible to continue to hold oftlce until his successor; 
enters upon his oftice or, as the case may be, for re-nominatien u a 
member. 
DiaquaHlo 
ftcatio ... 

Vacation 
of seats 
by mem-
bers. 
Meetings 
of 
Board. 
Constitu-
tion of 
commit-
tees. 
Tempo-
rary asso-
ciatiOn of 
persons 
wi~~,. 
Board 
for par-
ticular 
purposes, 
Vacancy 
in Board 
not to 
invalidate 
acta or 
proceed-
inls. 
Member-
secretary 
and offi-
cer. and 
other em-
ployees 
of State 
Boards. 
8 
9. If a member of a State Board constituted under this Act become. 
subject tl:> any of the disqualifications specified in section 8, his seat 
shall become vacant. I • 
10. For the purposes of 'this Act, a Board shall meet at least once in 
every three months and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard 5 
to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed: 
Provided that if, in tae opinion of the Chairman, any business of an 
urgent nature is to be transacted, he may convene a meeting of the Board 
at such time as he thinks fit for the aforesaid purpose. 
11. (1) A Board may constitute as many committees consisting whol- IO 
ly of members or wholly of other persons or partly of members and partly 
of other persons and for such purpose or purposes as it may think fit. 
(2) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at such 
time and at such place, and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
regard tJ:> the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be IS 
prescribed. 
(3) The. members of a committee other than the members of the 
Board shaU be paid such fees and allowances, for attending its, meet .. 
ings and for attending to any other work of the BOard as may be pres-
cribed. '" 
12. (1) A Board may associate with itself in such manner, and ror 
such purposes, as may be prescribed, any person whose assistance or 
advIce it may desire to obtain in perfonning any of its functions' under 
this Act. 
20 
(2) A person associated with the Board under sub-section (1) ~or 25 
any purpose shall have a right to take part in the discussions of the 
Board relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a 
meeting of the B)ard and shall not be a member of th.e Board for "any 
other purpose. 
(3) A person associated with a Board lUlder 8ub-sedion (1) shall be 30 
entitled to receive sueh fees and allowances as may be prescribed. 
13. No act or proceeding of a Board or any dommittee thereof shall 
be called in question on the ground merely on the existence of any 
vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or such com-
mittee, as the case may be. 3S 
" 14. (1) The terms and conditions of service of the member-secretary 
of a Sta~ Board constituted under this Act shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
I 
, (2) The member-secretary of a State Board whetb.er.-COnStitutfKl ~ 
this Act or nOlt shall exerciSe suell. powers and perform auch duUee $lJ14O 
may be prescribed. 
(3) Subject to such rule5 as may ~ Il1M,e by the, se.4e" ~,r~, 
in, this behalf, a State Board, whether coutltuted uuder tlaaJ. Act Or no,,' . 
may appoint saeh oftlters anel odler employees u it eollstders nedaary 
for the dlclent performanee of Its fUnctions under this Aet. .'. <, 4S 

6 of 1974. 
7 
(4) The method of appointment, the conditions of service and the 
lCatesof pay of the officers (other than the member-sE'Cretary) and other 
employees of a state Board appointed under 8ub-section (3) shall be 
such as may be determined, by regulations made by the State Board 
, s: under this Act. 
15. A State Board may, by general or special order, delegate to the 
Chainnan or the niember-secretary subject to such conditionS and 
:, ltmUtations, if any, as may bespecifled in the oroer, such of f.ts powers 
; and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary. 
10 CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND }'UNCTIONS OF BoARDS 
18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and without prejudice 
to the performance bf its functions under the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, the main functions of the Central Board 
15 shall be to improve the quality of air and to prevent, contI101 or Abate air 
pollution in the country. 
(~) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
"foregoing function, the Central Board may perform all or any of the 
following functions, namely:-
, (a) ,advise the Central Governmellt on my matter concerning 
~~~~~t:~t; o"t',~: .. ,qt1aH~ of Qfr faitd the Prev:rrttion, control or 
aUBW ..• t.o afro PQllu1i.lon;· .' . 
~~(. j_,i.,{1 /! it'Y!, • , • 
".; rort;, J';(;)(~~,C~~ ,~o ~'~ecuted a naiio~-wide progr~e for 
"~I;~~ffi1' c:;on~?l)o~ abate~t,of airi~llution; 
2,'i'~(C) c6-otclinate(the'8otivtties of the State Boards and resolve 
i 'diSputes among them; 
i' 
(d) provide technical assistance and guidance to the S:ate Boards, 
carry out and sponsor investigations and research relating to pro-
.blems of alir pol1ution and prevention, control or abatement o.f airl 
30. pollution; 
35 
, rt,' 
(e) plan and organise the training of persons engaged or to be 
engaged in programmes for the prevention, control or ab.'lItement of 
air pollution on such terms and conditions as the Central Board may 
specify; 
<f) organise through. mass media a comprehensive ~ogramme 
regarding the preventiQn, control or abatement of ~r pollution; 
(g) collect, compile and publish technical and statistical ?ata re-
lai1ling to air pollution and the meEiSures devised for its .eft'ectIve pre-
Vention, control or abatement and prepare manuals, codes OJ;' guides 
relating 'to preveontion, control or abatement of ail' paUution; 
(h) to lay down standards for the quality of air; 
(i) collect and. disseminate information in respec~ of matter5 re-
lating to sir pollution; 
(j) perform such other functions as may be prescribed. , 
45(3) The Central Board may efltabJish or recognise 8 laboratory or 
laboratorie6 to eaable the Central Board to JX'rfonn its functions under 
this section eftlcieDtIy. 
Delega-
tion ()f 
.powe~, 
Functions 
Of Central 
Board. 

.. , ' 
Punc:ttons 
or·'State 
Boards. 
8 
(4) The Central Board may-
(a). delegate any of its functions under this A:ct ~rally or 
speciaLly to any of the committees appointed by it; 
(b) do such other things and perform such other acts as it may 
think necessary for 'the proper discharge of its funotions and general.- S 
ly for the purpose of carrying into effect the purposes of this Act . 
1'1. (1) SUbject to the provisions of this Act and without prejudice to 
the performance of its functions, if any, under the Wa+.er (Pmvefttion 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, 'the functions of a StateBoBm shall 
be-
(a) to plan a comprehensive programme for the prevention, con-
trol or abatement of air pollution and to secure the execution thereof; 
(0) to advise the State Government on any matter concerning 
the Fevention, contrOll or abatemeDJt of air ,pollution; 
10 
(C') to collect and disseminate information relating to air pol- IS 
lution; 
(d) to collaborate with the Central Board in organising the train-
ing Qf persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes relating to 
prevention, control or abatement of air pollution and to organise 
mass-education programme rela'ting thereto; 
(e) to inspect, at all reasonable times, any control equjpment, in-
dustrial plant or manufacturing process and to give, by order. such 
directions to such persons as it may consider necessary to take steps 
for the prevention, con~rol or abatement of air pollution; 
20 
(1) to lay down, in consultation with the Central Board, and 2S 
having regard to the standards for the quality of air laid down by the 
Central Board, standards for emission of air pollutants into the 
atmosphere from industrial plants and automobiles or for the dis-
charge of any air pollutrmt into the atmosphere from any other 
source whatsoever not being a ship or an aircraft: 30 
Provided thnt differ€'l1t standards for elllission may be laid down 
under this clnuse for different industrial plan4:.s having regard to the 
quantity and composition of emission of air pollutants into the atmos-
phere from such industria1 plants; 
(g) to advise 1he State Government with re-speot to the sulta- 3S 
bility of any premises for carrying on any industry which is likely 
to cause air pollution; 
(h) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as 
malY, !from time to time, be entrusted ,to it by the Centr&i Board or 
the State Government; 40 
(i) to do such other things and to perronn such other acts as it 
may think necessary for the proper discharge of fits fWlCtiQPJ and 
generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the ~: Ilf this 
Act. 
(Z) A State Board may establish or reeognise a la~ratory or labora- 45 
tories to enable the State Board to perform its functions under 1111, see-
tiOD eftleieady. 
118. In t.lle performance of its functions under this Act-
(G) .~ Central Board shall be bound by such diredtions 1ft writ-
ing as the Central Government may give to it; and SO 
6ot1974. 

4 of 
• 
(b) every State Board shall be bound by such directlons in ".'. 
-writing as the Central Board or the State Govemment may give to it: 
Provided that where a direction given by the State Government is 
Inconsistent with the direction given by the Central Board, the matter 
5 .hall be ref~rred to 'the Central Government for its decision. 
CHAPTER IV 
PREVENTION Am> CONTROL OF AIR POLLUTION 
n. (1) The State Government m~y, after consul'tation with the State 
Board, by notifl.coation in the Official Gazette, declare any area or areas 
10 'within the State as air pollution control llI'ea or areas for the purpo~es of 
this Act. 
(2) Any area may be ded1ared under sub-sec'tion (2) as air pollution 
coatJl'OJ. area either illy reference to a map or by reference to the boundar-
tes of anyone or more districts or partly of one district and partly ·of 
15 another district. 
(3) The State Government may, after consultation With the State 
. .Bow, by notification in the Official Gazette,-
(tI) alter any air pollution contr.oI area whether by way of ex-
tension or reduction; 
2~, (~ decl~re a new air pollution control area in which may be 
nierged one or more existing rur 1'011u'tlon control areas or any part 
or parts thereof. 
(4) If the State Government is of opinion that the use of any fuell,' 
other than an approved fuel, in any air pollution control area or part 
25 thereof, may cause or is likely to cause air pollution, it may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, prohibit the use of such fuel iri sucb area or 
part thereof with effect from such date (being not less than three months 
hom the date of puhlicatiOlll of the notification) as may be !'!peCi~l~ in 
the notification. 
30 (5) The State Government may, by notification in the Omcial Gazet~e, 
direct that with effect from such date as may !be ~ified therein, no ap-
pliance, other than an approved appliance, shall be used in the premises 
situated in an air pollution control area: 
Provided that difi'E!!"ent dates may be specified for different P3rts of an 
35 air pollution control area or for the Uf;e of different appliances. 
(6) If the State Government is of opinion that the burning of any 
material (not being fuel) in any air pollution control area or part there-
of may cause or is likely to cause air pollution, it may, by notification in 
the .official Gazette, prohibit the burning of such material in such area 
40 or part thereof. 
20. With a view 10 ensuring that the standarm for emission of Ilir 
. pollutants from automobiles laid down by the State Board under clause 
<I) of sub-section (1) of section 17 are complied with, the State Govem-
roent shall, in consultation with the State Board, give such instnlctions 
45 88 may be deemed necessary to the concerned authority in charge of re-
1939. gistration of motor vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, and such 
authority shall, notwithstanding anything contained in tha't Act or the 
rules made thereunder be bound to comply wi1h such instructions. 
Power to 
declare 
air pollu-
tion con-
trol areas. 
Power to 
live ins-
tructionl 
for en-
suring 
standards 
far emis-
sion trom 
automo. 
bile.. 

Restric-
tions on 
use of 
certain 
industrial 
plants. 
10 
21. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, no person shall, 
without the previous consent of the State Board, operate any industrial 
plant for the purpose of any industry specified in the Schedule in an 
. air pollution control area. 
(2) An application for consent of the State Board under sub-section 5 
(1) shall be accompanied with such fees as may be prescribed and shall 
be made in the prescribed form and shall contain the particulars of the 
industrial plant and such other particulars as may be prescribed: 
Provided that where any person, immediately before the declaration 
of any area as an air pollution control area, operates' in such area any 10 
industrial plant for the purpose of any industry specified in the Sche-
dule, such person shall make the application under this sub-section 
within such period (being not less than three months from the date of 
such declaration) as may be prescribed and where such person makes 
, ,such application, he shall be deemed to be operating such / industrial 15 
plant with the consent of the State Board until the consent appUed for 
has been refused or the expiry of a period of four months referred to 'in 
sub-section (4), whichever is earlier. 
(3) The State Board may make such inquiry as it may deem fit in 
respect of the application for consent referred to in sub-section (1) and 20 
in making any such inquiry, shall follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed. 
(4) Where within a period of four months after the receipt of the 
application for consent referred to in sub-section (1), complete in all 
respects, the State Board does not refuse to grant the consent, ~ upon 25 
refusal, does not communicate the refusal to the person who has made 
the application, it shall be presumed that the consent applied for nas 
been granted by the State Board. 
(5) Every person to whom a consent has been granted by the State 
Board under sub-section (1) or is presumed to have been so granted 30 
under sub-section (4), shall comply with the following conditions, 
namely:-
(i) the control equipment of such specifications as the State 
Board may specify in this behalf shall be installed and operated 
in the premises where the industry is carried on or proposed to be 35 
carried on; 
(ii) the eXisting control equipment, if any, shall be altered or 
replaced in accordanCe with the directions of the State Board; 
(iii) the control eqUipment referred to in clause (i) or clause 
(ii) shall be kept at all times in good running condition; 40 
(iv) chimney, wherever necessary, of such dimension as the 
State Board may specify in this behalf shall be erected or re-erecled 
in such premises; and 
(v) the conditions referred to in c:lause (i), clause ." (iiY and 
clause (iv) shall be complied with within such period as the Sta.te 45 
Doard may specify in this behalf: 
Provided that in the case of a person operating any industrial plant 
: for the purpose of at.ly industry specified in the Schedule in an air pollu-
tion control area immediately before the date of dec:iaration of such 
area as an air pollution control area, the period so specifted shall' not 50 
be less than six months: ' 

n 
Provided further that-
(a~ after the installation of any control equipment in accordance 
with the specifications under clause (i), or 
(b) after the alteration or replacement of any control equip-
S ment in accordance with the directions of the State Board under 
clause (ii). or 
(c) after the erection or re-erection of any chimney unda 
clause (iv) , 
no control equipment or chimney shall be altered or r~laced or, as the 
10 case may be, erected or re-erected except with the previous approval of 
the state Board. 
(6) If due to any technological improvement or otherwise the State 
Board is of opinion that aN or any of the conditions referred to in sub-
section (5) requires variation (including the change of any con'trol equ~p-
IS meni, either in whole or in part), the state Board shall after givIng 
the' petson to whom c()nsent has been granted or is presumed to have 
been granted an opportunity of being' heard, vary all or any of such 
conditions and thereupon such persvn shall be bound to comply with 
the conditions as so varied. 
20 (7) Where a person to whom consent lias been or is presumed to 
have been granted by the State Board under sulHlection (1) or sub-sec-
tion (4), as the case may be, transfers his interest in the industry to any 
other person, such consent shall be deemed to have been granted to such 
other person and he shall be bound to comply with all the conditions 
25-subject to which it was granted as if the consent was granted to him 
originally. - -
22. No person carrying on any industry specified in the Schedule or PersoI1l 
operating any industrial plant, in any air pollution control area shall dis- carrying 
charge or cause or permit to be discharged the emission of any air ' on indus-
30.t>0Ilutant in excess of the standards laid down by the State Board under ~Zt, te;c" 
clause (f> of sub-section (1) of section 17. allow 
" , 
23. (1) Where in any air pollution control area the emission of any 
air pollutant into the atmosphere in excess of the standards laid down 
by'the State Board occurs or is apprehended to occur due to accident or 
3S other unforeseen act or event, the person in charge ot the premises from 
where IUch emission occurs or is apprehended to occur shall forthwith 
intimate the fact of 'Such occurrence or the apprehension of such occur-
rence to the State Board and to such authorities or agencies as may be 
preSCribed. 
40 ,1 (a}'On receipt, of intimation under sub-section (1), the State Board 
and the authorities or agencies sball, as early as practicable, take such 
remedial measures as are necessary to mitigate the emi'SSion oj sucbatr 
pollutants. 
emission 
of air 
pollutant. 
, in exx:e. 
of the 
standards 
laid 
dOWn br 
the State 
Board. 
Furnish-
ing of 
informa-
tion to 
the &*ate 
Board 
and other 
agenei .. 
in eel'-
taln c .... 
't 

Power of 
entry and 
inspection. 
Power to 
obtain 
inforl1l1l-
tion. 
Power to 
take· 
........ 
of air or. 
emi8lkm 
and)WO>-
cedureto 
be·'w.. 
lowed in 
connec_ 
tion 
there-
with. 
12 
k (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person empower-
ed by a State Board in this behalf shall have a right to enter, at all 
reasonable times with such assistance as he considers necessary, any 
place--
(a) for the purpose of performing any of the functions of the S 
State Board entrusted to him; 
(b) for the purpose of determining whether and if SO in what 
manner, any such functions are to be performed or whether any 
provisions oj; this Act or the rules made thereunder or any notice. 
order', direction or authorisation served, made. given or granted 10 
under this Act is being or has been complied with; 
(c) for the purpose of examining and testing any control equip-
ment, industrial plant, record, register, document or any other 
material object or for conducting a search Of any place in which he 
has reason to believe that an offence under this Act or tbe rules IS 
made thereunder has been or is being or is about to be committed 
and for seizing any such control eqUipment, industrial plant, record, 
l'egister, document or other material object if he has reason to 
believe that it may furnish evidence of the commission of an 
offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder. 20 
(2) Every person carrying on any industry specified in the Schedule 
and every person operating any control equipment or any industrial 
plant, in an air pollution control area shall be bound to render all assis-
tance to the person empowered by the State Board under sub-section 
(1) for ·carrying out the functions under that sub-section and if he :faiIs 2S 
to do so without any reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be guilty ot 
an offence under this Act. 
(3) If any person wilfully delays or obstructs any person empowered 
b1 the State Board under sub.section (1) in the diseharge of his duties, 
he·4hall.be f(Ui1ty of an offence under this Act. 10 
25. For the purposes of carrying out the functions entrusted to it, the 
State Board or any officer empowered by it in that behalf may call for 
any information (inclucUng information regarding the types of air pollu-
tants emitted into the atmosphere and the level of the emission of such 
air pc:lIll1l1ta.nlts) from any person carrying on any indus';ry or operating 3S 
any control equipment or industrial plant and for the purpose of veri-
fying the correctness of such information, the State Board or such 
officer shall have the right to inspect the premises where such indus-
try, control eqUipment or industrial plant is being carried on or ope-
rMed. 40 
26. (I) A State Board or any officer empowered by it in thi. behalf 
shall have power to take, for the purpose of analysis, samples 'Ol ;aU-
or em,ission from any chimney, flue or duct or any other outlet in .-. 
manner as may be prescribed. ' : 
(2) The result of any analysis of a sample of emission taken'unier 45 
suIHoction (1) shall not be admissible iB'evideBce in· any legal 1Iro. 
ceec:lin'sunless the provisions of aub.sections(3), (4) and (~) Vf!~" 
plied with. ,I ' 

i3 
(3) Subj~t to the proVIsIons of sub-sections (4) and (S), when a 
sample of emission is taken for analysis under sub-section (1), the per-
son taking the sample shall-
(a) serve OD. the occupier or his agent, a notice, then and there, 
5 .in such form 8S may be prescribed., of his intention to have .it 8G 
aaalysed; 
(b) in the presence of the occupier or his agent, collect a sam-
ple of emission for analysis and dime in such manner as may be 
pre&Cl'ibed the sample into two parts; 
10 (c) cause each part of the sample to be placed in a container 
which shall be marked and sealed and shall also be signed both 
by the person taking the sample and the occupier or his agent; 
(d) send one container forthwith to the laboratory established 
or recognised by the State Board under section 17; 
15 (e) on the request of the occupier or his agent, which shall be 
made at the time when the notice is served on him under clause 
(a), send the second container to the laboratory ~tablished or 
specified under sub-section (l) of section 28. 
(4) When a sample of emission is taken for analysis under sub-
20 section (1) and the person taking the sample serves on the occupier or 
his agent, a notice under clause (a) of sub-section (3), then-
(a) in a case where the occupier or his agent wilfully absents 
himself, the person taking the sample shall collect the sample of 
emission for analysis and divide the sample into two parts and cause 
25 each part to be placed in a container which shall be marked and 
sealed and shall also: be signed by the person taking the sample, 
and •• 
(b) -. a case where the occupier or his agent is present at the 
time ~f bking the sample but refuses to sign the marked and sealed 
30 containers of the sample of emission as reqUired under clause (c) 
of sub-section (3), the two marked and· sealed containers shall be 
signed by the person taking the sample, 
and one of the containers shall be sent forthwith by the person taking 
the sample for analysis to the laboratory referred to in clause '(e) of 
35 sub·section (J) and such person shall inform the Government analyst 
appointed under sub~seCt1on (<1) of section 29, in writing,about the 
wilful absence of the occupier or his agent, or, as the case may be, his 
refusal to sign the container . 
. (1$) When Ii sample of emission is taken for analYSis under sub-
40 section (1) and the person taking the sample serves on the occupier or 
Ail agent a notice under clause (a) of sub-section (3) and the occupier • CII' his &gmt who is present at the time of taking the sample does not 
make a request as provided in clause (e) of sub-section (3), then, the 
sample 'shall not be divided .into two parts and the sample 10 taken 
4.5 shall be placed in a container which shall be marked and sealed and 
eball also be signed by the penon ,taking the saftlple and the lame shall 
be eent £orthwith by such penon for analysis to the laboratory referred 
tom clause (d. ofsub .. section (3) . 
. ' f:1. (1) Where a sample of emission has been sent for analysis to the Reports 
'50 taboratory established or recognised by the State Boarc1., the Board ana- of the 

result ot 
analY8ia 
on sam-
ples 
taken 
under 
section 
26. 
State 
Air Labo. 
ratory. 
Analyatl. 
J4 
lyst appointed under sub-section (2) of section 29 shall analyse th.! 
~ple and submit a report' in the prescribed form of such analysis in 
triplicate to the State Board. 
(2) On ~eceipt -of the report under Bub-section (1), one copy of the 
report shall be sent by the State Board to the occupier or his agent S 
referred to in section 26, another copy shall be preserved for produetion 
before the court in case any legal proceedings are taken asaiDat him and 
the other copy shall be kept by the State Board. 
(3) Where a sample has been sent for analysIs under clause (e) of 
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 26 to any laboratory men- 10 
tioned therein, the Government analyst referred to in the said su1:rsec-
tion (4) shall analyse the sample and submit a repo·rt in the presorioeo. 
form of the result of the analysis in triplicate to the State Board which 
shall comply with the provisions of sub-section (2). 
(4) If there is any inconsistency or discrepancy between, or variation IS 
in the results of, the analysis carried out by the laboratory established 
or recognised by the State Board and that of the laboratory established 
or specified under section 28, the report of the latter shall prevail. 
(5) Any cost inClUlTed in getting any sample analysed at the request 
of the occupier or his agent as provided in clause (e) of SUb-section (3) 20 
of section 26 or when he wilfully absents himself or refuses to sign the 
marked and sealed containers of sample of emission under sub-section 
(4) of that section, shall be payable by such occupier or his agent and 
in case of default the same shall be recoverable from him as arrears of 
land revenue or of public demand. 2S 
~. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette,-
(a) establiBh a Stale Air Laboratory; or 
(b) specify any laboratory or institute as a State Air Laboratory, 
to carry out the functions entrusted to the State Air La.boratory 30 
under lhis Act. 
(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the State 
Board, make rules prescribing-
(a) the functions of the State Air Laboratory; 
(b) the procedure for the submission to the said laboratory of 35 
samples of air or emission for analysis or tests, the fonn of the 
laboratory's report thereon and the fees payable in respect of such 
report; 
(c) su,c:h other matters as may be necessary or expedient to 
enahle that laboravoo-y to carry out its functions. 40 
29. (1) The State GOIvernmeat may, by notification in the OftIcIal 
Gazette, appoint luch perlons as it thinks fit and having the preserilted 
qualifications to be Government analysts for the purpose of aDIllysis of 
BamPIes of air or emission sent for a~lysis to any laborator), estab-
lished or specified under sub-Section (1) of section 28. .45 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 14t, the Sta'te Board 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and with the approval of the 
State Government, appoint such persons as it thinks fit and. having the 
prescribed qualifications to be Board analysts for the purpose of analy-
sis of samples of air or emission sent for analysis to any laboratory ~tab- 5 
Ushed or recognised under section 17. 0 

IS 
30. Any document purporting to be a report signed by a Govern-
ment analyst or, as the case may be, a State Board analyst may be used 
as evidence of the facts stated therein in any p110Ceeding under this 
Act. 
Reports 
of ana-
lysts. 
S 31. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State' Board Appeals. 
under this Act may, wUhin thirty days from the date Ob 'which the 
order is communicateci to him, prefer an appeal to such authOrity (there-
budter referred to as the Appellate Authority) as the State Govern-
ment may think fit to constitute: 
10 Provfded that die Appellate Authority may entertain the appeal after 
~ expiry of the said period of thir,ty days if such authority is satisfied 
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cauSe from filing the 
appeal in time. I 
(2) The Appellate Authority shall consist of a single person or three 
I S persons as the State Government may think fit to be appointed by the 
State Government. 
(3) The form and the manner in which an appeal may be pre:erred 
under sub-section (1), the fees payable for such appeal and the proCe-
dure to be follewed by the Appellate Autherity shall be such as may 
20. be prescribed. 
(4) On receipt of an appeal preferred under sub-section (1), the 
Appellate Authority shall, after giving the appeNant and the State Board 
an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal as expedittiously as 
possible. ' .... ' - r 
CHAPTER V 
Fmm, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
32. The Central Government may. after due appropriati01l made by 
Parliament by law lin this bellaH, make in eaeb flnancial year such con-
tributions to the State Boards as iimay think necessary to enable the 
30 State Boards to perform their functions under this Act: 
Provided that when the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
6 of 1974. Act, 1974, is amended empowering the State Board for the Preventien 
and Control of Water Pollution constituted under that Act to expend 
money from its fund thereunder for the purposes of this Act also, then, 
3S with effect from the date on which such amendment comes into force 
in any State in which a State Board for the Prevention and .<?htrol of 
Water Pollution has been constituted under that Act, the provisions of 
~his section shall, in relation to such State, have eft'ect as if for the words 
"State Boards", where thev occur in the firSt place~ the words "State 
40 Boards constituted under this Act" and fer the words "State Boards". 
where thev occur in the second place, the words "said State Boards". had 
been subst.ituted. 
31. (1) Every State Board shall have its own fund for the purposes 
." this Act arid all sums which mav. from time to time. /be paid to it by 
4S the CenitJ'al Government and all other receipts (bv way of contributions, 
if any, from the State Government, fees, gifts, grants, donations, bene-
factions or otherwise) of that Board shall be carried to the fund of the 
Board and all payments by the Board shall be made therefrom. 
(2) Every State Board may expend such sums as it thinks fit for per-
So formin~ its functions under thi!! Act and ~uch sums shall be treated as 
ex:pendflture payable out of the fund of that Board. 
Contribu-
tions by 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Fund of 
Board . 

Budget. 
Annual 
report. 
Accounts 
and 
audit. 
16 
(3) When the Water (prevention and Control of Pollution} Act, 1974, 6 of 1974. 
is amended empowering a state Board fOT the Prevention and Control 
of Water Pollution constituted under that Act to expend money froin 
its fund thereunder for the purposes of this Act also, then, with effect 
from the date on which such amendment comes into force in any State S 
in which a State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollu~ 
Uon has been constituted under that' Act, the provisions of 8ub-sectioDS 
(1) and (2) shall, in relation to such State, bave effect as if for the 
words "State Board", at both the places where they oceur, the words 
"state Board constituted under this Act" had been substituted. 10 
34. The Central Board or, as the case may be, the State Board shan, 
during each financial year, prepare, in such form and at such time d 
may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year next 
ensuing showing the estimated receipt and expenditure under this Act, 
and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government or, IS 
as the case may be, the State Government. 
35. (1) The Central Board shall, during each financial year, prepare, 
in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report 
giving a true and full account of its activities under this Act during the 
previous financial year and copies thereof shall be forwardel\ to the 20 
Central Government an~ that Government shall cause every such report 
to be laid before both Houses of Parliament within six months of the 
date on which it is received by that Government. 
(2) Every State Board shall, during each financial year, prepare, in 
such fonn and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving 2'S 
a true and full account of its acttvitips under this Act duri.nj:! the previous 
fhilanci.al year and copie!'l thereof shall be forwarded to the State Govern-
ment anl\ that Government shall cause every such report·to be laid ~ore 
the State LeJ!islature within a period of nine months of the date on wbkh 
it is received by that Government. 30 
1'8. (1) Every Board shall, in relation to its functions UlIlder- this Act, 
maintain prnper accounts and other relevant records and prepare all 
annual ~atement of accounts in such fonn as may be prescribed by the 
P..entral Government or, as the case may be, the State Government. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by an auditor (July 35 
qualified to act as an auditor of companies unl\er section 2!8 of the Com- 1 of 1958. 
panies Act, 1956. .. 
(3) The said· auditor shall be appointed by the Central GovernrDellt 
or, as the ease may be, the State Government on the advice of the C0mp-
troller and AuditoT-General of India. 40 
(4) Every auditor appointed to audit the accounts of the Board under 
this Act shall have the right to demand the prottuetion of books, aGlX>unts, 
eonnec~ vouchers and other documents ll1ld pape!'B and to inspect' 8Bf' 
of the offices of the Board. 
(.5) Every such auditor shall send a copy of his report together with 45 
an audited copy. of the aC(:ounts to the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the State Government. 
(6) The Central Governmen.t shall, as ·soon as may be .after the receipt 
of the audit report under su.b-section. (5)" cause the same to be laid. before 
both Houses of Parliament. 50 

S 
1'7 
(1) The ~e Governmentlhall, as 50011 as may 1M after the receipt 
of tile audit reportunrier nb-aeetiora (5), cause the same to be kid 
befOile ~he State LegWature. 
CHAPTER VI 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
31. (1) Whoever fails to comply with any order or direction given 
under this Act, within such time as may be specified in the said order or 
direction shall, in respect of each such failure, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, and in case the failure eon-
10 tinues, with an additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees 
for every day during which such failure continues after the conviction 
for the first &Weh failure. 
(2) If 'he failure referred to in sub-section (1) continues beyOlld a 
period of 0Be year after the date of cORviction, the offender shall be 
IS punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months. 
38. Whoever-
FaUuce 
to comply 
with 
orders 
Or direc_ 
tions 
issued 
under 
the Act. 
Penalties 
for cer-
(4) destroys, pulls down, removes, injures or defaces any 'pillar, tain acts. 
post o~ stake fixed in the ground or any notice or other matter put 
20 up, inscribed or placed, by or under the authority of the Boao:d, or 
(b) obstructs any person acting under the orrlers or directions 
of the Board from exercising his powers and performing his fundions 
under this Act, or 
(c) damages any works or property belonging to the Board, or 
(d) fails to furnish to the Board or any officer oa' other employee 
of the Board any information' required by the Board or such officer 
or other employee for the purpose of this Act, or 
(e) fails to intimate the ~cwnnce of the emisstbn of air pollu-
tants into the atmosphere in excess of the staadard$ laid down by' 
the State Board or the apprehension of such occulTence, to the State 
Board and other prescribed authorities or agencies, or 
(f) in gfvfng any information which he is required to give under 
this Aet, knowingly OIl' wflfuny makes a statement which is false fn 
any material particutar, or 
35 (g) for the purpose of obtaining any consent under section 21, 
lmDwingly or wilfully makes a statement which is false in any 
lll8terial particular, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term whick nay exlend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to five hundlred rupees or 
40 with both. 

Penalty 
fOr <:on-
traven-
tion of 
certain 
provisions 
of the 
Act. 
Offences 
by com-
panies. 
Offences 
by Gov-
ernment ' 
Depart_ 
ments. 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good faith. 
18 
•. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, for which 
no penalty has been elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and in the cue of 
continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees for every day during which such contravention S 
continues after conviction for the first such contravention. 
40. (1) Where an offence under thl!1 Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence-was committed, was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to.oe 10 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided thBJt nothing contained in this sulb-section shall render any 
Ruch person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves 
that the offence was committe(f without his knowledge or that he exer- IS 
cised all due dilig.ence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committett with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attributable to any ne,glect on the part of, any director, 20 
manager, secretary or other officer of the companv. such dlrector, mana-
~er, Recretary or other officer shall ~lso be deemed to be ttttilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceede~ against and punished. 
accordingly. 
Explanatidn.-For the purposes of this se~tion,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a finn means a partner im the firm. 
25 
4.1. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any 
Department of Government. the Head "f the Department !'!hall be aeemed 30 
to be ~i1ty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against' and 
punished accordingly: 
Provitted that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head 
of the Department liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence 
was committed without his knowledJ;(e or that he E!'Xerciled all due diU- 35 
gence to prevent the commission of 'Such offence. 
4.2. No suit or other le.ral proeeedin~s shall tie a~atnst the GoVern-
ment or any offlcer of the Government or anv member' or any offtcer or 
other ~mplovee of the Board in respect of any thIn It which is none or 
intended to bp done in good faith in pursuance of this Aet or the rules 40 
made thereunder. 

i9 
U. l'toeouri shall take'bognizance of any offence under this' Act e:tcept 
on a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of the 
StJlte BOaM, and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate 
'or a' Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable 
S under this Act. 
M. AU the members and all ofticers and other employees of a Board 
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of 
this Act 'at the rul~s made 'thereunder shall be deemed to be public 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
10.. 45. The Central Board shall. in relation to its functions under this 
Acr~~ ,furnish to the Central Government, and a State Board shall, in 
relation to its functions under this Act, furnish to the State Government 
and to the Central ,Board such reports, returns, statistics, accounts and 
other information as that Government, or, as the case may be, the Central 
IS Board may, from time to time, require. 
, 48. No civil court shall h~ve .jurisdiction to entertain any suit or pro-
ceeding in respect of any matter which an. Appellate Authority consti-
tuted under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to determine, 
and no injunction shall be gr.anted hy 'any court. or other authority in 
20 respect 01 ally action taken 01' to be taken in pWiSuance of any power 
'conferred by Ol" u!lder' this Act 
CHAPTER VII 
. f MISCBUANEOUS 
47. (1) If 8:tany t~me the State Government is of opinion-
, ,. 
':1 
2 S '. 'I " '" (d) that a State Board 'cOll8tituted under ,this Act· has persis-
tently made default in the performaace of the functioDs imposed on 
it by or under this Act, or 
(b) that circuInstances exist which render it necessary in the 
public interest so to do, 
30 the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
supersede the State Board for such period, not exceeding one year, as 
may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section for 
the reasonS'mentioned in clatise (a), the State Government shall give 
3S, a . reaso~le opportuni~ to the State· Board to show cause why it 
shoUld not be SUperseded and shall consider the explanations and ob-
JectiOnB. if any. of the State Board. 
eoin!:. 
zance of 
offences. 
Members, 
officers 
and em-
ployees 
of Board 
to be 
public 
servants. 
Reports 
and re-
turns. 
Bar of 
jurisdic-
tion. 
Power of 
State 
Govern-
ment to 
supereede 
State 
Board. 

Special 
provision 
in the 
case of 
superses-
sion of 
the Cen-
tral Board 
or the 
state 
Boards 
coAstitut.. 
ed under 
the Water 
(Preven-
tion and 
Control 
of Pol-
lution) 
Act, 1974. 
Dissolu-
tion of 
State 
Boards 
consti-
j6 
(2) Upon the puhJ!ication of a notifi.cati9n under sub-~a (1; 
superseding the State Board,-
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersess1DIl, 
vacate their offices as such; 
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under S 
this Act, be exercised., performed or diBcharged by .the sWe Board 
shall, until the State Board is reconstituted under sub-section (3), 
be exercised, performed or c:llscharged by such person, Of persons as 
tbeState Government may direct;' , 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the State Board shall, 10 
until the BoBlI'd is reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the 
State Government. 
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession speciJied in the 
notification issued under sub-section (1), the State Government may-
(a) extem\ the period of supersession for such further tenn, not 15 
exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary; or 
(b) reconstitute the State Board by a fresh nomination or 
appointment, as the caSe may be, and in such case any person who 
vacated his office under clause (4) of sub-aectioR (2) shall not be 
deemed disqualIfied for non'lination or appointment: 20 
Provided that the State Government may at any time before the 
e'Xplratkm of the period of supersession, :wbetimr origiftaUy speci6ed 
under sub-section (1) or as extended under this ...m-seetion, take action 
under clause (b) of this sub-section. 
48. Where the Central Board or any State Board constituted under the 25 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, is superseded by 8 of 1974. 
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
under that Act, all the powers, functions and duties of the Central Board 
or such State Board under this Act shall be exercise<\, performed or 
discharged during the period of such supersession by the persoil or per- 30 
sons, exercising, performing or discharging the powers, functions and 
d1rtIes fJf the Oen1ral Board «' sudl Stde Board under 6e Water (Pre-
vention 'and'Cbfttrol of PoU1It1on) Act, 1974, during such period. 
... (1) As and whea the Water (pr.ventionancl Control o~ Pollu-
tion) Act, 1974, comes into foroe ~ ally State. and ,the State .G~vernment 3S • of 1974. 
OODatitutes a State Board for the Preventj.arn and Control of Water PoUu· 
tion under that Act, the State Bo~ constituted. by the State Government 

21 
under this Act stand dissolved and the Board first-men.tioned shall 
exerc:iBe the powers and perform the functions of the Board second~men­
tiooed in that State. 
(2) On the dissolution of the State Board constituted under this Act-t 
5 (0;) all the members shall vacate their offices as, such; 
(b) all moneys and other property of whatever kind (including 
the fund of the State Board) owned by, or vested in, the State Board, 
immediately before such dissolution, shall stann transferiea to and 
vest in the State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water 
10 Pollution; 
(c) every officer and other employee serving under the State 
Board immediately before such dissolution, shall be transferred to 
and become an officer or other employee of the State Board for tIie 
Prevention and Control of Water Pollution and hold office by the 
IS same tenure and at the same remuneration and on t.he same terms and 
conditions of service as he would have held the same if the State 
Board constituted under this Act had not been dissolved an!! wl18ll 
continue to do· so unless and until such tenure. remuneriilion-- and 
terms and conditions of service are rluly altered by the StateBou'd 
20 for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution: 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions 
of service of any such officer or othell' employee shall not be altered 
to hlB disadvantage without the previous sanction of the State Gov-
el'llll\Eia t; 
2S (d) 8Ill1iabilities and obli~ations of the State Board of whatever 
kind. immediately before such rlissolution shall be deemed to be the 
liabilities or oblillations. a~ thE' case mav be. of the State Board for 
the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution and any proceeding or 
.cause of action. pending or exi~tin~ immediately before such dissolu-
30 tion by or allainst the State Board constituted under this Act in 
relation to such liabiJItv or oblil:tation mav be continued and enforced 
hv or 81lllinst the State Board for the Prevention and Control of 
Water Pollution. 
SO. The Centrllli Government mav. of its own notion or on the recom-
35 m.,ndation of a :Rou-d. by notifiCAtion in the Offici'll Gazette. add to, or 
Gmit from. the Schedule any industrv Qr Rlter the deRcription of any 
industrv Rnd thereupon the . Schedule shall be deemed to be amended 
8acordinl!iy. 
51. (1) Everv State Board shall maintain a rellister containinq parti-
40 elllar!'! of thE' person!'; to whom consent. hll~ been ~ranted under sPCtion 
21, 'the standards for emission laid down by it in relation to each such 
consent and such otheor particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) 'nle rellister maintained under sub-section (1) shall be open to 
Inspection at all reasonable hours by any person interested in, or affected 
45 by. such standardc; for emission or by any o~her person authorised by 
- such person in this behalf. 
5Z. Save as otherwise provided by or under the Atomic Enemy Act. 
33 of 1882. ]9~2. in relation to radioactive Rir pollution, the provisions of this Act 
shall have effect notwithstanding anvthin(t inconsistent therewith con-
$0 4.pfned in any ena-ctJ'llent other than this Act. 
tuted un-
der tm. 
Act. 
Power te 
amend 
the Sche-
dule. 
Mainte-
nance of 
Re-
,tstel'. 
Effect of 
(:ther 
law .. 

Pcwer 
of Central 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
power. of 
State 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
22 
"13. (1) The Central Govemment may, in consultation with the Central 
11., lrd, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules in respect of 
11:" following matters, namely:-
\.' . 
(a) the intervals and the time and place at wl*h meetings of 
~he Central Board or any committee thereof shall be held and the 5 
,rocedure to be followed at such meetings, includil'l'g the quorum 
necessary for the transaction of business thereat, under section 10 
and under sub-section (2) of section 11; 
(b) the fees and allowances to be pairl to the members :01, a ( 
committee of the Central Board, not being members of the. Boaa-d, 10 
under sub-seC'tion (3) of seemon 11; 
(c) the manner in which and the purposes for which persons 
may be associated with the Central Board under sub-section (1) of 
section 12; 
(d) the fees and allowances to be paid under sub-sectiob(J) of IS 
section 12 to persons associated with the Central Board under sub-
section (1) of section 12; 
(e) the functions to be performed bv the Central Boarrl under 
clause (j) of sub-section (2) of section 18; '. 
(1) the form in which and the tim'e Within ·which the bud~et and 2Q 
the annual report of the Central Board may be prepared and forward-
ed to the Central Government under sections 34 and i'5; 
(Q) the form in which the accounts of the Central Board may be 
maintained under section 36. 
(2) Everv rule made by the r.entral Government undpl' this Act shall 25 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, bE'fore each House of 1i'arlia-
ment, while it is in session, tfor a total period of thirctv davs which mav 
be comJ)1'ised in one ~ssion or in ~o 01' morE' ~uccessive ses5!ions, ~d if, 
before the expirv of the seR~ion immediatelv followinq the session 01' the 
~uccessive sE'ssions ~foresRid. both Houses aqree in makinp' ati\r mocUflr.a- 30 
Hon in th~ l'1l1e or both Houses liiltT'ee ~hat the rule should not be Thade. 
the l"'Il1e shan thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect. as the case mav be: ~o. however, that anv such modification O!' 
annulment shall be without prejudiCe 'to the validity of anything pre-
vious!: .... d6ne under that rule. 3~ 
54. (n Subiect to the provisions nt sub-section (3). the State Gov-
ernment may, by notift.cation in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry 
out the pllt'J'OSE!6 of this Actt in respect of matters not falling within the 
purview of section 53. 
(2) In particular, and without prejurlice to the generality of the fQre.-: 40 
liroin~ power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, ~amely: - ' 
'. ··,r,' 
(4) the terms and conditions of service of· the members (otheT 
than the ehaia-man and the mp.mber~se01'etary) of the State BQud 
constituted under this Act under sub-section (8) of section 7~ 4lS 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman of the 
Sta~ Bo~d constituted., under this Act under sub-section (9) of 
section 7; , , , 
" ' I ( 
(c) the time and place of meetings of the State Hoard or any 
committee thereof and the pl'QCedure to Ile fonow~ at sucb meetings, 
including the quorum necessary :tor the Wan&ac.t.ion of business' there-
itt, under sectlon 10 and sul>-s~T.ion {~) of secu,oall; 
(d) the fees and allowances to be paid to the members of a 
commMee of the Sta;.e Board, not being members of the Hoard, Wlder 
sub-section (3) of section 11; 
(e) the manner in w:hich and the purposes for which persons 
may be associated with the State Board under SUb-section (1) of 
sectlOIl. 12; 
" (1) the fees and allowances to be paid under sub-section (3) of 
aection 12 to persons associated. with, the State Board under sub-
~tion (1) of section 121; , , , 
'(11) the terms and eonditions of service of the member-secretary 
of the State Board constituted under this Act under su1>.-section (1) 
of section 14; 
(h) the powers and duties to be exerciset\ and discharged by the 
member-secretary of a State ~o.ard under 8U~tion (2) of section 
14; . 
(i) 'the conditions subject to which a State Board may appoint 
such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient performance of its fUnctions under sub-section (3) of section 
14; 
(;) the functions to be performed by the State Board under 
clause (h) of sU'b-section (1) of section 17; 
(k) the form of application for 'the consent of the State Board, 
the fees payable therefor, the period within which such application 
shall be macle and the 'particulars it may contain, under sub-section 
(2) of section 21; 
(1) the procedure to be followed in respect of an inquiry under 
sub-section (3) of section 21; 
(m) the authorities or agencies to whom information under sub-
section (1) of section 23 shall be furnished; 
(n) the'manner in which samples of air or emission may be 
taken under sub-secticm (1) of section 26; 
(0) the form of the notice and the manner in which a sample of 
40 emission shall be divided, under sub-section (3) of section 26; 
(p) the form of the rep<)rt of the State Board analyst under sub-
section (1) of section 27; 
(q) . the form of the report of the Government analyst under 
. ~n .(3) pt !JieCti.an, 27; ',i 

~ 
'(1') the functions of the State Air Laboratory, the procedure ftk 
the subnUssion to the said laboratory of samples of air or emiSsion for 
analyses or tests, the form of the laboratory's report thereon, the fees 
.payable 'in respect of such report and other mattem as may be 
f 
necessary of expedient to enable that la.boratory to carry out its 5 
functions, under sub-section (2) of section 26; 
(8) the qualifications required fOl' Government analysts under 
sub-section (1) of ilectiOB 29; 
(t) the qualifications required fot State Board analysts u.nd.er 
SUb-section (2) of SectiOB 29; lJ: ~ 
(u) the form and the manner in which appeals roay be filed., the 
fees payable in respect of such appeals and the procedure to b~ 
followed by the Appellate Authority in disposing of the appeals 
under sub-section (3) of section 31; 
(v) the form in which and the time within. which the budget and 15 
annual report of the State Board may be prepared anrt. forwarded to 
the State Government under sections 341 and 35; 
('lV) the form in which the accounts of the State Board may be 
maintained under sub-section (1) of section 36; 
(x) the particulars which the register maintained under section 20 
51 may contain; 
(y) any other matter which has to be1 or may be, prescribed. 
(3) After the first constitution of the State Board, no rule with respect 
to any of the matters referred to in sub-section (2) [other than those ref-
erred to in clauses (a) and (b) thereof], shall be made, varied, amended 25 
or repealed without consulting that Board. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 21, 22, 24 and 50) 
1. Iron and Steel Plants. 
2. Non-ferrous metal industries. 
3. Foundaries. 
4. Mining and Ore processing industries. 
5. Coke Ovens and Coal processing plants. 
6. Petroleum and Petro-Chemical industries. 
7. Power Plants and Boiler Plants. 
8. Chemical and allied industries. 
9. Ceramic and Cement industries, 
lO. Textile industries. 
11. Processing plants for animal and agricultural products. 
35 
" 
12. Plants for recovery from and disposal of wastes including incine- 40 
rntors. 

With the increasing industrialisation and the tendency of the majo.-
rity of ~dustries to congregate in areas which are already heavily in-
dustdalised, the problem of air pollution has begun to be felt in the 
country. The problem is more acute in those heavily and industrialised 
-areAS which are also densely populated. Short term studies conducted 
by the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur. 
has confirmed that the cities of Calcutta, Bombay, Delhi, etc., are having 
the impact of air pollution on a steadily increasing level. 
2. The presence in air, beyond certain limits, of various pollutants 
discht..rged through industrial emissions and from certain human aetivi-
ties connected with traffic, heating, use of domestic fuel, refuse incine-
ration, etc., have detrimental effect on the health of the people as aiSO on 
animal life, vege-tation and property. 
3. In the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment 
held in Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, decisions 
were taken to take appropriate steps for the preservation of the natural 
resources of the earth which, among other things, include the preserva-
tion of the quality of air and control of air pollution. The Government 
has decided to implement these decisions of the said Conference in so 
far as they relate to the preservation of the quality of air and control of 
air pollution. 
4. l:t is felt that there should be an integrated. approach for tackling 
the environmental problems relating to pollution. It is, therefore, pro-
posed that the Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Water 
Pollution constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974, will also perform the functions of the Central 
Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution and of a State 
Board for the Prevention a'nd Control of Air Pullution in the Union 
territories. It is also proposed that the State Boards constituted under 
the said Act will also perionn 'the functions of State Boards in respect 
of prevention, control and albatement of air pollUtion. However, in those 
States in which State Boards for the Prevention and Control of Water 
Pollution have not been constituted under that Act, separate State 
Boards for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution are proposed to 
be CCJnstituted. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
6. The Notes on cla~ appended to the Bill explmn in detail the 
various p.,visions thereof. 
NIW DELJU; SIKANDER BAKHT. 
The 14th March, 1978. 
• I 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION uNDER AR1'IcLl 177 OF 
.. , THE CONSTITUTION OF' INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 0-1301215:71-(LSG) jEPC, dated the 28th March, 
1978 from Shri Sikandsr Bakht, Minister of Works and Housing and 
I-Supply and'Rehabilitation to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
' ... , J 
The ;President, having been infonned of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill to provide fDr the prevention, control and a:ba~ent of air 
poUution, for the establishment, with a view to carrying oUt the afQte-
said purpose, of Boards for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution, 
for conferring on and asSigning to such Boards powers and functions re-
lating 'th .. etoandfor ma!tters connected therewith, recommends the con-
. sideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha under article 117 (3) of the Cons-
titution. 

Notes on clauses 
. ·Clause 1 provides for bringing the proposed legislation into force in 
the. whole of India on· such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Clause 2 seeks to define certain expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 3 empowers the Central Board for the Prevention and Con.-
trol of Water Pollution constituted under the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, also to exercise the power'S and per-
form the functions of the Central Board for the Prevention md Control 
of Air Pollution under this Bill I 
Clause 4. provides that the State Boards for the Prevention an~ C~~ 
trol of Water Pollution constituted under the Water (Prevention and 
Cqptrol. of Pollution) ,Ac't, 1974, shall also exercise the powers and 
perform the functions of the State Boards for the Prevention and Control 
of Air Pollution under this Bill. 
Clau.se 5 provides for the constitution of a State Board for the Pre-
vention and ConJtrol of Air Pollution under this Bill in. such a State 
which has not yet (!onstituted a State Board far the Prevention and 
Control of Water Pollution under the Wat.er (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974. 
Clause 6 empowers the Central Board to exercise the powers and 
perlonn the functions of a State Board for a Union territory under this 
Bin. 
Clau''1es 7 to 10 lay down the tenns and conditions of service of the 
member~ of a State Board constituted \,mder this Bill, disqua1ificati~ 
for membership and vacancy arising therefrom and meetings of a Board 
fOf' the purposes of this Bill. 
Clause 11 provides for the constitution of committees, the proce-
dure for transaction of bUBiness in such committees' and for payment of 
lfees and allowances to the members of the committees. 
Clause 12 provides for the temporary association of persons with a 
Board for purposes of advice or assistance. 
Clause 13 lays down thlit a vacancy in a Board or in a committee 
thereof shall not invalidate ads or proceedings of such Board or com-
mittee. 
Clause 14 ·deals with the terms and conditions of service of the 
member-9E!ICretary of a State Board constituted under this B~l1. It al~ 
provides for the appointment of officers and other employees of a State 
Board and terms and conditions of service thereof. 
Clause 15 provides for the delegation of powers by a State Board to 
the Chairman or the member-secretary thereof. 
Clawe 16 provides that the main functions of the Central .B~d 
shall be to improve the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air 

pollution in the country. It also specifies in particular certain functions 
of the Central Board which inter aHa relate to laying down the stan-
dards for the quality of air and establishment of laboratories to per-
form its functions efficiently. 
Clause 17 deals with the functions of the State Boards which 
b.ter" a.tia relate to laying down the standards for emission of air pollu-
tants into the atmosphere from industrial plants and the establishment 
of laboratories to perform its functions efficiently. 
Clause l8 provides that the Central Board shall be bound by such 
directions 8$ the Central Government may give to it and every State 
Board shall be bound by such directions as the Central Board or the 
st.ate Government may give to it. 
Cliluse 19 empowers the State Governments to declare, by notifica-
tiQn in the, Ofticial Gazette, air pollution control areas and, to do cer-
tain other acts in relaltion thereto. It also empowers the State Gov-
ernmen'ts to prohibit, by notification in the Official Gazette, the. use of 
any fuel, other than an approved fuel, which is likely to caUSe air pollu-
tion, with effect from such date which may not 'be less than three 
months from the date of publication of the notification in the Official 
Gazette. Under this clause the State Governments have also been 
empowered to direct that no' appliance, othel" than an approved appli-
ance, shall be used in premises situated in an sir pollution control 
area from a specified date. 
Clause 210 empowers the State Governments to give instructions to 
the concerned authorities in charge of registration of motor vehicles 
under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, for ensuring standards for emission 
from fllltomobiles. 
Clause 21 provides that no person shall operate any industrial plant 
for the purpose of any industry specified in the Schedule to the Bill, 
in an air pollution control area without the previous consent of the 
State Board. The clause also lays down the procedure to be followed 
in l"eBpect of such consent. The conditions subject to which such con-
sent shall be granted have also been provided in this clause. 
Clause 22 provides that no person carrying on any industry specified 
, in 'the St-hedtll1e to the Bm or operating any industrial plant, in any air 
pollUtion control area shall allow emission of any air pollutant in excess 
of the standards laid down by the State Board. 
'Cla1LSe 23 deals with a case wherein any air pollution control area 
the emission of any air pollutant into the atmosphere in excess of the 
,standards laid down by the State Board occurs or is apprehended to occur 
lEor any reason. It provides that in such a case the person in charge ot 
such premises shall forthwith intimate the fact of such occu~nee or 
apprebension 'thereof to the State Board and to sUt'h au1hl)ri+ies or agencfes 
as may be prescribed. 
CZ'luse 24 empowers persons authorised by a State Board in this bp.haU 
to enter ,and inspect any place for the purpose of performing any of the 
functims of the State Board and for detennining as to whether the pro_ 
visior of this Bill 0" rules framed thereunder have been complied with. 

2! 
ClaUB~ 25 empowen the State Boards and otBoers empowered in this 
behalf to obtain information relating to air pollution and to inspect the 
concerned premises with a view to verifying the correctness ot such in-
formation. 
ClaUH 26 empowers the Sltate Board or any ot6.cer authorised by the 
Board to take samples of air or emission for analysis from any chimney, 
flue or dud or any other outlet in the prescribed manner and also lays 
down the procedure to be followed while taking such samples for analysis. 
ClaUSle 27 deals with the manner of dealing with the reports of the 
result of allalysis on samples ot emission taken under clause 26. The 
clause also provides that any cost incurred in getting any sample analysed 
at the request of the occupier or his agent or when he wilfully absents 
himself or refuses to sign. the containers of samples shall 'be payable by 
such occupier or his agent. 
Clause 28 provides for the establishment of a State Air Laboratory. 
It als" provides for specifying any laboratory or institute as a State Air 
Laboratory to carry out the functions entrusted to the State Air Labora-
tory under this Bill. The clause also empowers the State Government to 
make rules to prOVide for the functions of the laboratory and other 
matters. 
Clause 29 deals with the appointment of Government analysts and 
the Board analysts. 
Clause 30 provides for the reports of analysts being used as evidence 
in any proceeding under this BilL 
Clause 31 makes provision for an appeal against the orders passed 
by the State Board. 
Clause 32 provides for the contributions by the Central Government 
to the State Boards to enable them to perform their functioll'S under this 
Bill. This clause, however, further provides that when the Water (Pre-
vention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, is amended empowering the 
State Board. constituted under that Act to expend money from its fund 
thereunder for the purposes of. this Bill also, then with effect from the 
date on which such amendment comes into force in any State in which a 
State Board has been constituted under that Act, the provisions of this 
clause shall apply only in relation to such State Boards as are constituted 
under this Bill. 
Clauses 33 to 36 contain the usual provisions relating to funds, budget, 
annual report, accounts and audit of the Central Board and ,the State 
Boards. 
Clauses 37 to 41 provide for penalties in respect of offences committed 
under this Bill. 
ClaUse 42 seeks to give protection to any member, officer or employee 
of a Board in respect of actions done or intended to be done in good 'f.aith 
in pursuance of this Bill or the rules made thereunder. 
Clause 43 lays down that no court shall take cognizance of any offence 
under this B6ll except on a complaint made by, or with the previous 
sanction in writing of the State Board, and also that no court inferior to 

30 
that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate ot the flrst 
class shal1. try any offence punishable under the BUl 
Clause 44 provides that members, officers and employees ot a Board 
w hen acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of 
this Bill or the rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be public ser-
vants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 45 lays down that the Central Board and the Sta1te Boards 
shall furnish to the Central Government and the State Governments res-
pectively such reports, returns, statistics, accounts and other information 
with respect to their activities under this Bill as may be called for by the 
respective Governments. 
Clause 46 bars the jurisdiction of courts in respect of any matteor 
which the Appellate Authority constituted under this Bill is empowered 
to determine under this Bill. 
Clause 47 empowers the State Government to supersede a State 
Board constituted under this Bill under cprt::lin cirC1lmstances. 
Cl4use 48 makes a special provision to deal with a case of superses-
sion of the Central Board or the State Board constituted under the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. It has been provided 
in this clause that in such a situation the powers, functions and duties of 
the Central Board or such State Board under this Bill shall be exercised. 
performed or discharged during the period of such supersession by the 
person or persons exercising, perfoJ.·ming or discharging the powers, func-
tions and duties of the Central Board or such State Board under the 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, during such 
period. . 
Clause 49 provides that as and when the Water (Prevention and Con-
trol of Pollution) Act, 1974, comes into force in a State and the ·State 
Government constitutes a State Board for the Prevention and Control 
of Water Pollution under thaJt Act. the State Board constituted by the 
State Government under this Bill shall stand dissolved and the Board 
first-mentioned shall exercise the powers and perform the functions of 
the Board second-mentioned in that State. This clause also makes other 
consequential provisions in this behalf,. 
Clause 50.-This clause empowers the Central Government to amend 
the Schedule. 
Clause 51 provides for the maintenance of a register regarding parti-
culars of consents granted by a State Board. 
Clause 52 lays down that, save as otherwise provided und~r the 
Atomic Energy Act, 1962, in relation to. radioactive air pollution, the pro-
visions of this Bill shall have overriding effect in case of inconsistency 
with any other enactment. 
Clauses 53 and 54 . empower the Central Government and the State 
Governments respectively to make rules in consultation with the Central 
Board or, as the case may be, the State Board. 
The Schedule specifies the industries ret erred to in clauses 21. 22, 
24 and 50. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The scheme of the Bill is to achieve co-ordination in ,the matter of 
environmental pollution control. Hence, it has been provided that lhe 
Boards constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollu-
tion) Act, 1974, will also perform the functions relating to prevention, 
control and abatement of air pollution under this Bill (Vide clauses 3 and 
4) . In the States in which the State Boards for the Prevention and 
Control of Water Pollution have not been constituted under that Act, 
separate State Boards for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution will 
be constituted under this Bill (vide clause 5) and the expenditure for the 
same will be borne by the Central Government. However, as and when 
the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, comes into 
force in any such State and that State Government constitutes a State 
Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution under that Act, 
the State Board constituted under this Bill will stand dissolved ano the 
liability of the Cemral Government to meet the expenditure will also 
cease. 
2. Tn the 15 States which have so far adopted the Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, the intention is that the Boards 
constituted under that Act should also perform the functions relating to 
prevention, control and abatement of air pollution under this BID. 
However, the Water (Prevention and Control at Pollution) Act, 1974, as 
it is, does not authorise expenditure by the Boards for the work relating 
to the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution. The said Act 
is proposed to be separately amended to enable the Boards constituted 
under 'that Act to spend also for the work relating to prevention, control 
and abatement of air pollution under this Bill. In the meanwhile, it has 
been provided that in these States also the Central Government will 
meet the expenditure for the work relating to prevention, control anet 
abatement of air pollution. But necessary provisions have been made to 
the effect that the responsibilities of the Central Government to bear 
expenditure on the work relating to prevention, control and abatement 
of air pollUtion will cease as soon as the proposed amendment to that 
, Act is passed and becomes effective in any State vide proviso to clause 
32 and sub-clause (3) of clause 33 of the Bill. 
3. Under clause 32, the Central Government have to make contribu-
tions to the State Boards to perform their functions under this Bill. 
However, this is covered by a proviso that as Roon as the Water (Pre-
vention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, is amended, empowering 
the State Boards constituted under that Act to expend money from their 
funds for the purposes of this Bill also, the responsibilitie1; of the Central 
Government to pay to these State Boards will be restricted only to the 
State Boards constituted under this Bill. 
4. Under clause 3, the Central Board for the Prevention and Control 
of Water Pollution constituted under the Water (Prevention and Con-
trol of Pollution) Act, 1974, will also perform the functions of the 
~entral Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution, and of a 
Sate Board in the Union territories under clause 6 of the Bill. 
3 J 

5. Under clause 28, the State Government may establish or specify 
a State Air Laboratory to carry out the functions assigned to it under 
the Bill. In respect of Union territories, it is proposed to specify the 
Central Water Laboratory established under section 51 of the Water 
(Pte~ention and Control of Pollution) Act, 197~, to perform the fUnctions 
of the State Air Laboratory also under this Bill. 
6. Clause 11 of the Bill provides for the constitution of committees 
by a Board. Sub-clause (3) thereof provides for the payment of such 
fees and allowances as may be prescribed to the members of a Com-
mittee, other than the members of the Boards, for attending the meetings 
and for attending to any other work of the Board The said Central 
Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution, while per-
forming the functions of the Central Board for the Prevention and 
Control of Air Pollution and as a State Board for the Prevention and 
Control of Air Pollution in the Union territories under this Bill, may 
constitute such committees, for the purposes of this Bill. This may 
involve some additional expenditure. Similarly, under sub-clause (3) 
of clause 12, any person associated with the Central Board under sub-
clause (1) of clause 12, shall be paid such fees and allowances as may 
be prescribed. 
7. The actual expenditure which the Central Government would be 
required to incur for implementing the provisions of this Bill cannot 
be correctly e9ti.mated at present. Assunrlng that the amendments to 
the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, referred to 
in paragraph 2 will be passed soon and that some of the remaining 7 
States will also adopt that Act, the net expenditure on the Central 
Government is not likely to exceed Rs. 20 lakhs. This will be a recur-
ring expenditure till all these States adopt that Act and constitute State 
Boards under that Act. Besides, there will be certain addition to the 
expenditure in respeC't of the Central Board for the Prevention and 
Control of Water Pollution as it has to perform the work relating to 
prevention, control and abatement of air pollution also in the Union 
territories in addition to its function as the Central Board for the Pre-
vention and Control of Air Pollution under thisBill. This is estimated 
at Rs. 10.78 lakhs, out of which Rs. 5.73 lakhs will be reMlrring expendi-
ture and the remaining will be non-recurring. However, this may be 
off-set by the revenues expected from the Water (Prevent.ion and Con-
trol of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED i:..EGISLATION 
Clause 53 of the Bm empowers the Central Government, after con-
sultation with the Central Board, to make rules for the purpose of 
giving effect to the provisions of this Bill in respect of matters speclfted 
therein. ' 
2. Likewise, clause 54 empowers the State Government to make rules, 
after consultation with the State Board if that Board has been consti-
tuted, in respect of matters not falling within the purview of clau8e 53. 
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 53 and subl-clause (2) of clause 54 enume-
rate the various matters with respect to which rules may be made 
respectively by the Central GOvernment and the State Government 
These ma\ters pertain to procedure, fonn or administrative detail and, 
8$ such, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
33 

LoK SABHA 
" . ,.' 
A 
to provide for 'the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution, for 
the estahlishment, with a view to carrying out the aforesaid purpose, 
of Boards for the prevention and control of air pollution, for confer-
ring on and. assigning to such Boards powers and functions relating: 
thereto and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Sikandar Bakht, 
Minister of Works and 
HOUSing and Supply and 
Reh4bilit4tion) . 