As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
1 ~ SEP 196~ 
Bill No. 58 of 1964 
THE COURT OF WARDS (RULERS OF INDIAN 
STATES) BILL, 1964 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
COUICT OF WARDS AND ASSUMPTION OF SUPERINTENDENCE 0 .. ESTAT~S 
3. Court of Wards. 
4. Assumption of superintendence by Court of Wards of the 
estates of disqualified Rulers. 
5. Disqualified Rulers. 
6. Inquiry into circumstances and conditions of a Ruler be-
lieved to be disqualified. 
7. Assumption of superintendence by the appointed guardian. 
8. Superintendence by Court of Wards on application of a 
Ruler. 
9. Temporary provision for protection of estates o~ Rulers in 
certain cases. 
10. Superintendence where estate is within the jurisdiction (Jf 
two or more Courts of Wards. 
11. Assumption of superintendence to be notified and to extend 
to whole of the ward's estate. 
·12. Barring of su;ts to contest authority to assume superinten-
dence. 
CHAPTER III 
INVESTIGATION OF CLAIMS AGAINST THE WARD 
13. Publication of notice to claimants against ward. 
14. Power to require claimants to furnish full particulars and 
documents. 
940(B) LS-1. 

ii 
CLAUSES 
15. Investigation and decision of claims. 
16. Execution of decrees to be stayed till certificate ·filed. 
17. Repart"to' Central Government. 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF COURT OF WARDS 
18. Delegation of powers by Court of Wards. 
19. Appointment of manager by Court of Wards. 
20. Liabilities, etc., of manager appointed by Court of Wards. 
21. General powers and duties of Court of Wards and manager. 
22. Allowance for ward, his family and dependents. 
23. Powers of Court of Wards as to the estate of the ward. 
24. Recovery of arrears of rent, etc., as arrears of land revenue. 
25. Estate under s uperintendmce of Court of Wards not liable 
to sale for arrears. 
26. Liability of estates to pay expenses of Court of Wards. 
27. Power of Court of Wards to claim exemption of the estate 
of ward from process of civil court. 
28. Notice of suit. 
29. Manager or Cow1 of Wards to be next friend or guardian 
in sufts by or against the ward. 
30. Payment of costs . 
. 31. Processes aiamst ward to be served on his ne~t f~iend or 
guardian. 
32. Authority of Court of Wards required in case of suits 
brought on behalf of w.ards. 
33. Adjudication of civil disputes between two or more wards. 
CHAPl'Elt. V 
DIsABILITIES OF A W AJU) 
34. Dil8bilities of a ward. 
35. Sanction of Central Government necelJt8l")' Ior adoption 
and wills to be made by wards. 

LOK SASHA 
-
CORRIGENDA 
1:0 
THE COURT <F 1'/ARDS CUJL.E..l1S OF INDIAN STATES) BILL, 1964 
(To bel As introduced in 10k Sabha) 
1. Page 15, line 31,~ 
t,Q£ ·.that·' ~ "any such" 
2. Page 16, line 3,-
~ "Terri tory" ~ "terri tory" 
3. Correct line numbers on pages 4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14. 
NEW DELlUj 
SentembeL 141l_1Q64 
Bhidra 23, 1886 (SaRa:) 

iii 
CHAPTER VI 
RELEASE OF ESTATES FROM SUPERINTENDENCE 
CLAUSES 
-36. Withdrawal of superintendence of Court of Wards. 
37. Appointment of guardian in certain cases. 
38. Withdrawal to be notified in Official Gazette. 
39. Appeals. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
40. Control of Central Government. 
41. Delegation of functions by Central Government. 
42. Power to compel attendance of witnesses. 
43. Bar of suits. 
44. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
45. Repeal and savings. 
THE SCHEDULE 

THE 
DIU No. 58 of 1961 
COURT OF WARDS (RULERS OF INDIAN 
STATES) BILL, 1964 
It. 
BILL 
to provide for the superintendence of the estates of the Rulers 01 
Indian States by the Court of Wards in certain cases. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPI'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Court of Wards (Rulers of Short 
Indian States) Act, 1964. title, ex-tent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu com-
and Kashmir. mence-
ment. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
JO ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
IS 
9 of 1875. 
20 
Z. In this Act, un1ess the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Commissioner" includes the Board of Revenue; 
(b) "Indian State" has the same meaning as in article 366 
of the Constitution; 
(c) "minor" means a Ruler who, under the provisions of the 
Indian Majority Act, 1875, has not attained majority; 
(d) "Ruler" has the same meaning as in article 366 of the 
Constitution; 
(e) "ward" means a Ruler who has been made a ward of 
the Court of Wards under this Act, . 
940(B) LS-2. 
Defini-
tions, 

2 
CHAPTER II 
COURT OF WARDS AND ASSUMPTION OF SUPERINTENDENCE OF ESTATES 
Court of 3. The Collector or the Deputy Commissioner of a district shall 
Wards. be the Court of Wards for the limits of his district: 
Assump-
tion of 
superin-
tendence 
by Court 
of Wards 
of the 
estates 
or cit. 
qualifled 
Ruler •. 
DUlquali-
aed 
Rulen. 
ProVldecl that the ,Central Government may, if it thinks fit, by S 
notification in the Official Gazette,-
(a) appoint a Commissioner or Special Officer to be the 
Court of Wards for any division, di8tri~t, area or estate; or 
(b) constitute a Board consisting of two or more officers to 
be die Co1U"t ,of Wards for any division, district, area or estate. 10 
4. The Court of Wards may, with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government, assume the superintendence of the estate of 
any Ruler who is disqualified under section 5 to manage his estate. 
5. The fallowing Rulers shall be deemed 
manage their estates, namely:-
to be disqualified to 
IS 
(a) Rulers who are minors; " 
(b) Rulers declared by a competent civil court to be of 
unsound mind and incapable of managing their estates; 
(c) Rulers declared by the Central Government to be 
capable of managing or unfitted to manage their estates,-
(i) owing to any physical defect or infirmity; or 
in-
20 
(ii) owing to their having entered upon a cow-se of ex-
travagance; or 
(iii) owing to their failure to discharge the debts and 
liabilitieS due by them: lS 
Provided that no declaration under sub-claUBe (ii) or sub-clause 
(iii) of this clause shall be made unless the Central Government is 
aatisfted- ·i 
(a) that the aggregate annual interest payable at the con~ 
tractual rate on the debts and liabilities due by the Ruler ex- 30 
ceeds one-third of the gross annual profits of the estate; or 
(b) that such extravagance or such failure to discharge the 
said debts and liabilities is likely to lead to tbe dissipation of the 
~te. 

5011908, 
j 
6. (1) Where on the basis 01. _ iDformatlon in its possession, inquirY 
tlae Central Government has reasOD to believe that a Ruler is inca- into eir-
pahle of. 1I18R8gin, or unfttted to manale his estate Wlder clause (c) cum-
of section 6, it may direct an inquiry to be made into the circumstan- stances 
S eel and conditioBS of the Ruler by IUl aftlcer of Government appoint- B.nd CODtdi-
d b it ' ... L· L_L If tions 0 e y lD ..... 1& _a . a Ruler 
believed. 
(2) The officer appointed to make the inquiry may, for the pur- to be dis. 
pose of compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production qualified. 
of docwnents in the course of such inquiry, exercise all or any of 
10 the powers of a civil court under the Code of C~vil Procedure, 1908. 
(3) The Central Government, on receipt of the report of the 
officer appointed to make the inquiry, may, if satisfied that it is 
necessary in the public interest so to do, declare the Ruler to be 
disqualified under clause (c) of section 5: 
IS Provided that no such declaration shall be made in respect of a 
Ruler until the Ruler has been furnished by the Central Government 
with a detailed statement of the grounds on which it is proposed. to 
disqualify him and the Ruler has had an opportunity of showini 
cause why such declaration should not be made. 
20 7, Where any person is appointed or declared to be guarciian of 1AuumP-
the estate of a minor under sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Guar- tion of. 
II of 1890. dians and Wards Act, 1890, he shall intimate the fact to the Court of superin-
Wards, and the Court of Wards may thereupon, with the previous teDdenee 
sanction of the Central Government, aSSlIllle the superintendence of :~i~ted 
25 the estate. guardian. 
8. (l) Any Ruler may apply to the Central Govemment to have Superin-
his estate placed under the superintendence of the Court of Wards, tendeuee 
and the Central Government may on such applicatiC)ll, if it thinks fit :: ,;:: 
and expedient, order the Court of Wards to assume the superinten- OIlappli-
30 dance of the estate. cetion of 
• Ruler. 
(2) An order made by the Central Government under sub-section 
(1) shall be sufficient to authorise the Court of Wards to assume the 
superintendence of the estate referred to therein, and such order 
shall not be questioned in any court of law. 
35 9. (1) Pending decision as to succession, the Central Govern- Tempo_ 
ment may, if it considers it necessary so to do for theproteetion of r~1')' pro-
the estate of a deceased Ruler, direct the Court of Wards to take such Vlsi:~or 
steps and make such orders for the custody and protection of the :-~~n 
estate of such Ruler as the Court of Wards thinks ftt. of Rulen 

in eertain 
cases. 
Superin-
tendence 
where 
estate 
is within 
the juris-
dicliu.nof 
two or 
more 
Courts of 
Wards. 
Assump-
tion of 
superin-
tendence 
to benoti-
fled and to 
extend to 
whole of 
the ward's 
estate. 
Barring 
of au ita to 
contest 
authority 
toassum. 
superin-
tendence. 
Publica-
tion of 
notice to 
claimant. 
against 
ward.. 
(2) Whenever the Court of Wards has reason to believe that the 
person recognised as the successor of a deceased Ruler is one who 
is, or should be declared to be, disqualified under section 5; it may 
take such steps and make such orders for the temporary custody 
and protection of the estate of such Ruler as it thinks fit. 5 
10. Where a Ruler owns an estate which is within the jurisdic-
tion of two or more Courts of Wards, such one only of the Courts 
of Wards as the Central Government may direct in this behalf shall 
assume the superintendence of the estate of the Ruler. 
11. (1) Whenever the Court of Wards assumes the superintendence 10 
of the estate of any Ruler under this Act, the fact of such assump-
tion and the date on which it was S lDctioned or ordered by the 
Central Government shall be notified in the Official Gazette. 
(2) On and with effect from the date of such sanction or order, 
the whole of the property, movable and immovable, comprising the IS 
estate 01 such Ruler, whether the existence of any such property 
may be known to the Court of Wards or not, shan be deemed to be 
under its superintendence. 
(3) Axly property which the ward may inherit subsequent to the 
date of such sanction or order and during the continuance of the 20 
superintendence, shall also be deemed to be under the superinten-
dence of the Court of Wards. 
12. No suit shall be brought in any civil court to contest the 
authority of the Court of Wards in respect of the estate of any Ruler 
under this Act on the ground that such person was not, or is not a 2S 
Ruler or a minor. 
CHAPTERm 
INVESTIGATION OF CLAIMS AGAINST THE WARD 
13. (1) On the issue of a notification under sUb-sectioD (1) 01 
section 11, the Court of Wards shall pIlJblish in the Oftl.cial Gazette, 
and in such other manner as the Central Govemmen.t may, by 30 
general or special order, direct, a notice, in English and also in the 

i'egionai language or languages in common use til thed1atrict·of 
division in which the ward is ordinarily resident and in the district 
or division in which his estate or any part thereof is situated, calling 
upon all persons, having claims against the ward or his estate to 
submit the same in writing to the Court of Wards within six months 
5 from the date of the publication of the notice aforesaid in English in 
the Official Gazette. . 
(2) Every such claim (other than a claim on the part of the .•. 
Government) not sUlbmitted to the Court of Wards in compliance 
10 with the notice published under su~ction (1), shall, subject to the 
provisions of clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 17, be deemed 
for all purposes and on all occasions, whether during th.f:! continuance 
of the superintendence or thereafter, to have been duly discharged: 
Provided that if the Court of Wards is satisfied that the claimant 
IS for reasons beyond his control or other sufficient reasons was unable 
to comply with the notice published under sub-section (1) within 
tlhe period referred to therein, it may receive his claim at any time 
after the date of the expiry of that period, but any claim so received 
shall, notWithstanding any law, contract, decree or award to the 
20 contrary, cease to carrY'fony interest from such date until its J."eceipt. 
14. (1) The Court of Wards may by written order require that Powerto 
any claimant submitting his claim shall, within such reasonable ~uireanta 
time as it may specify in such order, furItish full particulars thereof ~o :::rush 
and produce all documents on which he relies to support his cJ.aim, full parti-
25 together with a true copy of every such document: culara and 
Provided that, where the claim relates to an amount secured by doc,!: 
d . h . . men ... a ecree or award, It s all ·be suffiCIent for the chumant to produce 
before the Court of Wards, a certified copy of the decree and a certi-
ficate from the court which passed the decree or is executing it 
30 declaring the amount recoverable thereunder, or a true copy of the 
award and statement of the sum recoverable thereunder, as the case 
may lbe; and where the claim is pending adjudication in any CQun 
or has been referred to ar:bitration, it shall be su1licient for the 
claimant to produce a certified copy of the plaint, or as the case maf 
3S be, III true copy of the reference to ar.bitration. 
(2) The Court of Wards shall, after marking for the purpose of 
identi1ication, every original document so produced and. verifying 
the correctness of the copy, retain the copy and return the original 
to the claimant. 
40 (3) Where any document, which is in the possession or under the 
control of a claimant, is not produced by him in accordance with an 
order under sub-section (1), the document shall not be admissible 
in eVidence against the ward, in any suit filed, whether during the 
continuance of the superintendence of the Court of Wards or there-

In..-tl-
pti011a11id 
declaion 
ofclatms. 
bec:ution 
of 4iecnII 
to be 
~ed 
till cert1-
kat. 
med. 
• after, bplNCA ctlabn .. t. or by any penon claiming under him, in rei-
peot of any claim ~ which the Gocument relates, unless it is proved. 
to the aati8faetion at the court that he was, for reasons 'beyond his 
aonwol or other sufieient reasons, unable to produce such document 
.. NquiNd .by such order. I 5 
15. (1) On receipt of the claima submitted in compliance with 
the provisions of sections 13 and 14, the Court of Wards shall proceed 
to investigate such claims and sball decide, BUbject to the provisions 
of lUb-seotion (3), which of them are to be wholly or partly admitted 
or wholly or partly rejected, as the case may be, and shall communi- 10 
cate its decision in writing to each claimant concerned. 
(2) Where the Court of Wards has admitted any claim under 
sub-section (1), it may make to the olaimant a proposal in writing 
for the reduction of the claim, or of the Mte of interest ·to be paid 
in future, or of 'both; and if such' proposal or any modification of it, IS 
is accepted by the claimant, and his acceptance is ftnally recorded 
and is attested by the Court of Wards or by any Rew!nue OtIicer (not 
below the rank of a Deputy Collector or an Assistant Commissioner) 
whom the Central Government may, by general or special ,order 
appoint in this behalf, it shall be conclusively binding upon the 30 
ela:bmlnt: 
Ptovided that if, when the sapenntencit!nee of the estate by the 
Cburt of Wards is 'Withdrawn, any portion of the claim reduced as 
aforesaid is stin unsatisfied, the claimant shall !be entitled to reeoover 
e. sum bearing the same proportion to the original claim admitted 25 
under sub-section (1) as the unsatisfied portion ibeanr to the reduced 
claim. ' 
(3;) Subject to the provisions of su'b-section (2), nothing in this 
Beetion. shall ~ construed to bar the institution of a suit in a elvi1 
court agaiftst a ward or his estate for the recovery of a claim which 30 
has been duly submitted to the Court of Wards: 
Provided that no decision of the Court of Wards under this section 
Ihall be proved in any such suit as against the defendant. 
18. (1) On the publication of a notice in Engllsh in the Oftl.cial 
Gazette under SUib-osection (1) of section 13, JW proceeding in execu- 35 
tion of any decree against the ward or his estate shall be inatituted 
or continued until the decree-holder files a certificate from the Court 
of Wards that the decree-claim has!been duly submitted or until 
the 9lpIratton of one month from the date of receipt by the Court 
of Wards ~ a written application, accompanied by a certified copy 40 
of tIhe decr:ee, for 8Uclt certificate. 
~) In computing 4t1e period of limitation prescribed by the 
Limitation Act, 1963, for any application for the execution of a decree, 0 1963. 
JINii .... t •• which haw been stayed 01' temporvily barred by 

-
, 
reuon of the claim not ha~ been duly BUbmittted, the time from 
the publication of the notice in English in the Ofticial Gazette 
under sub-section (J) of section 13 or from the date of the decree if 
it was passed subsequent to such publication, to the date of due 
~ submission shall be excluded. 
17. (1) When all claims have been investigated under section 15, Report to 
the Court of Wards sball submit to the Centl:al Gov.ernment a Central 
schedule of the debts and liabilities of the ward, and the Central Govem-
Government may, where the estate appears to be imrolved beyond ment. 
10 all hope of extrication, or ior any other· suftlcient reason, by an 
order p1Ibllshed in the 01Bcial Gazet4e, direct that, on a date to be 
fixed by the order, the su.perintendenee of the estate of the ward by 
the Court of Wards shall be withdrawn. 
(2) On. the date so fixed-
rs (a) the superintendence shall termiDate; 
(b) the Ruler of the estate under superintendence shall be 
restored to the posseSSion thereof, subject to any contracts en-
tered into by the Court of Wards for the preservation or benefit 
of such estate; 
20 (c) the claims referred to in sub-section (I) of section 13 
shall revive. 
(3) In calculating the periods of limitation applicable to Buits to 
recover and enforce debts and liabilities revived under this section, 
the time during which the superintendence has continued sh$11 be 
25 excluded. 
CHAPTER IV 
Powau; .um FtJNCTIOKS OF COtnlT ()F W.AJtD8 
18. (1) Where the Court of Wards does not coneist ef \he Collec-
tor or the Deputy Commissioner of a district, such Ccturt .of Wards =e~~_ 
30 may, with the general or special sanrt;on of the Central Gwe:rDmeBt, power. 
from time to time, delegate all or any of its powers to the Collector bY' Court 
or the Deputy CommisBioner of any district in which any part of ofWard.l. 
the .estate of the wtmi is situated, or to any ·et.her Revenue 0fBcer 
not below the rank of a Deputy Collector or aD Aaistant Commts-
3S stoner whom it may appoint in this behalf, and may, .at arry time, 
with the like sanction, revoke such de1esatiOD. 
(2) Where the Court of Wards does not CORsist C1f the Collector 
or the Deputy Commissioner of a district, then, subject to any 
40gener.al or special orders of the Central Government, such Court of 
Wards may exercise all or any of the powers conferred on it by this 
Act through the Collector or the Deputy Cornmissioller of any dis-
trict in which any part of the estate of a ward ill situated, or th!'QUgh 
-..-..-... .-

, \, 
any other Revenue Officer not heloi, the rank of a Deputy Collector 
or an Assistant Commissioner whom it may appoint in this behalf, 
and, subject to the like orders, any such Collector, Deputy Commis-
sioner or other Revenue Officer may exercise all or any of those 
powers through any Revenue Officer subordinate to him. 5 
(3) Where the Court of Wards consists of the Collector or the 
Deputy Commissioner of a district, then, subject to any general or 
special orders of the Central Government, such Court of Wards may 
exercise all or any of the powers conferred on it by this Act through 
a Deputy Collector or an Assistant Commissioner whom it may 10 
appoint in this behalf: and subject to the like orders, any such 
Deputy Collector or Assistant Commissioner may exercise all or any 
of those powers through any Revenue Oftlcer subordinate to him. 
Appoint- 19. The Court of Wards may appoint a manager of the estate of 
ment of any ward under its superintendence. IS 
manager 
by Court 
01 Wards. 
Liabilities, 
etc., of 
manager 
appointed 
by Court 
01 Wards. 
ZOo (1) Every manager appointed by the Court I)f Wards shall-
(a) give such security, with such sureties, if any. as the 
Court of Wards thinks fit for the due discharge of the trusts of 
his office and for the due accounting of all property and moneys 
which come in10 his control or possession by reason of his office; 20 
{b) be entitled to such allowance as the Court of Wards 
thinks fit for his diligence and responsibility in the execution of 
his duties; and 
(c) be responsible for any loss occasioned to the estate 
under his management by his wilful default or gross negligence; 2S 
and every streh loss shall be recoverable from him and from the 
sureties, if any; in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 
(2) The manager or any servant of the Court of Wards shall be 
deemed to be a ''public servant" within the meaning of Chapter IX 
of the Indian Penal Code; and, in the definition of "legal remunera- ~~ 01.1860. 
tion" contained in section 161 of the said Code, the word "Govern-
ment" shall, for the purposes of this sub-section, be deemed to include 
the Court of Wards. 
21. Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules made 
General d thereunder, the Court of Wards may, by itself or through the 3S 
r::s o1.an manager, if any, appointed by it under this Act, do all such things 
~urt 01. ali may be necessary for the proper care and superintendence of the 
Wards and estate diligently and faithfully for the benefit of the estate, and the 
man.,... Court of Wards pr the manager shall in every respect act to the best, 
of its or ,his judgment fOf the jnter~sts of the estate as if the estate 40 
were its. or 1l~ own. 

9 
22. The Court of Wards may, from time to time, determine what AllOW-
IWDI shall be allowed in respect of the expenses of any ward and of ance for 
hds family and dependents. war,d. his 
family 
and de-
pendents, 
23. The Court of Wards may sell, exchange, mortgage, charge or Powers 
S let the estate of a ward, and may do all such things as it may judge ot Court 
to be best for the benefit of the estate and the advantage of the of Wards 
ward: as to the 
estate ot 
Provided that- the ward. 
(a) the previous sanction of the Central Government shall 
10 be required for any sale, exchange or mortgage of, or charge on, 
immovable property and for any lease of such property for a term 
exceeding ten years, and 
'" .. 
(b) where one-third of the immovable property of a ward 
has already been sold or exchanged, no further sale or exchange 
shall be made . 
14. For the purpose of the recovery of rents, profits and other sums Recovery 
due in respect of the estate under the superintendence of the Court at arrears 
of Wards (whether such arrears become due before or after the 0'1 rent. etc., 
assumption of such superintendence), the Court of Wards shall have a; rr;ars 
20 11111 the powers possessed by the relevant authority or officer of a dis- ~ev:ue, 
trict under the law for the time being in force for the recovery of 
land revenue due to Government. 
%5. Save as otherwise provided in section 26, no estate under the Estate 
superintendence of the Court of Wards shall be liable to sale on under 
25 account of arrears of land revenue: 8Uperill-
. . tendence Pro'l/lded that all such arrears of land revenue shall be the first of Court 
charge upon the sale proceeds of any such estate which may be sold of Wards 
for any cause other than for arrears ot land revenue. not liable 
to sale 
for 
arrears. 
28. All expenses incurred by the Court of Wards under the provi- Liability 
30 sions of this Aet in respect of the estate of a ward and if the Court of elltates 
of Wards assumes the superintendence of the estate of any Ruler to pay ex-
disqualified under clause (c) of section 5, all expenses incurred by r~~tf 
the Central Government for complying with the provisions of sec- wOards. 
tion 6 in relation to such Ruler, shall form a charge upon such estate 
35 and shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue. 
27. (1) Whenever it appears to the Court of Wards that by virtue l'ower of 
of or in execution of a decree or order of a civil court the estate of CoUrt of , Wards to 

claim 
exemption 
ot the 
estate 
01 ward 
from pro-
eess of 
civil 
court. 
Notice 
otsWt. 
Manager 
or Court 
of Warda 
to be next 
triendor 
guardian 
in suits 
by or 
against 
the ward. 
18 
a ward under its superintendence is or is likely to be insuftlcient for 
the payment of the expenses-
(a) of the superintendence of the estate of the said ward 
under this Act, or 
(b) of. the said ward, his family and dependents, allowed 5 
under section 22, 
the Court of Wards may issue a certificate in writing to the civil 
court executing the said decree or order claiming exemption of the 
estate for such period as the Court of Wards may from time to 
time deem expedient from any attachment, sale, transfer or other 10 
process of a civil court. 
(2) Upon the receipt of such certificate, the civil court executing 
the decree or order against the said estate shall, notwithstanding any-
thing contained in section 16 or any other law for the time being in 
force, raise any attachment or ~ther procese pending agalnlrt the I" 
estate specified in the certificate or shall set aside any order of sale or 
transfer of the said estate which thereupon shall be exempt from any 
attachment, sale, transfer or other process of a civil court for the 
period specified in the said certificate and during the said period tbe 
execution of such decree or order shall, so far as it affects the estate 
for the purposes of section 15 of the Limitation Act, 1963, be 20 
deemed to have been stayed: 
Provided that if the superintendence of the Court of Wards of the 
said estate terminates under section 17, or is withdrawn under sec-
tion 36, the exemption granted under this section shall, with effect 25 
from the date of such termination or withdrawal. cease to be in 
operation. 
28. No suit relating to the estate of any ward shall be brought in 
any civil court untll the expiration of two months after notice in 
writing stating the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff, 30 
the cause of action and the relief claimed. has been delivered to, or 
left at the office of, the Court of Wards; and the plaint shall contain a 
statement that such notice has been so delivered or left: 
Provided that notice under this section shall not be required in 
the case of any suit the period of limitation for which will expire 35 
within three months from the date of the notification under sub-sec-
tion (1) of sectiQll 11. 
29. In every sUit brought by or against a ward, the manager or if 
there is no manager, the Court of Wards liaving the IlUperintendence 
of the ward's estate shan be named as the next friend or guardian for 
the suit, as the case may be. 40 
36011963. 

11 
!ro. Where. in any suit brought by or against a ward. any civil court Payment 
decrees any costs against the ward's next friend or guardian for the of costs. 
suit, the Court of Wards $lall cause the Costs to be paid out of the 
estate of the ward. 
S' 31. Every process which may be issued by any civil or revenue Processes 
court against any ward shall be served on the ward's next friend or against 
Iluardian for the suit. ward to be served on 
his next 
friend or 
guardian. 
32. No suit shail be brought. and no appeal in any suit shall be Authority 
preferred, by any manager appointed by the Court of Wards on behalf of Court 
10 of any ward unless it is authorised by an order in writing of the OfW?reddS requlr 
Court of Wards: in case of 
PrOVided that the manager may authorise the filing of a plaint or bRuits ht . . ro~ 
a memorandum of appeal lD order to save a SUIt or appeal from being on behalf 
barred by the law of limitation, but the suit or appeal shall not after- of wards. 
15 wards ,be proceeded with except with the sanction of the Court of 
Wards. 
33. (J) Where any question arising between two or more wards is Adjudica-
of such a nature that an adjudication upon it by a civil court is ex- tien ot 
pedient. it shall be lawful for the Court of Wards or any person ci.vil 
20 who may be authorised by it in this behalf to file in the civil court ~putes 
in which a case might have been stated for its opinion with regard t;:::n 
to that question under rule 1 of Order XXXVI in the First Schedule more 
to ,the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908. a statement containing the Wards. 
point or points for determination. 
25 (2) When such statement has been filed, the court shall appoint a 
guardian for the suit for each ward having a separate interest, and 
such guardians shall thereupon conduct the case subject to the ~eneral 
control of the Court of Wareis. 
(3) The court may, if it thinks fit. amend the case so stated and 
30 shall then proceed to hear and dispose of the ease in the manner pro-
vided in Order XXXVI in the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, for the hearing and di,sposal of cases stated for its 
opinion under that Order. 
35 
CHAPTER V 
DISABILITIES OF A W ABO 
34. (l) Except with the approval of the Court of Wards, a ward Disabili-
shall be incompetent to transfer or create any charge on, or interest ties of a 
In, his estate or I'IlY part thereof except such interest as may be created ward. 

Sanction 
ot Central 
Govern-
ment 
necessary 
for 
adoption 
and wills 
to be made 
by wards. 
With-
drawalot 
superin-
tendence 
of Court 
of Wards. 
1~ 
by a win made in accordance with section 35 or to enter into any eon;. 
tract which may involve him in pecuniary liability; and no suit ahall 
be brought in any civil court whereby to charge any Ruler upon any 
promise made aiter he has ceased to be a ward to pay any debt COIl-
tracted during the period when he was a ward, or upon any ratifiea- 5 
tion made after he has ceased to be a ward of any promise· or cOn-
tract made during the period aforesaid, whether there is or is not 
any new consideration for such promise or ratification. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed. to affect the capacity 
of a ward to enter into a contract of marriage: 10 
Provided that a ward. shall not incur, in connection with such 
a contract, any pecuniary liability, except such as, having reprd 
to the personal law to wlUch he is subject and to his rank and cir-
cumstances, the Court of Wards may, in writing, declare to be 
reasonable. r 5 
35. No adoption or will made by a ward shall be valid unless it 
has been made with the sanction of the Central Government obtain-
ed on an application made to it by the ward through the Court 
of Wards: 
Provided that sanction shall not be withheld unlesa it appeari 20 
to the Central Government that the adoption or the will 1s COD-
trary to the personal or special law applicable to the ward, or that 
it is likely to cause considerable pecuniary embarrassment to the 
estate or to lower considerably the influence or respectability of 
the Ruler in public estimation. 25 
CHAPl'ER VI 
RELEASE OF ESTATES FROM SUPEBINTBNDENCE 
38. (1) The Court of Wards shall withdraw its superintendence 
of the estate of a ward-
(a) in the case of a Ruler disqualified under c1au. (a) of 30 
section 5 or in the case referred to in section 7, as soon as the 
Ruler attains his majority; 
(b) in the case of a Ruler diaqu8lifted under <:lause (b) of 
section 5, as soon as he ceases to be of unsound mind and is 
capable of managing his elJtate; 35 
(c) in the case of a Ruler .disqualified under clause (c) of 
section 5, as soon as in the opi.n1on of the Central Government 
hc,Das become fit to manage his estate; 
"(d) in the case referred to in section 8, on such date as the 
" Central Government may, by notification in the Offtcial Gazette, 40 
appoint; and 
(e) in the case of the death of a Ruler, as IIOOIl u hia lUe· 
cessor is recognised by the President. 

8 of 1890. 
13 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (I) shall prevent the Court. 
of Ward&-
(a) in any case where at the time when the Court of 
Wards has to withdraw its superintendence under suh-feCtion 
5 (1), the estate is still encumbered with debts and liabilities, 
from continuing its superintendence with the sanction of the 
Central Govemment until such debts and liabilities are dis.-
charged; or 
(b) from withdrawing its superintendence at any time with 
10 the sanction of the Central Government. 
37. (J) Where in exercise of the powers conferred by section 36, Appoint-
the Court of Wards decides to withdraw its superintendence from. ment of 
the estate of any minar, it shall, before such withdrawal, by an order JUal'dian 
in writing, appoint some person to be guardian of the estate of the in certain 
IS said minor, and such appointment shall take effect from the date of cues. 
such withdrawal. 
(2) In appointing a guardian under this section, the Court of 
Wards shall be guided Iby the provisions of the GuardikllS and. Wards 
Act, 1890, and every guardian so appointed shall have, and be SLlb-
~o ject to, the same rights, duties and liabilities as if he had been 
appointed under that Aet. 
38. Where the Court of Wards withdraws its superintendence With-
tram the estate of a ward under this Act, the fact of such with· drawal to 
drawal shall be notified. in the Official Gazette and i.n such other man- be ootUled 
:as ner as the Central Government may, by general Ot' special orde!', Gin OfIclal 
di t azette. rec . 
30 
3S 
39. An appeal shall lie from every order other than an order of a Appeals. 
civil court passed. under this Act, whether original or on appeal,-
(a) if the order is that of a Commissioner, Special Oftlcer 
or a Board, to the Central Government; 
(b) if the order is that of a Collector or a Deputy Commis-
mOIler, to the Commissioner; 
(c) in all other cases, to' the Collector or the Deputy Com-
missioner of a district: 
Provided that in no case shall a third appeal lie. 
CHAPTER VII 
MIscELLANEOUS 
40. All orders or proceedings under this Act, other than orders or Control of 
proceedings of a civil court, ahall be sulbject to the supervision and Central 
40 control of the Central Government; and the Central Govemment :,em. 

Dele8&-
lion of 
tuDctiODI 
by Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Power to 
compel at-
tendanee 
of wit-
neaes. 
Bar of 
suit.. 
Power~ 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rul •. 
iila7. if it thinks fit, revise, modify, or reverse any such OII'der or 
proceeding, whether an appeal is presented against such order or 
proceeding or not. 
41. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that the functions exercisable by it under this Act 5 
shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any. as 
may be specified in the notification., be exercisable also by an oftlcer 
su.bordinate to that Government or by a State Govemment or by 
an offiCE:1' sUlbordinate to .a State Government. 
42. For the purposes of this Act, the Court of Wards may sum- IO 
mon and enforce the attendance of any witness and compel him to 
give evidence, and compel the production oJ documents, by the same 
means and, as far as may be, in the same manner, as is provided in 
the case of a civil court by the Code of Civil Procedure, 190& & of 1808. 
43. No suit s~all be ·brought in any civil court against the Court IS 
of Wards or any public servant or person duly appointed or authoris-
ed under this Act in respect of anything in good faith done or in-
tended to be done under the provisions thereof or the rules made 
thereunder: 
Provided. that any tenant from whom an arrear of rent has been 20 
recovered under section 24 may ::-lIe for recovery of the amount. (lr 
any part thereof, so recovered. 
". (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the OM-
cial Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In panicular and without prejudice to the generality of the 25 
foregoing power, such rules may-
(a) prescribe the matters to which regard shall be had in 
appointing or removing guardians and managers, IDd in fbdDg 
their remuneration, and their powers and duties; 
(b) regulate the fonn., conditions and amount of security, 30 
and the number of sureties, if any, to be given by the manage.rs 
appointed by the Court of Wards; , 
(c) prescribe the cases in which proposals or arnngemente 
connected with the administration of the estates of wards shall 
be reported for the sanction of the Central Government; 3S 
(c1) prescribe the accounts and other returns, and. the form 
and other particulars thereof, which shall be rendered by the 
;, Court of Wards to the Central Government and to the Court of. 
Wards; 

15 
(e) regulate the custody of securities and title-deeds belong-
ing to the estate of a ward; 
(f) regulate the procedure in inquiries and appeals under 
this Act, fix the periods of limitation which shall apPlY to such 
S appeals and the fees payable in respect of such appeals; 
(g) prescribe the mode in which powers delegated to 
managers and officers are to be notified for the information of 
persons concerned; 
(h) prescribe the mode in which any expenses incurred by 
10 the Court of Wards, or any revenue officer under any power 
conferred by this Act may be recovered; 
(i) generally prescri'be the manner in which the powers aDd 
duties of the Court of Wards under this Act shall be exercised 
and performed. 
IS (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it 11'1 in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be compriseci in 
one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of 
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
20 ing. both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only In such modlfted form or be of no effect, 
a. the case may be; so however that any such modiftcatioa ar annul-
ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previ-
25 ously done under that rule. 
45. (1) The enactments specified in column 2 of the Schedule Repeal 
shall, to the extent to which they confer powers and functions in and 
relation to the estates of Rulers of Indian States, stand repealed in lavin ... 
the State or Union territory specified in the corresponding entry in 
30 column 1 thereof or, as the case may be, in any part or parts of that 
State or Union territory where that enactment is in force. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the provisions of any enactment specified. in the Sche-
dule shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with 
3 S the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the provisions of this Act as if the said provisions were in 
force when such thing was done or when such action was taken and 
shall contf.nue in force accordingly until superseded by anythfng 
done or any action taken under this Act. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section '5) 
State or Union TerrttorY Enactments 
Andhra Pradab 
Gujarat 
Kerala 
Madhya Prademl 
Mahara.htra 
• 
MflO ra 
west Benlal 
Manipur 
Himachal PradMh 
2 
The Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) , 
Court ot Wards Act, 1902 (l of 
1902). 
The Bombay Court ot Warda Act, 
1905 (1 ot 190~). 
The Madras Court at Wards Act, 10 
'1902 (I of 19(2). 
.. The Central Provinees Court ot 
Wards Act, 1899 (XXIV of 1898). 
The Madras Court of Ward. Act, 
1902 (l of 19(2). 15 
(i) The Bombay Court ot Ward. 
Act, 1905 (1 of 1805). 
(ii) The Central Provineea Court 
of W8l!Cls Act, 1899 (XXIV 
of 1899). 10 
(i) The Madrae Court of Wards 
Act, 1902 (I of 1902). 
(Ii) The Bombay Court of Wards 
Act. 1905 (I of 1905). 
The Oriua Court ot Warda Act, 1"" 25 
(XXVI of 1947). 
The Court of Wards Ad, 18'19 (IX of 
1879). 
The Court of Ward. Act, 1879 (Ben-
gal Act IX of 1879), .. extended to 30 
Manlpur. 
The Punjab Court of wards Act, 1903 
(Punjab Act n ot 1903), as extend-
ed to Himaehal Ptadelb. 
16 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
" When the Ruler of a former Indian State is a minor or is other-
wise incapable of maooging his estate, the need arises to place his 
estate under the supervision of a Court of Wards. According to the 
Constitution, the power to enact laws relating to Courts of Wards for 
the estates of Rulers of Indian States is vested. in Parli'lment. No 
such law has yet been enacted. This has given rise to some incon-
venience and it is proposed to remedy the situation by enacting this 
Bill. . ., 
The notes on clauses explain the important provisions of the Bill. 
NEW'DELHI; GULZARI LAL NANDA. 
The 4th September, 1964. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 21/5/64-Poll. III, dated the 5th September, 
]964 from Shri Jai Sukh Lal Hathi, Minister of State in the Minis-
try of Home Affairs to the Secretary, Lok Sabhs.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of 
the Court of Wards (Rulers of Indian States) Bill, 1964, recom-
mends consideration of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under article 
117 (3) . of the Constitution of Indie. 
17 
940 (B) LS-4. 

Notes on clause8 .. 
CHAPTER II 
Cla.we 3 provides for the constitution of the Collector or the De-
puty Commissioner as the Court of Wards within his jurisdiction and 
also authorises the appointment of it Commissioner or a Special 
Oftlcer or a Board to be e Court of Wards. 
Clause 5 specifies the faetorf; or circumstancs which should be 
deemed to disqualify a Ruler to manage his estate. 
Clause 6 lays down the procedure to be followed before a Ruler 
is declared to tbe disqualified to manage his estate. Provision hi) 
been made for an inquiry before the declaration and for giving to 
the Ruler an opportunity to show cause against the proposed declara-
tion. 
Clause 8 enables 0 Ruler to apply to the Central Government teo 
have his estate placed under the superintendence of the Court of 
Wards. . 
Cl.auae 9 provide. for the custody and protection of the estate of 
a Ruler if there is any doubt or dispute relating to succession. But 
this power can be exercised only by the Central Government Gnd 
the steps necessary for such custody end protection will be taken by 
the Court of Wards on the issue of a direction by the Central Gov-
ernment. In cases where the Court of Wards itself feels 1mat a pel'IOll 
recognised as the successor of a deceased Ruler is, or should be 
declared to be, disqualified to manage his estate, the Court may, on 
its own motion, take necessary action for the temporary custody and 
prottIriion of the estate of such Ruler. 
Cla.use 11 i7l.teT alia makes it clear that whenever the Court of 
Wards assumes the superintendence of the estate of any Ruler, such 
superintendence will eXltend to the whole of the property, movable 
and immovable, comprising the estate of such Ruler including pro-
perty, if any, of whose existence the Court may not be aware. 
(8 

19 
CHAP'l'ER III 
Clause 13 imposes an obllgation on the Court of Wards to require 
all p~rsons having claims against the estate to submit the claims in 
writing to the Court wiLhill a specified period. 
Clause 14 authorises the Court of Wards to call upon all claim· 
ants to furnish full particulars and to produce all documents on 
which they rely in support of their claims. 
Clause 15 provides for the investigation of claims and for the 
ascertainment of the amounts payable under each claim. 
ClaUBe 16 imposes a temporary ban on the execution of d~ 
againat the ward or his estate subsequent to the publication by the 
Court of Wards of the notice inviting persons to submit cleims 
against the estate. Consequent upon the temporary stay of the 
execution of decrees provided in this clause, ,provision has been made 
for saving the period of limitation. 
Clause 17 p.nables the Central Government to direct the Court of 
Wards to withdraw its superintendence where it appears to the Cen-
tral Government that the estate Is involved beyond all hope (If 
extrication and specifies the consequences of such withdrawal. 
CHAPTER IV 
Clouae 18 provideB for the delegation by the Court of Wards of 
its powers and it allO empowers the Court to exercise all or any 
of its powers through certain Revenue Omcers. 
Clauses 19, 20 and 21 provide for the appointment by the Court 
of Wards of a manager of an estate and specify the powers and 
functions of such manager. 
Clause 22 enables the Court of Wards to detennine the'amounts 
that should be anowed in respect of the expenses of the ward and' of 
his family and dependents. 
Clause 23 enables the Court of Wards to sell, mortgage or other-
wise deal with the estate of the ward, subject to certain restrictions 
rmd limitations. 
Clause 24 provides for the recovery of arrears of rents, profits, 
etc., as arrears of land revenue. 
ClaII.Be· 25 saves the estate .so long as it is under the superintend- . 
eDce of the Court of Wards from liability to sale on account of 
U'l'eal'll of land revenue, but this will not affect clause 26. 

20 
Ckz'use 26 constitutes all expenses incurred in respect of the estate 
of a Ruler hy the Court of Wards as a charge upon the estate and 
.renders it recoverable as 'lrrears ·of land revenue. 
Clause 27 enQbles the Court of Wards to claim exemption of the 
estate for a specified period from attachment and sale etc., by a Court. 
Clause 28 bars all suits relating to the estates of wards in respect 
of which at least two months' prior notice has not been given to the 
Court of Wareis. 
Clause 33 confers power on the Court of Wards acting through 
the Collector or the Deputy Commissioner to state a case for the 
opinion of a civil cqurt whenever any question arises between two 
or more ~rds which ~s of such a nature that adjudication by a court 
of law is considered expedient. 
CHAPTER V 
Ci.au.ses 34 and 35 impose I!ertain disabilities on the ward in res-
pect of his dealings with the estate and prohibits the making by any 
ward of any adoption or will oove with the sanction of the Central 
Government. 
CHAPrER VI 
. ·Cl~uBe 36 enumerates the circum.stances under which it will be 
·~bligatory on the Court of Wards to withdraw its superintendence of 
the estate of a ward. 
ClfJuse 37 empowers the Court of Wards to appoint a guardjan of 
the estate before the Court withdraws its superintendence. 
Clause 39 provides for appeals from orders of any authority other 
than a civil court and makes it clear that there shall be no third 
appeal. 
CHA,PTER VII 
Clause 40 vests in the Central Government control over the Court 
of Wards and also enables the Central Government to revise the 
orders of the Court of Wards. 
Clause 45 provides for the repeal of emctmentstn force in certain 
States and Union territories in so far as they confer powers and 
functionS in relation to the estates of Rulers of Indian States. Most 

21 
of those enactments, which were in force even before the C'Jmmence-
ment of the Constitution, continued to be in force after such com-
mencement by virtue of article 372 of the Constitution. In the absence 
of any separate enactment relating to the Court of Wards for estates 
of Rulers of Indian States, those enactments were adapted so as to 
confer on the Central Government the executive authority under 
them in relation to such estates. 
The Schedule contains the list of enactments to be repealed in 
part. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill constitutes the Collector or the Deputy 
Commissioner of the district as the Court of Wards within his juris-
diction and the proviso to that clause er.ebles the Central Govern-
ment, if it thinks fit, to appoint a Commissioner or Special Officer 
or a Board to perform the functions of the Court of Wards in certain 
cases. The expenses incurred by the Court of Wards would in the 
first instance have to be met from Central revenues. Again, clause 
6 provides for the making of an inquiry into the circumstances 
and conditions of a Ruler believed to be disqualified to manage his 
estate. Such an inquiry will be held by an officer appointed by the 
Central Government. On the basis of the report of the inquiry 
officer, the Government mayor may not decide to fake over the 
estate of a Ruler under the Court of Wards. 
Where the estate of a Ruler is taken over under the Court of 
Warels, a'll expenses incurred by the Court of Wards in respect of 
that estate will by virtue of clause 26 form a charge upon the estate 
and will be recoverable as arrears o! land revenue. However, the 
expenses incurred in the initial stages, that is, before the estate 
is taken over, and the expenses incidental to such taking over, in-
cluding the holding of an inquiry, would have to be met from the 
Consolidated Fund of India in the first instance. This expenditure 
will be reimburSed from the estate if it is eventually taken over 
und~r the Court of Wards. 
In certain cases, it is possible that the results disclosed by the 
inquiry contemplated by clause 6 may not be such as to justify 
the Central Government directing that the management of the 
estate be taken over by the Court of Wards. The expenses of the 
inquiry which will have to be met from the Consolidated Fund of 
India, will not in such cases be reimbursable since there would be 
no estate from :whose revenues it could be claimed. At present it 
is not possible to foresee what the expenditure on this account is 
likely to be as it depends upon the number of inquiries to be COD-
ducted and the decision in each case. However, the amount Is not 
!xpected to be substantial. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING. DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purpose. of the Act. The matters with 
reepect to which such rules may be made relate, inter alia, to the 
appointment or removal of guardians and maoogers by the Court df 
Wards, their remuneration, powers and duties, the cases in which 
sanction of the Central Government is required regarding proposals 
or urrangements connected with the administration of the estates of 
wards, the accounts and returns which should be rendered to the 
Court of Wards, and the form and other particulars thereof, the cus-
tody of securities and title deeds belonging to the estate of a ""rd, 
the procedure in inquiries and appeals and the fees payabie in respect 
thereof and the recovery of expenses incurred by the Court of Wards. 
These are matters of procedure or administrative detail. The delega-
tion of legislative power is thus of a normal charecter. 

LOK SABHA 
:\ 
BILL 
to provide for the superintendence of the estates of th~ 
Rulers of Indian States by the Oluft of Wards in 
certain cases. 
(Shri- Gulzarilal Nanda. 
Minister of Hqme Affairs.) 