= the People Short
title and
com.

mence-
Govern- ment,



’ \ ~ AS INTRODUCED In Lok Sapna

9 ANG 10६

Bill No. 58 of 1966

‘THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
4 «1 (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1966...

poe:

Bem BIL

mete

“>
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and the
Representation of the People Act, 1951.

1, Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth: Year of the yr I
Public of India as follows * ।
|

CHAPTER I i

i ’
(0 This Act f the People Short it
may be called the Representation 9
Amendment) Act 1986 title and i

com.
mence-

(

OB shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- ment.
Tent dare by Notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and ae
का be appointed for different provisions of this A



|

Mement-

svenst. 0 be filleg by pers

Nencjes,

2
CHAPTER Ir
AMENDMENT OF THE REPRESENTATION
2. For sections 3 and 4 of t

h
1950 (hereafter in this Chapter re,

entation of th
fe:
following sections shall be substity:

the 1959. हु
ted, namely: _ 20000, the

People and the numbe:
Scheduled Castes ang
shall be as shown in ६

T of seats, if any, to b, i
४, le Teserved f,

for the Scheduleq Tribes of each Sta,

he First Schedule, :

section 3 to the Part B tri
by a person nominated

(2) Save as aforesaid, al] the other

Seats in the House of the
People allotted to th,

e States under that section shall be seats

‘ons chosen by direct election from parlia- ड़
tary constituengies in the States,

(3) Every. Parliamentary constituency referred to in sub-
~ Section- (2) shall be a single-member constituency.

=@ Every ‘State .to. which only one seat is allotted under
Section 3 shall form 076 parliamentary constituency. 20
(5) Save ‘as provided in’ sub-section (4), the = a
= Parliamentary constituencies shall be as napa ne
orders of the limitation Commission made under ¢ गा पर
Slons of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 or, as . v wert 25
torjce 4) 467 the Provisions of the Government of Unio!
s Act, 1963 4°" *
N j + mbers
"reson  thstanding anything contained in section Ae “ eis
he Mid immediately before the commencement ० ae et the
\ ae of Jammu ‘and Kashmir and Nagaland 7 Taecadive, 30
0७५ an Cries of the Andaman and Nicobar Islan - natn
sent Ko, Amindiyj Islands and Dadra and Naga nt each such
reach vy 20 People shall continue to Nicene eee
“ Such : हर issolution ० if
Se of the pa? Union territory until the dissolu' solution any seat
mt ea ple and 80 often as hefore such gee in the 35
” State or to each such Union 1 be filled by 4
© People becomes vacant, it sha shall represen!
the President and that person

unti!
People un
*rritory in the present House of the

men:

| of 1962.

20 af |


4, For section 7 of the 1950-Act, the following shall be su

stituted,
namely: —

“7, (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assem-
bly of each State specified in the Second Schedule, to be filled
by persons chosen by direct election from assembly constitu-

5 encies, and the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of the State,
shall be as shown in that Schedule:

Provided that for the period referred to in clause (2) of
article 371A, the total number of seats allotte

d to the Legisla-
10 tive Assembly of the State of Nagaland shall be forty-six, of
which— हि

(a) six seats shall be allocated to the T:
and shall be filled by persons chosen by the members of the
15 .- - , Tegional council, referred to in that articl

rticle, from’ amongst
themselves in such manner as the Governor, after consulting
that council may, by notification in the Official “Gazette,
specify, and

‘uensang’ district

chosen: by direct elect
the gest of the State.

(2) Every assembly constituency referred to in sub-section
(1):shall be a. single-member constituency.

ion from assembly constituencies in

' (83) The extent of each assembly constittien¢y“in the State

of Nagaland shall be as determined by the order‘ of the Election

3, Commission under section 11 of the State of N: saland, Act, 1962;

and the extent of each assembly constituency.in any other State

shall be as determined by order of the Delimitation Commission

under the provisions of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962

or, as the case may be, under the provisions of the Govern-
ment of Union Territories Act, 1963.

THe DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY
CONSTITUENCIES ORDER

8. (1) As soori as may be, after all the orders referred to
in sub-section (5) of section 4 or in sub-section (3) of section 7
relating to the delimitation of parliamentary and assembly cons-
tituencies have been made by the Delimitation Commission or,
* the case may be, the Election Commission and published in
t © Official Gazette, the Election Commission shall, after mak-
8 such amendments as appear to it to be necessary for

Substitu-
tion of
new sec_

tions for
section 7.
Total
number
of seats
in Legis-

lative As-

semblies
and as_
sembly
constitu.
encies,

(b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by persons ©

Consolida-

tion of
delimita_
tion
orders.

\


4

date the description of the extent of a parlia=

constituencies as given in such orders, con-

men On ders into one single order to be known as

sO limitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies
omer, 1966 and shall send authentic copies of that Order to the 5

Central Government and to the Government of each State

having a Legislative Assembly; and thereupon that Order shall

supersede alt the orders referred to in sub-section (5) of sec-

] tion 4 or in sub-section (3) of section 7 and shall have the full
force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. 10

pringing up-to

(2) As soon as may be, after the said Order is received by
the Central Government or by the Government of a State, that
Government shall cause it to be laid before the House of the
People or, as the case may be, the Legislative Assembly of the 7
State.

wer Of 9. (1) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by
notification published in the Gazette of India and in the Official
Gazette of the State concerned —

(a) correct any printing mistake in the Delimitation of
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1966, 20
or any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or
omission;

(b) where the boundaries or name of any district or
any territorial division mentioned in the Order are or is
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be neces- 25
Sary or expedient for bringing the Order up-to-date.

(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as
Soon as may be after it is issued, before the House of the People
and the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.”,

3 After section 13A of the 1950-Act, the following section shall 30 हि ६८
be inserted, namely: —

oma a each district in a State, other than a Union

i Gove e Election Commission shall, in consultation with

lection a of the State, designate or nominate a district

7 who shall be an officer of Government:

J SSSR | rovided that {

01 ६ more tha
ta mmission

not be Perform

35
he Election Commission may designate or
॥ one such officer for a district if the Elec-
is satisfied that the functions of the office
ed satisfactorily by one officer.



Pe

(2) Where more than one district election officer are deslg-
nated or nominated for a district under the proviso to sub-
section (/), the Election Commission shall in the order designa-
ting or nominating the district election officers also specify the
area in respect of which each such officer shall exercise
5 jurisdiction.

(3) Subject to the superintendence, direction and control
of the chief electoral officer, the district election officer shall
co-ordinate and supervise all work in the district or in the area
within his jurisdiction in connection with the preparation and

10 revision of the electoral rolls for all parliamentary, assembly

and council constituencies within the district.

(4) The district election officer shall also perform such
other functions as may be entrusted to him by the, Election
Commission and the chief electoral officer.”.

6. In section 138 of the 1950-Act, in sub-section (J), for the Amend-
८ “for a parliamentary constituency in each of the Union terri- ment of
tories of Delhi, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Laccadive, 188
Minicoy and Amindivi Islands and Dadra and Nagar Haveli”, the .

owords “for each parliamentary constituency in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir or in a Union territory not having a Legislative
Assembly” shall be substituted.

1. For section 13D of the 1950-Act, the following section shall be Substitu-
substituted, namely:— tion of
new sec.
tion for
section

“ 13D.

25. , 13D. (1) The electoral roll for every parliamentary consti- Electoral
he other than 4 parliamentary constituency in the State of rolls for
vammu and Kashmir or in a Union territory not having a Legis- patlia~
awe Assembly, shall consist of the electoral rolls for all the ments

कि only constituencies comprised within that parliamentary encies. हि

stituency; and it shall not be necessary to prepare or revise

Sepa
tueneys the electoral roll for any such parliamentary consti-

15

: ation ya that for the period referred to in clause (2) of

s | the ele , it shall be necessary to prepare and revise separate-

eney of Neale roll for that part of the parliamentary constitu-

Provisions of heen comprises the Tuensang district and the

2nd revision of न गा shall apply in relation to the preparation

i relation ६ e electoral roll of the said part as they apply
© an assembly constituency.

0


See,

6

(2) The provisions of P
parliamentary constituency
or in a Union territory not
they apply in relation to an

art IIT shal
in the Sta
having a

1 apply in relation to every
te of Jammy and Kashmir

Legislative Assembly as
assembly Constituency,”,

8, In section 20 of the 1950-Act,—

(a) for sub-section (3),

the following sul
substituted, namely: —

b-section shal] be

“(3) Any person having a service qualification shall pe
deemed to be ordinarily resi 'y date in the consti-

esident on an
tuency in which, but for his having such Service qualification,
Y resident on that date.”;

he would have been ordinaril

1a in a post outside India,”
shall be omitted;

(c) in sub-section (5) ,—

(i) for the words “but for his service jin the armed
forces or, as the case mi

ay be, the armeq police force”, the
words “but for his having the service qualification” shall be
substituted;

(४) the words «
shall be omitted; and

(tit) for the words “conclusive

evidence of that fact”,
the words «

accepted as correct” shall be substituted;
(d) after sub-section

हे (6), the following sub-sectiong shall
be serted, namely:

5

Io

1S

20
or being employed in any such post”

25

हु 0) If in any case a question arises as to where a person
7 ordinarily resident at any relevant time, the question
hall be determine with reference to all the facts of the

Pa and to such Tules as may be made in this behalf by the
entral Government in consul

(8) In

Sub-sect
Cans

ions (3) and (5) “service qualification”

(2) being a . f the
Union; 7 8 4 member of the armed forces ०

tation with the Election Com- 3

35

46 of 1950.

su
10

75

20



7

(b) being a me:

sions of the Army

1950 whether with op
ge

Mber 6;

Act, 1950, hay

Modif

'-¢ to which the provi-

© been made applicable

i
without cations; or

(c) being a

member 6, a
5 State,

f 4
who is Serving outeig armed police force of a

© that State; or
(4) being a perso

nm who
ernment of India, in

is employed under the Gov-
8 Post outside India’,

9. In section 21 of the 1950-Act, i i d-
sub-section shall be substituted, namely; 7 (2), the following Amen

ment of
: qT i section 21,
(2) The said electoral Toll shal] continue to be ; पर
it is directed by the Election Cy © be in force until

mmission to be revised in any
subsequent year; and where any such

ae
: direction ig given, the
electoral roll shall be revised in that year in the prescribed
manner by reference to the qualifying date ang the electoral roll
15 as in force at the time of the issue of such direction shall conti-
nue to be in force until the completio:
:

n of the revision so direct-
ed

10, For section 23 of the 1950-Act, the following section shall be Substitu.
substituted, namely: — : _ ot
tion for

section 23.
“23, (1) Any person whose name is not included in the elec- Inclusion
apply to the electoral Tegistra- of names
8 name in that roll, in elec-

toral
(2) The electoral registration officer shall, if satisfied that rolls,

toral roll of a constituency may
tion officer for the inclusion of hi,

20
the appl
5

icant is entitled to be registered in the electoral roll,

direct his name to be included therein:

Provided that if
roll of

L in
Stituenc
Strike 0]

2

the applicant is registereq in the electoral
any other constituency, the electoral registration officer
form the electoral registraticn officer of that other con-
v and that officer shall, on receipt of the information,
ff the anplicant’s name from that roll.

(3) No amendme

30

nt. transposition or deletion of any entry

be made under section 22 and no direction for the inclusion

fa name in the electoral roll of a constituency shall be given

a UNder this section. after the last date for making nominations for

lection in that constituency or in the parliamentary consti-

a within which that constituency is comprised and ‘before
“ompletion of that election.”.

l Th h Amend.
of ela O84 ० the 1950-Act, the word “and” cecurring at the ment of

: ion 24
5९ (६) shall be omitted and clause (b) shall be omitted. section >

Shal]



12. In section 28 of the 1950-Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (a)

the foll

owing clauses shall be substituted, namely: —

« a) the determination of ordinary residence under sub-
section (7) of section 20;

(aa) the particulars to be entered in the electoral rolls;”.

“THE FIRST SCHEDULE

Allocation of seats in the House of the People
_ री ee EEE

(See section 3)

Total Reserved

Name of State, Union territory or area number
of seats हैं scheduled scheduled

for

castes % tribes

43, For the First Schedule to the 1950-Act, the following Schedule
shall be substituted, namely: —

Reserved

for

| : ; |
L—STATES:
1. Andhra Pradesh : ar 7 वि
जगत 12 7 7
3 Bihar 53 7 5
4. Gujarat नर पु दा है :
5. Jammu and Kashmir . 6 i
6. Kerala नि . 18 if |
५ vedhya Pradesh 36 5 i
- Madras ae 7 ;
9. Maharashtra
10. 3 26 :
Mysore 7
1. Nagaland °
12. Orissa 7 ह
13. Punjab 2 : ;
* Rajasthan i 3 2
7 22 3
2 tar Pradesh 86 8
» West Ben 36 ‘ 2
gal 36 6 7

Io

15

20

25

30

10

Til

15

8८06


' 2 3 4

L—UNION TERRITORIE,

SS

. Andaman and Nicobar Islands I
2. Dadra and Nagar Haveli I हु 1
3. Delhi 5 1 हि
4. Goa, Daman and Diu 2 ह
5. Himachal Pradesh 4 1
6. Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi
Islands . पु . I 1
10 Manipur 2 I
8. Pondicherry I हा
9. Tripura 2 I
= —AREA
Part B tribal areas. पु . . I
7 ToTaL . : : 508 76 33.”

14. For the Second Schedule to the 1950-Act, the following Substitu-

Schedule shall be substituted, namely:— tion of
new
“THE SECOND SCHEDULE Schedule
(See section 7) for Second
~ Tq - a . Schedule.
20 Total number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies
Se __
N, हि Total Reserved Reserved
ame of the State/ Union territory number for for
of seats. scheduled scheduled
castes tribes
4 ++_-- -- >+-
० ! हि 2 3 4
1-७7५ TES .
7. Andhra Pra
॥ Pradesh I
Assan 390 #8 29
3: पक हि दि कि
4 Gujara 318 # »
5. Keraly 154 गा डा
| hyn p, वि पु 7 मु 126 II I
radesh 2 4
7 anol yo, 288 3 5 y,



10
| जप
= _—
if 2 3 4
$. Maharashtra, . : r 264 33 14
9. Mysore. . . . . 208 28 I है
10. Nagaland रु . : . 60 an -
) [for the period referred to in 5
j clause (2) of article 371A, 46]
1. Orissa के . . . . 140 25 29
12. Punjab. . . : नि 154 33 जा
13. Rajasthan . न न 5 176 28 20
14 Uttar Pradesh . . . . 430 89 .. Io
15. West Bengal. व दि . 252 45 15 id
IL—UNION TERRITORIES: ‘
1. Goa, Daman and Diu : . 30 बा
2. Himachal Pradesh. . न 4I 12 aa
3. Manipur . 7 : . : 30 7 .. TS
4. Pondicherry $ . नि 30 5 i 15
5. Tripura . 7 . हर डर 30 on Phe

CHAPTER III
AMENDMENT OF THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE Act, 1951

15. In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 2? 43 of
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the 1951-80) —

(a) in sub-section (J) —

(i) after clause (c). the following clause shall ibe in-
serted, namely: —

‘(ec) “district election officer’? means the officer 25
designated or nominated under section 13AA of the Re-
presentation of the People Act, 1950;’;

(ii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be in-
serted, namely: —

‘(h) “public holiday” means any day which is ae 30
Public holiday for the purposes of section 25 of the Ne-
gotiable Instruments Act, 1881;’;

(iti) clause (k) shall be omitted;



pO I

= for sub-section (5), the

following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely; — 8

“(5) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in

force in the State of Jammy and Kashmir shall, in relation

पर to that State, be construed as a reierence to the correspond-
ing law, if any, in force in that State.”, :

16. In Part I] of the 1951-Act, for the heading “QuALIFICATIONS
anp DISQUALIFICATIONS For Mempersiny”, the heading “Quattrica-
nIoNS AND DISQUALIFICATIONS” shall be subs.ituted,

10 17, In section 3 of the 1951-Act, the brackets and words “(other
ihan the State of Jammu and Kashmir)” shall be omitted.

18, In section 4 of the 1951-Act,—

(a) the words “to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, or”
shall be omitted;

15 (0) in clause (c), the word “and” cccurring at the end shall
be omitted;

(c) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(cc) in the case of the seat reserved for the Scheduled

20 Tribes in the Union territory of the Laccadive, Minicoy and

Amindivi Islands, he is a member of any of those Scheduied

Tribes and is an elector for the Parliamentary constituency

of that Union territory; and”.
19. In section 5 of the 1951-Act, in clause (b), for the words
25 “Scheduled Tribe of that district”, the word- “Scheduled Tribe of
any autonomous district” shall be substituted.

20. In Part II cf the 1951-Act, for Chapter III, the following Chap-
‘eS shall be substituted, namely: —
‘CHAPTER III

Disquatipicarions FOR MEMBERSHIP OF PARLIAMENT AND STATE
LEGISLATURES

»

7. In this Chapter—

35 disg
of e

(4) “appropriate Government” means in relation to any |;
Ualification for being chosen 85 or for being a member
0 a House of Parl‘ament, the Central Government, and

101 to any disqualification for being chosen as or for

Substitu-
tion of
new
heading
for head-
ing of
Part II.
Amend-
ment of
section 3.
Amend.
ment of
section 4,

Amend-
ment of
section 5.

Substitu-
tion of
new
Chapters
for
Chapter
III of
Part II.

Defini-
ions



the 4 ve As. inbly or Legislative

511, the St Government;
disqualified fur being chosen
either House of Parliament
or Legislative Council of a §

means

r of the Levislative Assembly

8. (7) A person convicted of an offence punishable under
section 17117 ov section 1717 of the Indian Penal Code, or under 45 of 1860,
tion 135 <r clause (a) of sub-vection (2) of sec-

ection 125 or se
tion 136 of this Act shill ve disqualified for a period of six years

f such convic ion.

(2 on convicted by a.court in India for any offence

and sentenced 1० imprisonment for noi less than two years shall
fied ‘vom the date of such conviction and shall conti-

ied for a further period of five years since his

from the date

2) A per.

nue to be disquati
release.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1) and sub-
ion (2), a disqualification under either sub-section shall not,
case of a person who on the date of the conviction is a
er of Parliament or the Legislature of a State, take effect 20
e months have elapsed ircm that date or, if within that
period an appeal or application for revision is brought in respect
he conviction or the sentence, until that appeal or application

sposed of by the court.

2A. A person iound guilty of a corrupt practice, by an order
section 99, shall be disqualified for a period of six years
he date on which that order takes effect.

of tl

(1) A person who having held an office under the Govern-
of India or under the Goverament of any State has heen
ralty to the State shall be dis- 30
s frorn the date of such dismissal.

sed for corruption or dis]

ded for a period of five 5
(2, For the purposes of sub-section (/), a certificate issued
tne Election Cornmission to the effect that a person having
ld office under the Government of India or under the Gov-
t of a State, has or has not been dismissed for corruption

all be conclusive proof of thet fact. 35

n
ord clovalty to the Staice

13. A person shall be disquatiied if, and for so long as, there
into by him in the course of his trade

12 .1515 a contract en‘ere
OF buUSinese wi तु a मु
हो a with the appropriate Government for the supply of

2 10, or for the execution of any works undertaken by, that 40

Goy,
ernment,

15



18
Explanation.—For the purposes of. this section, Wheré a con+
tract has been fully performed by the person by whom it has
been entered into with the appropriate Government, the contract
shall be deemed not to subsist by reason only of the fact that
the Government has not performed its part of the contract either
wholly or in part. हे है

10, A person shall be disqualified if, and for so long as, he is pjsqualifi-
a director, managing agent, manager or secretary of any company cation for
or corporation (other than a co-operative society) in the capital office न
of which the appropriate Government has not less than twenty- ander
five per cent. share. ment.com-
. . . pany.
_10A. If the Election Commission is satisfied that a person— pj.qualifi-

हि ti cation
(a) ‘has failed to lodge an account of election expenses +), saiture

', within the time and in the manner requiréd by or under this to 10186

Act; and account: .-
5 i fait ०३६17 ६ # of elec= ;

a © + (8) has ho good reason or justification ‘for the failure, tion ex-
the Election Commission shall, by order published in the penses.
Official Gazette, declare him to be disqualified and any such
person shall be disqualified for a period of three years from

the date of the order.

10

£ ~ वा, The Election Commission, may, for reasons to be recorded, Removal
remove any disqualification under this Chapter, or,.reduce’ the °F reduc~ i
period of any such disqualification. : tion of «A i

DISQUALIFICATIONS FOR: VOTING ’

है : 11A. If any person, after the commencement of this Act,— Disquali- | |
4. है fication -

3 . (a) is convicted of an offence punishable under section arising :
IT7IE or section 171F of the Indian Penal Code, or under sec- out OF adi 4
tion 125 or section 135 or clause (a) of sub-section (2) of ood
section 136 of this Act, or corrupt
§ (0) is found guilty of a corrupt practice by an order tee,
By. Under section 99, 4 :
a he shall, for a period of six years from the date of the conviction

+ MH from the date on which the order takes- effect, be disqualified
i r voting at any election.

11B. The Election Commission may, for reasons to be re- Removal

eae forded, remove any disqualification under this Chapter.’. qualifica-
: tions.



a1. After section 19 of the 1951-Act, the following section shalt
asertion Ld
nserted, namely: —

he i

“9A. The functions of the Election Commission under the :
constitation, the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and this 43 of 1950,
‘Act or under the rules made thereunder may, subject to such 5
general or special directions, if any, as may be given by the Elec-
tion Commissibn in this behalf, be performed also by a Deputy
Election Commissioner or by the Secretary to the Election Com-

mission.”.
Insertion 22, After section 20 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall be 10
oirew inserted, namely: —
section
28.
General 908, (1) Subject to the superintendence, direction and con-

duties trol of the chief electoral officer, the district eleetion officer shall
co-ordinate and supervise all work in the district or in the area
within his jurisdiction in connection with the conduct of all elec- 1६
tions to Parliament and the Legislature of the State.

(2) The district election officer shall also perform such other

functions as may be entrusted to him by the Election Commis-
sion and the chief electoral officer.”.

23. In section 21 of the 1951-Act, for the words “an officer of Gov- 20
ernment”, the words “an officer of Government or 0 local authority”
shall be substituted. है

५ 24, In section 22 of the 1951-82, in the proviso to sub-section (1),
tor the words “an officer of Government”, the words “an officer of
Government or of a local authority” shall be substituted. 25

2%. For section 25 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall be
‘ont SUbstituted, namely: —

95 गु'

he district election officer shall, with i
froval oe हे the previous ap

of pollin he Election Commission, provide a sufficient number
bart of bia for every constituency, the whole or greater 30
such mann ich lies within his jurisdiction, and shall publish, in
ing the "lig as the Election Commission may direct, a list show-
: of voter हि Ing stations so provided and the polling areas or groups
00१0६ 1 or which they have respectively been provided.”
p= "of 1 section 26 of the 1951-Act,—

४

© a the words “returning officer”, wherever they occur,
rds “district election officer” shall be substituted:

35

he

1d



4

(0) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely: —

“(5) Any reference to a district election officer in section

25 and in this section shall, in relation to a constituency in a
| 4 Union territory, be construed as a reference to the returning
: officer for that constituency.”
है Amend.
| 27. In section 30 of the 1951-Act,— ent oe
(a) in clause (b), for the words “the second day after”, the section
words “the day immediately foliowing” shall be substituted;
. 10 (0) in clause (c), for the words “the third day”, the words
“the second day” shall be substituted;
(c) in clause (d), for the words

“the twentieth day”, the
E “the fifteenth day” shall be substituted;

(@) the Explanation shall be omitted.

1s 28. In section 31 of the 1951-Act, the words “for the constituency” Amend.
shall be omitted,

ment of
section
31,
28. In section 33 of the 1951-Act— हु

wo Amend.
2) to sub-section 1), the followi i Bete
ee ( ‘ollowing proviso shall be added, section
33,

Paper shall be delivered
hich is a public holiday.”;

“Provided

that no nomination
to the ret

urning officer on a day wl

५ (0) in sub-section (4), for the
all be Substituted, namely:—

“Provided
Clerical, tech

Proviso, the following proviso

3s

Of the Candidate



16

shall permit any such misnomer or jn:
or clerical, technical or printing
where necessary, direct that
description, clerical, technica

accurate description
error to be corrected and
any such misnomer, inaccurate

1 or printing error in the elec~
toral roll or in the nomination Paper shall be overlooked.”. >

\

Amend- 30. In section 39 of the 1951-Act—
ment of हि 7
section (a) in sub-section (7), —

39,
(i) in clause (b), for the words “the second day after”,
the words “the day immediately following” shall be substi-
tuted; 10

(#) in clause (c), for the words “the third day”, the
words “the second day” shall be substituted;

(iii) the Explanation shall be omitted;

(b) in sub-section (2), after clause (a) of the proviso, the हि
following clause shall be inserted, namely: —

“(aa) in the case of an election to the Legislative Council
of a State by the members of the Legislative Assembly of
that State, clause. (a) of sub-section (2) of section 36 shall
be construed. as including a reference to sub-clause (d) of 20
clause (3) of article 171;”.

31. For section 41 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall be
substituted. namely: —

“ON fop
‘elion 4),

cn “4. Any person who is for the time being disqualified under
ny ane Constitution or under this Act for being a member of either
7 House of Parlisment or the House or either House of the Legis- 75
leture of a State or for voting at elections, shall, so long as the
disqualification subsists. also be disqualified for being an election
“nt at any election.”, ;
7 22. Th
90101

for 59 of the 1951-36, for the words “Tf a contesting 7
"ation hag eS the words and figures “If a candidate whose nomi- 3°
hag Not withaey found valid on serutinv under section 36 and who
Teport of hi awn his candidature under section 37 dies and a
“ntesting ५ death is Teccived before the publication of the list of

. in. . 4
ogy sh डे Candidates under section 38, or if a contesting candidate 3
© substituted,

10

15

as


Nv

43. In section 60 of the 1951-Act, in clause (a), for sub-clauses Amend-

(i), (iii) and (iv), the following sub-clauses shall be substituted, ment of
section

namely: —
2 60.

“ 6) any person to whom the provisions of sub-section (3)
5 of section 20 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 apply; 43 of 1950.

(ii) the wife of any such person as is referred to in sub-
clause (i) to whom the provisions of sub-section (6) of the said
section 20 apply;”.

34. After section 64 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall be Insertion
10 inserted, namely: — of new
section
642.
(6443. (1) If at the time of counting any ballot papers used Destruc-
at a polling station or at a place fixed for the poll are unlawfully tion, loss,
taken out of the custody of the returning officer or are accident- etc., of
ally or intentionally destroyed or lost or are damaged or tamper- ap.
ed with, to such an extent that the result of the poll at that atthe
polling station or place cannot be ascertained, the returning time of
officer shall forthwith report the matter to the Election Com- counting.

mission.

15

(2) Thereupon, the Election Commission shall, after taking
- all material circumstances into account, either—

(a) direct that the counting of votes shall be stopped,

. declare: the poll at that polling station or place to be void,

appoint a-day, and fix the hours, for taking a fresh poll at

४ that polling station or place and notify the date so appointed
ay. and hours so fixed in such manner as it may deem fit, or

५ (b) if satisfied that the result of a fresh poll at that
=" polling station or place will not, in any way, affect the result
of the election, issue such directions to the returning officer
हैँ 5 as it may deem proper for the resumption and completion
® of the counting and for the further conduct and completion
of the election in relation to which the votes have been

‘jy; Counted.

(3) The provisions of this Act and of any rules or orders
Made thereunder shall apply to every such fresh poll as they
*Pply to the original poll.”,
thy Section 66 of the 1951-Act, for the words “shall forthwith Amend-

> the words “shall, in the absence of any direction by the ment ot
"0७, section



18
Election Commission to the contrary, forthwith declare” shall bé

substituted.

amend 36. Section 78 of the 1951-Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section
mental (7) thereof and—

ation ‘
| (a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, for the words
“returning officer” the words “district eléction’ offiéer” shall be
substituted; :
(०) after sub-section (J) as so re-numbered, the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namély:— whe
“(2) The reference to the district election officer in sub- 10
section (7) shall, in relation to a constituency in a Union
territory, be.construed:as a reference to theitéturnitig officer

‘sei 31. In seetion 7 ‘of
a A Sager : we ae
ial (a) for the words and figures “Parts VII and VII’, - the 15,
i word and figures “Part VII” shall be substituted; |
(0) before clause (b), the following clause shall be inser-
ted, namely: — i

“(@): arly reference to a Hi r to the Chief |
Justice or Judge of 4 High Coutt shall, in relation to a Union 20
territory having ia Court. of the Judicial. Commissioner, be
construéd as a reference. to the said Court: of the. Judicial
Commissionér’ or. to..the Judicial Commigsioner. or any Addi-
tional Judicial Commissioner, as the case may: be;”; °

7 (० in clause (d), for the words “to withdraw”, the words 25,
10 withdraw or not to withdraw” shall be substituted; ‘
(7) for clause (e),"the following élause shall be substituted,

namely: — : ‘ है +

‘(e) “High Court” means the High Court within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction the election to which the ३०
election petition relates has been held.’,

alan

“i 8 7 After section 80 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall
Mserted, namely: — ४ : १

oF

ay (1) The Court having jurisdiction to try an election ..
on shall be the High Court, 35
tag Such jurisdiction shall be exercised ordinarily by *:
tina’ Judge of the High Court and Chief Justice shall, from
० time, assign one or more Judges for that purpose:

eerie



7 19

Provided that where the High Court consists only of one
Judge, he shall try all election petitions presented to that Court.

i 5 Amend-
39. In section 81 of the 1951-Act,— Amend.

(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “Election Commission”, section
5 the words “High Court” shall be substituted; 81.
हि (0) sub-séction (2) shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section (3), the words “and one more copy for
thé usé of thé Election Commission” shall be omitted.

a 7 . 0 oat
40. Section 85 of the 1951-Act, shall be omitted. earl

85.
10 41. For sections 86 to 92 of the 1951-Act, the following sections pol
on 0!
shall be substituted, namely: — हि kesaeed
eee coe tions for
sections
86 to 92,
“86. (1) The High Court shall dismiss an éleetion petition pyia1 कि

which does not comply with the provisions of 5९८४० 81’ or section election
82 or section ‘117. er हि 3
15... _Extpldnatiow—An’' ordet of the High Court dismissing an
है election pétition पंत this sub-section shall be deemed to be an
order made’ under clause (a) of section 98.
(2) As soon as may be after an election petition has been
presented to ‘the High Court, it shall be referred to the Judge
, ० one of the Judges who has or have been assigned by the
Chief Justice for the trial of election petitions undef sub-section
75 (६) of sebtion SOAS “51 "हे se बलि व
(3) Where rnéte election
tA. छाए the: High Court in:respect
gi shall be referred for trial .t
discretion, try them separati
(4) Any candidate not
application made by him to

petitions.

petifions ‘than’ ‘oné are ‘presented
‘of:the same election,-all.-of them
6-the'same Judge:who may;-in. his
ely or in one or more groups.
already a respondent shall, upon
the High Court within fourteen
days from the date of commencement of the trial and subject

to any order as to security for costs which may be made by the
High Court, be entitled to be joined as a respondent.

Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section and of
Section 97, the trial of a petition shall be deemed to commence
5 36... Ps the date fixed for the respondent. to appear before the High

urt_and .answer::the claim or claims made in the petition.

(5) The High Court may, upon such terms as to costs and
aes TWise agit may deem fit, allow the particulars of any
"Tupt practice alleged in the petition to be amended or ampli-

™ such manner as may in its Opinion be necessary for

ensuring a fair and effective trial of the petition, but shall not


20

| allow any amendment of the petition which will have the effect

॥ of introducing particulars of a corrupt practice not previously
alleged in the petition.

| (6) ‘The trial of an election petition shall, so far as is prac-

| ticable consistently with the interests of justice in respect of the 5
trial, be continued from day to day until its conclusion, unless
the High Court finds the adjournment of the trial beyond the
following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded.

(7) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as
possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial with- 1°
in six months from the date on which the election petition is
presented to the High Court for trial.

Procedure 87. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules
before made thereunder. every election petition shall be tried by the न
alana High Court, as nearly as may be, in accordance with the provi-

sions applicable. under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to the 5 of 19
trial of suits:

Provided that the High Court shall have the discretion to
refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writing, to examine any 5,
witness or witnesses if it is of the opinion that the evidence
of such witness or witnesses is not material for the decision of
the petition or that the party tendering such witness or witnesses
is doing’so on frivolous grounds or with a view to delay the pro-

: ceedings. Leal .
(2) ‘The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, shall 75:10
subject to the provisions of this Act, be deemed to apply in all

Amend. respects to the trial of an election petition.”.. 7 7
‘eco 42. Tn sections 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101 and 102 of the 1798-82.

56 97 for the words “the Tribunal”, wherever they occur, the words “the 30
Mm, 100, igh Court” shall be substituted.
||
nt
Substity.

“on ot 43. For secti i
tevin. Substituted, vamely. the 1951-Act, the following sections suet be

Pia

ig, 193

mt clusion ८ ? ९ High Court shall, as soon as may be after the con”
Tot stane of the trial of an election petition, intimate the | sub-

Cou k e of the decision to the Election Commission and the Spea- 35

er बे

or ot sonra, as the case may be, of the House of Parliament

thereaft, State Legislature concerned and, as soon as may

श्ते co er, shall send to the Election Commission an authenticat-
PY of the decision.


I

21

104. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Letters Orders
Patent of the High Court or any other law for the time being in of High
force, every order of the High Court under this Act shall be final Court to

ive.” be final
and conclusive.”. be fi

con-
F elusive.
5 44. In sections 106 and 107 of the 1951-Act, for the words “the Amend-
Tribunal”, whereever they occur, the words “The High Court” shall ment of

be substituted. pra

107.
45, Section 108 of the 1951-Act shall be omitted, Omission
of section
108. .
46. For sections 109 and 110 of the 1951-Act, the following sections Substitu-
10 shall be substituted, namely:— . tion of
new sec-
tions for
sections
co. 109 and
i filglian है 110, i
“109. (7) An election petition may be withdrawn only by withdra-
leave of the High Court. wal of

election
(2) Where an application for withdrawal is made under sub- petitions.

ह section (1), notice thereof fixing a date for the hearing of the
_ application shall be given to all other parties to the petition and
shall be published in the Official Gazette.

110. (1) If there are more petitioners than one, no application Procedure
' 1० withdraw an election petition shall be made except with the for with-
consent of all the petitioners. ccs drawal of
$ . op election
(2) No application for withdrawal shall be granted if, in the petitions.
opinion of the High Court, such application has been induced
by any bargain or consideration which ought not to be allowed.
(3) If the application is granted— |
(a) the petitioner shall be ordered to pay the costs of
the respondents theretofore incurred or such portion there- ’
of as the High Court may think fit;
(b) the High Court shall direct that the notice of with-
drawal shall be published in the Official Gazette and in such
-¥ other manner as it may specify and thereupon the notice
shall be published accordingly;

(c) a person who might himself have been a petitioner
‘dj, May, within fourteen days of such publication, apply to be
Substituted as petitioner in place of the party withdrawing,

meer



22

and upon compliance with the conditions, if any, as to
security, shall be entitled to be-so substituted and to conti-

nue the proceedings upon such terms as the High Court may
deem 11.7,

Amend 47. In section 111 of the 1951-Act, for the words “the Tribunal”, 5
ment of

wherever they occur, the: words “the High Court” shall.be substituted.
section \ Mee Mts -

Substitu- 48. For sections 112, 113, 114 and 115 of the 1951-Adt, the following

tion of section shall be substituted, namely: —
new sec H

tion for
Sections
12 to

15.

car “112. (1) An election petition shall abate’ only ‘on the death
a

election of a sole petitioner or of the survivor of several petitioners.
Petitions,

10

(2) Where an election petition abates under sub-section (1),
the High Court shall cause the fact to be published in such
manner as it may deem fit. snort

(3) Any person who might himself have been a petitioner
may, within fourteen days of such publication,; apply to be sub-
stituted as petitioner and upon compliance with the conditions,
if any, as to security, shall be-entitled to he‘so substituted and
to continue the Proceedings upon such terms asthe High Court
may deem fit.”

व कं ‘In seetion “H6-of 'the.1951-Act for the words ‘the Tribunal”, 20
a th the places where they occur, the words “the High Court”
Shall be substituted,

15

: है Chapter IVA of Part VI of the 1961-Act shall be omitted.

M6, वि ||
पा (लक Sections 117, 118, 119, 119A and 120 of the 1951-Act, the
ey

Sections shall be substituted, namely: — 3s

© ७७ 7. ¢

Petitiang, a At the time ०

{ presenting an election petition, the
hall deposit in the High Court in accordance with the


:

jules of the High Court a sum of two thousand rupees as security
for the costs of thé petition.

i i lection petition, the
During the course of the trial of an é! mn 1
Hi 1 Court ins at any time, call upon the petitioner to give
a further security for cests as it may direet.

a joi Securit
118, No person shall be entitled to be joined as a respondent curity,

oof for eests
under sub-section (4) of section 86 unless he has given such secu- from a
se aan : a
tity for costs as the High Court may direct. resp

“119, Costs: shall be in the discretion of the High Court: Costs.

Provided that where a petition is dismissed undet clause (a)
of section 98, the returned candidate shall be entitled to the costs
incurred by him in contesting the petition and accordingly. the
High Court shall make an order for costs in favour of the return-
ed candidate.”. :

15 52. In section 121 of the 1951-Act, for the words ‘the Election Amend-

Commission”, wherever they occur, the words “the High Court” shall ment of
be substituted; लक; nial
: रा प 1] बे पु 121.
58. Ih section 128 of the 1951-Act— .. , . _ Amend-
2) in ol; _ ment of
( ) jn a (1) (A), i section, ¥

(i) in’ sub-clause-
Words “to withdraw 6

(i) in sub-claus
“the Words “haying,
be Substituted;

acre ace . a 08 .
(०), for the words. ‘to withdraw”, the 123...
7 2० to withdraw” shall bé substituted:

Ce cc Ca ot
€ (i), for the words “having withdrawn”,
withdrawn or nat having withdrawn” shall

(b) in clause (/) (B),—

; ee
wong iD sub-clause (a), for the word “withdrawing” the “4
oS “Withdrawing ० not withdrawing”

shall be substitut-

(#) in sup.
Words “to witha

¢) in Clause (
f
0]

clause (b), for the words

Taw or not to withdraw” shall be substituted;
5), for the words

“for the Conveyance”, the

he use of such vehi
cle or vessel for the 1! न
i 1 be Substituted: me convey

N Clause
€ Words = (2) of the Exp

OMitteg Ss") ora Polling

“to withdraw”, the

lanation at the end of the sec«
agent or a Counting agent” shall


a

24
54. In section 126 of the 1951-Act, for sub-section (/), the follow-

4mend-

neat of ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely: —
a “(1) No person shall convene, hold or attend any public
हु meeting in any polling area during the period of forty-eight

hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of the poll 5
for any election in that polling area.”,
eine 55, In section 129 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (1), for the words
wei “a returning officer”, the words “a district election officer or a return-
! ing officer” shall be substituted.
Ane. 56. In section 130 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (J), for the 16
‘tion Words “one hundred yards”, the words “one hundred metres” shall
2 be substituted.
ae 51. Section 133 of the 1951-Act shall be renumbered as sub-
sin, Section (1) thereof and—
i (a) in sub-section (J) as so re-numbered, for the words “two 15
hundred and fifty rupees”, the words “one thousand rupees” shall
be substituted;
(0). after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely: —
“(2) An offence punishable under sub-section (1) shall 20
be cognizable.”,

end.

wae “ne In section 134 of the 1951-Act, in sub-section (3), for the words
4 offer officers”, the words “district election officers, returning
x, ts” shall be substituted.

5 .
५ 59. Alter section 134 of the 1951-Act, the following section shall 25
4 Mserted, namely: —

as ana if any person in the service of the Government acts
Candidate ne agent or a polling agent or a counting agent of a
ate at an election, he shall be punishable with fine which

Ma
Y extend to five hundred rupees.”. 30

$4 Le
ing | “0 Sect; lo
8 set 136 of the 1951-Act, for sub-section (4), the follow
nall be substituted, namely:—

“(@)
mien offence punishable under sub-section (2) shall ad



| हि 7
: 61. Section 137 of the 1951-Act shall be omitted: Omission
vided that such omission shall not affect any inquiry or other ae
under the said section pending immediately before such saving.

d any such inquiry or other proceeding may be continued

ecution may be instituted as a result of such inquiry

y penalty or punishment may be imposed

th the said section as if that section harl

ak

Pro

५ proceeding
j omission an
Sand any pros
or other proceeding and an,
under and in accordance wi

not been omitted.

62. Part VIN of the 1951-Act shall be omitted. , ” Omission

ae of Part

vill.

70 * 63. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, nothing herein shall Act not
apply to any election which has been called before the commencement to apply
of this Act or to any election petition arising out. of such election, '° pending
whether such, petition is pending at such commencement or is present- ea

ed afterwards, and all such elections shall be held‘ and ‘petitions tried,
yg end all matters in connection with such elections or petitions (includ-
in, constitution of Election Tribunals) shall be regulated, in accor-
with the provisions of the law in force immediately before such

.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Election Commission, have made a number of recommenda-

tions for the anieridment of the election law and procedure in its Re-

on the Third General Elections in India in 1962 and subsequent-

ly, After careful examination, the Government have’ decided to

accept those recommendations excepting those relating to election

expenditure, increase jn security deposit, multiplicity of candidates
and deposit in connection with Presidential election.

The ‘important recomniéndations which have been accepted by the
Govettiment'relate to the following matters:—

(i), consolidation of the provisions relating’ to seats and deli-
“mitation-orders;  - है ase :

(४) creation of a new officer’ to be known as the district ©
election officer in: the electoral machinery of the country who
would be an officer of the Government designated or nominated
by the Election Commission in consultation with the State Gov-
erament and would occupy a position in the electoral hierarchy
between the chief electoral officer of the State and the returning
officer for the constituency and be in charge of the preparation
and revision of electoral rolls and the conduct of elections;

. (iii) revision of electoral rolls according to the direction of
e Election Commission and not otherwise;

iC (iv) consolidation of the provisions relating to disqualifica-
ns for membership and voting; '

के nd lessening the rigour of the disqualification resulting from
ailure to lodge accounts of election expenses;

dete conferment of power upon the Election Commission to
e its functions to senior officers of the Commission;

(vii) reduction in the time-table for the General Elections by

Seven days by making sui :
of the pM ea) suitable changes in the relevant provisions 5

(viii ‘el :
os, a Provision for fresh poll in the case of destruction or
० Of ballot papers at the time of counting;

26



ला अंग बदन

27

(ix) power of Election Commission in suitable cases to with-
hold the declaration of results of election;

(x) abolition of Election Tribunals and trial of election peti-
tions by High Court;

ice and
(vi) making free conveyance of voters a corrupt practice ai
nhancement of the punishment for the offence;
e

(wii) obtaining the assistance of a Government employee 7

Hing or counting agent by a candidate not to be a corruy
p sere but ‘penalty for a Government employee acting as हा
शय agent or a polling agent or a counting agent of a candi-
date to be imposed;

(xiii) certain offences by election officers to be cognizable.

The Bill is intended to give effect to these recommendations,

The-notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions of the -
Bil. te Reese
G. S. PATHAK,
New Dein;
The 12th August, 1966.

“SIDENT's RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(०
eee letter No. F.7(6) /66-Elec., dated the 20th August, 1966
a * >. Pathak, Minister of Law to the Secretary, Lok
“A eet pa been informed of

People (Amendmen

4 of artic] C
the ) article 117 of the
00) ®ration of the Bill by ६

the subject matter of the
t) Bill, 1966 has, in pur-
Onstitution of fj
he Lok Sabha,

India, recom-



Notes on clauses

Clause 2—By this clause, two new sections are proposed to b

substituted for existing sections 3 and 4 of the Representation at
the People Act, 1950. The proposed section 3 will show not only
the total number of members allocated to each State, Union terri-
tory or area, put it will also show the seats reserved for the Sche-
duled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes which would make for conve-

nience of reference.
Proposed section 4, apart
in the House of the People, provides al;

ing to constituencies for the purpose 0
the People. Besides, sub-sections (3), (4) and: (5) of the proposed

section 4 consolidate at one place the provisions which at present
lie scattered in different Acts such as the Delimitation Commission
Act, 1962, the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 and the Government

of Union Territories Act, 1963.
Clause 3—This 18 a saving provision i
nated members in the House of the Peop.
tories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the Laccadive, Mini-
coy and Amindivi Islands and Dadra and Nagar Haveli and the
States of Jammu and Kashmir and Nagaland. - ”
Clause 4—This clause seeks to substitute new sections for 880: है
tion 7 of the 1950-Act and new section 7 is along the lines of the
proposed section 4 in relation to the House of the People.
s for the consolidation of all the deli-
ntary and assembly constitu-
0 be known as the Delimita-
Constituencies Order,
candidates, voters, ministers,

from providing for the filling of seats
so for several matters relat-
f elections to the House of

in relation to sitting nomi-
le from the Union Terri-

Proposed section 8 provide:
mitation Orders in respect of parliame
encies throughout the whole of India t
tion of Parliamentary and Assembly
This would be of great help to the
officials and everyone concerned.

Proposed section 9 empowers t
keep the consolidated delimitation
printing mistakes and other mistakes
or omission.

Clause 5—This clause seeks to insert a neW section 13AA
provides for the creation of a new, officer to be
election officer in the electoral machinery of
absence of an intermediate officer of sufficient!

iommission to
py correcting ©
advertent

he Delimitation Ce

Order up to date
out of any in

which
strict

28


29

ween the chief electoral officer of the State and the returning
officer for the constituency, a gocd deal of avoidable inconvenience
in connection with the preparation and revision of electoral rolls
and the conduct of elections is being felt. Thus, by providing for
a district election officer who will be an officer of the Government
designated or nominated by the Election Commission in consulta-
tion with the State Government, it is intended to rectify the diffi-
culties so far experienced in this behalf. It has also been provided
that in the case of bigger districts. the Election Commission may
designate or nominate more officers than one.

Clauses 6 and 7.—In the scheme obtainirg under the 1950-Act, no
separate electoral roll is prepared for a parliamentary constituency.
The electoral rolls prepared for assembly constituencies form the basis
for the preparation of the electoral rolls of parliamentary constituen-
cies. However, there are a few exceptions to this general scheme in
relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and to the Union
territories not having Legislative Assemblies, namely, Delhi, the An-
if and Nicobar Islands, the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi
Islands and Dadra and Nagar Haveli. So far as the State of Jammu
and Kashmir is concerned, the electoral rolls for the assembly
constituencies are prepared on the basis of the provisions of the
Jammu and Kashmir Constitution and the Jammu and Kashmir
Representation of the People Act, wherein the essential condition
for a ‘Derson to be registered as a voter for an assembly constitu-

_ in that State is the test of his permanent residence in that
tate. On the other hand, under the Constitution of India and the
ie of the People Act, 1950, the necessary criterion for
coe as a voter in the electoral roll for an ascembly
ship, By in any of the other States in India is the test of citizen-
made: nae of this difference, separate provisions have to be
Seton. aa ‘auses 6 and 7, by making suitable amendments in
४5 and 13D of the 1950-Act. seek to provide for this.

Clase 9 .
2 &.—By this clause, changes of merelv drafting nature

ave
ing a लक in section 20 of the 1950-Act which gives the mean-
“S€ctinn, वि ‘ordinarily resident”. However, by a new
PS Of dou mely sub-section (7), it has heen provided that in
“ular time, the id Where a person is ordinarily resident at a par-
hy ttts of ni Suestion shall be determined with reference to all
॥ ne case and such rules as mav be made in this behalf
Government jn consultation with the Election
Elaborate provisions in this behalf are found in the

ule .
$ both in the United Kingdom and in Canada.


30

—By this clause, a new sub-section is sought to be
section (2) of section 21 of the 1950-Act, with
a view to doing away with the necessity of having annual revision
of electoral rolls, as in practice, it has been found that it is neither
feasible nor is it possible to carry it out in a satisfactory manner.
Hence, 2s suggested by the Election Commission, it has now been
provided that the electoral roll shall be revised in any subsequent
when so directed by the Election Commission.

Clause 9-
substituted for sub-

year only
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to substitute a new section for the
existing section 23 of the 1950-Act, relating to inclusion of names
in electoral rolls. The new section differs from the existing section
in two particulars. Unlike as at present, under the new section, in
every case the application for inclusion of name shall be made only
to the electoral registration officer. Besides, it has also been pro-

vided in sub-section (3) of new section 23 that the electoral regis-
tration officer shall not give any direction for the inclusion of a
name after the last date for making nomination as fixed under
section 30 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, as other-
use considerable difficulties and inconveni-

wise such applications ca
neral elections:

ence to the electoral machinery specially during ge

; Clause 11—Since the newly substituted section 23 provides for
he making of application for inclusion of name in the electoral roll
or ° the electoral registration officer and not to the chief electo-
50. het it has now become necessary to amend section 24 of the
aang a as to provide for an appeal to the chief electoral officer
of sexes decision of the electoral registration officer in respect
Meee fons for inclusion of names in, the electoral roll. Clause
amend section 24 for this purpose.

Cl
2158 12—The change effected in section 28 of the 1950-Act by

‘his clause j ,
setion 20 is consequential to the amendment made by clause 8 in

Clauses 1
Scheg 3 and 14—These two clauses seek to substitute new

“Aedules | Fi
950-Act or the First Schedule and the Second Schedule to the

ne nt clause, among other things, seeks to insert in
तजात ली nt the People ‘Act, 1951, two defini-
essary | lection officer” and “public holiday”. This has

in view of the new provision for the appointment

Sons of ८

९ Ne
istrict

195 elect
0 ni Again, the we made in the new section 13AA of the
4 39 of the 1951 ‘inition of “public holidav” given in sections
“Act has heen shifted to section 2 which deals



31

with the general definitions of terms and expressions, and in the pro-

cess, the definition has been altered with a view to exclude from its
purview any day notified by the State Government to be a holiday

for the Government offices in the State, as that creates lot of difficul-

ties in the conduct of elections in view of different States declaring हु
different days as holidays in their States,

Ciause 16.—

This clause mnakes a ininor amendment of a verbal
character.

Clauses 17 and 18—The amendments made in sections 3 and 4

of the 1951-Act by these two clauses are consequential upon and

are a corollary to the amendments made in the 1951-Act by clause
2 of the Bill.

i ,
Clause 19—This clause again makes an amendment of a verbal
character in section 5 of the 1951-Act.

Clauses 20 and 31—The existing provisions relating to disquali-
fication for membership of Parliament and State Legislatures are
scattered in two places in the 1951-Act, which are wide apart from
each other. Section 7 lays down the disqualification for member-
ship. Section 8 contains some saving provision with respect thereto
and section 9 contains an interpretation clause. While sections 139

aid 140 Specify the offences of corrupt practice which entail
disqualification and also lay down the period for such disqualifica-
tion, secti

2 on 140A gives power to the Election Commission to
Remove any such disqualification or to reduce the period. Again,
While séction 141 provides for disqualification for voting, section
a empowers the Election Commission to Temove any such disqua-
tion tion. Section 14 provides for disqualification for being an elec-

agent of a candidate at an election. Clause 20 seeks to group

er all these Provisions relating to disqualification for member-

and Voting in one place so that it becomes easy for everyone
to वी नाश the provisions contained in our election law as
be do, के गा for membership and voting. This is proposed to

W sections 7, 8, 8A, 9, 9A, 10, 10A, 11, 118 and 118.

Part f i a
+ changes pe Srouping of the sections effected by clause 20,

4 &: sect € also been made in the relevant provisions. In
te 2A: an Explanation has been added to make it
Star's, 8 contra

Den YY 18 Ct with the Government shall be deemed not to
bya ed it “Son only of the fact that the Government has not
Shang has S part of

+ My the contract either wholly or in part. This
है tion, OMe neg
that at

tach Sssary in order to do away with the disqua-
Shes to a person for being chosen as or for being


32
islature even after he has
d his part of the contract, since it would hardly be
ain such a disqualification provision in a modern
welfare Stave when State aciivities extend almost over every
+ domain 01 the citizens’ affairs where very many persons are, in one
way or other, | relationship with the Government.
‘That being the case, an unduly strict view abuut Government con-
tract in the present day might lead to the disqualification of a
large number of citizens many of whom may prove to be able and
capable members of Parliament and State Legislatures. Jt would
be of interest to note in this ९०7 काल री in this connection that in the United Kingdom,
any Tisqualifcation arising out ol any COT क। out of any contract with the Crown has
been done away_ with by the House of Commons सा by the House of Commons Disqualifications
Act, 1957. Likewise, the change made in the new section 10A
which marks a departure from the provision contained in clause (०)
of existing section 7 has become necessary to save a considerable
waste of time and energy of the Election ‘Commission and its staff
who, under the existing scheme, spend considerable time in going
through the returns of election expenses filed by the candidates to
ascertain whether they have been lodged within the time and in
the manner required by. law, only to remove the disqualification
imposed, as invariably the lapses and laches on the part of the
पाता are of a trivial nature. To get over this, new section
thal then _ pi provide that if the Election Commission is satisfied
ite oe peen a failure to lodge an account of election ex-
failure, then rl ad and that there was no good reason for such
किक की] जि ection Commission shall declare the person
a disqualified and such disqualification shall be for
Period of three years.

a member of Parliament or State Leg’

fully performe
justitiaole to ret

have coniractua.

Claus i
ing to Teal rari a new section for existing section 41 relat-
section 41 0० ification for being an election ‘agent, and this new
rresponds to existing section 145.

Clause n
Powering hein है present law, there is no provision em-
Toutine matters in ommission to delegate its functions even in
€ Election oe in practice, creates lot of difficulties where
: ३ superior nig is unable to delegate its functions even
Ba Section 190 1 of the Commission. Clause 21 seeks to insert
re Commission» Provide for the delegation of functions of the
cc 6h है hen the Commissto Deputy Election Commissioner or to the Sec-
Election Comment to any directions that may he given



33
Clause 22—This clause seeks to insert a new section 20A which
provides for the duties of the district election officers in connection
with the conduct of elections,

Clauses 23 and 24—As the present provision contained in
sections 21 and 22 of the 1951-Act which require a returning officer
or an assistant returning officer to be an officer of the Government
creates practical,inconvenience and difficulty, clauses 23 and 24
seek to amend sections 21 and 22 so as to provide that a returning
officer as well as an assistant returning officer may be an officer of
a local authority also, such as a municipal corporation.

Clause 25.—This clause seeks to substitute a new section for sec-
tion 25 of the = so as to empower the district election officer
(who will be an officer senior to the returning officer) to provide
Polling stations in constituencies under his jurisdiction as such a
function may be better performed by him. हु 1

Clause 26.—This clause 5९९६ to amend section 26 by providing
that presiding officers and polling officers in constituencies in a State
Will be appointed not by the returning officer but by the district
election officer. But it has also been provided that so far as a Unior.
territory is concerned, the functions of providing polling stations as
- as appointing presiding officers and polling officers will conti-

to be performed by the returning officers, as in a Union terri-
tory no Provision has been made for the appointment of a district

“lection officer,

- ¢ Thi .

the fe 27.—This clause makes suitable changes in section 30 of

Changes a SO as to compress the time-table for election, The

Election ’ ected result in a saving of seven days in the time-table of
Clause T

YY thi py amendment made in section 31 of the 1951-Act

९ is purely of a drafting nature,

H Clause 2
ei of the gs, clase seeks to make two amendments in  sec-
oy 2 to ub-secti ct. In the first instance, it is proposed to add a
Me Per Shal] ees Ae of section 33 to the effect that no nomina-
ig 8 fg Specific Slivered on a public holiday since in. the
५७ shat e of 7 Provision of this kind, candidates sometimes
Public a the returning officer should be Kept open
te. The en for the purpose of receiving their nomina-
७... १ 11 ig on Proviso to sub-section (4) is comprehensive
“entation the lines of sub-section (5) of section 39 of the
°F the People Act, 1949, This has been done to


34
[७ doubts about the power of the returning off
मु हे arn ४ offic
nomer or inaccurate description in regard see
se डर 8 the
e or his proposer or any other person or in tat
electoral roll or in the nomination

e all possibl
any mis
didat
entioned in the

remov'
to correct
name of a can
10 any place ™
paper.

Clause 30.
with the time
Legislative Coun
two days in the

_‘This clause seeks to amend section 39 which deals
-table of elections to the Rajya Sabha and to the State
cils, By the change made in section 39, a.saving of
time-table of elections has been effected.

has also been inserted so as to make it clear that
ve Council by the members of the
७ of the Assembly cannot become a

candidate because he is disqualified. Such an express provision in the
election law will enable the election officers who are hardly conver-
sant with the provisions of the Constitution to be guided properly

in this behalf.

A new provision
in an election to the Legislati

Legislative Assembly, a membe

Clause 32—This clause seeks to give effect to the recommenda-

tion of the Election Commission by amending section 52 of the 1951-
Act so as to provide for the countermanding of the poll even in cases
where a validly nominated candidate dies before the preparation of
the list of contesting candidates under section 38.

aoe 33.—This clause makes changes in section 60 of the 1951-
which are merely of a drafting nature.

tn rg fae clause seeks to insert a new section after sec-

of Votes any a situations wherein during the stage of counting

of the returnin ae are unlawfully taken out of the custody

¢d, lost op dame; officer or are accidentally or intentionally destroy-
ged or tampered with,

: Clause 35,1
OWer the F :

| ९ Elect;

Claration पा ction
totes and ¢
Sion in time,

i
('Ssion powep
०1९६ ७

डे cause seeks to amend section 66 so as to em-
the esl to issue directions to withhold the de-
e same is 7 Something goes wrong in the counting of
The ab; ought to the notice of the Election Commis-

sence of such power renders the Election Com-

less (६
0 act even A
when
© Commission such instances are brought to the

08 86. Tp:

Provig —This

the ase he fe seeks to amend section 78 so 2s '0
Strict ७] nt of election expenses should be lodged with

te ft
Office
1 instead of the returning officer.



कि

35

(७-०३ 37 to 45.—One of the principal recommendations of the
Election Commission relates to the abolition of Election Tribunals
and the trial of election petitions by the High Courts. The changes
in the 1951-Act to give effect to these recommendations are contain-
ed in clauses 37 to 45 of the Bill,

Clauses 46 to 49—These clauses seek to streamline and simplify
provisions of sections 109 to 116 of the 1951-Act relating to withdrawal

and abatement of élection petitions.

Clause 50.—By clause 50, Chapter IVA relating to appeals from
decisions of Election Tribunals is sought to be omitted in view of the
new scheme of trial of election petitions by High Courts.

Clause 51—By this clause, new sections are sought to be substi-
Ga for existing sections 117 to 120 of the 1951-Act relating to costs
and security for costs. As election petitions will be presented to
and tried by the High Courts, the provisions as to costs and security
for costs have been simplified, -

Clause 52.—This clause makes changes in section 121 of the 1951-
Act which are of a consequential nature,

to ee ह and 59.—Under the present law, an inducement offered
corrupt sis not to withdraw his candidature does not amount to a
Should, with At of bribery, It is felt that such an ~ inducement
|, ang appa be brought within the ambit of corrupt
OF the 1 0 58 seeks to achieve this by amending section 123
bas algy es 7 i fe definition of “electoral hight” in section 79(d)
i 2017 altered by clause 37.
any yay Under clause

roti en (5) of section 123, the hiring or procuring of

ire ya candidate, etc., for the conveyance of any
Sie है बा But the Election Commission has ex-
te te, as the = petites hining or procuring of the
tbe क ॥। induceme , Conveyance of voters by the candidate of his
be condemn 7 nt to them to vote on his behalf that requires

ee 4 corrupt practice. Clause (5) of section 123

amendeg कु
suit . the
Me Bain, he ably for this purpose,

Vig, Elert:
. peel on Commission has expressed the view that the .
fe Where of the eae deemed to assist in the furtherance of
७ itn, P° acts ag ‘a ae i election should be restricted only to
en का 0 View of e Stent and not as a polling agent or

Oty Ve been ones 13, references to polling agent and

Shion 19 ed from clause (2) of the Explanation

Ut at the same time, new section 134A,

in |
Aging
ay tng ® gent



36

proposed to be inserted by clause 59, provides that if a person in the

service of the Government acts as an election agent or a polling agent
or a counting agent of a candidate at an election, he shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. Thus, the
combined effect of clause 53(d) and clause 59 will be that whereas
the election of a person will not be liable to be set aside by reason of
a Government employee acting as a polling agent or as a counting
agent as it will no longer be a corrupt practice under clause (7) of
section 123, the Government employee will himself be guilty of an
offence and will be liable to punishment accordingly. Consequently,
therefore, if a Government employee chooses to act as a polling agent
or a counting agent of a candidate, he will do so at his own risk.

Clause 54—Because of an, erroneous understanding of the expres-
sion “twenty-four hours before the date of the commencement of the
poll” used in section 126 of the 1951-Act, in practice, election meet-
ings go on even after the mid-night which marks the beginning of the
day preceding the election day. Since this was not the real intention
of the section, the Election Commission has ‘recommended a minor
amendment of the section so as to clarify the position. This clause
seeks to extend the period of ban on public meetings slightly by
amending sub-section (1) of secticn 126.

Cluuse 55.—The amendment made by this clause in sub-section (1)
of section 129 of the 1951-Act is of a consequential nature.

: Clause 56.—By this clause, the reference to “one hundred yards”
mene 130 of the 1951-Act has been changed to “one hundred
etres” consequent on the general switch-over to the metric system.

ies 57.—This clause by amending section 133 of the 1951-Act

for ee effect to the recommendation of the Election Commission

of ae the punishment for the offence of hiring and procuring

23. In ria is a corrupt practice under clause (5) of section

180 been m fen enhancement of the punishment, the offence has
ade cognizable.

1.

Clause 50

(1) of he amendment effected by this clause in sub-section

sect i
on 134 of the 1951-Act is purely of a consequential nature.

Claus,
ade Ses 60 and 61.—Under the present law, a distinction has been
ee of the same offences committed by an officer on the
a Y an ordinary citizen on the other. While this proce
० challenge as being violative of article 14 of the Cons-

जा on the ६

NE Han
1५ ‘8 op
Muti
n
गा ribet, of unreasonable discrimination, considerable
onvenience is being experienced by the Election Com-



37

mission in following an elaborate and cumbersome procedure laid
down in section 137 in relation to offences under section 136 committed
by a returning officer or other officers. With a view to getting over
the constitutional objection and the inconvenience caused in this
behalf, clause 60 seeks to amend section 136 of the 1951-Act by making
the offence by electoral officers cognizable and clause 61 seeks to
omit section 137 of the 1951-Act as being unnecessary in view of the
changed scheme. It has also been provided that the omission of
section 137 shall not affect any inquiry pending before such omission.

Clause 62.—This clause seeks to omit Part VIII of the 1951-Act as
| provisions relating to disqualification for membership and voting
have all been brought into one place as referred to in clause 20.

Clause 63—This clause incorporates a saving provision in relation
to pending elections and election petitions which shall continue to be
Tegulated in accordance with the provisions of law in force immedia-
tely before the commencement of this amending Act.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill,
1966, provides for the creation of a new officer to be known 88 the
district election officer who will be an officer of Government desig-
nated oF nominated by the Election Commission in consultation with
the State Governments. The appointment of such district election
officers will entail expenditure being incurred by the Election Com-
mission which would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India.
‘There are about 330 districts in India and as such it may be neces-
cary to appoint about 350 officers (taking into account circumstances
in which more than one district election officer will be appointed in
some districts). These persons being officers of Government, it may
be necessary to give them some special pay for doing the additional
work as district election officers and consequently, therefore, an ex-
penditure of about Rs. 35,000 per month is likely to be incurred.
This is a recurring expenditure.

Clause 38 of the Bill provides for the trial of election petitions by
High Courts instead of by election tribunals, as at present. Depend-
ing upon the strength of the High Courts in the various States, it may
perhaps be necessary at least in some of the States, if not in all, to
appoint more Judges for this purpose which may involve incurring of
expenditure from out of the Consolidated Fund of India. On the
assumption that one Judge in each State shall be exclusively assign-
ed for the trial of election petitions, the expenditure to be incurred
in this behalf may amount to about rupees seven lakhs.

This is the estimated or probable expenditure during the first
Year after the General Elections during which most of the election
Petitions are expected to be disposed of. As to what will be the
expenditure thereafter, it is not possible at this stage to give even
* Tough estimate thereof because that would depend upon the num-
पा election petitions arising out of the General Elections, which

er . Undisposed of and the number of bye-elections and the nun
of elections petitions arising therefrom.

vec ans existing financial arrangements in respect of the
the le such expenditure would have to be shared by
fore, in all and State Governments on a half and half basis. a
‘neurved ang. rough estimate, the expenditure that is = to थे
Und of i which would have to be met from the Consolidate’
“lection betity, shall be about Rs. 3} lakhs in respect of the trial ०
गा wees (OF है Year within which the majority of the election
Rs 50 Wd be likely to be disposed of and a further sum of about

500
= fd month which may have to be incurred in respect of the

“lection officers.

38



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

4

¥ Clauses 8 and 12 of the Bil] empower the Central Government to
termination 01 the question as to where a per-

make rules for the del
son is ordinarily resident at any particular time.

Ak The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters
of administrative detail and procedure and as such, the delegation of

legislative power is of a normal character.

0७



ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE Prope Act, 1950
(43 or 1950)
( * : * * * *
PART II
ALLOCATION 07 SEATS AND DELIM:TATION OF CONSTITUENCIES

The House of the People

3. (1) The allozation of seats in the House of the People shall be
as shown in the First Schedule.

(2) To each State and the areas specified in the first column of
the First Schedule, there shall be allotted the number of seats speci-

fied in the second column thereof opposite to that State and those
areas respectiyely.

a

4 (1) The seats allotted under section 3 to the State of Jammu
€ गे Kashmir and to the Part 8 tribal areas shall be seats to be filled
by persons nominated by the President,

ne Save as aforesaid, all the other seats in the House of the Peo-
का allotted to the States under that section shall be seats to be filled
* Persons chosen by direct election,

हा * के *

. The State Legislative Assemblies
ot The |; [
State otal number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each
a... Pecified in के |

७. PY petsong the first column of the Second Schedule, !o be filled

the secon n by direct election, shall be the number specified
Provides q “mn thereof opposite to that State:

810 ‘at for the Period referred to in clause (2) of article

| ४ total
f 4aland g number of seats allotted to the |
a ॥ be 46, of which—

(a) g x
Shall he IX seats sh

filled iy all be allocated to the Tuensang district and

chose;
d ९०]

Persons chosen by the members of the regional

40

—*

pA



41
council referred to in that article fp
such manner as the Governor, after
by notification in the Official 6;

om amongst themselves ||
consulting that cou
azette specify, and

(b) the remaining forty seats shall be
chosen by direct election from assemh!

neil, may

filled by persons
| constituencies in the

Y rest of the S‘ate of Nagaland.
* * * * :
PART IIA
Orricers
Ce * * *

*

18B. (1) The electoral roll for a parliamentary constituency in Electoral
each of the Union territories of Delhi, the Andaman and Nicobar registra
Islands, the Laceadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands and Dadra a
‘ Nagar Haveli, each assembly constituency and each Council ae
constituency shall be prepared and revised by an electoral registra-
tion officer who shall be such officer of Government or of a local
authority as the Election Commission may. in consultation with the
Government of the State in which the constituency is situated, desig-
nate or nominate in this behalf.

के * +

PART IIB
EtectoraL Rous ror PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES

WD. (1) The electoral roll for every parliamentary constituency Electoral
oth

हि हा : एण110
ler than a barliamentary constituency in each of the Union terri-
tori

parlia-
"es of Delhi, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Laccadive, mentary
2100 and Amindi

: vi Islands and Dadra and Nagar Haveli shall consti-
मा of the electoral rolls of so much of the assembly constituen- '¥e2¢ies. |
it Ae are comprised within that parliamentary constituency; and
ml fp not be necessary to prepare or revise separately the electoral
° 7 any such Parliamentary constituency.
—_ Provisions of Part TIT shall ano'y in relation to every par-
ndaman and eee in each of the Union territories of Delhi, the
Nicobar Islands, the Laccadive, Minicov and Amindivi

"and

ae a adra and Nagar Haveli as they apply in relation to an
“nstituency, :

*

ay

“embly

td * * ‘
Bin PART गा
2g “गण, Rots ror Assempiy CONSTITUENCIES ved
(3) id * के . कु

iy Them
Th ag
00 po

of
; “ordinart
i हा the armed forces of the Union or, a member of “°!S
Ce fo

val ly resi-
ae is servi i at State,
deemeg of a State who is serving outside that

" dent"
* (B) | 8 0 be Ordinarily resident on any date in
an)



42
the constituency in which, but for his service in the armed forces or,
as the case may be, in that armed police force, he would have been
ordinarily resident on that date.

(4) Any person holding any office in India declared by the Presi-
dent in consultation with the Election Commission to be an office to
which the provisions of this sub-section apply, or any person who is
employed under the Government of India in a post outside India,
= be deemed to be ordinarily resident on any date in the consti-
tuency in which, but for the holding of any such office or employ-
ment, he would have been ordinarily resident on that date.

(5) The statement of any such person as is referred to in sub-sec-
tion (3) or sub-section (4) made in the prescribed form and verified
in the precribed manner, that but for his service in the armed forces
or, as the case may be, the armed police force or but for his hoiding
any such office or being employed in any. such post as is referred to
in sub-section (4) he would have been ordinarily resident in a spe-
cified place on any date, shall, in the absence of evidence to the con-
trary, be conclusive evidence of that fact.

* * * * *

2, (1) * * * * *

. (2) The said electoral roll shall thereafter be revised in every sub-
ताज year in the prescribed manner by reference to the qualifying
te:

Provided that if for any reason the electoral roll is not revised in
a year the validity or continued operation of the electoral roll
all not thereby be affected. ,

: *

Any person whose name is not included in the electoral
constituency may apply in the manner hereinafter 770
the inclusion of his name in that roll.

2. (1)
‘oll of
"ided fop

at any
ney oF
is
jon

(2) Wh
“ine ater th an application under sub-section (1) is made
issue of a notification calling upon that constitue

le ari
; cing constituency within which i
of that ९ हे ही elect a member or members and before the completi
any op neha it shall be made to the chief electoral officer; and 4
व कक it shall be made to the electoral registration office?

stituency,

that constituency

tg

a ae



43

a £ electoral officer or, as the case may be, the electoral !

(3) The chie: : न
registration officer shall, if satisfied that the applicant is entitled to

d in the electoral roll, direct his name to be included

be registere
therein:
provided that if the applicant is registered in the electoral roll of
any other constituency, the chief electoral officer or, as the case may
te the electoral registration officer shall inform the electoral registra-
tion officer of that constituency and that officer shall, on receipt of
the information, strike off the applicant’s name from that electoral
roll.
24, An appeal shall lie within such time and in such manner as Appeals.
may be prescribed—

(a) to the chief electoral officer, from any order of the elec-
toral registration officer under section 22 or section 23, and

(0) to the Election Commission, from any order of the chief
electoral officer under section 23.

* * : * * *
PART V
GENERAL
ae * * ’ GQ

(2) In parti ति हि बे
treo Particular and without prejudice to the generality of the Power to

in
: owing . ria such rules may provide for all or any of the fol- make
atters, namely: — Tules,

(a ५
‘he particulars to be entered in the electoral rolls;

*
by * *

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
= ection 3)
N Allocat; (ee s
x a of seats in the House of the People

Name of State;

Union territory or area Total
number
LA < of seats
hud) ~
lig Pad —
sh

|
a
12

53

33



44

_ Name of State, Union territory or area a
number
of seats

_ Se

5 Kerala है . 18

6. Madhya Pradesh’, 36

7, Madras . 41

3, Maharashtra; x» + oer 44

g. Mysore व ह . . . . . मु . . . 26

10, Orissa . . . . . . . ‘ : a 20

11, Punjab : : ‘ . . . d . . . . 22

12, Rajasthan. न . . 4 न . . 3 22

13, Uttar Pradesh «+ i : न के . . a 86

36

14. West Bengal =. * 1... lL 3

6

15. Jammu and Kashmir . : 5 . . :

: I

16, Nagaland ६ . डे : . हि A व 5 न : 4

wDihi gee + * *. ' (| to Go 3

18, : 4

. Himachal Pradesh हे : हा s : ' .
2

er ....:::::1!)्प1्प-्धौ. .श७<७८./.८७&/.5७&श७..ः *

2

20. Tripura, | : ; : : रा A :

2. And : 1

sAndaman and Nicobar Islands. : . . . :

22, i | 1

Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands. + *

23. |), : 1

जी ..:1!५!्<ड़फ. ॒ 71्"्ट्

“+ 301, Daman and 10 a. : :

’ dq हे
हे 1
© था) a :
‘ North 1५ 1 5

4St Frontier Tract

1151



45
THE SECOND SCHEDULE

(See section 7)

Total number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies

Total

number of

ae Legisative

: Assembly

I 2

1. Andhra Pradesh 2113888, . . . . ‘ 7 . 300

2. Assam. 105

3. Bihar 318
4 Gujarat 154
5. Kerala 126
6. Madhya Pradesh 7 H 288
7. Madras 206
8. Maharashtra रथ 264
9 Mysore 7 208
10. Orissa 140
oe fetes 154
12, Rajasthan i 46
13. Unar Pradesh it न हे हर 430
14. West Bengal उप
15. Nagaland 60 {For the

period referred
to in clause (2)

of article 371A,
16. 110७. | 4०]
Mehl Prue.
a Tadesh ही i i है 0
: Manipur
, i के : : : . : . 7 के 30
a Tope
४. G, f 30
५ Daman
20, p and Div 1 न हि हु 1 i i 7 30
00५1 ॥ 1१
: रे



46 20
ACTS PROM THE REPRESENTATION OF ‘THE PEOPLE Acr, 1951
1000 1011
(48 or 1951)
हर + .
PART I
PRELIMINARY
हे * * * *
2 (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

हे + * * *

(k) “Tribunal” means a tribunal appointed by the Election
Commission under section 86,

* * * * *

(9) Any reference in this Act to a High Court or to the Judge
of a High Court shall, in relation to a Union territory having a
Court of the Judicial = be construed as a reference to
the said Court of the J udicial Commissioner or to the Judicial Com-
‘tussioner or any Additional Judicial Commissioner, as the case may
be,

PART IL

Quauiricarioys AND Disquatirications FOR MEMBERSHIP
CHAPTER 1—Qualifications for Membership of Parliament

5 A person shall no
f

t be qualified to be chosen as

4. 8 per
‘le Hours ah shal] not be

U
J

5)

any the People oth

and K yg ‘at allotted to th S t
i Kashinin, or to the Part BT: ) 0 ine Stace 0

Tibal Areas, unless—
.
(०) in th : ये id
16 Cage fa
the , 388 of a seat reserved for the Scheduled Tribes

© aut
of Nome 8 disty
1.0७ 800९६ 3 Ustricts of Assam, he is 4 member of any
y 8 nd is an elector for the Parliamen-

४ 11 wy} ९ ch se:
Noy lament, ¢ Neh such Cul is reserved or for any
7 onsitucney comprising any such autonv-



a

47

Cuaprer I—Qualifications for Member

of State Legislatures

5. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Qualifica-
the Legislative Assemblv of a State unless—

tions for
member-
नि * * है
। हु ship of a
५ Legislative
(b) in the case of a seat reserved for en autonomous dis- Assembly.

trict of Assam, other than a seat the constituency for which
comprises the cantonment and muniv‘pality of Shillong, he is
= member. of a Scheduled Tribe of that district and js an elector
for the Assembly constituency in which such seat or any other
seat is reserved for that district: and

* * * * *

Cuaprer IIT.—Disqualifications

7. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for Disquali-
being, a member of either House of Parliament or of the Legislative fications

Ascembly or Legislative Council of a State— oe
bership

(a) if, whether before or after the commencement of the Parlia.
Constitution. he has heen convicted, or has, in proceedings for ment :
questioning the validity or regularitw of an election. heen found state

to have been euilty, of anv offence or corrunt practice which Legisla-
has been declared by sertion 129 or cection 140 to be an offence ture.
or practice entailing disonalification for memhershin of Par-
liament and of the Legislature of every State, unless such

Period has elapsed as has heen provided in that behalf in the

said section 139 or section 140, as the case may be or the Flec-

tion Commission has removed the disqualification;

i ow if, whether before or after the commencement of the
; nstitution, he has been convicted bv a Court in India of anv
ve

ence ३, नि
: and sentenced to imprisonment for not less than two
ars une

Election Pa 1 neriod of five vears. or such less period as the
elapseg /ommission may allow in anv particular case, has
" Since his release:

(0) if he hag

DNs ५५५४) ५ failed to lodge an account of his election ex-
this qv thin the

‘DiS Act. untegs me and in the manner required by or under
arin the pan uh Veats have elansed from the date by,
Mission ee ought to have been lodged or the Election

17 Temoved the disqualificat‘on;

0);
ot there subes
net ade on a 8 contract entered into in the course
"for the ५ 8 hy him with tho appropriate Govern
SUPDly of pond
ertaken hy

$ to. or for the execution of any
that Government;



48
f he is a director, managing agent, manager or secre-
yf, any company or corporation (other than a co-operative
y of, any | हर
| ty) in the capital of which the appropriate Government
॥॥'। ४) °
: not less than twenty-five per cent. share;

(e) i

है
व
\

hn

if) if, having held any office under the Government of
julia or the Government of any State or under the Crown in
jndin or under the Government of an Indian State, be =
whether before or after the commencement of the Constitution
hwon dismissed for corruption or disloyalty to ithe State, unless
५ periods of five years has elapsed since his dismissal.

a (1) Notwithstanding anything in section 7—
Savings. i
(a) a disqualification under clause (a) or clause (b) -of

that section shall not, in the case of a person who becomes so
(isoualified by virtue of a conviction or a conviction and a
guttence and is at the date of the disqualification a member
\t Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, take effect until
गत months have elapsed from the date of such disqualifica-
1४७५ or if within these three months an appeal or petition for
ion is brought in respect of the conviction or the sentence,
antil that appeal or petition is disposed of;

(b) a disqualification under clause (c) of that section
जजों not take effect until the expiration of two months from
the date on which the Election Commission has decided that the
svount of election expenses has not heen lodged within the
“we and in the manner required by or under this Act:

* * * कर

LJ @ fi Person shall not be disqualified under ‘clause (e) of
; ae im by Teason of his being a director unless the office
8 ector is declare i
wh a ee d by Parliament by law to so dis-
0) a disqualification
a in the case of a direc:
y such declaration ag j
ae im Tespect of the
= after the director h
“or of the Legislatur

under clanse (e) of that section shall
tor, take effect where the law makin¢
$ referred to in clause (e) of this
office of such director has come into
‘as been chosen a member of Parlia-
© of a State, as the case may be. until
i. गत after the date on which such aw

an h longer peri Electi a
in any partic period as the Election Com

‘ular case allow:
.

*



7

9 (1) In this Chapter—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in Telation to any
disqualification for being chosen as or for being a member of
either House of Parliament, the Central Government, and in
relation to any disqualification for being chosen ag or for being
a member of the Legislative A

ssembly or Legislative Council
of a State, the State Government;

Interpre.
tation,
ete,

० * * * A

(3) If any question is raised as to whether
held any office referred to in clause (f)
missed, is disqualified und
member of either House of
bly or Legislative Council ०
issued in the Prescribed m
the effect that such person
‘isloyalty to the State shal
qualified under that clause.

* * =

a person who, having
of section 7, has been dis.
e for being chosen as a
7 of the Legislative Assem-
e production of a certificate
he Election Commission to
has not been

dismissed for Corruption or
1 be conclusive Proof that he is not dis-

Parliament o:
f a State, th
anner by |]

*
PART IV
AbMInistrative Macuinery ror THe Conpuct oF Eecrions
* * * * *

* *

in For every ser tuency, for every election to fill a seat or seats Returning
1६ 15 Council of States and for every election by the members of the officers.
sislati embly of a State to fill a Seat or seats in the Legislative
wit of the State, the Election Commission shall, in Consultation
Officer «Government of the State, designate or nominate a returning
Who shall be an officer of Government:
Com, ted that nothing in this section shall prevent the Election
Sion from desi
In;

the tety ‘ ignating or nominating the same person to be
7 Officer for more than one constituency,

a ng Election Commission may

™ing officer in the perf

1060 that Every suc

1 person shal] be an officer of Government,
5m

appoint one or more persons Assistant

‘ ions: returning
nctions:
ormance of his fu officers,

* * *

«The Tot.

mus any Thing Officer for each constituency shall,
be, 7 Pproval :

i, Meh ne Pollin

with the Provision
sufficient of polling
ip} Stations
१1५ Manne as th ; and shall oublish, ण
Vote, Pin stati 6 Election Commission may direct, a list show- tituencies.
2 Which 50 Provided and the polling areas or groups
"ey have Tespec‘ively been provided,

he Election Commission, provide a
7015 for such constituency,


50

shall appoint 8 presiding officer for
ling officer or officers as he thinks
ho has been employed
ng for. a candidate in

) The returning officer
tation and such 90
he shall not appoint
f, or has been ot

26. (1
yent of each polling 5
wesidiN& necessary, but
; by or on behalf o
or about the election:

Appoint
any person W
it poll herwise workir
ations

cer is absent from the polling station,

Provided that if a polling offi
cho is present at the ;

the presiding officer may appoint any person W
polling station other than a person who has been employed by or on

behalf of, or has een otherwise working for, a candidate in or about
the election, to be the polling officer during the absence of the former
officer, and inform the returning officer accordingly:

in this sub-section shall prevent the
the same person to be the presiding
n in the same premises.

Provided further that nothing
returning officer from appointing
officer for more than one polling statio
if so directed by the presiding officer,
ons of a presiding officer under this

(2) A polling officer shall,
perform’ all or any of the functi
Act or any rules or orders made thereunder.

(3) If the presiding officer, owing to illness or other unavoidable
cause, is obliged to absent himself from the polling station, his func-
tions shall be performed by such polling officer as has been previously
authorized by the returning officer to perform such functions during
any such absence. हु
one, References in this Act to the presiding office!
ing न ae requires, be deemed to include any person perform-
Ca ion which he is authorized to perform under sub-section

poe (3), as the case may be.
* * *

ee ४७२८० ३90४8. अक

r shall, unless the

*

PART V
Conpuct oF ELECTIONS

Cc
tppoin. Hapter I—Nomination of Candidates
ne

to elect

all, bY

30.

1 4 As soon as Fi . : :
lites fo. @ Member or as the notification calling upon a constituency
members is issued, the Election Commission sh

“Oming. tification ;
io
6, ७७ 7 in the Official Gazette, appoint—
* * * *

(b) the :
Ne ae ag for the scrutiny of nominations. which shall 068
that day is on, after the last date for making nominations oF if
4 public Public holiday, the next succeeding day ४ hich is 08

10 holiday; : oe

ares, which

(०) th
e 18: 8] 77
last date for the withdrawal of candid



= 1881,

ne
shall be the third day after the date for the scrutiny of nomina-
tions or. if that day is a public holiday, the next succeeding day
which is not a public holiday;

(d) the date or dates on which a poll shall, if necessary, be
taken, which or the first of which shall be a date not earlier than
the twentieth day after the last date for the withdrawal of candi-
datures; and.

x * * * *

Explanation—In this section, “public holiday” means any day
which is a public holiday for the purposes of section 25 of the Negoti-
able Instruments Act, 1881, or any day which has been notified by the
State Government to be a holiday for the Government offices in the
State.

31. On the issue of a notification under section 30, the returning Public
cfficer for the constituency shall give public notice of the intended notice of
‘lection in such form and manner as may be prescribed, inviting ‘lection
nominations of candidates for such election and specifying the place
at which the nomination papers are to be delivered.

“ हा * * ®

oe m or before the date appointed under clause (x) of sec- Presenta-
a | candidate shall, either in person or by his proposer, bet- ee
the atternoon के eleven o’clock in the forenoon and three o'clock in paper and
this behalf in th 'ver to the returning officer at the place specified in require-
complet '९ notice issued under section 31 a nomination paper ments

aq cleats > the prescribed form and signed by the candidate and by fr 8

or of the consti valid
mstituen re
Cy as proposer. nomina-
' :
: . + tion

(4

) On th
fy pres i | i i
fice Presentation of a nomination paper the returning

* shal} Satisfy ps
© Candid Sly himself that the names and electoral roll numbers
“the sa,

ale and hig : aoe
I १ his proposer as entered in the nomination paper

116 as the .
1 Prong i 256 entered in the electoral rolls:
thy, 7५ tha:
n 1 ॥॥ : ff ' F
५ गा शा j 16 returning officer shall permit any clerical or
॥ Aaa .
“bey © be € nomination paper in regard to the said names
* Ue > Corr 4 :
teu ; "rected in order to bring them into conformity

५५1६
i 20
Hay AY ॥ bonding entr

Weg tes in the electoral rolls; and where

Nat any ९ A .
eq 'Y “lerical or printing error im the said entries

“Nooked



<7

52

39, (1) As soon as the notification calling upon the elected mem-

‘or the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State or the

mbers of the electoral college of a Union territory to elect a mem-

7 or members is issued, the Election Commission shall, by notifica-

tion in the Official Gazette, appoint—
* * *

soni pers oF

san 0

cag did ate

, other

eqestions, ‘ थे

(b) the date for the scrutiny of nominations, which shall be

| the second day after the last date for making nominations or, if
that day is a public holiday. the next succeeding day which is not
a public holiday;

(c) the last date for the withdrawal of candidatures, which
shall be the third day after the date for the scrutiny of nomina-
tions or, if that day is a public holiday, the next succeeding day
which is not a public holiday;

* * * * *
Explanation—In this section, “public holiday” has the same
meaning as in section 30.

(2) The provisions of sections 31 to 38, excluding sub-sections (2)
and (5) of section 33 and clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 34,
shall apply in relation to any such election as they apply in relation
10 an election in any constituency: हु

Provided that—

(a) any references in the said provisions to the electoral roll
पं the constituency shall, unless the context otherwise requires,
is et in the case of an election by the members or the
ae members of the Legislative Assembly of the State, as
may — to the list of members or elected members, as the case
Section ie that Assembly maintained under sub-section (1) of
electoral » and in the case of an election by the members of the

4 college of a Union territory, as references to the list ०

Membe :
(2) of 178 of such electoral college maintained under sub-section
° that section:
s ;

है * * *

ee] ChaPren T—Candidates and their Agents
के * के *

Ly,
| © Person g _.
Neg trom _ hall be appointed an election agent who is disqua-
५ + 8 an election agent under section 145.
C हा * * *
Hap

५५ "TER 6 7
vg x 1५ कर दा[.-द0शव! Procedure at Elections
“Weg Con

| t : हि : 7
hay before €sting Candidate dies and a report of his death is 1९

aA es
yyy tPon b i Commencement of the poll the returning ee
हू 8 Satisfi . हे 8
“d गे १ the Usfied of the fact of the death of the garnet
Poll a Elec Comm!
५७ the Poll and report the fact to the Election oth ie

*PPropriate authority and all proceeding!



53

to the election shall be commenced anew in all respects as if
rence i
for y election :
a that no further nomination shall be necessary in the
i a person who was 8 contesting candidate at the time of the
case
i countermanding of the poll: .
Provided further that ne person who has given a notice of with-
= of his candidature under sub-section (1) of section 37 before
the countermanding of the poll shall be ineligible for being nomina-
ted as a candidate for the election after such countermanding.

+ * + * *
Cuapter IV.—The Poll
+ हू + + +

60. Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained Special
in section 59, provision may be made by rules made under this Act eee
Vv
for enabling—

by cer-
(a) any of the following persons to give his vote by postal tain

ballot, and not in any other manner, at an election in a consti- classes of
i ersons.
tuency where a poll is taken, namely: — P

(i) a member of the Armed Forces of the Union or, as
the case may be, of an armed police force of a State, to whom
the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 20 of the Repre-
8. sentation of the People Act, 1950, apply;

* * * * *
(ii) a person who is employed under the Government
india in a post. outside India;

(iv) the wife of any such person as is referred to in sub-
clauses (i) and (४) to whom the provisions of sub-section
(6) of the said section 20 apply;

+

के

of I

* ®

CHAPTER V.—Counting of Votes
* * के

tut When the coy
ie officer shall

11178 of the votes has been completed, the re-

fi : Declara-
the i | orthwith declare the result of the election in tion of
हे Provided by this Act or the rules made thereunder. Results.
+ के

* *
Chapter VIII.—Election Expenses

78 E * * + *
ver :

0 Very “ontesting candidate at an

7 re ne Ale of election of the ret
the “I elect; one returned candidate at the election and the di

ction are 9;
turnin On are diffe

election shall, within thirty Lodging

. andi i of account
urned candidate or, if there with the

ates returning
tr officer 4 Tent, the later of those two dates, lodge with officer.
Yd Oby of । N account of his election expenses which shall
1९ account kept by him or by his election agent


Defini-

tions.

*Tesenta-
of

54
PART VI
DispuTES REGARDING ELECTIONS

CuHapTeR I.—Interpretation

79. In this Part and in Parts VII and VIII, unless the context
otherwise requires,—

+ * x * *

(d) “electoral right” means the right of a person to stand or
not io stand as, or to withdraw from being, a candidate, or to vote
or refrain from voting at an election;

(e) “pleader” means any person entitled to appear and plead
for another in a civil court and includes an advocate, a vakil and
an attorney of a High Court;

x * पु *

Cuaprer II.—Presentation of Election Petitions to Election Com-
mission

* % *

_ 81. (1) An election petition calling in question any election may
Pei on one or more of the grounds specified in sub-section
cane nn 100 and section 101 to the Election Commission by any
bart pee election or any elector within forty-five days from,
० if then 7 than, the date of election of the returned candidate,

© are more than one returned candidate at the election

“90 the dat, : a if
dates, €s of their election are different, the later of those two

के *

हि 7 this sub-section, “elector” means a person who
ote at the . वि कं 1९९४ ne
. whether fe election to which the election petition

85 voted at such election or =a

० ०८ i
0 tng ae election Petition

९1० shall be deemed to have been presented

n Commission

(a) a
°F to g nee It is delivered to
Miggio “Other Office
"in this ben If :
alf—

bY the pe

the Secretary to the Commission
$ may be appointed by the Election Com-

"son making the petition, or



55

(i) by a person authorised in writing in this behalf by
the person making the petition; or

(0७) when it is sent by registered post and is delivered to the
“ 4 A
Seereiary to the Commission or the officer so appointed
oec babe

(3) Every election petition shall be accompanied by as many
है copies thereof as there are respondents mentioned in the शक ॥॥
| and one more copy for the use of the Election Commission an . es
छः copy shall be attested by the petitioner under his own signatur
to be a true copy of the petition

* पु *

85. If the provisions of section 81 or section 82 or section 117 have

not been complied with, the Election Commission shall dismiss the
petition:

Procedure
on receiv-

ing peti-

tion.

Provided that the petition shall not be dismissed without giving

the petitioner an opportunity of being heard.

Cuaprer IL—Trial of Election Petitions

86. (1) If the petition is not dis!
tien Commission shall
Official Gazette and ac
and shall then refer th

missed under section 85, the Elec- Appoint.
cause a copy thereof to be published in the ment of
Opy to be served by post on each responden:, pees
© petition to an Election Tribunal for trial.
(2) For the Purpose of constituting such Tribunals, the Election
Commission shall i
Jammu:

hall maintain the list by
० time. 8 in as the High Court may, from time

i In this sub-section, the expression
.-S Judge of g city civil court,
chief judge of a sm
Eve; , T. रे

४ पा] shall cynsi f
ection ¢ shall consist 0

ड -OMMission fy,
»-६६७ 55101 tron
Cion (9) n

“district judge”
additional district judge, joint
all cause court.

a single member selected b\
any of the lists maintained by it under

Pro
de, o
res ti ay that Where th

हा ve ८ ssembly og ; ९ की हा in respect of an election to the

ag. UStricg judge Pi ; -Cgislative ouncil of a State. no Person who

te, his Aber of the eis State shall be selected for appointment
tha Nibun

“ except with the consent of the Gov


Ea sae

Provided further that if the Election Commission
xpedient so to do, it may appoint a person who has been
High Court as the member of a Tribunal,

considers 1६
a judge of a

(4) If for any reason a vacancy occurs in the :
a Tribunal, the Election Commission shall, as soon as Practicable,
appoint a person to fill the vacancy in accordance with the foregoing
provisions of, this section; and upon his Joining the Tribunal, the trial

of the petition shall be continued as if he had been on the Tribunal
from the beginning:

office of inember of

Provided that the Tribunal may,

if it thinks fit, recall and re-
examine any of the witnesses already

examined.

Connected 87. Where more petitions than one
petitions same election, the Election Commissi
peal same Tribunal, which may,
७ same Ne 07 More groups.

Tribunal,

are presented in respect of the
On shall refer all of them to the
in its discretion, try them separately or in

Place of
trial.

88. The trial shall be held

at such place as the Ele
sion may appoint:

ction Commis-

Provided that E
the trial at any oth
the petition relates

Tribunal may, in its discre’
er place in the State in whi
has taken place

tion, sit for any part of
ch the election to which

89. The Election Commi

हा Ssion may at any stage after notice to
Parties and, for

reasons to be recorded, withdraw any petition pend-
vibunal and transfer it for trial to another Tribunal
accordance with the provisions of section 86; and upon

that Tribunal shall proceed with the trial from the
it was withdrawn:

Provideg that
16 Witnesses alr

Sonstituted in
such transfer,
“980 at Which

it may, if it thin)

ks fit, recall and re-examine any of
eady examined,

Subject to the
Pearly ag सए election petiti
the Cog ay be, in accordance

© of Ciyj Tocedure, 190;

provisions of this Act and of any rules made
on shall be tried by the Tribunal. as

with the procedure appheable under

8, to the trial of suits:
‘ "OVideq
eas, th: Tri हे डर न
| पड 0 be he the Tribunal shall have the discretion to refuse for
it

18 of | कि ed in Writing to e
pen nion that their evid

Mion or छ
bing « that the part

०0७ frivolous grou

xamine any witness or witnesses
ence is not material for the deci-
¥ tendering such witness or wit-
nds or with a view to delay the

5 of 1908

डे

;



j
sions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, shall है

of 1872 (2) The provi

‘ va the provisions of this Aet, be deemed to apply in all respects to th
बी of an election petition.

§ (3) The Tribunal shall dismiss an election petition which does not

¢ comply with the provisions of section 81, or section 82 notwithstand
ing that it has not been dismissed by the Election Commission under

क्र section 85.

an election

५5 order of the Tribunal dismissing
der made

Exp
1 this sub-section shall be deemed to be an or

petition unde:
under clause (a) of section 98.

(4) Any candidate not already a respondent shall, upon application
made by him to the Tribunal within fourteen days from the date of
commencement of the trial and subject to the provisions of section 119,
be entitled to be joined as a respondent.

—For the purposes of this sub-section and of section

e deemed to commence on the date
ar before the Tribunal and answer

Explanation.
he trial of a petition shall b
‘xed for the respondents to 97978:
the claim or claims made in the petition.

upon such terms as to costs and otherwise
as it may deem fit, allow the particulars of any corrupt practice alleg-
ed in the petition to be amended or amplified in such manner as May
in its opinion be necessary for ensuring a fair and effective trial ot
the petition, but shall not allow any amendment of the petition which
will have the effect of introducing particulars of a corrupt practic?
70 previously alleged in the petition.

(5) The Tribunal, may,

ble iW Al election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as poss!

oan Endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six

Offic; ‘ ‘rom the date of publication of the copy of the petition in the
al Gazette under sub-section (1) of section 86.

act before the Tribunal may
t

91,
Any appearance, application or
leader duly appoint

© nade -

ioe done by the party in person or by @ P
act on his behalf:

Provic

to;
° pear

al to direct any parts

ded that it shall be open to the Tribun
it nec Vv

r In pers aay हु
1 person whenever the Tribunal considers

wheel are Vested In ५ ९०५
respect

ers

a ee
४१९ | ‘ eee shall have the pov:
mth | ode of Civil Procedure, 1908. when trying 3 suit m
ollowing matters: — : ;

(७) dis
liscovery and inspection,

Appear-
ance
before
Tribuna

Powers
the T
bunt



s
(b) enforcing the attendance of witnesses, and wes
deposit of their expenses,
(c) compelling the production of documents;
(d) examining witnesses on oath;

(e) granting adjournments,
(f) reception of evidence taken on affidavit, and

(g) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses,

and may summon and examine suo motu any person whose evidence
appears to it to be material; and shall be deemed to be a civil court
within the meaning of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1898. 5 of 1098.

Explanation.—For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of wit-
nesses, the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal shall be the
limits of the State in which the election was held.

ES * * * *

Answer- 95. (1) No witness shall be excused from answering any question
कि de : as to any matter relevant to a matter in issue in the trial of an elec-
ing ae tion petition upon the ground that the answer to such question may

criminate or may tend to criminate him, or that it may expose or may

tions and

i tend to expose him to any penalty or forfeiture:
ofindem-

uty, Provided that—

है (a) a witness who answers truly all questions which he is re
quired to answer shall be entitled to receive a certificate of in-
demnity from the Tribunal; and

: (0) an answer given by a witness to a question put by or be-
ore the Tribunal shall not, except in the case of any criminal
| Proceeding for perjury in respect of the evidence, he admissible
t evidence against him in any civil or criminal proceeding.
— oe certificate of indemnity has been granted to any wit:
complete Pa, e pleaded by him in any court and shall be a full and
Indian Penal ony to or upon any charge under Chapter IXA of the
to Which such ode, or Part VII of this Act arising out of the matter
him from an certificate relates, but it shall not be deemed to relieve
Y this 5 y disqualification in connection with an election imposed
ct or any other law.

96. Th
10 give evi Aue expenses incurred by any person in attending
Shay, idence may be allowed by the Tribunal to such person, and

» Un) Tri
the Costs less the Tribunal otherwise directs, be deemed to be part of



59 aA

97. (1) When in an ey
date other than the ret;

Ne 4 “vu
lection petition a declaration that any cant ४४

‘iS
duly elected ig lal vont

Provided that the return,
said shall not be entitled to

* 98 At the conely

Sion of the trial on
bunal shall make an

3, fpuniiion
an election petition the 7५० VI
order—

nf the

ppihunal.
(a) dismissing the election Petition; or

(9) declaring the election of all or any of the returned candi
ites to be void; or

akin है
'8 an order under section 98 the Tri- on to
ee also make an order— ja wade
: (2) where an
Pract;

y we
: wo any charge is made in the petition of any corrupt fyppnal.
708 having been committed a; i

Corrupt practices

has or has not
mitted at the ele

ction, and the

: १ any, who have been Prov-
© trial to haye been Builty 0

i any Corrupt practice and
© nature of that practice; and

(०) Ay;
+ the re’ mang the total amount of costs Payable, and specifying
पर 3 by and to Whom costs shall be paid:



60

provided that a person who is not a party to Dawe petition shall not,
be named in the order under sub-clause (it) of clause (a) unless—
(a) he has been given notice to appear before the Tribunal
and to show cause why he should not be so named; and
(b) if he appears in pursuance of the notice, he has been given ‘
an opportunity of cross-examining any witness who has already
been examined by the Tribunal and has given evidence against
him; of calling evidence in his defence and of being heard.

i st ; 4 a
(2) In this section and in section 100, the expression “agent” has
the same meaning as in section 123.

| Grounds 100. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) if the Tri- NY
for declat- punal is of opinion— 3
| (a) that on the date of his election a returned candidate was A
be void not qualified, or was disqualified, to be chosen to fill the seat
under the Constitution or this Act or the Government of Union z
Territories Act, 1963; or 20 of 1963

(b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a re-
turned candidate or his election agent or by any other person
with the consent of a returned candidate or his election agent; or

(c) that any nomination has been improperly rejected; or

(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a
returned candidate, has been materially affectec—
ES by the improper acceptance of any nomination, or

(ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests
of the returned candidate by an agent other than his
election agent, or

(iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of
any vote or the reception of any vote which is void, or

(iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the

Constitution or of this Act or of any rules or orders made
under this Act,

the Tri
be ee) shall declare the election of the returned candidate to

2) ifi ini 2
et i in the opinion of the Tribunal, a returned candidate has been 2S
Practic, 'ए an agent, other than his election agent, of any corrupt &

९. but the Tribunal is satisfied— ;
(०) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the $

e ect .
ion by the candidate or his election agent, and every such



=

corrupt practice was committed contrary to
without the consent, of the candidate or his ele

+ * * * *

(c) that the candidate and his election agent took all

reasonable means. for Preventing the commission of corrupt
practices at the election; and :

(d) that in all other respects the election was free from
any corrupt practice on the Part of the candidate or any of his
agents,

then the Tribunal may decide that the election of the returned
candidate is not void,

a declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly Which

elected and the Tribunal is of opinion— aie

(a) that in fact the petitioner. or such other Candidate re- ha
ceived a Majority of the valid votes; or a

"६ 18 1 dunin ; |
is ay sa the trial of an election petition it appears that there Procedure
that कह. के between any candidates at the election and in case of

९ ad tion of a ti di ae
be Ueclared elected ae Would entitle any of those candidates to ae

ns 5 decision made by the Teturning officer under the

tion betiveen the Act shall, in so far as it determines the ques-
0: i हि

« f the Petition, and iat, be effective also for the purposes

(8) in
mi, a far 48 that question is not determined by such a
+ ३३0 as ig Re Unal shall decide between them by lot and
Ona] Vote one on whom the lot then falls had received an



Communi-
cation of
orders 10
the Blec-
tion Com-
mission
and the
transtvis~
sion of
the
records of
the case.

Transmis-
sion of
order to
the appro-
priate au-
thority,
ete, and
its publi-
cation,

Effect of
Orders of
the Tribu.
nal,

62

103. The Tribunal shall, after announcing wm odessa

sections 98 and 99, send a Copy thereof to the Election Comm!

and the records of the case to the district judge of the district within
which the place of trial appo

inted under section 88 is situate, or if
such place is in a presidency-town, to the chief judge of the court
of small causes having jurisdiction there, as the case may he.

\

106. As soon as may be after the receipt of any order made by the
Tribunal under section 98 or section 99, the Election Commission
shall forward copies of the order to the appropriate authority and,
in the case where such order relates to an election to a House of
Parliament or to an election to the House or a House of the Legis-
lature of a State, also to the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may

be, of the House concerned and shall cause the order to be pub-
lished—

(a) where the order relates to an election to a House of
Parliament in the Gazette of India as well as in the Official
Gazette of the State concerned; and

(b) where the order relates to an election to the House or

a House of the Legislature of the State, in the Official Gazette
of the State.

; 107. (1) Every order of the Tribunal under section 98 or sec-
tion 99 shall take effect as soon as it is pronounced by the Tribunal.

(2) Where by an order under section 98 the election of a returned
candidate is declared to be void, acts and proceedings in which that
Teturned candidate has, before the date thereof, participated as a
member of Parliament or as a member of the Legislature of a State
shall not be invalidated by reason of that order, nor shall such
Candidate be subjecte

d to any liability or penalty on the ground
of such participation

Cuapren TV.—Withdrawal and Abatement of Election Petitions

El 108, An election petition may be withdrawn only by leave of the
ection Commission jf an application for its withdrawal is made
© any Tribunal has been appointed for the trial of such petition.

for



sm. ।

fe,
: of an cleetion With.

109. (1) Where an application for

petition is made after a Tribunal has been appointed for the trial of drawal of
such petition, the election petition may be withdrawn only by leave Petitions
of the-Tribunal, after

appoint-
(2) Where an application for withdrawal is made under sub- Ment of

: मै Tribunal.
section (1), notice thereof fixing a date for the hearing of the applica. “"?U"®
tion shall be given to all other parties to the petition and shall be
published in the Official Gazette.
110. (1) If there are more petitioners than one, no

application Procedure
to withdraw an election petition shall b

e made except with the for with-

consent of all the petitioners. drawal of
7 Hey : Petitions
(2) No application for withdrawal shall be granted if in the before the

opinion of the Election Commission or of the Tribunal, as the case Election
may be, such application has been induced by. any bargain or Commis-
consideration which ought not to be allowed. ee onthe

Tribunal.
(3) If the application js granted—

and upon com-
हज 117 as to security, shall be
Such term i stituted and to continue the proceedings upon
: Tribunal may think fit,

हे, था
bua)
(0)

When a 698

and ne 7 application for withdrawal is granted by the Tri-
ia has been substit
the fie 3) of section 110,
:  T€port the fact
Fazetye, THOM Commi

Report of
uted as petitioner under clause with-

in place of the party withdraw. drawal by
to the Election Commission ang ‘B® Tribu-

; : nal to th
Ssion shall publish the report in the Hlection हु

Commis-
slon.

॥ petit] 5
of ce ition hall abate only on the de:

i ath of a sole Abate-
'Vivor of sever,

al petitioners, ae of
election
petition

hie)


Abate-
ment of
petition
before
appoint-
ment of
Tribunal.

Abate-
ment of
petition
after
appoint-
ment of
Tribunal,

Substitu-
tion on
death of
peti-
tioner,

Abate-
ment or
substitu-
tion on
death of
Tespon-
कथा,

Apeals
*Sainst
riers og
Blection
‘ Ne |

‘als

64

113. If an election petition abates under section 112 Vv a

Tribunal has been appointed for the trial of the petition, notice of
the abatement shall be published in the Official Gazette by the

Election Commission.

114, Where an election petition abates under section 112 after
a Tribunal has been appointed for the trial of the petition, notice of
the abatement shall be published in the Official Gazette by the Tri-

bunal.

115. After a notice of the abatement of an election petition is
published under section 113 or section 114, any person who might
himself have been a petitioner may, within fourteen days of such
publication, apply to be substituted as petitioner and upon com-
pliance with the conditions of section 117 as to security shall be
entitled to be so substituted and to continue the proceedings upon
such terms as the Tribunal may think fit.

116. If before the conclusion of the trial of an election petition,
the sole respondent dies or gives notice that he does not intend to
oppose the petition or any of the respondents dies or gives such
notice and there is no other respondent who is opposing the petition,
the Tribunal shall cause notice of such event to be published in the

Official Gazette, and thereupon any person who might have been a

Petitioner may, within fourteen days of such publication, apply to
be substituted in place of such respondent to oppose the petition,
and shall be entitled to continue the proceedings upon such terms
as the Tribunal may think fit.

Cuaprer IVA.—Appeals
6A, (1) An appeal shall lie from every order made by a Tri-

bun; ४01
न्‍ध यह ander section 98 or section 99 to the High Court of the State
ich the Tribunal is situated.

ie teh Court shall, subject to the provisions of this Act.
same proce ture Powers, jurisdiction and authority, and follow the
© appeal were with respect to an appeal under this Chapter as if
Court situat d an appeal from an original decree passed by a civil
tion: 26 within the local limits of its civil appellate jurisdic-



{ .
4 ded that where the High Court consists of more than

= coy appeal under this Chapter shall be heard by a bencl
bi rs
if not less than two judges.

1 this Chapter shall be preferred within
rder of the Tribunal

3) Every appeal unde:
a Bee of thirty days from the date of the 0
under section 98 or section 99:

Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the ap-
pellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within
such period.

(4) Where an appeal has been preferred against an order made
under clause (b) of section 98 or section 99, the High Court may,
on sufficient cause being shown, stay operation of the order appealed
from and in such a case the order shall be deemed never to have
taken effect under sub-section (1) of section 107 and a copy of the
stay. order shall immediately be sent by the High Court to the Elec-
tion Commission and the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may be,
of the House of Parliament or of the State Legislature concerned. :

(5) Every appeal shall be decided as expeditiously as possible

and endeavour shall. be made to determine it finally within three

months from the date i
aaa Th a the memorandum of appeal is

80 As soon as appeal is decided.

i » the High Court shall intimat
| Sheaker ae the decision to th हक

Election Commissi
pts le m Commission and the
Renton of rare mm as the case may be, of the House of Parlia-
thats, hat ga Legislature Concerned, and as soon as may be
७१ ० the tock, end to the Election Commission an authenti
thay ion; and upon i i ti rea
pon its receipt, the Election Commisison

(० to
oF th, tward copies iti
at order of the thereof to the authorities to which copies

e Tri fe
inal were forwarded under section 106

et] decis;
Meloy," Which that gon f° 0९ Published i

n
fe the gazette or

published under the said

© 0९९६]
d 8 : 10n of th i
" she only ty ae Court on appeal under this Finality
or *ctinn 99 decision, the order of the Tribunal of orders
Shall be final and conclusive, and

decisions.


Deposit
of secur

rity.

Further
security

for costs.

Security
for costs
from 8
Tespon=
dent.
Security
for costs
of ap-
peal.

Costs,

Payment
of costs
Ut of
Security
कि
and Te.
Urn, 0
such
a le.

66

CuapTer V.—Costs _ ae Security for Costs

all enclose with the petition a Government
that a deposit of two thousand rupees has
Government Treasury or in the Reserve
Election Commission as security for

117. The petitioner shi
Treasury receipt showing
been made by him either ina
Bank of India in favour of the
the costs of the petition.

of the trial of an election petition the

all upon the petitioner to give such fur-
direct, and may, if he fails to do so,

118. During the course
Tribunal may at any time ci
ther security for costs as it may
dismiss the petition.

Jed to be joined as a respondent

119. No person shall be entit
less he has given such security

under sub-section (4) of section 90 unl
for costs as the Tribunal may direct.

119A. Every person who prefers an appeal under Chapter IVA
shall enclose with the memorandum of appeal a Government Trea-

” sury receipt showing that a deposit of five hundred rupees has been

made by him either in a Government Treasury or in the Reserve
Bank of India in favour of the Election Commission as security for
the costs of the appeal.

120. (i) Costs including pleaders’ fees shal i iscreti
of the ‘Tribunal: gp es shall be in the diszretion

sect et that where a petition is dismissed under clause (a) of
लक : , ie returned candidate shall be entitled to the costs in-
banal en an contesting the petition and accordingly the Tri-
date make an order for costs in favour of the returned candi-

(2) The Tribunal may allow interest on costs at a rate not ex-

ceeding th:
to the costa per cent. per annum, and such interest shall be added

Part the i mn any order as to costs under the provisions of this
person, such a een payment of costs by any party to any
in full ore costs shall, they have not been already paid, be paid
her बा * as possible, out of the security deposit and the fur-
on an apple leposit, if any, made by such party under this Part,
one year fen ion made in writing in that behalf within a period of
by the 0 the date of such order to the Election Commission
Tson in whose favour the costs have been awarded.

ee गई


67

ff there is any balance left of any of the said security deposit

Oe t under sub-section (1) of the costs referred to in that
ae tition, such balance, or where no costs have been awarded or
विकार का किक as aforesaid has been made within the said period of
one year, the whole of the said security deposits may, Pia an applica-
tion made in that behalf in writing to the Election -ommission by
the person by whom the deposits have been made, or if such person
dies after making such deposits, by the legal representative of such
person, be returned: to the said person or to his legal representative,
as the case may be.

* * * * के

B VII
Corrupt PRACTICES AND ELECTORAL OFFENCES
CHAPTER I—Corrupt Practices

128, The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for

Corrupt
the purposes of this Act:— practices,

(6) “Bribery”, that is to say,—

(A) any gift
agent or by any other

to any person
rectly of in-

(2) a person to stand or not to starid as, or to with-
draw from heing a candidate at an election, or

(0) an elector to’ vote or refrain from voting at an
election, .

OT as a Teward to—
9 a person
ving withdra

*

for having so stood or not stood, or for
wn. his candidature; or

bd *
Neation, ie het of, or agreement to receive,
7 aS a motive or a reward—
tor mae, candidate 3 as, or
री any person whomsoever

n for voting or refrainin

any grati-

Person for standin
ng from being, a

for himself or any
ig from Voting, or



68

inducing or attempting to induce a १
refrain from voting, or any candidate t
his candidature.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause the term “gratifi-
cation” is not restricted to pecuniary gratifications or gratifications *
estimable in money and it includes all forms of entertainment and
all forms of employment for reward but it does not include the pay-
ment of any expenses bona fide incurred at, or for the purpose of,
any election and duly entered in the account of election expenses
referred to in section 78.

* * * * *

(5) The hiring or procuring, whether on payment or otherwise,
of any vehicle or vessel by a candidate or his agent or by any other
person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent, for
the conveyance of any elector (other than the candidate himself,
the members of his family or his agent) to or from any polling sta-
tion provided under section 25 or a place fixed under sub-section (1)
of section 29 for the poll:

Provided that thé hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector or
by several electors at their joint costs for the purpose of convey-
ES him or them to and from any such polling station or place fixed
for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this
clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel not
propelled by mechanical power:

Provided further that the use of any public transport vehicle or
vessel or any tramear or railway carriage by an elector at his own
cost for the purpose of going to or coming from any such polling
station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to be a cor-
एफ practice under this clause.

Explanation-—In this clause, the expressio
vehicle used or capable of being used for ॥
transport, whether propelled by mechanical power oF otherwise
whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise.

*
* * *

n “vehicle” means any

the purpose of road
and

*
*

* *
7801 shall be deemed to
f a candidate’s election
counting

Explanation —(1) bd
(2) For the purposes of clause (7), @ 7०

assist in the furtherance of the prospects 0:
if he acts as an election agent, or 8 pol
agent of that candidate.

ling agent or 8



69
= 1 Offences
के

Cuaprm 11,
°

Neement of the poll or on tthe i
4, : ngs
which a poll is taken for an election in that polling area. ipa ‘day
preceding
N the elec.
tion day
and on
= elec-
tion day,
s . के * *
129. (1) No person who is a returning officer
turning officer Hi

Officers, .
rat an election, or ete, at

ing officer or the presid- elections
tform any duty j i

With an election shall ri हब
the management of the election go any act (other

the furtherance of the Prospects of the neat
election of ४8 candidate, ence
Voting.
= * क्र . *

130, ( ) No Person Shall, on the date or dates on which a Poll Prohibi
1s taken at any polling Station, commit any of the following acts tion of
Within Polling station or in any public or privai
३ distance of One hundreq yards of ६]

near
or Polling
* Stations.
* * के 7
॥ 133, MY Person js Suilty of any such Corrupt practice as ~is Penalty
ria h aia (5) of Section 123 a or in connection with an for illegal
> 2e shall be “nishable with fine which may ext, to hiring or
two hung and PI fine which m 'Yy extend ine
of con.
veyances
at elec.
14 (0) * * * * 7 tions.
3
one’ d Persons to Whom this section applies are the Teturning Breaches
cers 7 'SSistant eturning Officers, Presiding officers, Polling offi- of officiay
ration with qn’? PetSon appointed
tures

कि - Perform any duty in con- 448
कि the ९ Teceint of Nominations or withdrawal of candida. wit
the Tecordj

at an election; and elections

al duty” shai for the Purposes of this section |



=

:
be construed accordingly, but shali not include duties imposed
otherwise than by or under this Act.

10

क s * * *
136. (1) : ‘ ‘ * 4
|... शोध (4) An offence punishable under clause (b) of sub-section (2)
हि shall be cognizable.
int
serail
Prosecu- 137. (1) If the Election Commission or a Regional Commis-

tim re- Sioner appointed under clause (4) of article 324 or the Chief Elec-

gading toral Officer of the State has reason to believe that any offence

erin punishable under section 129, or under section 134 or under clause

hore (0) of sub-section (2) of section 136 has been committed in refe-
rence to any election within a State, it shall be the duty of the
Election Commission, the Regional Commissioner or the Chief Elec-
toral Officer, as the case may be, to cause‘such inquiries to be
made -and such prosecutions to be instituted as the circumstances
of the case may appear to it or him to require.

(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable
under section 129 or under section 134 or under clause (a) of sub-
section (2) of section 136 unless there is a complaint made by
Sie of, or under authority from, the Election Commission or a
ee Commissioner appointed under clause (4) of article 324

the Chief Electoral Officer of the State concerned.

+
bg * * * *

PART VIII

“DISQUALIFICATIONS

Cuaprer I—Disqualifications for Membership

a
Pa 189. (1 : .
Stag, hembersh - following offences shall entail disqualification for
m Namely. of Parliament and of the Legislature of every State,
(0 Ms
offences punishable with imprisonment under section te

0 :
7 section 171F of the Indian Penal Code, and
b

७) | ; 4
Oy rine punishable under section 125 or section 135 45 oft
1) of sub-section (2) of section 136 of this Act

he

\ Per ' eae : j

* of oe Of such disqualification shall be six years from
“Oaviction for the offence


\
71
140, The corrupt practices specified in section 123 shall entail Corrupt
disqualification for membership of Parliament and of the Legisla- practices
ture of every State for a period of six years counting from the aaa
date on which the finding of the Election Tribunal as to such prac- tan fe
. tice takes effect under this Act.

The Election Commission may, for reasons 10 be recorded, Removal,
remove any disqualification under this Chapter or reduce the period or reduc-
of any such disqualification. * tion of

, i period, of
disqualifi-
cations.

Cuaprer II—Disqualifications for Voting

. Disquali-
. fication
. I nt of this Act—
141. If any person after the commencement of this Act. arising out
. ‘i : काम मलिक of convic-
(0) is convicted of an offence punishable with imprison- tion and

ct, ment under section 171E or section 171F of the Indian Penal corrupt
* Code, or of an offence punishable under section 125 or section practices.

135 or clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 136 of this Act,

or

: (b) is, upon the trial of an election petition under Part VI,
Ound guilty of any corrupt practice,

he sh . ‘

af बाप for a period of six years from the date of the conviction or

e date on which such finding takes effect, be disqualified for

Voting at बा election,

*

ny disqualificati

: yg, An
le
Bection Ommission

on under this Chapter may be removed by Removal

for reasons to be recorded by it in writing. °f dis-
qualifica-

tions,

C
पर HAPTER III—Other Disqualifications

Pers, ae
1 tie mus ey is for the time being disqualified under pisquali-
te Pani ment of this Part for being a member of : ither fication
१५ State op f °F the House or either House of the Legisla- लि being
t sop Voting at elections, shall, so long as the dis- °" *!°*

8
ly 088 » also be gi P : _ tion agent.
lection disqualified for being an election


2
Cuaprer IV—Powers of Election Commission in connection with In-
quiries as to Disqualifications of Members . 6

146, (7) Where in connection with the tendering of any opinion
to the President under article 103 or, as the case may be, under sub-
commis- ection (4) of section 14 of the Government of Union Territories
sin. Act, 1963, or to the Governor under article 192, the Election Com- 20of 1963, ७

mission considers it necessary or proper to make an inquiry, and

the Commission is satisfied that on the basis of the affidavits filed

and the documents produced in such inquiry by the parties con-

of their own accord, it cannot come to a decisive opinion on
the matter which is being inquired into, the Commission shall have,
for the purposes of such inquiry, the powers of a civil court, while
trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of 5 of 1908.
the following matters, namely:— .

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath; :

(b) requiring the discovery and production of any docu-
ment or other material object producible as evidence;

(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(d) requisitioning any public record of a copy thereof from
any court or office; हा

rs of
Blection

ey

(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses
or documents.

pee shall also have the power to require any
Sons under a l y privilege which may be claimed by that per-
tion on aah | faw for the time being in force, to furnish inform-
may be papal or matters as in the opinion of the Commission
for, or relevant to, the subject matter of the inquiry.

WI 8) The Commission shall be d d to be a civil court and
sen IY such offence, as 1 leemend to be a civil co
on 179, secti , as is described in section 175, section 178,
hai sane or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code, is 4 of 1860.
sate ™®Y after 18 view or presence of the Commission, the Commis- y
Pre ent of the cording the facts constituting the offence and the
ah Ure, 1898 Faller as provided for in << Code of Criminal
Wordeg © same ‘orward the case to a magistrate having jurisdiction 5 of 1898. |
it the Shall ial the magistrate to whom any such case is for-
Of (५९३७९ had |; eed to hear the complaint against the accused as
Timing) 2 been forwarded to him under section 482 of the Code

(4) Ocedure, 1898
be ay ny Proceegi :
Meigs cial, ding before the Commission shall be deemed है

245 og PPC eding within the meaning of section 198 and
the Indian Penal Code

व
sion

45 of !


=

146A. No statement made by a person in the course of giving evi- State-
dence before the Election Commission shall subject him to, or be ae
used against him in, any civil or criminal Proceeding except a

ersons
prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement; if the
Election
Commis-
sion,

Provided that the statement—

(a) is made in reply to a question which he is required by
the Commission to answer, or
(b) is relevant to the subject-matter of the inquiry.
1468. The Election Commission shall h;
its own procedure (including the fixing
sittings and deciding whether to sit in pi

ave the power to regulate Procedure
of places and times of its ee
ublic or in private), by the
Election
Commis.
sion.

on in respect of anything which is in good faith done t#kenin
ta red to be done in Pursuance of the foregoing provisions of Ee
Pier or of any order made thereunder or in respect of the
the ony of any opinion by the Commission to the President or,
to the Governor or in Tespect of the publication,

© authority of the Commission of any such opinion,
ceedings, : a”



aa a LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to ammend the Representation of the People Act,
1930, and the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

(Shri G. 3. Pathaky
Minister of Law)