But No. $8 of 1263 
THE HINDU ADOPTIONS AND , 
MAINTENANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 20m JUNE, 1962) 
. '-\IoO;J~ .... 

',8 of 1956. S 
THE HINDU ADOPTIONS AND MAINTENANCE 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
fu.rther to amend the Hindu. Adoptio11.S and Maintenance Act, 1956 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenllnce Short title. 
(Amendment) Act, 1962. 
2. In section 2 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 Amen~en' 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the Explanation of aectiQD 3. 
to sub-section (1)-
(a) in clause (b), the word "and" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted; 
10 (b) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted. 
namely:-
"(bb) any child, legitimate I?r illegitimate, who has 
been abandoned both by his father and mother or whose 
parentage is not known and who in either case is brought 
IS up as a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh; end". 
3. In section 9 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and figure of 8CCtion 9· 
"sub-section (3) ", the words, brackets and figures "sub-section 
(3) and sub-section (4)" shall be substituted; 
973 (B) LS 

2 
(b) for sub-section (4) the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(4) Where both the father and mother are dead or 
have completely Qnd finally renounced the world .or have 
abandoned the child or have been declared by a court of S 
competent jUrisdiction to be of unsound mind or where the 
parentage of the child is not known, the guardian of the 
child may give the child in adoption with the previous per-
mission of the court to any person including the guardian 
himself,"; 10 
(c) in the Explanation-
(i) in clause (i), the word "and" Qt the end shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) after clause (i), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:- IS 
• (ia) "guardian" means a person having the care 
of the person of a child or of both his person and pro-
perty and includes-
(a) a gueardian appointed by the will of the 
child's father or mother, and 20 
('b) a guardian appointed or declared by a 
court; and', 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Hindu Adop: icns and Maintenance Act, 1956, thea 
guardian of a child has been given the power to give the child in 
adoption with the previous permission of the court. But this power 
can be exercised only by a testamentary guardian or a guardian 
appointed or declared by the court as specified in section 9 (4) of 
the Act. A person having the care and custody of a child has, how-
ever, no power to give the child in adoption although for all practi-
cal purposes he is the guardian of the child. Then again, there is 
no provision in the Act authorising the adoption of a child aban-
doned by both of his parents or of a child whose parentage is not 
known. Children are sometimes abandoned -by their parents for 
fear of social opprobrium, for reasons of poverty and for other 
reasons. If these children could be given in adoption, they might 
grow up in congenial home atmosphere as good citizens. These 
abandoned children lJ.re very eften brought Uip in foundling homes 
or other children's institutions. The manager of such homes or 
institutions having the care and custody of these children is for all 
practical purposes their guardian and there is no reason as to why 
he should not have the power to give the child in adoption with the 
permission of the court like the testamentary gwardian or the guar-
dian appointed or declared by the court. It is, therefore, considered 
that this lacuna in the law should be removed by suitably amend-
ing section 9 (4) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, 
so as to bring a person having the care and custody of the child 
within the mE.lJning of 'guardian'. 
Under section 10 of the Act only a Hindu can be adopted. As the 
religion of an abandoned child or of a child whose parentage is not 
known cannot be ascertained, it is proposed to amend the Explana-
tion to section 2 (1) of the Act to the effect that a child., legitimate 
or illegitimate, who hIlS 'been abandoned by both of his parents or 
whose parentage is not known ,but who in either case is brought up 
as a Hindu will be a Hindu by religion. 
The Bill is designed to give etfect to the above proposals. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th June, 1962. A. K. SEN. 

PeI'ICIIIl' capable in 
IiviDIn adoptions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE HINDU ADoPTIONS AND MAINTENANCE ACT, 1956 
(78 OF 1958) 
• • • • 
2. (1) 
.. • • • 
E:cplanation:-The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, 
J ainu or Sikhs by religion, as the case may be:-
• '" • • 
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitillBte, one of whose 
parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion and who 
15 brought up as a member of the trl,be, community, group or 
family to which such parent belongs or belonged; and 
•. (1) • • • • 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the father, if 
alive, shall alone have the right to give in adoption, but such right 
Ihall not be exercised save with the consent of the mother unless 
the mother has completely and finally renounced the world or has 
ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by a court of competent 
jurisdiction to be of unsound mind . 
'" • • • 
(4) Where both the father and mother are dead or have com-
pletely and finally renounced the world or have been declared by e 
court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind, the guardian 
of a child (whether a testamentary guardian or a guardian appointed 
or declared by a court) may give the child in adoption with the 
previOUS permission of the court. 
'" '" • • 
E:cplana.tion: -For the purposes of this section-
(i) the expressions "father" and "mother" do not include 
an adoptive father and an adoptive mother; and 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956. 
(Shri Asoks K. Sen, 
Minister oj LarD) 