AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

109 Jut 199b

Bill No. 58 of 1998.
THE ABOLITION OF DEATH PENALTY TO WOMEN, CHILDREN AND
INDIGENT PERSONS BILL, 1998
By
‘Suet Suswit Kumar Suinpe, M.P.
A
BILL
to abolish death penalty to women, children and indigent persons.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
lows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Abolition of Death Penalty to Women, Children
Indigent Persons Act, 1998.

(2) It shall apply to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise provides—
(i) “child” means any child below the age of fifteen years;

(if) “death penalty” means a sentence of death in any form passed by acourt of
law orany other authority including the Village Courts or District Councils or Regional
Councils or sentence of death passed by village Panchayats or Sabhas, tribal sabhas
or heads of villages or tribes, whether having legal authority or not, in accordance
with personal law, custom or usage and includes death penalty for practising witch-
craft; and

Short title,
extent and
commencement.

Definitions.


Death sentence
not f0 be
awarded to
women,
children and
indigent
persons.

Purushment

(ii) “indigent person” means and includes any person who has attained
age of sixty years or above and is suffering from any incurable disease or men
retarded.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code or any other law
the time being in force or custom or usage in practice in India, death penalty shall not
awarded to any woman or a child or an indigent person, notwithstanding the nature

. crime committed or caused to be committed and abetted or caused to be abetted by si

woman or child or indigent person.

4. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished wi
rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than ten years and also with fine of rupees
lakh,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

has been observed that vulnerable sections of the Society, the women, the children
the indigent persons continue to be the subject of exploitation, including sexual
loitation and abuse and are often placed in circumstances wherein they are liable to
it crimes attracting severe penalties including death penalty. Various customary,
igious as well as tribal laws often provide for death penalties for such offences like
lultery” and practising “witch-craft”.

A circumstance or situation can hardly be conceived when the persons belonging to
er sex, the children or the indigent would commit such a crime without enough
ocation as to attract the penalty like death.

In arecent case, a woman was sentenced to death. It would only be proper to abolish
penalty for such vulnerable sections such as women, children or the indigent persons,

Hence this Bill,

‘New DELHI; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
18, 1998.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to abolish death penalty to women, children and indigent persons.

(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)JMRND—832LS—25-6-1998