CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE DELHI AGRICULTURAL PR0DUCE Mf.RKETING (REGULATION) BILL, 1976 
L-TQ be/As intr?duced in Ink Sabh l 7 
1. Pago (iii), line 18,-
fqr "sub-sectio (2)" reld "sub-section (2)" 
2. Page 4, line 31,-
fpr "used" read "sued" 
3. P~go 5, line 13,-
fJr "the C)ther members" rend "any other member" 
4. Page 5, line 14,-
for "their" reld "his" 
5. P'lge 12, in t he mar gin:\l he) 9,d 1ng t') c lausG 17,-
6. 
6A. 
7. 
for "Thrms" re a~_ "'Itrm" 
P~gc 21, line 37,-
!:2!:. "oxceed s" r£.~ "exceed" 
Page 2~ line 21, -. for 'trade allowance' read' "trade allol,o,T3,nce '" P-~g(' 24-', in thG rn1.rgir'll h01.ding t') cl9.use 4-6,-
for "C')mr.J.i t te c " re ad "Co mmi t teE.; s" 
8. Page 25, in tho margin:).l hellding to clause 47,-
t:.Q.!: "Committe e" re ad "Conmi t tee s" 
9. Page 25, line 24,-
f()r "direction" I:Q...ld "direc ti()ns" 
1 0 • Page 27, in the ;"]~r ginal he 1.d ing to c 13.use 54,-
for "cintr1.vcnti')n" read "contr'lVenti0n" 
11 • P'lge 42, lin(~ 2,-
f'1r "Centr'll G0vernment" reld ".Act~inistr'\tor" 
NEW DElHI; 
May 1~. 1996 

As IN'1'RODUCEJ) IN Lol[ SABRA ON 
Bm No. &8 of 1976 
THE DELHI AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE MARKETING 
(REGULATION) BILL, 1976 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
CLAUSES 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Notification of intention of regulating marketing of agricultural 
produce in liQecified area. 
4. Declaration of regulation of marketing of specified agricultural 
produce in market area. . 
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION OF DELHI AGRICULTURAL MARKETING BOARD 
5. Constitution, powers and duties of Delhi Agricultural Marketing 
Board. 
CHAPTER III 
ESTABLISHMENT OF MARKETS AND CONSTITUTION OF MARKET COMMITTEES 
6. Establishment ot markets. 
7. Establishment of special markets. 
8. Constitution of Market Committees. 
9. Composition of Market Committees. 
10. Incorporation of Market Committees. 
11. Election and term of office of members. 
12. Creation of Election Fund. 
13. Commencement of term of office of members. 
14. Resignation of members and nomination in certain circumstances. 
15. Removal of members for misconduct. 
16. Casual vacancies. 
17. Term of office of Chairman and Vice-Chairman and honorarium 
payable to them. 
18. Procedure for election of Vice-Chairman. 
19. Resignation of Chairman and Vice-Chairman. 
20. Consequences of absence of Chairman without leave. 
(i) 
620 (B)LS-l. 

(1i ) 
CLAUSES 
21. Vacancies in office of Chairman and Vice-Chairman. 
22. Befunl tohaDd overcharge to new Chairman or Vice-Chair~ 
man. 
23. MeetiDg, etc., of Market Committee. 
2' . .... ben·to act duriBg vaeancy; acts- of Market Committee, etc., 
not to be iuvalidatedby informalities. 
CHAPTER IV 
MARKET COMMITTEES-POWERS AND DUTIES 
25. Powers and duties of Market Committee. 
26. Appointment of Sub-Committees; delegation of powers. 
27. Power ot; the Market Committee to a,en collection centres for 
marketing of specified produce; provisions for receipt and 
payment by purchaser. 
28. Power of Market Committee to levy fees. 
28. Power to borrow. 
30. Execution of contracts. 
31. CertaAn disputes regarding construction of rules, etc., about 
weights and measures to be decided by the Controller of 
Weights and Measures. 
CHAPTER V 
OFFICERS AND SERVANTS OF MARKET COMMITTEES. 
32. Power of Market Commi ttee to employ staff. 
CHAPTER VI 
MARKETING- OF AGBICULTUBAL PRGDUCE 
33. Regulation of marketing of agricultural produce. 
34. Grant of licences. 
35. Power to cancel or suspend licences. 
36. Al?peal. 
37. Provision forae.ttlement of disputes. 
CHAPTER VII 
MARKETING DEVELOPMENT FuND AND MMIml':PuND 
38. Marireting Development Fund. 
39. Market Fund, its custody. and investment. 
40 Purposes for whieh Market Fund may be expeDGed. 
41. Manner of auditing aecounts, preparing budget, annualrepm-t, 
etc. 

CLAVUS 
(ili) 
CHAPTER VIII 
TRADE ALLOWANCES PROHIBITED 
-te. Maktng or recovery of trade allowance prohibited. 
CHAPTER IX 
CONTROL BY THE BOARD 
43. Inspection, inquiry, submission of statements, etc. 
44. Duty of oftleers, servants and members of Market Commiftee 
to furnish information to Board, authorised ~ and 
Administrator. 
45. Seizure of account books and other documell1l. 
46. Powers of Board to call for proceedings of Market CommitteeJ 
and to !pass orders thereon. 
47. Amalgamation or division of Market Committees. 
48. Supersession of Market Committee, etC. 
CHAPTER X 
PENALTIES 
49. Penalty for not complying with directions under sub-sectio (2) 
of section 22. 
50. Penalty for contravention ot section 33. 
51. Penalty for making or recovering trade allowance. 
52. Penalty for obstruction of officer and failure to obey order 
under section 43. 
53. Penalty for contravening provisions of section "-
54. Penalty for contravention of section 45. 
55. General proviSion for punishment of offence. 
CHAPTER XI 
MIsCBLLAlfEOUS 
56. Liability of members or employees of Board or Market Com-
mittees. 
57. Chairman, etc., of the Board and the Market Committee to be 
public servants. 
58. Bar of suit in absence of notice. 
59. Trial of offences. 
60. Recovery of sums due to Government, Board, Market Com-
mittee and others. 
61. Power of Administrator to delegate powers. 
62. ~ Jwer to exempt the Board, Market Committee, etc., from pro-
visions of the Act. 
63. Power to make rules. 
64. power to make regulations. 

CLAUSES 
65. Bye-laws. 
66. Power of Administrator to amend Schedule. 
67. Power of Administrator to transfer assets, etc., in cases of Mar-
ket Committees constituted for excluded areas under Bombay 
Act 22 of 1939. 
68. Power to write off irrecoverable fees, etc. 
69. Revision. 
70. Power to cOIIlCJound offences. 
71. Power of the Committee and Chairman to impose penalties. 
72. Repeal and saving. 
73. Power to remove difficulties. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. 58 of 1976 
THE DELHI AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE MARKETING 
(REGULATION) BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the better regu.lation of the pu.rchase, sale, storage and 
processing of ag,ricultural produce and the establishm.ent of markets 
for agricultural produce in the Union territory of Delhi and for 
ma.tters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Agricultural Produce Market- Short 
title, 
extent 
and 
10 
ing (Regulation) Act, 1976. 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. commen. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, cement. 
by notification, aQpoint. 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Administrator" means the Administrator of the Union 
. territory ot: Delhi appointed by the President under article 239 of 
t'le Constitution; 
Deflni. 
tions. 

... 
.2 
(b) "agricultural produce" means such produce (whether pro-
cessed or not) of agriculture, horticulture, forest, animal husbandry, 
apiculture or pisciculture as are specified in the Schedule; 
(c) "agriculturist" means a person who ordinarily by his own 
labour or by the labour of any member of his family or who by the .5 
labour of his tenants r": by servants or hired labour or otherwise ia 
engaged in the produc~ion or growth of. agricultural produce which 
has not been processed, but does not include a trader, commission 
agent, processor or broker, in or in relation to, agricultural produce 
except where such trader, commission agent, processor or broker fs 10 
also engaged in the production or growth of agricultural produce; 
(d) "Board" means the Delhi Agricultural Marketing Board 
constituted under section 5; 
(e) "broker" means an agent who, in consideration of a com-
mission, fee or remuneration, contrives, makes and concludes a bar- I, 
gain, or contracts on behalf of his principal, for the purchase or sale 
of agricultural produce, but does not receive, deliver, trang;lort, or 
pay for the purchase or collect payment for the sale of, the agri-
cultural produce; 
(f) "bye-laws" means bye-laws made under section 65; 20 
(g) "commission agent" means a person, who, by himself or 
through his servants, buys and sells agricultural produce for another 
person, keeps it in his custody and controls it during the process of 
its sale or purchase, and collects payment therefor from the buyer 
anti pays it to the seller, and receives by way of remuneration a 25 
commission or percentage upon tee amount involved in each tran-
saction; 
(h) "Director" means a person appointed as the Director of 
Agricultural Marketing for the Union Territory of Delhi; 
(i) "local authority" means, in relation to an area within the 30 
local limits ot,-
(i) the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, that Corporation; 
(ii) the New Delhi MuniCipal Committee, that Committee; 
(iii) the Delhi Cantonment Board, that Board; 
(j) "market" means any principal market established under this 3S 
Act and inc]udes a subsidiary market; 
(k) "market area" means an area declared to be a market area 
under section 4; 
(l) "Market Committee" means a committee constituted for a-ll 
market area under section 8; 
(m) "notification" means a notification published in the Offietal 
Gazette; 
(n) "Official Gazette" means the 'Delhi Gazette; 
(0) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(P) "processor" means a person who procesae. any agrlcNltural .. , 
produce on Qayment of a charge; 

5 
10 
(q) "retail sale" in relation to any agricultural produce, ~ 
the sale of that produce, not exceeding such quantity as the Market 
CQmmit~e .may, by bye-laws, determine to be a retail sale; 
(r) "Schedule" means the Schedule to this Act-, 
(8) "Secretary" mealll a SeC1'etary ot a Market Committee and 
includes a Joint, Deputy or Assistant Secretary; , 
(t) ··Surveyor" means a person who, on arrival of a consign-
ment of agricultural produce for sale in any market area or market, 
surveys itior ascertaining the quality, refraction, adulteration and 
·other :like 1actors; 
(1£) "trader" means a person who buys or sells agricultural pro-
duce as a principal or as duly authorised agent of one or more 
persons. 
(Z) If anyquestign arises as to whether a person is or is not an agri-
IS oulturist for the purposes of this Act, the matter shall be referred to 
the Director who shall decide the same. 
3. (1) The Administrator may, by notification, declare his intention Ilf 
regulating the marketing of such agricultural produce, and in such area, 
at!! may be specified in the notification in accordance with the provisions 
20 of this Act. 
(2) The notification may also be published in any newspaper pub-
lished in the regional language and circulating in the area specified 
under sub-section (1), or in such other manner as, in the opinion of the 
Administrator, is best calculated to bring to the notice of persons in 
2S .that area, the intention aforesaid. 
(3) The notification shall state that any objections or suggestions 
which may be received by the Administrator, within such period as may 
be specified in the notification, not being less than one month from the 
date of publication of the notification in the Official Gazette, shall be 
)0 considered by him. 
4. (1) On the eX(Jiry of the period specified in the notification issued 
under section 3, and after considering the objections and suggestions, 
if any, as may be received before such expiry, and holding, wherever 
coPiidel-ed necessary, an inquiry in the pre5(:ribed manner, the Admini&-
35 taltor may, by notification, declare an area to be a market area wherein 
th,e. marketing of agricultural produce specified. in the notification sball 
be regulated in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) A declaration made under this section may also be published in 
allY ,-new'paper published in the regional language and circulatin:g in 
40 the1frea specified under sub-section (1), or in such other manner .. ill 
tlrIie opinim ofi the Administrator, is best calculated to bring to the notice 
of persons in that area the declaration aforesaid. 
(3) On a declaration being made under sub-section (1) no local autho-
rity sball, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law fGr the 
45 time being in force, establish, or authorise or allow to be established, or 
continue, or authorise the continuation of, any place in the market area 
"r tAe marketing of agricultural produce specified in the declaration. 
(4) The Administrator may, in the manner specified in section 3, at 
any time, exclude any area·$rcu;p a market .. ea, or ~lude therein an 
NoWlca-
tiOR Of 
intention 
ofrelUla-
tingmar-
ketiD,of 
agricul-
turalpro-
ducein 
apecifted 
area. 
Declara-
tionot 
regula-
tion ot 
market-
ingot 
specJ1led 
agricultu-
ralpro-
duceJn 
market 
area. 

Constitu-
tion, 
powers 
and 
duties of 
Delhi 
AlricuI-
tural 
Market-
inc " Board. 
4 
addiUonal area, or may declare that the regulation of marketing ot any 
agricultural produce in any market area shall cease or that the market-
ing of any agricultural produce hitherto not regulated shall be regulat-
ed in the market area. 
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION OF DELHI AGRICULTURAL MARKETING BOARD 
5. (1) The Administrator shall, for the purposes of this Act, establish 
5 
a Board to De known as the Delhi Agricultural Marketing Board consist·· 
ing of a Chainnan, to be nominated by the Administrator, and twelve 
other members, of whom four shall be officials and eight non-officials, to 10 
be nominated by the Administrator in the following manner, namely:-
(a) the Director and three other officials representing, respec-
tively, the Agriculture Department, the Co-operative Department and 
the Animal Husbandry Department, of the Delhi Administration, 
shall be the official members; IS 
(h) the non-official members shall be-
(i) two agriculturists, being members of the Market Com-
mittees; 
(ii) one member representing the organisations of farmers; 
(ii~) one progressive agriculturist of Delhi; 
(iv) one member representing traders and commission 
agents licensed under section 34; 
(v) one member ra,resenting the co-operative societies; and 
(vi) two members representing the interests of consumers, 
20 
of whom one shall be a member of the Metropolitan Council of 2S 
Delhi. 
(2) The Director shall be the ex officio Secretary of the Board. 
(3) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, hav-
tng perpetual succession and a common seal, with powers, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire and hold property, and to contract, and 30 
shall, by the said name, sue and be used. 
(4) Every non-official member shall hold office for a period of three 
years, but shall be, on the expiry of the term, eligible for re-nomination 
and every official member shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Administrator: 
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of the term of office, a 
non-official member shall continue in office unUI his successor has been 
nominated and has assumed office. 
(5) No person shall be eligible to become a member of the Board if 
3S 
be- 40 
(0) is below twenty-five years of aie; 

S 
5 
(b) has been removed from membership of a Market Committee 
under section 15; 
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 
court; or 
(d) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or con-
victed by a criminal court, whether within or outside the Union 
Territory of Delhi, of any offence which, in the opinion of the Ad-
ministrator, involves moral turpitude: 
Provided that the disqualification on the ground of conviction 
10 by a criminal court shall not apply after the expiry of five years 
from the date on which the conviction became final and effective. 
(6) The Chairman of the Board may resign by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Administrator and the other members may resign by 
writing under their hand addressed to the Adnrlnistrator through the 
I S Chairman of the Board and the resignation shall take effect from the 
date on which it is accepted by the Administrator. 
(7) The Administrator may remove from office any non-official mem-
ber of the Board who has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
specified in sub-section (5) or who, in his opinion, is remiss in the dis-
20 charge of his duties or has ceased to represent the interest to represent 
which he wa'S nominated: 
Provided that no non-official member shall be removed from office ex-
cept after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
the proposed action. 
2S (8) A casual vacancy caused by death, resignation or removal of a 
member, or otherwise, in the Board shall be filled by fresh nomination 
and the person nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office for the 
remainder of the term of office of the member in whose place he was 
J"Iominated. 
30 (9) The Admini'strator shall exercise superintendence and control 
over the Board and its officers and may call for such informatio.n as he 
may d~m necessary and, in the event of his being satisfied that the 
Board is not functioning properly or is perSistently makinR defaw.t to 
the performance of the duties imposed on it by or under this Act or is 
3S' abusing its powers or is guilty of corruption or mismanagement, may 
suspend the Board till such time as a new Board is constituted, and make. 
suoh arrangements fOll' the exercise of the functions of the Board as he 
may think fit: 
Provided that no order of suspension as aforesaid shall be made ex-
40 cept after giving the Board a reasonable opportunity of showing cause 
against the propose<! action: 
Provided further that a new Board shall be constituted within a 
period of six months from. the date on which the Board is suspended. 
(10) The Board shall exercise superintendence and control over the 
4S Market Committees. 
(11~ The Administrator or the Chairman or the Secretary of the 
Board or any other official of the Board authoriSed in this behalf by 
, 

6 
the' Board may call for from any Market Committee or any trader, 
godown keeper or any other functionary operating within the· market 
area any information or return relating to agricultural produce and 
shall have the POWe'l' to inspect the records and accounts of sueh Market 
Committee, trader, godown keeper Or other functionary. 5 
(12) The Board may transfer the Secretary or any employee.dealing 
with accounts from one Market Committee to another Market Com-
mittee and exercise such other powers and discharge such o~erGutieis 
as may be specified in the regulations framed by the Board. 
(13) Subject to the provisIons of this Act and the rules and regula-lo 
tions made thereunder, the Bowrd ftlay employ such persons for the per-
formance of its functions as it may consider necessary and the method 
of recruitmelnt, the scale of pay and other conditions of service of such 
persons shall be such as may be provided in the regulations made by 
the Board in this bch.a!lf. IS 
(14) (a) Subject to the rules made under this Act, an estimate of the 
annual income and expenditure of the Board for the ensuing year shall 
be prepail'ed and passed by the Board and submitted every year, not later 
than the prescri'bed date, to the Administrator for his sanction. 
(b) The Administrator may sanction the budget of the Board with 20 
such alterations or modifications as h~ may think fit and the budget so 
altered or modified by the Administrator shall be the budget of the 
Board for the year. 
(e) The budget as sanctioned by the Administrator shan be returned 
to the Board withi'n two months from ~ date of the receipt teereo! 25 
and if it is not so returned within the said period of two months, it ,shall 
be presumed that the budget, as presented by the Board. hu been duly 
sanctioned by the Administrator, 
(15) Five members shall constitute a quorum at a meeting of the 
Board: 30 
Provided that, if a meeting is adjourned for want of quorum, no 
quorum shall be necessary for the next meetin g called for transacting tAe 
same business. 
(16) All questions which come up before a meeting of ,the Board 
thall be decided by a majority of votes ·of the members present and voting 3S 
and, in the case of an equality of votes the Chairman, or in his absence 
the person presiding, may exercise a second or casting vote. 
(17) The Board may, with the approval of the Administrator, dele-
gate any of its powers to its Chairman, Secretary or any of its ether 
offic~: ~ 
Provided that the person to whom such power is delegated $hall 
function .under the superintendence, direction and control of the Board. 
(18) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely 'by 
reason of' the . existence of any vacancy among its members 1Jr any 
detect in the constitution thereof. 45 

7 
(19) Subject to the rules made under this Act, the Board . .may, with 
the approval o.f ,the Administrator and by notification, make r~lations 
for-
. (a) regulating the transaction of business at its meetings; 
(b) delegation of duties and powers of the Board to its Chair-
man .or secretary or any other officer employed by it; 
(c) generally, the efficient conduct of the affairs of 'the-Board. 
CHAPrER nI 
EsTABLISHMENT OF :MAlUCETS AND CONSTITUTION OF M.uKET CoMMI'l"l'EES 
10 .. (1) . For every market area, there shall be. establisheda.prJDcipal 
In8l'ket, and there may also be established one or more subsidiary mar-
kets, for the marketing of agricultural produce. 
(2) The Director shall, as soon as possible after a declaratklll is made 
under sub-section (1) of section 4, by notification, establish .ny place 
15 . (including any structwe, enclosure, open space or· locality) in t1DY market 
area to be the principal.market for the marketing of the ~tural 
produce specified in such notification and may, by the·aamenotif~ation 
or by a subsequent notification, establish in any other like places in the 
mark-et . area subsidiary markets for the marketing of such agricultural 
20 produce. 
7. (1) Where the Administrator is satisfied that on account of the 
specialised nature of marketing of any commodity, like fish, fr8flh fruits, 
fresh vegetables, sheep, wQOI or cattle, in any area, it is expedient to 
ensure the efficient regulation of the marketing of . such commodity in 
25 such area, he may establish,-
30 
(G) in such area special markets for such commodities. and 
(b) independent market committees in relation to suc.."t 'special 
marke~ notwithstanding that such area falls within tbelDral limits 
of. the jurisdiction of any other Market Committee qr Committees 
already functioning in that area, 
and every such special market and independent market committee shall 
be.established.and. constituted in the same manner in which a market 
and, Market Committee is established and constituted under this Act. 
(2) Where a special market is established under sub-section (1), the 
as Administrator may, by' notift.eation, declare that the proviSoions of this 
Act shall, with such modificatiQtls, restrictions or limitations as may be 
-apecUied in,the·notification, apply in respect of such special market. 
S. (1) Without prejudice to the "rovisions of section 7, there 8hall be 
constituted by the Administrator, for every market area, a Market· Com-
·tIli~1Iee; ... dtftenm.tlMarilet, Committees may ,be.-constituted for regulat· 
40 'ingtfte"IUI!Jaeting ·o~ different kinds of. agricultural prod\K:e marketf'd 
in the same market area:or:any part thereof. 
Eltab-
lishment 
of 
marketa. 
Establish-
mentof 
special 
markets. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Market 
Com-
mittees. 

Composi-
tion of 
Market 
Commit-
tees. 
8 
(~) Every Market Committee shall exercise such powers and dIs-
charge such functions as may be vested in it by or under this Act. 
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of sUlb-section (2), every Market 
Committee shall consist of the following fourteen members, namely:-
(4) six members to be elected by the agriculturists residing in 5 
the market area and holding agricultural land in the Union territory 
of Delhi: 
Provided that where the Administrator is satisfied that the bulk 
of the arrivals in any market in the market area are from outside 
the Union territory of Delhi, he may nominate such number of 10 
members, not exceeding fifty per cent. of the members representing 
agriculturists, as he may think fit, and such nomination shall be made 
from among the residents of the six neighbouring States, namely, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan 
and Uttar Pradesh; 
(b) two members to be ele~ted by the traders and commission 
agents holding licences to operate as such in the market area; 
(c) the Chairman of the co-operative society engaged in the 
business of processing or marketing of agricultural produce in the 
market area: 
Provided that, if there be more than one such co-operative 
societies in the market area, then the managing committees of all 
such societies shall meet together and elect the Chairman of one of 
such co-operative societies as a member of the Market Committee: 
IS 
20 
Provided further that where there is no such co--operative society 2S 
in the market area, the Administrator may nominate a member to 
represent the persons doing the business of processing or marketing 
of agricultural produce in the market area; 
(d) one member to be elected by the members of the local 
authority within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the principal 30 
market in relation to that Market Committee is situated: 
Provided that a person to whom a licence has been granted under 
section 34 shall not be eligible f()r election under this clause; 
(e) one member to be elected by the licensed weighmen and 
measurers; 3S 
(f> one member of the Metropolitan Council of Delhi to be 
elected by that Council from amongst its members, to represent the 
interests of consumers; 
(g) two members to be nominated by the Administrator of 
whom one shall represent the interests of consumers. 
(2) When a Market Committee is constituted for the first time, all 
the members thereof, including the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman, 
shall be nominated by the Administrator. 
(3) Without any prejudice to the provisions of 8Ub-section (2), the 
Chairman of a Market Committee shall be nominated by the Admtnistra- 45 
tor from among the members of the Committee. 

9 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), every Market Com· 
mittee shall elect one of its elected members to be its Vice-Chairman. 
10. Every MArtket Committee shall be a body corporate by such name 
, as the Administrator may, by notification, specify and shall have per· 
petual succession a:nd a common seal and may, in its COllpOrate name, 
sue and be sued and shall, subject to such restrictions as are imposed by 
or under this Act, be competent to contract and to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to do all other 
10 things necessary for the purposes for which it is constituted. 
11. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act and subject to the 
provisions of sub.section (2) of section 9, the members of a Market Com-
mittee aball be elected by the individuals, authorities or bodies referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 9. 
15 (2) The manner Of election, preparation and maintenance of the list's 
of voters, qualifications of members, disqualifications for being chosen as, 
and for being, a member, the right of vote, the paiYIDent of deposit and 
its fo,rfeiture, determination of election disputes, pu'blication of the names 
of members elected, and all matters ancillary thereto shall be such as 
20 may be prescribed. 
(3) If, for any reason, any body of persons, local a.uthority Ol" co· 
operative society or managing committee thereof fails to elect members 
of any Market Committee, the Director shall give notice in writing re· 
quiring such body of persons, local authority or cooperative society or 
25 managing committee thereof to elect members within one month from 
the date of service of such notice; and on the failure of such body, autho-
rity, soCiety or committee to elect members within the aforesaid period, 
the Director shall nominate the required number of persons who are 
qualified to be elected under this Act representing such body of persons, 
30 local authority or co·operative society or managing committee thereof. 
(4) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a member Of a Market 
Committee (not being a committee constituted for the first time) shall 
hold office for a period of three years and the members of a. Market Com-
mittee constituted fur the first time shall hold office for a period of two 
35 rears: 
Provided that the Administrator may, by notification, extend the 
term of office of members of any Market Committee for a period not 
exceeding one year. 
(5) The names of the members of a Market Committee who ha.ve been 
,.0 elected or nominated shall be published in the Official Gazette. 
(6) Upon the publication of the names of all the members of a Market 
Committee after election or nomination or, as the case may be, upon the 
publication of the names of at least nine members of such Committee in 
the Official Gazette, the Market Committee shall be deemed to be duly 
4S constituted. 
12. (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation 
.. of the list of voters for, and conduct of, all elections to Market Committee 
shall be vested in the Director, and, fOr the purpose of preparing theHst 
Incorpo-
ration ot 
Market 
Commit-
tees. 
Election 
and 
term of 
office of 
members. 
CreatiOn 
ofElec-
tionFund. 

Commen-
cement of 
term of 
office of 
memberl. 
to 
_~ -vo .. ; aDd conduct 'of..,tions,- every '_ Market ,eo.m.Jttee." COIlS\'!-
tute an Election Fund consisting of an amount-equal to five .p4:!l.ceDt. 
of all money received by it by way of fees under this Act during any 
year or two thousand rupees per annum, whichever is leis. 
(2) The Election Fund shall be invested in such manDer' as.the Dire£- S 
tor may direct, regard beiDg,had -to elec:iiQas-.to:belheld.:dm:iag<&jyear',..aad 
the necessity to have the moneys av"nable from the Fund f'Or,mee~ 
the expenses in relation to the preparation 'Of the list of voterB,.or<.fordie 
conduct of elections; or both. 
(3) Every Market Committee shall, not later than the 3ht ~ of 
~tober each year, inform the Director or any person author'ised 'by 'him 
in this behalf, of the amount standing to the credit of the Elee4lioR FUnd 
on the 30th day of September and also at any other time wheft -n!QUil'ed 
Qy the Director. 
1'0 
(4) Whenever the list of voters is to be prepared or revised'or any IS 
tlection to the Market Committee is to be held, the Director or -any person 
\uthorised by him in this behalf shall in writing inform theMaril'et 
'::ornmittee to deposit with him such amount and before such date as 
may be specified in the direction for meeting the expemeg for'pPepariftg 
or revising the list of voters or, as the case may be, for conducting the 2'0 
election, or both and the Market Committee shall comply with such 
direction. 
(5) The Director or any person authorised by him in this behalf -shall, 
after the preparation or revision of the list of voters or after the declara-
tion 'Of the result of Ute electi'On, draw up a statement of expenditure 2S 
incurred in preparing or reviSing such fISt or in conduetingthe election 
and shall, within a period of three months from sueh preparation or 
revision of the list or declaration of the result, as the case may be, 
forward the same to the Market Committee for information. 
(6) The balance of the amount remaining unspent, if any, mall be 3'0 
refunded to the Market Committee and, if the expenditnre meutTed 
exceeds' the amount of deposit, the Director, or any person authorised by 
him in this behal1, shall direct the Market Committee to pay the-excess 
amount, as specified by him in the direction, within one month from the 
date of the receipt of the direction a.nd the Market Committee shall cllm- 3S 
ply with such direction. 
13. (1) The term of 'Office of members of a Market Committee shall 
be deemed to commence on the date of the ftrst meeting of ' the Market 
Committee at which business is transacted: 
Proviciedthat; a person, who is a member :by' Wtue· of bts..beiAg the 40 
Chairman of a co.-operative society or member-'of acklcal ntllePlty10r .of 
the MeiropolitanCouncilof Delhi,shall cease to hold aIlee .. n ...... g 
to.bellllCh Cbainnan or member, and in the.case of "'person who:.,a 
licensee he shall cease to hold office on his ceasing to be the holder1of'Jtbe 
licence. 45 
(J) The first meeting of the Market Committee, to be ealled by' tile 
~Chainmm. shan be held on such date as may be ftxed by the Director, 

n 
_ any',ofticer authorised by him in that behalf, being. date not later 
ttIa ~ tbiJliy dap-:from -the· date. on which· the' Committee is deemed, under 
su ....... tim 1(') ofwecti.oD. 11, to'be duly constituted.. 
S (J)Where the fintmeeting calUllot, for any reason, behetd within 
the .. iel.period oftbirty days, the Director shall report the fact to the 
.l\draiailtrater stating iIle re&80DS for the failure to hold the meeting, 
and IIAaU -act aecocding ,to the directions of the Administrator issued ,in 
that behalf. 
(4) TM term of oftice of the outgoing members shall be deemed to 
10 extend to, and expire with, the date immediately preceding the date of 
s.ucll.ftrst meeting. 
14. (1) A member of a Market Committee may resign his office by 
writing· unGer his hand addressed to the Chairman and the Chairman 
may resign his ofIlce of melYiber by writing under his hand addressed 
IS to the Director, Uld the resignation shall take effect from the date on 
which it is accepted 'by the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Director. 
(Z)If at any time it appears to the Administrator that any :Market 
Committee, by reason of the resignation of all or a majority of the 
members thereof, is unable to discharge the fUnctions conferred or lm-
20 posed upon it by or under this Act, he may, by notification, nominate 
persons to fill the vacancies of the members who have resigned; and the 
persons so nominated shall hold oftlce for the ramainder of the term of 
the members in wlwse place they are nominated or until the vacancies 
are duly filled hy election or nomination, as the case may be. 
2515. The. Administrator may. on the recommendation of the Market 
Committee supported by not less than nine members of that Committee, 
present and voting at a meeting, remove any member if he has been 
guilty of neglect or misconduct in the discharge of his,duties, or of ..any 
di~graceful ,conduct, or has become incapable of performing his duties as 
30 a Ulember or is. adjudged, an insolvent: 
Provided that no such member shall be removed from office unless 
'he has been gtveft a reasonable opportunity of being 'heard by the 
AdnUrumator. 
Resigna-
tion of 
mem-
bers an'd 
nomina-
tion in 
certain 
circum-
stances. 
Removal 
ofmem-
bers tor 
miscon-
duct. 
II; -&lbjeet to 1:ibe--proviJiom of sub-section (3) of section 11 and sub- Casual 
35 <MCtioll"(2') of 1IeCt4on 14,m the event -of a' vacancy occ~ng on" acootmt vacanciet. 
«, the deata, resignation or removal of a member, whether ele~ 'or 
aemiaated, aefore the ftiPiry of 'his term of office, or otherwise, the 
Chairman of the Market Committee shall forthwith communicate tse 
occurrence of such vacancy to the Director and the vacancy shall be filled 
40 8S soon as conveniently may be, by election, or, as the case may be, 
nomination, of a person. who shall hold office for the remainder of the 
term of office of the member in whose place he is elected or nominated: 
Provided that, if the vacancy occurs at any time, within six months 
immediately preceding the date on which the term of office of the mem-
45 bar is due -10 expire, the vacancy shall aot, uu.l-.s the Administrator 
directs otherwise, be;1iHed, 

Terms of 
office 
of Chair-
man and 
Vice-
Chairman 
and honor 8-
rium pay-
able to 
them. 
Proce-
dure for 
election 
of Vice-
Chalnnan. 
Resigna-
tion of 
Chairman 
and 
Vice-
Chairman. 
Consequ-
ences of 
absence 
of Chair-
man with-
out leave. 
Vacan-
cies in 
office of 
Chairman 
and 
Vice-
Chairman. 
17. (1) The Chairman and the Vice-Chairman shall hold office for 
such period u may be prescribed and shall, notwithstanding the expiry 
of their term of office, continue to hold office until their respective 
successors enter upon their office. 
(2) There shall be paid to the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman an ~ 
honorarium of such amount as the Board may, having regard to the 
finances of the Market Committee, specify; so, however, that the total 
amount of honorarium to be paid to each shall not exceed rupees one 
thousand and eight hundred per annum. 
18. (1) The Vice-Chairman shall be elected in the first meeting of 10 
the Market Committee. 
(2) Such meeting shall be presided over by the Director or any 
person authorised by him in this behalf. 
(3) The Director or such person shall, when presiding over the 
meeting, have the same powers as the Chairman has while presiding 15 
over a meeting of the Market Committee, but shall not have the right 
to vote. 
(4) If, in the election of the Vice-Chairman, there is an equality of 
votes, the result of the election shan be decided by lots to be drawn in 
the presence' of the person presiding over the meeting and in such manner 20 
as he may determine. 
(5) In the event of a dispute arising as to the validity of election of 
th(' Vice-Chairman, the Director, if he is the presiding officer, shall 
decide the dispute himself, and. in any other case, the person presiding 
shall refer the dispute to the Director for decision and the decision of 25 
th~ Director, subject to an appeal to the Administrator, shall be final, 
and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any 
such decision. 
]9. (1) The Chairman of the Market Committee may resign his office 
by writing under his hand addressed to the Director; and the resigna- 30 
tion shall take effect from the date on which it is accepted by the Director. 
(2) The Vice-Chairman of the Market Committee may resign his 
office by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman; and the 
resignation 'Shall take effect from the date on which it is accepted by the 
Chairman. 
20. Subject to the rules made by the Administrator in this behalf, a 
Chairman of the Market Committee who absents himself from three 
consecutive meetings of the Market Committee without lea'Ve of the 
Board shall cease, on and from the date on which the third such meeting 
is held, to be the Chairman. 
35 
21. (1) In the event of, a vacancy in the office of the Chairman or the 40 
Vice-Chairman by reason of death, resignation, or otherwise, the vacancy 
shall be filled as soon as possible,-
(a) by nomination, in the case of a Market Committee consti-
tuted for the first time; and 
(b) in any other case, in the manner provided in 8ub-seetion (8)45 
or, as the case may be, sub-section (4) of seetion 9. 

t! 
. (2) .Eve:t'Y Chairman or Vi,*C~ nominated or electedt uthe 
case may be, under this section, to fill a casual vacancy shall hold ~ 
for such period 8.$ tb,! ClW~ or the VlQfl-C~Rltfl in whose place 
he is nominated, or as the case may be, elected, would have held such 
, office if the vacancy had not occurr~ 
22. (1) On the nomination or election of the Chairman or Vice-
ChairmlPl, the o~lSPU1.i C~map o~ Vice-Cl'ulirQlIJ). .-u .,rtbwith harad 
over charge of h'i.s ~ to tbe successor-in-oftlce. 
(2) If the outgoing Chairman or Vice-Chairman fails or refuses to 
10 hand over charge of his oftice, as required under sub-section (1). the 
.Qirector or any person authorised by the Director iJl this, ~lf may, 
by order in writinS, diJ."ect such ChJir~n or Vice-ClulirmM. ~. th~ cue 
l~ be, to forthwitq hand oyer c9arge of his o~e to t}~e succ~r-in­
<Jffice together wiUl all records, funds and property of the M~~e~ Com-
15 mittee. if any, in his possession as such Chairman or Vice-Chairman. 
(3) U the outgoing Chairman or Vice-Chairman to whop! a direction 
has been issued under sub-section (2) does not comply with sllch direc-
tion, the Director or any Qther person authorised by ~~ in. th~ ~t>alf 
may apply to the Executive Magistrate within the local limits of whose 
.30 jurisdiction the Market Committee is functioning for sewPg IiJld takinl 
possession of the records, funds and property of the M~rket Go~ittee 
in the possession of such Chainnan or Vice-Chairman and handing over 
~session thereof to the successor-in-oft\ce. 
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (3). th" Executive 
25 Magistrate may authorise any police officer, not below the rank of • 
s\1b-inspector, to enter and search any place where the ~rds. tunds 
and property are kept or are likely to be kept and to seize them and hand 
over possessio,n thereof to the person specified in such applicui.Dn· 
(5) The provisions of the Code of CrinlJ,nal PrQPe.dUJ."~, 1~7~, ~h.ll 
I of 1974. 30 WJy to every sear~h and seizure made under this Act. 
.' 23. The quorum for a meeting of the Market Committee and ~ pro-
eedure to be followed thereat ,ball be regulated in eccor4.tll(:f with th! 
bye-laws made for the purpose by the Market CQJnmit_ 
. new 
C.hairllWl 
Ol'VIce-
Cha~ 
_"tiD., ,te.,ot 
Market 
Com-
mittee 
Ment~ 
to.ct 
24. A Market Committee shall have power to act, notwiij1standtng 
an.y Y8l:fUH!Y 1~ tlw JJl~$:ip, or any detect in the constitution, there-
35 Qt.; @d ~ prpceed.~gs of a ~rket Committee $h~~l b~ VlJlia notwith-
~ndiz)g ~t lQ~ ~;Q. wQ.o WJS not enti~led to be .. member, hatt 
sat, voted or otherwise taken part in the proceedings of an:1 such Com-
durin. 
vacllDC)'; 
.ad. ot 
mittee. 
"'.rket 
CoInmlt-
•• etc., 
DOt to 
heinv.lt-
dltedb~ 
JlQtonn.-
Uti ... 

Powers 
and duties 
otiM~ket 
CQ:m-.:, .: 
mitt~. 
~ .. 
l' ,,' 
" 
. ' 
, , 
MARKET COMMI'1'TEES-POWERS AND DUTIES 
25. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of a 
Market Committee-
(i) to implement the provisions of this Act and of the rules and S 
bye-laWs made thereunder for the market area; 
(Ii) to provide such facilities for marketing of agricultural pro-
duce therein as the Board may, kom time to time, direct; 
(iii) to do such other acts as may be required in relation to the 
superintendence, direction and control of markets, or for regulating 10 
marketing of agricultural produce in any place, in the market area, 
and' for purposes connected with the matters aforesaid, 
and, for that purpose, may exercise such powers and perform such duties 
and discharge such functions as may be provided by or under this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, IS 
a Market Committee may-
(a) regulate the entry of persons and of vehicular traffic into 
the market; 
(b) supervise the conduct of those who enter the market for 
transacting business; 20 
(e) grant, renew, ref-use, suspend or cancel licences; 
(d) provide for settling disputes arising out of any kind of 
transactions connected with the marketing of agricultural produce 
and all matters ancillary thereto; 
(e) prosecute persons for violating the provisions of this Act 2S 
"'and of the rules and bye-laws made thereunder; 
(f) maintain and manage the market, including the regulation 
of. admissions to, and conditions for use of, the market; 
'(11) regulate the marketing of agricultural produce in the mar-
ket area or the market, and the weighment or delivery of, or pay- 30 
mentfor, such agricultural produce; 
(h) arrange for the collection-
(i) of such agricultural produce in the market area in which 
all trade therein is to be carried on exclusively by the Govern-
II.1ent by or under any law for, the time being In force for that 35 
purpose, or 
(ii) of such other agricultural produce in the market area 
as the Administrator may, from time to time, notify in the om~ 
cia! Gazette (hereinafter referred to as the notified produce); 
(i) acquire, hold and dispose of any movable or immovable pro- ~ 
perty (including any equipment necessary for the Ipurpose of em-
clently carrying out its duties); 

IS 
... ,. 
(j) collect or maintain, disseminate and supply. information ill 
respect of production, sale, storage, processing, prices andmov~ment 
of agricultural ~roduce (including information relating to crop-statis-
tics and marketing intelligence) as may be required by the Directo,r 
5 or the Board. . 
(k) take all possible steps to prevent adulteration and to pro-
mote grading and standardization of such agricultural produce as 
may be prescribed; 
(l) enforce the provisions of this Act and of the rules and· bye-
10 laws made, and conditions of the licences granted, under this Act; 
(m) perform such other duties as may be prescribed. 
26. A Market Committee may constitute QIle or more sub-corn.in1ttees 
consisting of one or more of its members and, if the Committee deemS 
it desirable, may C(H)pt any person with the approval of the Board or 
15 of any officer authorised by the Board in this behalf and may, subject 
to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the regul! tiona 
framed by the Board, delegate to such sub-committees such of its 
powers or duties as it may think fit. 
Z7. (1) A Market Committee duly authorised by the Administrator 
20 for the purpose may, by an order published for the information of the 
public in such manner as it deems fit, open collection centres for collect-
ing thereat the produce specified in such order (hereinafter referred to 
as the specified produce). 
(2) Where any person wishes to sell any specified produce in a mar~ 
25 ket area, he shall tender all such produce only at the collection centre 
established for the purpose under sub-section (1): 
Provided that, any such specified produce may be tendered through 
a commission agent or any agency specified by the Administrator in this 
behalf. 
30 (3) The Market Committee shall, on the sale of such ~roduce, get it 
weighed, measured or, as the case may be, counted, forthwith. and 
arrange for issuing a receipt therefor to the person who has tendered 
the produce at the collection centre for sale or, as the case may be, to the 
commission agent or any agency and shall also arrange to give a copy of 
35 the receipt to the purchaser. 
(4) Such receipt shall contain the following particulars, that is to 
say,-
(i) the name of the collection centre; 
(ii) the name o~ the tenderer; 
40 (iii) the name of the purchaser; 
(iv) the name of the commission agent or agency, if any; 
(v) the name of the specified produce, the weight, measure or 
number thereof and the fees paid for the weighing, measuring Qr 
c~unting such prod]lce; . , 
45 (vi) grade of specified produce, if any,- and the, rate;· 
Appoint-
mentof 
sub-com-
mittees; 
delegation 
of powers. 
Power 
of the 
Market 
Commit-
tee to 
open 
collection 
centres 
for 
market-
ingof 
speei1led 
produce; 
provi-
sions tor 
receipt 
and 
payment 
bypp.t;. , 
chuef, . . ~ ',' 
".. ~> 
-. ~ . ... ~., : 
. 'i . . :;. 

itS 
(ri) 'tIN "Imoont to be paid ·totM 'Market tommit* by the 
·.purdtailer; 
(mU) the amount to be paid by the tenderer to the cotnmiaaion 
a~nt by way of his cOJtUnission, if ahy, and such other market 
charges, as are duly authorised by the Market Committee; ~ 
(iI:e) the amount to be paid by the tenderer to B co-operative 
'=--t liftRr the Delhi Co.opei'atiVe Soetettes Act, 19'72; 35 of 1872. 
(x) the amount of advance price received by the tenderer, if 
. ." itt * .. t 6f the ~ifted produce; 
(ri) the amount to be actually paid to the tenderer after deduct- 10 
ing tM'mounts, if any, falling under elau5e (mi), clause (viii), 
clause (iz) or clause (x); and 
(~i) the total amount to be paid by the purchaser in respect 
efthe -tpecifted produce purchased by him, 
(5) 'n. dues payable to a Market Committee under clause (mt) of J 5 
-Idb~on (if) shatl consist of fees to be levied and collected fn:Jm. a 
·tNrebaser by or under this Act. 
(6) The purchaser shall, on receiving a copy of the receipt, pay 
forthwith the total amount to be paid by him as recorded in the receipt 
by drawing separate cheques payable en presentation in favour of- 20 
(A) the Market Comm.ittee, 'for an amount equal to the total of 
.~ amounts referred to in clause ('OU), clause (viii) or clause (i.-r) 
of sub-section (4); 
~ (b) the tenderer for an amount equal to the amount referred 
to in clause (xi) of sub-section (4). 2~ 
(7) The Market Committee, on receipt of the cheques, shall hand 
·otift"to t~tenderer the cheque drawn in his favour and arrange to pay, 
innn the amount received by it under the cbeque drawn ill its favour, 
to the commission agent and the co-operative society, if any, the amount 
recorded against each of them in the re<'eipt and credit the balance due 30 
'to !t to the Market Fund. 
II. It shall be competent ror a Market Committee to levy and collect 
a.ch fees (hereinafter referred to as the market fees), not being in 
-exceu of, or less than, an amount detennined by the Administrator, by 
notification, from every purchaser of agticultural produce sold in a 35 
market area in sueh manner as may be prescribed and at such rates as 
may be '!!pedfted in the bye-laws: 
Provided that the amount determined by the Administrator shall not 
exceed one and a half per cent. of the value of the agricultural r.:>roduce: 
Provided further that, when any agricultural produce brought into 40 
any market area for the I;)urpose of processing only, or for export, is not 
processed or exported therekom withtnthtrty daYfi'tron'l the date of its 
arrival therein. it shall, until the contrary is proved,be presumed to have 
been brought into the market area for buying and selling, and shall be , 
Mtn,eelto ,the ~ of feet! under ·thls ~ion, as f!it had been brought 4! 
IIhd -sold'tJtereft\: 
Provided all10 that no such fees shall be levied and collected in the 
lame ma~t ··a" intelMtOn to .. ny ~lml'id fJMduce tn respect of 

BaJuthan 
Act 32 
.f 1858. 
11 
whieh fees under this' section have already been levied and collected 
therein. 
it. (1) A Market Committee may, with the previous sanction of the Powerto 
~oard, raise money required for carrying out the purposes for which it borrow. 
S Is established on the security of any pra,erty vested in it and of any fees 
leviable by it under this Act. 
{2) The Market Committee may, for the purpose of. meeting the 
expenditure on lands, buildings and equipment required for establishing 
the market, obtain a loan from the Administrator on such terms and 
10 oonditiona as he may determine. 
(3) A Market Committee may, with the previous approval of the 
Board, obtain loans from other Market Committees on such conditions, 
and subject to such rules, as may be matie. 
30. (1) Every contract entered into by a Market Committee shall 
IS be in writing and shall be executed on behalf of the Committee by the 
Chairman or Vice-Chairman, and two other Members of the Committee. 
(2) No contract, other than a contract executed as provided in sub-
section (1), shall be binding on the Market Committee. 
31. (1) If any dispute arises between an Inspector appointed 
20 under the Rajasthan Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1958, as 
in force in the Union territory of Delhi, and any person interested, as to 
the meaning or construction of any rule made under that Act or as to 
the method of verif.ying, re-verifyin~, adjustin/! or stampin~ any wei~ht 
or measure or weighin~ or measurin~ instrument, in any market area, 
25 such dispute may, at the request of the person interested or by the Ins-
pector of his own accord, be referred to the Controller appointed under 
that Act; and the decision of the Controller shall, subject to the provi-
sions of sub-section (2), be final. 
(2) An appeal shall lie, within such time and in such manner as may 
30 be prescribed, from the decision under sub-section (1) to ij1e Adminis-
trator or such officer as the Administrator may appoint in this behalf and 
the decision of the Administrator or such officer shall be flnal. 
'CHAPTER V 
OFFICERS AND SERVANTS OF MARKET COMMl'l"l'EES 
3S 32. (1) Every Market Committee shall have as its Secretary a per-
son appointed by the Board and whose services are lent to the Committee 
subject to such terms and conditions as the Board may provide by regu-
lations made in this behalf. 
(2) A Market Committee may, with the previous aQproval of the 
40 Secretary of the Board, employ such number of other officeJ."S and ser-
vants as may be necessary for the management o~ the market and the 
salary and conditions of service of such officers and servants shall l?e 
sueh as may be detennined by the Board' by regulations made in this 
behalf. 
Execution 
of 
contracts. 
Certain 
disputes 
regarding 
construc-
tion of 
rules, 
etc., about 
weights 
and 
measare. 
to be 
decided 
by the 
Controller 
of Weights 
and 
Measure •. 
Power of 
Market 
Commit-
tee to 
employ 
staff. 

Regula-
tion ot 
market-
ingot 
agricul-
tural 
produce. 
Grant ot 
licences. 
J8 
(3) Every Secretary in the service of a Market Committee constituted 
under the Bombay Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1939, as in force in 
the Union territory of Delhi immediately before the commencement of 
. thi~ Act, shall continue in the service of. such Market Committee and shall 
be deemed to be the servant of the Board and his emoluments and other S 
conditions of. service shall be such as may be determined by the Board 
by regulations made in this behalf. 
CHAPTER VI 
. i 
M.AltKETINc OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE 
33. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and of the rules 10 
providing for regulating the marketing of agricultural produce in any 
place in the market area, no person shall, on and after the date on which 
an area is declared under sub-section (1) of section 4 to be a market 
area, without, or otherwise than in conformity with the terms and condi-
tions of, a licence granted by- IS 
(a) the Director, when a Market Committee has not been con-
stituted or has not started functioning; or, 
(b) in any other case, by the Market Committee,-
(i) use any place in the market area for the marketing of 
the agricultural produce specified in the said declaration; or 20 
(ii) operate in the market area or in any market therein as 
a trader, commission agent, broker, processor, weighman, mea-
surer, surveyor, warehouseman or in any other capacity in rela-
tion to the marketing of such agricultural produce. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to the retail sale by an 2S 
agriculturist of his own produce, or to sale by a person, not being a trader 
or agriCUlturist, where such person himself sells to another who DUYs 
for his personal consuInQtion or the consumption of any member of his 
family. 
34. (1) Subject to rules made in this behalf, a Market Committee may, 30 
after making such inquiries as it deems fit, grant or renew a licence f<lr 
the U'Se of any place in the market area for the marketing of agricultural 
produce or for operating therein as a trader, commission agent, broker, 
processor, weighman, measurer, surveyor, warehouseman or in any other 
capacity in relation to the marketing of agricultural produce or may, 3S 
after recording its reasons in writing therefor, refuse to grant or renew 
any such licence: 
Provided that the Director may, where a Market Committee has 
not been constituted or has not started functioning, subject to any rules 
that may be made in this behalf, grant a licence for the marketing of 40 
agricultural produce or for operating in any market area as a trader, 
commission agent, broker, processor, weighman, measurer, surveyor, 
warehouseman or in any other cat;lacity. 
(2) A licence granted under sub-section (1) ,-
(a) shall be in such form, valid for such period, and subject to 4S 
auch terms, conditions, restrictions and limitations as maybe 
Bombay 
ActXXll 
ot 1989 • 

.. 
prescribed and such restrictions may include a provision prohibiting 
brokers and commission agents from acting in a~y transaction (except 
between a trader and a trader) in respect of agricultural produce 
other than poultry, cattle, shefQ and goats and such other agricul-
5 tural produce as may be prescribed; and 
(b) may also specify,-
(i) the manner in which and the place at which auction of 
agricultural produce shall be conducted and bids at such auction 
shall be accepted; 
10 (ii) places at which weighment and delivery of agricultural 
produce shall be made in any market or market area and on 
payment of such fees as ~ay be prescribed. 
35. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), a Market Com-
mittee may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend or cancel a 
I S licence granted or renewed under this Chapter,-
(a) if the licence had been obtained through wilful misrepre-
sentation or fraud; 
(b) if the holder of the licence or any servant or anyone acting 
on his behalf, with his express or implied permission commits a 
20 breach of any of the terms or conditions of the licence; 
(c) if the holder of the licence in combination with other holden 
of licences commits any act or abstains from carrying out his normal 
business in the market with the intention of wilfully obstructing, 
suspending or stopping the marketing of agricultural produce in the 
2S market area; 
(d) if the holder of the licence has been adjudged an insolvent, 
and has not obtained his discharge; or 
(e) if the holder o~ the licence is convicted of any offence under 
this Act. 
30 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) but sub-
ject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the Director may, lor reasons 
to be recorded in writing, by order, suspend or cancel any licence granted 
or renewed under this Ch~ter. 
(3) No licence shall be suspended or cancelled under this section, 
35 unless the holder thereof has been given a reasonable opportunity of show-
ing cause against the proposed action. 
36. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order-
(a) of the Market Committee, refusing to grant or renew a 
licence, or cancelling or suspending any licence, may appeal to the 
Board; 
(b) of the Director, refusing to grant or cancelling or suspending 
a licence, may appeal to the Administrator, 
within thirty days from the date on which such order is communicated 
to him and in such manner as may be prescribed. *., . 
Power 
to cancel 
or suspend 
Ucencetl. 
Appeal 

ProvisiOn 
for 
settle-
mentof 
disputes. 
Market-
ing Deve_ 
lopment 
Fund. 
ao 
(2) The Board or, as the case may be, the Administrator shall, on 
such appeal, make su,ch order as it or he may deem just and proper: 
Provided that, before dismissing an aQpeal, the Board or, _ the 
case may be, the Administrator shall give the appellant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, and record in writing the reasons for such 5 
dismissal. 
37. (1) For the purpose of settling disputes between buyers and sel-
lers of agricultural produce or their agents including any disputes regard-
ing quality or weight or payment, or any matter in relation to the regu-
lation of marketing of agricultural f.?roduce in the market area, the 10 
Market Committee constituted for that market area may appoint arbitra-
tors or constitute from amongst its members a sub-committee. 
(2) The method of appointment of arbitrators, the constitution and 
function of the sub-committees and the fees, if any, that may be paid by 
parties for the settlement of disputes shall be such as may be prescribed. 15 
(3) Any party, aggrieved by the decision of the arbitrator or the 
Bub-committee, may prefer an appeal from such decision to the Board 
in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. 
CHAPI'ER VII 
MARKETING DEVELOPMENT FUND AND MARKET Fmm 
38. (1) All moneys received by the Board shall be credited into a 
f1Uld to be called the Marketing Development Fund. 
(2) All expenditure incurred by the Board shall be defrayed from 
such Fund which shall be jointly operated by the Chairman and the 
20 
Secretary. 25 
(3) The amount standing to the credit of the Marketing Development 
Fund shall be kept or invested in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(4) The amount standing to the credit of the Marketing Develop-
ment Fund shall be expended for all or any of the following purposes, 
namely: - • .. ,0 
(i) better marketing of agricultural prod~e; 
(ti) marketing of agricultural produce on co-operative lines; 
(iii) collection and dissemination of market rates and news; 
(iv) grading and standardisation 01 agricultural produce; 
(v) general improvements in .the markets or their respective 3; 
areas; 
(vi) maintenance of the oftice of the Board and construction 
and repair of its office buildings, rest houses and staft q\Ull1oH; 
(vii) giving aid to financially weak Market Committees in the 
..,. of 108lll, or arante, or b9tb; 40 
(mii) Qayment of salary, leave, allowance, gratuity, compassio-
.te aUowanae, compensation for iQjuria or deaUl resulUllJ froa 
acdaentl, while OQ, dvty, ~eal aid, penaiOll or prov1det fund to 

• 
21 
the persons e~OJ8d 1?Y: ~ ~ ~d l~ve and pension contribu-
tions to Government servants on deputation; .. . . . . ~: : 
I • I' , (~), paYJllent of travelling and other allowances to ~ members 
til and employees of the Board; , 
(a;) propagapda, demo~tration and publicity in favour of 
agricultural tmP~ovements; 
, .1, , .'. 
(a:£) production and betterment of agricultural produce;' 
(xii) meeting any legal expenses incurred by the Board; 
(a:iii) imParting education in marketing of agricultural produce; 
• 10 (xiv) construction o~ godowns; 
(xv) expenses incurred in auditing the accounts of the tBoard; 
(xvi) with the fPrevious sanction of the Administrator, any other 
purpose which is calculated to promote the general interest of the 
.Board. and the Market Committees or the national or public interest: 
I; ~ Provided that, if the Board decides to give aid of more than five thou-
sand rupees to a financially weak Market Committee under clause (vii), 
prior approval ,of the Administrator, to such payment shall be obtained. 
- - 38. (1) All fees and other moneys received by a Market Committee 
;. 'under this Act (exc~t the amount of such fees credited to the Election 
20 Fund under section 12), an sums realised by way of penalty (otherwise 
. -than by way of a fine in a criminal case), all loans raised by th~ Commit-
tee, and all grants, loans or contributions made by the Administrator to 
.; .. _ the Committee shall form part of a fund to be called the Market Fund. 
(2) The amount to the credit of a Market Fund shall be kept or 
~, invested in such manner as may be prescribed. 
30 -
35 
'(8) Every Market Committee shall, out of the Market Fund; pay--
(0) to the Board, as contribution, such pereentage of its income 
derived from licence fee and market fee, as well as the amount paid 
to it under sUb-section (4) of section 59, as is specified below, to 
enable the Board to defray its expenses on the office estabUshment 
and other expenses incurred by it in the interest of the Market Com-
mittee generally,-
(i) if the annual income of a Market 
Committee does not exceed Rs. 10,000 . - 10 per centum; 
(it) if the annual income of a Market 
Committee exceeds Rs. 10,000 but does not 
exceeds RI. 15,~n the first Rs. 10,000 
r 
on the next Rs. 5,000 or part thereof 
10 per centum; 
15 per centum; 
Market 
Fund, its 
custody 
and 
inv.t-
ment. 

Purpo&es 
for 
which 
Market 
Fund 
maybe 
expended. 
22 
(iii) if the annual income of·a M'arkwt 
Committee ~ Ra. 15,OOO--on the ftrtt 
Ra. 10,000 10 per centum. 
on the next Rs· 5,000 11 per centum; 
on the remaining income 2D per oentum; , 
(b) to the Administrator, the cost of any special or additional 
staff employed by the Government, in consultation with the Market 
Committee, for giving effect to the proviaions of this Act in the market 
area. 
(4) The Administrator shall detennine the cost of the special or 10 
additional staff referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3) and shall, 
where the staff is employed for the purposes of more Market Committees 
than one, apportion such cost among the Market Committees concerned in 
such manner as he thinks fit, and the decision 01, the Administrator dete.-
mining the amount payable by any Market Committee shall be final. IS 
40. The amount standing to the credit of the Market Fund may be 
.:,Qtpended for all or any of the following purposes, namely:-
(a) the acquisition of site or sites for the market; 
(b) maintenance, development and improvement of the market; 
(c) construction of, and r~airs to, buildings necessary for the zo 
purposes of such market and for the health, convenience and ,81ety 
oi persons using it; 
(d) the provision and maintenance of standard weigh" ,and 
measures; 
(e) pay, pen.ion and leave, allowances, gratuitiel, compensa- 25 
tiona for injuriea or death, resulting from accidenta, compauiOllAte 
allowances and contributioIll towards leave, ,allowancet, penaiODa or 
provident fund of the offi.cen and lervants employed by tb.e Market 
Committee; 
(1) the payment of interest on loan, if any, railed by the l\Iark.t JO 
Committee and the provision of sinking fund in respect of luch loan; 
(g) the collection and dissemination of information regardi~1 
matters relating to crop-statistics and marketing in respect of the 
a¢cultural produce specified. in the notification under .ub~ction 
(l) oi section 4; IS 
(h) propaganda in favour of agricultural. improvement and 
orderly marke~; 
(i) payment of travelling and other allowances to the memberl 
of the Market Committee and its aub-eommittee. and of lub-
committees, if any, constituted under section 37; 
(j) the payment of honorarium to the Chairman aDd Vice- <4Q 
Chairman under sub-section (2) of. section 17; 
(k) giving grant or donation to any institution or body conduct-
ing any educational or welfare activities for the benefit of agricul-
turists in the market area, subject to the condition that the amount 
of such grant or donation does no.t exceed, in the aggregate, ten Per .5 
~ent. of the net amount remaining after deducting the expenditure 
from the revenues of the year immediately preceding the year fD 
which such grant or donation is made; 

23 
(I) expenses of any Tribunal constituted. under sub-section (4) 
of section 60; 
(m) any other function of the Market Committee epeclfted in this 
Act or in the rul. made thereunder; 
(tI) for any other purpose, with the previous ap;>roval of the 
Admin.trator. 
a. The manner in which any payment from the Marketing Develop-
ment Pund or Market Fund .han be made, its account shall be kept 
ud audited or reo-audited (including power, to be exercised by the 
10 auditor in that behalf), its annual, revised or supplementary budget estI-
mates of income and eXJ;>enditure shall be made (including provision for 
modifying, annulling or rescinding such budgets) and its annual adminil-
trattoh 1'eport shall be prepared, shall be such al may be preaeribed. 
CHAPTER vm 
TIlADI: ALLOWANCES PJlOHIB:rrm 
42. No person shall make, or cause to be made on his behalf or on behalf 
of any other persOIl, or recover, or cause to be recovered on his behalf or 
on behall of any other person, any trade allowance in any market or 
market area in relation to any transaction made or proposed to be made 
20 in the market area in respect of any agricultural produce. 
Expfana««m.-For the purposes of this section, trade allowance meanl 
any deduction in Qrice or rate of the agricultural produce on account of 
any variation in the quality, weight, container, sample or admixtUre. 
I CHAPTER IX 
CONTROL BY THE BoARD 
. 
43. The Board, or any officer authorised by it by general or special 
or_ in thi.· behalf, may-
(a) inspect or caU8e to be inspected the accounts and ot!lces of a 
Market Committee; 
30 (b) hold inquiry into the affairs of a Market Committee; 
3S 
.8· 
(c) can fur any return, statement, accounts or report whieh it or 
he may think fit to tWqui~lUch Committe\! to furnf8h; 
(d) require a Market Committee to take into consideration-
(i) any objection which appears to it or him te ... t to the 
deing ofl anything which is about to be done or iI being doM'· by 
or on behalf o~ such Committee, or 
(if) any information it, or he, is able to furnish and which 
appears to it or him to necessitate the doing of a certain tblng, 
which il not being done by such Committee, 
and make a written reply to it or him within a reasonable time statine 
tta realonl for doin •• or not doing such thing; 
Manner 
otaudi-
tiD,ac-
counts, 
preparm, 
budlet, 
annual 
report, 
etc. 
Makin, 
erreco-
veryot 
trade 
allowanee 
prohibit. 
ed. 
Inspec-
tion, 
inquiry, 
lubmil-
lional 
state-
ments, 
etc. 

Dutyot 
omeers, 
servants 
and 
members 
of Market 
Com-
mittee 
totur-
nish in-
formation 
to Board, 
authorised 
officers 
and 
Adminis-
trator. 
Seizure 
of ac-
count 
books 
and 
other 
docu-
ments. 
Powerso! 
Board 
to call 
for pro-
ceedings 
Of 
Market 
Commit_ 
tee and 
to Pass 
orders 
thereon. 
• 
24 
(e) direct, pending consideration of their reply made under clause 
(d), that anything which is about to be done or is being 'done, sh~d 
'not be done and anything which should be done but is not being done, 
should be done within such time as it or he may direct. 
44. (1) When the accounts and offices of a Market Committee are 5 
inspected, or the aftairs of such Committee are inquired lnto, under ~. 
tion 43, or the proceedings of such Committee are examined under section 
46, all officers, servants and members of such Committee shall fUrnisb 
such information in their possession in regard to the aCtount.c; and olftces 
or affairs or proceedings of such Committee as the Board, or the ofBeera reS • 
authorised by the Board, as the case may be, may require. 
(2) The Board or any officer inspecting the accounts and oftlces,or 
inquiring into the affairs, of a Market Committee under section 43,01' the 
Board examining the pro,ceedings of such Committee under section 46, 
!,11Ull, for the purposes of such inspection, inquiry or examination, have 15 
the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908. while trying a suit. in respect of the following matters, lof IDOl. 
namely:- ,~ 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any officer, 
servant or member of the Market Committee and examining him on 20 
oath; 
(b) the discovery and production by any officer, servant or mem-
ber of the Market Committee of any document or other material object 
producible as evidence; and 
(c) the reception crf evidence on affidavits. 25 
(3) Any officer exercising the powers conferred by sub-section 
(2) shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Proceaure, 1973. 2 of un" 
45. Where the Board has reason to believe that the books and reconlf 
of a, Market Committee are likely to be t.ampered with or destroyed or 30 
the funds or property of a Market COmmittee are'likely to be misappro-
priated or misapplied, the Board may issue an order dlrectlng a, periOn 
duly authQrised by it in writing to seize and take possession of such boob 
and records, funds and property of a Market Committee, and the officer 
or 'officers of, the Market Committee responsible for the custody of such 35 
books, records, funds and property, shall give delivery thereof to ,the per-
son so authorised. 
46. The Board may, at any time, call for and examine the proceedings 
of any Market, Committee for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the 
legality or p~riety of any decision or order passed by the Market Com- 40 
mittee under this Act, and if, in any case, it appears to the Board that .,~ 
any decision or order or proceedings 10 called for should be modified, 
annulled or reversed, the Board may pass such order there01l as it thiDkI 
fit., ' 
~ '. . " 
" , 
" , 
" 
" 

25 
4T. (1) Where the Adminjstrator is satisfied that, fQr securing eftlcient 
regulation of marketing of agricultural ~roduce in a market area, it is 
necessary that two or more Market Committees therein should be 
amalgamated or any Market Committee therein should be divided 
5 into two or more Market Committees, he may, after consulting tIie 
Market Committees or Market Committee, as the case may be, and the 
Board, by notification, provide for the amalgamation of such Market Com-
mittees into a single Market Committee or division of the Market. Com-
mittee into two or more Market Committees for the market area in respect 
loot the agricultural produce specified in the notification with such con-
stitution, p~, rights, interests and authorities and such liabilities, 
duties and obligations (including proviSion in respect of contracts, assets, 
employees, proceedings and such incidental, consequential and supple-
. mentary matters as may be necessary to give effect to such amalgamation 
15 or, as the case may be, the division) as may be specified in the 
notification. 
(2) Where mqre Market Committees than one are established in any 
market area under SUb-section (1), the Administrator may, notwithstand-
ing anything contained in this Act, issue general or special direction as 
20 ttl which of the Mark~t Committees shall exercise the powers, perform 
the duties and discharge the functions of a Market Committee under this 
Act, in respect of matters in which they are jointly interested. 
(3) Where any direction is issued under sub-section (2), the cost 
incurred by a Market Committee in pursuance of the direction shall be 
2S shared by the other Market Committee concerned in such proportion as 
may be agreed u~n, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined 
by the Administrator or such officer as he may direct in this behalf and 
the decision cd the Administrator or such officer, as the case may be, 
shall be final. 
30 48. (1) If, in the opinion of the Administrator, a Market Committee, 
or any member thereof, is not competent to perform, or persistently makes 
default in performing, the duties imposed on it or him by or under this 
Act, or abuses its or his powers or wilfully disregards any instructions 
issued by the Administrator or any officer duly authorised by him in this 
3S behalf and arising out of audit of accounts o.f the Market Committee or 
inspection of the office and work thereof, the Administrator may, for 
reasons to be recorded by him in writing and after giving the Committee 
or member, as the case may be, an opportunity of tendering an explana-
tion, by notification, supersede, such Market Committee, or remove such 
40 member, as the case may be; and, where a member is removed the 
vacancy so caused shall be ftlled in the same manner, and suhj~t to the 
same condition in regard to term of office, as provided in section 16. 
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under SUb-section 
. (1) superseding a Market Committee, thefoUowing consequences shall 
45 enlJUe, that is to say,-
(4)' aU members of the Market Committee shall, as from the 
date of such publication, be deemed to have vacated their oftlces; 
(b) all the assets of the Committee shall vest in the Board and 
the Board shall be Uable for al1le,aUy enforeeable Uabiliti.8 of the 
Aalalla-
mationor 
division 
of 
Market 
Commit-
tee. 
Supersea. 
sion of 
Market 
Commit-
tee, etc. 

Penalty 
for not 
comply-
ing with 
directiona 
under 
sub-alc-
tion (2) 
of sec-
tion 22. 
Penalty 
for con-
traven-
tion Of 
l'IE'Ction 
33. 
Committee, subeistiJle on the date of Jts supenellion, • the _teat 
of the aaid auetsi 
(c) the Administrator may, by ortier, either coltstitute Il new 
Market Committee in accordance with the provisions contained in 
Chapter III or make such other arrangements for the carrying out of' S 
the functions of the Market Committee as he thinks fit. 
(3) If the Administrator constitutes a new Market Committee under 
clause (c) of sUb-section (2), he shall transfer the assets and liabilities 
of the Market Committee, as on the date immediately preceding the date 
of such transfer, to the new Market Committee so constituted. 10 
(4) Where the Administrator dOleS not constitute a new Market Com-
mittee under clause (e) of sub-section (2), the balance of the assets of 
the Market Committee as may be left after meeting all the liabilities of 
such Committee shall continue to vest in the Board and the Board shall 
utilise the said assets for such objects of public utility as the Adminis- IS 
trator may by order specify as being conducive to the regulation of the 
marketing of agricultural produce in the market area. 
CHAPTER X 
49. If the outgoing Chairman or Vice-Chairman, to whom a direction 20 
has been issued under sub-section (2) of section 22, does not, except ror 
reasons beyond his control, comply with such direction, he shall be 
puni:'hed with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or 
with both. 
so. Whoever, in contravention of the provisions ofsub-section (1) 
of section 33, uses any place in the market area for the marketing of the 
agricultural produce specified in the declaration made under sub-section 
(1) of section 4, or operates in the market area or in any market therein 
as a trader, commission agent, broker, processor, weighman, measurer, 30 
surveyor, warehquseman, or in any oth~r capacity in relation to the 
marketing of agricultural produce specifi'ed in such declaration, shall be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; and, 
in the case of a continuing contravention, with a further fine which· may 3S 
extend to fifty rupees for every day, after the -ftnt, d.urina wlltch the 
contravention conti.D1leI. 

27 
11. Wbotwer,iD. contravention of the provisions oll8Ction 42, makes or 
eaUlli to be Inade or·recovers or caUIJe8 to be recqvered any trade .allow-
. anee ahalt, be punilhed with :imprisonment for a tenn whicll. may extend 
to three months, or with fine whleh may extend to five hundred rupees, 
6 or with both. 
I!. Whoever obstructs any officer in carrying out the inspection of 
accounts, or in holding any inquiry into the affairs of a Market Com-
mittee or fails to obey Billy order with reference to ~ny matter specified 
in 1:lause (a), clause (c), clause (/I) or clause (e) of section 43, shall, 
l O be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for 
everyday during which the offence continues. 
53. If any officer, servant or member of a Market Committee, when 
required under section 44 to furnish information in regard to the accounts 
and oftlces or affairs of the Mar-ket Committee or the proceedings of a 
IS Market Committee,-
(a) wilfully neglects or refuses to furnish any information; Dr 
(b) wilfully furnishes information which is false or incorrect in 
material particulars, 
such officer, servant or member shall, be punished with imprisonment for 
20 a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to 
five hundred rupees, or with both. 
54. Whoever, in contravention of the provisions of section 45 obstructs 
any person in seizing or taking possession of any books, records, funds 
or property of the Market Committee or fails to give delivery thereof to 
25,·auch person shall, be punished with fine which may extend to two 
bundred rupees. 
65. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule or 
bye-law made thereunder shall, if no other penalty is provided for such 
contravention elsewhere in this Act or in the rules or bye-laws, be 
30 punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
56. (1) Every member or employee Of the Board or any Market Com-
mittee shall be liable for the loss, wastage, misappropriation or misappli-
9S cation of any money or other property belonging to a Market Committee, 
if such loss, wastage, misappropriation or misapplication is proved. to the 
satisfaction of the Board to be the direct consequence of the neglect or 
miaconduct on the part of such member or employee, and he may, after 
beiDg given an opportunity by a written notice to show cause why he 
40 should not be required to make goad the loss, be required by the Board 
to make good the amount of money or the value of the property SO 
10lSt, wasted, misappropriated or misapplied, and, if the money or the 
Penalty 
for mak-
ing or 
recover-
ing trade 
allow-
ance. 
P"malty 
for obs-
truction 
of officer, 
and 
failure 
to obey 
order 
under 
section 
43. 
Penalty 
for con-
tra\'ening 
provi-
sions of 
section 
44. 
Penalty 
for cin-
traven-
tion Of 
section 
4.>;. 
General 
provi-
sionfor 
punish-
ment of 
offence. 
LiabAllty 
of mem-
ben 01' 
emp-
loyees of 
Board or 
Market 
Com-
mittees. 

Chairman, 
etc., ot 
the Board 
and the 
Market 
C0m-
mittee to 
be pub11c 
servan •. 
Bar of 
suit in 
the 
absenCe 
of notice. 
value of the property is not made good within one month itom the 
expiry of the period of appeal. specified in. 8ub-sectiOQ (3). an ~ount 
equal to the money or the value of the property shan be NCOV!1"~. 
from such member or employee as an arrear of land revenue: 
Provided that no such member or employee shall be called upon to 5 
show cause after the expiry of a period of four years from the occurrence 
of such loss, wastage, misappropriation or misapplication or after the 
expiry of a period of two years from the time of his ceasing to be a 
member or an employee of the Board or Market Committee, as the case 
may be, whichever is earlier. 10 
(2) Every member or employee of the Board shall be'liable for the 
loss, wastage, misappropriation or misapplication of any money or other 
property belonging to the Botard, if such loss, wastage, misappropriation or 
misapplication is proved to the satisfaction of the Board to be the direct 
consequence of the neglect or misconduct on the part of such member IS 
or employee in the performan<:e of his duties as such member or em-
ployee, and he may, after being given an opportunity by a written notice 
to show cause why he should not be required to make good the loss, be 
required by the Board to make good the amount of the money or the 
value of the property so lost, wasted, misappropriated or misapplied, and, 20 
if the money or the value of the property is not made good within one 
month from the expiry of the period of appeal specified in sub-section (3), 
an amount equal to the money or the value of the property shall be 
recoverable from such member or employee as an arrear of land revenue: 
Provided that no such member or employee shall be called upon to 2, 
show cause after the expiry of a period of rour years from the occurrence 
of such loss, wastage, misappropriation or misappli<:ation or after the 
expiry of a period of two years from the time of his ceasing to be a mem-
ber or an employee of the Board, whichever is earlier. 
(3) The member or employee against whom an order under sub-sec· 30 
tion (1) or sub-section (2) is made, may, within thirty days from the 
date of the service of such order, appeal to the Administrator who shall 
have the power of· confirming, modifying or reversing the order made by 
the Board. 
(4) In cOIlll;luting the period of two years or four years, as th~ case 3S 
may be, the period during which any proceeding was stayed or the period 
during which any appeal or revision against the order for making good 
the loss, remained pending, shall be excluded. 
57. The Chairman, the members, the Secretary and other officers and 
servants of the Board and the Chairman, Vice-Chairman, members, 40 
Secretary and other officers and servants of a Market Committee shall 
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code. 45 .t latO. 
Sf. (1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall be illl'tituted again.t 
the Board or any Market Committee or any member, ofBcer or servant 45 
thereof or any person acting under the direction of any such Board, 
Market Committee, member, ofBcer or servant for anything done or pur-

~ 
ported to be done, in good faith as such member, ofticer, or servant U1\der 
this Act, until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing, 
stating the cause of action, the name and place of residence of the intend-
ing plaintiff and the relief which he claims, has been, in the case of the 
S Board or Market Committee, delivered or left at its office, and. in the 
case of any such member, officer, servant or person as aforesaid, delivered 
to him or left at his office or usual place of residence, and the plaint 
shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left. 
(2) Every such suit shall be dismissed unless it is instituted within 
J 0 six months from the date of accrual of the alleged cause of action. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any suit in-
47 of 1983. stituted under section 38 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963. 
59. (1) No offehce under this Act, or any rule or bye-law made there-
under, shall be tried by a court inferior to the court of a Judicial Magis-
IS trate of the first class. 
(2) No prosecution under this Act shall be instituted except by the 
Director or any officer authorised by him in that behalf or by the Secre-
1my or by any other person duly authorised by the Board or the Market 
Committee, as the case may be, in that behalf. 
20 (3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act or 
any rule, order or bye-law made thereunder, unless cOnl,Plaint thereof is 
made within six: mOtllths from the date on which the alleged commission 
of the offence came to the knowledge of the Director, officer, Secretary 
or person referred to in sub-section (2). 
2S (4) All fines received by a court from an offender shall be ereclited to 
the Government revenues and an amount equal to such fine shall be 
paid by the Gov~rnment to the Board or the Market Committee, as the 
case may be. 
60. (1) Every sum due from the Board or a Market COmmittee to the 
30 Government shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 63, any sum 
due to the Board or a Market Committee on account of any charge, costs, 
expenses, fees, rent or on any other account under the provisions of this 
Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder or any sum due to an airl-
3S culturist for any agricultural produce, specified under sub-section (1) of 
section 27, sold by him in the market area and which is not paid to him 
as provided by or under this Act, shall be recoverable from the person 
from whom such sum is due, in the same manner as if it werp an arrear 
of land revenue. 
40 (3) If any question arises whether a sum is due to the Board or 
Market Committee or any agriculturist within the meaning of sub-sec-
tion (Z), it shall be referred to a Tribunal constituted for the purpose 
which shall, after making such inquiry as it may deem fit. and after 
giving to the person from whom it is alleged to be due, an opportunity 
45 of being heard, decide the question and the decision of the Tribunal shall 
be final. 
(4) The Administrator may constitute one or more Tribunals con-
sisting of one person, possessing such qualifications as may be prescribed, 
who is not connected with the Board or Market Committeeo.r the agri-
SO culturist, as the case may be, or with the person from whom the sum 
is alleged to be due. . 
Trital of 
olfencea. 
Recovery 
of sums 
dUe to 
Govern-
ment, 
Board, 
Market 
Com-
mittee 
and 
other .. 

Power of 
Adminis-
trator to 
delegate 
powers. 
Power to 
exempt 
the 
Board, 
Market 
Com-
mittee, 
etc., from 
provi-
sions of 
the Act. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
~o 
(5) Except as otherwise directed by the Tribunal in the circumstan .. 
ces of any case, the expenses of the Tribunal, as computed by it, shall, 
ordinarily, be borne by the party against whom a decision is given. 
8L The Administrator may, by notification, and subject to such con-
ditions, if any, as he may think fit to impose, delegate all or any of the S 
powers conferred u{X)n him by or under any of the provisions of this Act 
to the Board or any other officer or person specified in the notification. 
62. (1) The Central Government may, by general or special order, 
published in the Official Gazette, exempt the Board or any Market Com-
mittee or any class of persons from any of the provisions of this Act or 10 
any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder or may direct, in like 
manner, that the provisions of this Act shall apply to the Board or any 
Market Committee or any class of persons with such modifications, not 
affecting the substance thereof, as may be specified in that order. 
(2) All orders made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as IS 
may be after they are made, before each House of Parliament. 
(3) The Administrator may, by general or special order, published in 
the Oftlcial Gazette, direct that any rule, regulation or bye-law made 
under this Act shall apply to the Board or any Market Committee or any 
class of persons with such modifications, not affecting the substance 20 
thereof, as may be specified in that order. 
63. (1) The Administrator may, by notification, make rules for carry-
ing out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 2S 
matters, namely:-
(a) the manner of holding an inquiry under section 4; 
(b) preparation of the estimates of annual income and expenditure 
of the Board under sub-section (14) of section 5 and matters con-
nected therewith; 30 
(c) the manner in which the members of a Market Committee 
may be elected, under section 11, including all matters incidental to 
such election; 
(d) term of office and other conditions of service of Chairman 
or Vice-Chairman of the Market Committee under sections 17 and 3S 
20; 
(e) the duties of Market Committees under sub-section (2) of 
section 25 and the promo.tion of the grading and standardisation of 
such agricultural produce as may be specified in the rules, under 
clause (k) of that sub-section; 40 
(f) the manner of levy and collection of market fees by Market 
Committee, under section 28; 
(g) the conditions subject to which loans may be obtained by a 
Market Committee from another Market Committee under sub-
section (3) of section 29; 45 
(h) the manner in which and the time within which an appeal 
may be filed under sub-section (2) of section 31 or sub-section (2) 
of section 71; 
(i) the form of licence and the terms and conditions subject to 
which a licence may be granted or renewed, including the fee. to be so 
paid in respect of such licence, under section 34; 

5 
31 
(j) the fees payable in connection with the weighment and 
delivery of agricultural produce under section 34; 
(k) the manner in which an aweal may be filed under sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 36; 
(l) the composition of sub-committees, method of appointment of 
arbitrators and the fees, if any, that may be paid by parties for the 
settlement of disputes, the procedure to be followed by the su~ 
committees or arbitrators for the settlement of disputes and the 
10 
manner in which and the time within which an appeal may be 
preferred from the decision of the sub-committee or arbitrator under 
section 37; 
15 
20 
25 
(m) the manner in which the amount to the credit of a Marketing 
Development Fund or a Market Fund shall be kept or invested under 
sub-section (3) of section 38 or, as the case may be, sub-section 
(2) of section 39; 
(n) travelling and other allowances payable to the membe~ of 
the Board or the Market Committees; 
(0) the manner in which payment from the Marketing Develop-
ment Fund or Market Fund shall be made, its account shall be kept 
or audited or re-audited, budget estimates of income and expenditure 
shall be made and annual administration report shall be prepared 
under section 41; 
(p) the qualifications of a member of a Tribunal constituted 
under sub-section (4) of section 60; 
(q) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
(3) Any rule made under this section may provide that, if any pur-
chaser fails to make the payment forthwith as required by sub-section 
(6) of section 27, he shall be liable to pay interest from the date of sale 
30 to the date of payment at such rate as may be provided in such rule, 
such rate not being in excess of the maximum rate of interest fixed for 
unsecured loans by banking institutions and if payment is not made within 
thirty da~ from the date on which the agricultural produce is sold, the 
principal and interest shall be recoverable by the Market Committee 
35 from the purchaser in the manner provided in section 60. 
(4) Any rule made under the provisions of this Act may provide that 
the contravention thereof shall, on conviction, be punished with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(5) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall be sub-
40 ject to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication. 
(6) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid. as soon as may be 
after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
45 session immediately following the 'session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
50 be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
~! ,. 
that rule. . ~ 

Power to 
make 
regula· 
tiona. 
32 
M. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Adminis-
trator and by notification, make regulations, not inconsistent with any 
rules made under this Act, for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore. 
going power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the follow- S 
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the method of recruitment, the scales of pay and other 
conditions of service of employees of the Board; 
(b) regulation of transaction of business at the meetings of the 
Board; 10 
(c) delegation of duties and powers of the Board to its Chair-
man or Secretary or any other officer employed by it, 
(d) delegation of duties and powers of the Market Committees 
to its sub-committees; 
(e) terms and conditions regarding lending of services of Secre- IS 
tary and the salary and other conditions of service of 'other officers 
and servants of Market Committees. 
Bye-laws. 65. (1) Subject to any rules and regulations made under this \ct, a"ld 
with the previous sanction of the Board or any other officer specially 
empowered in this behalt by the Administrator, a Market Committee 20 
may, in respect of the market ar«.>a for which it is constituted or any 
markets established therein, make bye-laws for determining the quan-
tity of agricultural produce which may be provided for retail sale, for 
the regulation of the business (including meeting, quorum and pro-
cedure) of the Market Committee, and the conditions of trading in the 25 
market area, including the rates and manner of collection or refund of 
market fees or any other fees levied under this Act. 
(2) Where a Market Committee fails to make bye-laws under this 
section within six months from the date on which this Act comes into 
!force or the date of its constitutio,n, whichever is later, the Board may 30 
make such bye-laws as it may think fit and the bye-laws so made shall 
remain in operation in relation to that Market Committee. 
(3) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules, 
regulations or bye-laws made thereunder, if the Board considers that an 
amendment, alteration, rescission or adoption of a new bye-law is neces- 3S 
sary or desirable in the interests of a Market Committee, it may, by an 
order in writing to be served on the Market Committee by registered 
post, require the Market Committee to make such amendment, altera-
tion, rescission or adoption of new bye-law within such time as may be 
specified in such order. 40 
(b) If the Market Committee fails to make the amendment, altera-
tion or rescission or to adopt the new bye-law within the time specified 
by the Board in its order under clause (a), the Board may, after giving 
the Market Committee an opportunity of being heard, register such 
amendment, alteration, rescission or adoption of such new bye-law, and 4S 
issue a certified copy thereof to the Market Commitee. 
(c) The Market Committee may, within thirty days from the date of 
issue of the certified copy referred to in clause (b), appeal against such 
order to the Administrator, 

n 
(d) Where an appeal is presented within the period specified in clause 
(c), the amendment, alteration, rescission or new bye-law shall not come 
into force till the order is confirmed by the Administrator. 
(e) A certified capy of the amendment, alteration, rescission or the 
5 new bye-law registered by the Board under clause (b) shall, subject to 
the result of an appeal, if any, under clause (c), be conclusive evidence 
that the same has been duly registered and such amendment, alteration, 
rescission or new bye-law shall be deemed to have been made by the 
Market Committee. 
10 (4) No bye-law or rescission of a bye-law or its alteration or amend-
ment shall take effect until it has been confinned by the Board and 
notified in the Official Gazette. 
(5) Any bye-law made under the provisions of this Act may provide 
that any contravention thereof shall, on conviction, be punished with 
15 fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 
86. The Administrator may, a~ter consulting the Board and Market 
Committees concerned, by notification, include in the Schedule any item 
of agricultural produce or, amend, or exclude, any of the items of agri-
cultural produce specified in the Schedule. 
20 67. When, before the commencement of this Act, any area comprised 
in any market area was excluded from such market area under section 
4 of the Bombay Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1939, as in force in 
the Union territory of Delhi immediately before the commencement of 
this Act, and the area so excluded was declared as a separate market 
25 area and a Market Committee was constituted therefor, and both the 
Market Committees continue to function immediately after such com-
mencement and the assets, rights and liabilities of, the separate Market 
Committee are not yet determined, then, the Administrator may, 
by notification, after consulting the Market Committee concerned, /?rovide 
30 for the transfEr of the assets, rights and liabilities of the Market Com-
mittee in relation to the area so excluded (including the rights and 
liabilities under any contract made by it) to the separate Market Com-
mittee on such terms and conditions as may be specified in such notifi-
cation. 
35 68. Whenever it is found that any amount due to the Board or a Mar-
ket Committee is irrecoveralble or should be remitted, or whenever any 
loss of the Board's or a Market Committee's money or stores or other 
property occurs through the fraud or negligence of any person or for 
Rny other cause and such money or property is found to be irrecoverable, 
40 the fact shall be reported to the Board or Market Committee, as the case 
may be, and the Board, with the approval of the Administrator, and the 
Market Committee, with the approval of the Board, may order the amount 
(Jr value of the property to be written off as lost, irrecoverable or remit-
ted, as the case may be: 
4S Provided that in the case of Market Committee, if in any case the 
amount due or the value of such property is in excess of one hundred 
rupees, such order shall not take effect unlea, it Is approved by the 
Administrator. 
Power of 
AdJJlJnM-
trator to 
amend 
Schedule. 
Power of 
Adminis-
trator to 
transfer 
asset., 
etc., in 
CIl8£5 of 
Market 
Com-
mittees 
consti-
tuted for 
excluded 
areas 
under 
Bombay 
Act 22 
of 1939. 
Power to 
writ. off 
irrecover-
able feel, 
etc. 

Revision. 
Power to 
compound 
offences. 
Power of 
the Com_ 
mittee 
and 
Chairman 
to impose 
penalties. 
Repeal 
and sav-
ing. 
34 
68. Notwithstanding anyt~g contained in this Act, the Administra-
tor shall have the power of reversing or modifying any order of ~he 
Board or any of its officers Qassed or purporting to have been passed 
under this Act if he is satisfied that such order is not in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act, or any rule, regulation or bye-law made there- S 
under. 
'19. (1) With the previous approval of the Chairman of the Board, a 
Market Committee or with the authorisation by a resolution of a Market 
Committee, its Chairman, may accept from any person against whom a 
reasonable suspiCion exists that he has committed an offence under this 10 
Act, or any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder, a sum of money 
by way of composition foor such offence. 
(2) On the payment of such amount of money to the Market Com-
mittee or to its Chairman, as the case may be, the suspected f?erson, if 
in custody, shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken IS 
against such person. 
71. (1) A Market Committee and its Chairman shall have the power, 
by order, to impose the penalties of censure and fine on any market 
functionary or agriculturist or purchaser for the contravention of any 
bye-law, after giving the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of 20 
being heard: 
Provided that the Market Committee shall not be comt?etent to im-
pose fine exceeding twenty-five rupees and the Chairman shall not be 
competent to impose fine exceeding five rupees. 
(2) An appeal against an order under sub-section (1) shall lie to the 25 
Board, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
72. (1) On the commencement of this Act, the Bombay Agricultural 
Produce Markets Act, 1939, shall cease to be in force in the Union territory 
of Delhi: 
Provided that such cesser shall not affect the previous operation of 30 
the enactment aforesaid and anything done or any action taken (in-
cluding any appointment, delegation or declaration made, notification, 
order, rule, direction CYr notice issued, bye-law framed, Market Com-
mittee established, licences granted, f,ees levied and collected, instru-
ments executed, any fund established or constituted) by or under the 35 
provisions of any such enactment shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act, and shall continue in 
force unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken 
under this Act. 40 
(2) Any area or place declared to be a market area or any place or 
market declared to be a market un'der the enactment so ceasing to be 
in force shall, on the commencement of this Act, be deem('d to be the 
market area or market declared under this Act; the Market Committee 
constituted for the said market area and functioning immediately prior 45 
to such commencement shall be deemed, notwithstanding anything con-
tained in this Act, to be the Market Committee constituted under this 
Act for such market area, and, where it is so declared or notified, also 
for the agricultural produce speCified in the declaration or notification; 
and all the members of such Market Committee shall be deemed to be So 
dlembers nominated by the Administrator under sub-section (2) of 
~ctiQn 9. 
Bom-
bay Act 
22 of 
1939: 

(3) Any reference to the enactment ceasing to be in fOtrce as aforesaid 
or to any provision thereof or to any officer, authority or pt!rSf>n entrust-
ed with any functions thereunder, in any law for the time being in force 
or in any instrument or document, shall be construed, wher~ necessary, 
S as a reference to the corresponding provisions of this Act or to the corres-
ponding officer, authority or person tunctioning under this Act, and the 
corresponding officer, authority or Qerson, as the case may be, shall have 
and exercise the functions under such law, instrument or document. 
(4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not affect 
10 the general application to this Act of section 6 of the General Clauses 
Act, 1897 as if the Bombay Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1939, as 
lOot 1897. applicable to the Union territory of Delhi, had been repealed by this Act. 
22 of 1939. 
73. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, as occasion requires, by order not in-
IS consistent with the provisions of this Act, do anything which appears to 
it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two 
years from the commencement of this Act. 
Power to 
remove 
difllcul-
ties. 

THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (1) (b) and section 66] 
I. Animal husbandry products--
1. Butter. 
2. Cattle. 
3. Eggs. 
4. Ghee. 
5. Goat. 
6. Hides and skins. 
7. Milk. 
8. Poultry. 
9. Sheep. 
10. Wool. 
II. Apicultu.re-
Honey. 
III. Cattle feeds-
1. Guwar. 
2. Punvad. 
IV. Cereals-
1. Bajra. 
2. Barley. 
3. Inferior millets, for example. swank, kodra kangni. etc. 
4. Jowar. 
5. Maize. 
6. Oats. 
7. Paddy (husked and unhusked). 
8. Wheat (husked and unhusked). 
V. Condiments, spices and others-
1. Betel leaves. 
2. Betelnuts. 
3. Cardamom and pep;>er. 
4. Cashewnuts. 
5. Chillies. .. , 
,. , 
6. Corriander. , , 
7. Dalchini. 
8. Garlic. 
s 
10 
IS 
2.0 
35 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
37 
9. Ginger. 
10. Dachi. 
11. Long. 
12. Methi. 
13. Rai (mustard). 
14. Sonf. 
15. Turmeric. 
16. Zeera. 
VI. Fibres ...... 
1. Cotton (ginned and unginned). 
2. Sanhemp. 
VII. Fruits-
1. Almonds. 
2. Apples. 
3. Banana. 
4. Cherry. 
5. Chickoo. 
6. Fig. 
7. Grapes. 
8. Guava. 
9. Kakri. 
10. Leechi. 
11. Lemon. 
12. Malta. 
13. Mango. 
14. Melon. 
15. Mosambi. 
16. Papaya. 
17. Peaches. 
18. Pears. 
19. Plums. 
20. Pomegranate. 
21. Santra. 
22. S~awberry. 
23. Water melons. 
VIII. Grass and fodder. 
IX. Gur, sugar, sugarcane, khandsaTi, shakhar and rashkct. 
X. Narcotics-
Tobacco. 
40 XI. Oilseed&-
1. Castor seed. 
620 (D) L~ .. 

2. Cotton seed. 
3. Groundnut (shelled and unshelled). 
4. Linseed. 
S. Sarson. 
6. Sesamurn. 
7. Taramira. 
8. Toria. 
XII. Pisciculture-
Fish. 
XIII. Putses-
l. Arhar. 
2. Beans. 
3. Gram. 
•. Guara. 
5. Mash. 
6. Masur. 
7. Moth. 
8. Mung. 
9. Peas. 
10. Urad. 
XIV. Vegetables-
1. Arvi. 
2. Garrots-all types. 
3. Cucumber-all types. 
4. Gobhi-all types. 
5. Kachalu. 
6. Leafy and fresh vegetables. 
7. Onion. 
8. Peas-all types. 
9. Potatoes and sweet potatoes. 
10. Tomatoes. 
10 
IS 
%0 
\ I 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The marketing of agricultural produce is regulated in the Union 
territory of Delhi under the Bombay Agricultural Produce Markets Act. 
1939. The said Act has been found to be inarl;equate to cope with the 
changing socio-economic patte'rn and present-day requirements in the 
matter of marketing of agricultural produce in the Union tenitory oif 
Delhi. It was also felt that the penal provisions should be more severe. 
The Bill, therefore, seeks to replace the Bombay Agricultural Produce' 
Markets Act, 1939, as extended to the Union: territory of Delhd, by a new 
enactment. 
2. The Bill provides for the establishment of an Agricultural Marketing 
Board, consisting of a Chairman and twelve other members, of whor.l-
(a) four shall be' officials, representing, respectively, the Agri-
culture Department, the Co-operative Department and the Animal 
Husbandry Department (jf the Delhi Administration, and 
(b) eight non·officials, representing agriculturists, organization 
of farmers, traders and commission agents and co-operative societies. 
With a view to ensuring that the interests of the urban consumers Me 
safegua.rded, the Bill further provides that the Board shaH also include 
two representatives of consumers, one of whom will be a member of the 
Metropolitan Council of Delhi. 
The functions' of the Board will be to regulate and supervise the 
activities of the Market Committees, constituted under the Bill, and to 
constitute a fund, with the moneys received by it from the Government 
and the Market Committees, for the better marketing of agricultural 
produce, grading and standardization of agricultural produce, and general 
improvement of the markets. 
3, The Bill further provides for the establishment of principal markets 
for every market area and for the constitution of Market Committees 
for regulating the marketing of different kinds of agricultural produce 
marketed in the said market area or any part thereof. The func-
tions of the Market Committees would include provision of facilities for 
the marketing of agricultural produce, superintendence, direction and 
control of markets, regulation of the entry of persons and of vehicular 
traffic into the market, settlement of disputes arising out of any kind of 
transactions cohnected with the marketing of agricultural produce and 
all matters ancillary thereto. 
39 

40 
4. The Bill further provides that, on the sale of any prociuce, it shall 
be the duty of the Market Committee to get such produce weighed (or 
measured) and to grant a: receipt to the purchaser indicating the weight 
(or measure) and grade of the produce and the names of the seller and 
purchaser of the produce. 
5. The other provisions of the Bill relate to matters of detail. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 6th May, 1976. SHAH NAWAZ KHAN. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 7-1/73-AM, dated the 7th May, 1976 from Shri 
Shah Nawaz Khan, Minister of State! in the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Irrigation to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Delhi 
Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Bill, 1976, has recommend-
ed under article 117(1) of the Constitution the introduction of the Bill in 
Lok Sabha and has also reconunended under article 117(3) of the Consti-
tution the consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-claruse (41) of clause 59 provides that all fines received from an 
offender shall be paid by the Government to the Boarrl. or the Market 
Committee, as the case may be. The procedure for such payment will 
be that such fines will, in the first instance, be credited to the Govern-
ment revenues and thereafter an amount equal to the amount so credited 
will be paid to the Boud or the Market Committee. There will thus be 
no actual out-go from the Consolidated Fund.. 
2. At present an annual e'Xpenditure of a sum Rs. 1.03 lakhs and a non-
recurring expenditure of a sum of Rs. 0.10 lakhs is incurred in enfordng 
the provisions of the Bombay Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1939, as 
e.xtenrl.ed to the Union territory of Delhi. An identical recurrln'g and 
non-recurring expenditure will be involved if the Bill is enaICted. 
3. No other recurring or non-recurring expenditure wUl be involved 
if the Bill is enacted. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 63 of the Bill empowers the Central Government t() make rules 
for the purpose of carrying· out the provisions of the Bill. The matten 
in relation to which such rules may be made have been enumerated in 
detail in· sUb-clause (2) of that clause. These matters relate, mainly, to 
the manner in which the members of Market Committees are to be 
elected, the manner of levy and collection of market fees by Market 
COmmittees, conditions subject to which loans may be obtained by a 
Market Committee from any other Market Committee, the terms and 
conditions subject to which a licence to use any place in the market area 
for marketing agricultural produce or operating therein as a trader, 
commission agent, etc., may be granted, fees payable in connection with 
weighment anti delivery of agrieultural produce, composition of sub-
committees, method of appointment of arbitrators for settlement of 
disputes, qualifications of Tribunal to be constituted for determining 
disputes about sums due to the Government, Board, Market Committees 
or agriculturists, and travelling and other allowances payable to members 
of the Board or Market Committees, etc. 
2. Clause 64 of the Bill empowers the Board to make, with the pre-
vious approval of the Aclministrntor, regulations for carrying out the 
provh:ions of the Bill. The matters in regard to which regulations may 
be made by the Board relate to the me1hod of recruitment, scales ~ pay 
and other conctitions of service of the employees of the Bo a,rd , regulation 
of the transaction of business at meetings of the Board, delegation of 
dutiels and powers of the Board to its Chairman, Secretary or other 
officers, delegation of the powers of the Market Committee to its sub-
committees, etc. 
3. Sub-dause (1) of clause 65 of the Bill empowers the Market Com-
mittees to make, subjl"'rt to the provi!,>jon~ of the Bill and any rule or 
regulation made thereunder and with the previous sanction of the Board 
or any r,ther officer specially f'mpowered by the Adminisb:ator in this 
behalf, bye-laws, in respect of the market area for which it is constituted, 
for determining the quantity of agricultural produce which mlllY be 
provided for retail sale, for the regulation of the transaction of business 
of the Market Committee and the conditions of trading in the market area 
including the rates and manner of collection or refund of ma·rket fees or 
other fees levied under the Bill. 
Sub-clause (2) of clause 65 of the Bill empowers the Board to make 
bye-laws for a Market Committee where the Market Committee fails to 
make bye-laws within six months from the commencement of the pro-
posed enactment or the constitution of such Market Committee, which .. 
ever is later. 

43 
Sub-clause (3) (a) of clause 65 of the Bill empowers ihe Board to 
require the Market Committee to amend, alter or rescind any bye-
law made by it or to adopt a new bye-law for the Market Committee 
within the time specified in the order and further empowers the Board,. 
in the event of the failure of the Market Committee to make the amend .. 
ment within the specified time, to register such amendment and to issue 
a certified copy thereof to the Market Committee. The aggrieved Market 
Committee has been given a right to appeal to the Administrator against 
the action taken by the Board. 
4. Clause 66 of the Bill empowers the Administrator, after consulting 
the Board and the Market Committees concerned, to include, by notii-
fication, in the Schedule any item of agricultural produce or to amend or 
exclude any of the items of agricultural produce specified in the Schedule. 
5. The matters in relation to which such rules or regulations or bye-
laws may be made are matters of netail and it is hardly possible to 
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of the legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
6. Clause 62 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
exempt, by general or special order, the Board or any Market Com-
mittee or any class of persons from any provision of the Bill or any 
rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder and further empowers 
the Central Government to modify, without affecting the substance 
thereof, any provision of the Bill in its application to the Board or any 
Market Committee or any class of persons. The clause further provides 
that every order making such exemption or modification shap. be laid 
before each House of Parliament. Sub-clause (3) of that clause empowers 
the Administrator to modify, without affecting the substance thereof, any 
rule, regulation or bye-law made unner the Bill. The powers of exemp-
tion or modification so delegated to the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, to the Administrator are such that they can hardly be 
provided in the Bill itself. The delegation of the power is, therefore, of 
a normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to prol"ide for the better regulation of the purchase, sale, storage and 
processing of agricultural produce and the establishment of markets 
'for agricultural produce in the Union territory of 'Delhi and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
. (Shri Sho.h Nawaz Khan, 
Mi7I.iBter of State in the 
Ministry of Agriculture and 
Irrigation.) 