As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
..... But No. $8 of 1983 
THE NATIONAL OILSEEDS AND VEGETABLE OILS DEVELOPMENT 
BOARD BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the development under the control of the Union of the 
Oilseeds industry and the vegetable oils industry and for matters 
connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by ParUament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - ": ' I ~ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
," 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the National Oilseeds and Vegetable Short 
Oils Development Board Act, 1983. title, 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
extent 
and com_ 
mence.. 
,(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government ment. 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest Oeclara.-
10 that the Union should take under its control the oilseeds inct.lStry. tion all to 
expedL 
encyCif 
coatrol 
by the 
Union. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(4) "Board" means the National OilJeeds and ¥egetable 
Development Board established under section 4; 
(b) "Chairman" mians the Chairman of the Boardi 
Deftn1-
tl""""' Olls v._ 

l:atablish-
~ent and 
ronstltu. 
tionof 
the 
Board. 
(c) "coconut" has the same meaning as in the Coconut Develop-
~«t Board Act, 1979; • ot1979. 
(d) "Executive Director" means the Executive Director of the 
Board; I 
(e) "member" means a member of the Board; 
(f) "oilseed" does not include coconut; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
5 
(h) "vegetable oil" means any oil produced from oilseeds, or 
any other oil bearing material of plant origin, and containing 10 
glycerides but does not incl\lde any such vegetable oil which haa 
been subjected to any processing subsequent to the recovery of aU; 
(i) "Vice-Chairman" means the Vice-Chairman of the Board. 
.... ..; .. 
-.:.. :. -" ~ ..... CHAPTER II 
'!.II 
THE NAnONAL OILSEEDs AND VEGETABLE OILS DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
4. (1) With eRect from such d.a:te as the Central Government may, 
by notiScatiun in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall b. 
established, for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be ~alled ,the NatioDal 
Oilseeds Dnd V ~getable Oils Development Board. 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 20 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acq'Uire, 
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
(.3) The head office of the Board shall be at Delhi or at such other 
place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 125 
Gazette, specify. j • 
,(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely':-
,(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry of the Central Gov-
ernment dealing with agriculture, who shall ex officio be the Chair-
man of the Board; 
(b) the Secretary in charge of the Ministry of the Central 
Government dealing with agricultural development, who shall ex 
officio be the Vice-Chairman of the Board; 
(c) the Agriculture Commissioner to the Government of India, 
ex officio; 35 
(d) the Director-General, Indian Council of Agricultural Re· 
search, ex officio; 
(e) three members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elect-
ed by the H?US8 of the People ~d one by the CO'Wlcil of Statesj 

LOK SABHA 
-
CORRIGENDUM 
to 
THE NATIONAL OILS2EDS A~D VEGETABLE OILS DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
BILL. 1983 
(To be/As introduoed in LQk Sabha) 
Page 9, in the marginal headin~ to clause 10,-
for - "Solution 
Dis-It 
f\JEW DELHI; 
April 304 19~~ • Va i 5 i3 kh a l.0. 19:;.o:O~5~C5I1:"'a~ik-a~)-
Read 
- "Dis-
solution" 

5 
3 
U) one member to be appointed by the Central Government to 
represent the Planning Commission; 
(9) three membeJ;s to be appointed by the t!entral Government 
to represent respectively the Ministries of the Central Go"ernment 
dealing with-
(i) finance (revenue); 
(ii) commerce; 
(iii) civil supplies; 
. (h) Executive Director, ex officio; 
10 (i) Financial Adviser to the Ministry of the Central Govern-
ment dealing \vith agriculture, ex officio; 
(j) eleven members to be appointed by the Central Govern-
ment to represent respectively the Governments of the states of 
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Baryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
15 Karnataka, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttar 
Pradesh: 
Provided that every appointment under thi.. clause shall be 
made on the recommendation of the Government of the State 
concerned; 
20 (k) five members to be appointed by the Central Government 
to represent respectively-
(i) the Sta'ie Trading Corporation of India Limited; 
Development 
the National 
Corporation 
Cooperative 
25 r 1962. 
(ii) the National Co-operative 
established under section 3 of 
Development Corporation Act, 1962; 
61 of 1981. 
30 
(iin the lI:ntionnl Dairy Df.'velopm(,llt Board: 
(iv) thcl National Agricultural Co-'Opel'ative Marketin:g 
Federation; 
(v) the N!,\tional Rank £01' Altricultur(' and Rural Develop-
ment estabHshcd under section 3 of the National Bank for 
A!tJ'icu1ture ntH' R'll'al Developmert Act. 1981; 
(l) three mt'mhers to be appointed by the Central Government 
to rcpre~ent t~\(· oi1!ll'e{1 .. '?,'Towers: 
(m) one member to be appointed by the Central Government 
35 to represent exporter!l of oilseeds, vegetable oils or other productllJ 
derived from oi1!lC'cds; 
(n) one member to he aopointed hy the Central Governm"nt to 
repre~ent the vegetnhlp oj1~ industry; 
(0) two m('mhers to be appointed hV the Central Government 
to represent su('h other intert'sts connected with the oil~eeds indu~­
try or the vege1ahle oils industry as. in the opinion of that Govern-
mellt, ought to h(' repl'fsenfetJ. 
(5) The term of office of the members, oth"r than the ex officio 
members. and the manner of fllIin.~ vacancies among, and the procedure 
to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, such mem~ers 
45 ,llall be such as may be prescribed! 

Allow-
ancesof 
membe ••. 
Officers 
of the 
Board 
and 
other 
staff. 
r-" . 
4 
., 
(6) Any officer of the Central Government, not being· a member of 
the Board, when dep,uted by that Government in this behalf, shall have 
the right to attend the meetings of the Board and take part in the pro-
ceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote. 
F) The Board may associate with itself in such manner, subject to 5 
sllch conditions and for such purposes as may be prescribed, any person 
whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the 
provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to 
take part in the discussions of the Board relevant to the purpose for 
which he has been 3!'!sociated but shall not have the right to vote and 10 
shall be entitled to receive such allowances or fees as may be fixed by 
the Central Government. 
(8). No act or proceeding of the Board or any committee appointed 
by it under section 8 shall be invalidated merely by reason of-
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 15 
Board or such committee; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a 
member of the Board or S'Uch committee; or 
(c) any irtegularity in the procedure of the Board or such com-
mittee not affecting the merits of the case. 20 
(9) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at ita 
meetings (including the quorum at its meetings) as may be provided by 
regulations made by the Board under this Act. 
S. The members of the Board shall receive such allowances as may 25 
be fixed by the Central GovernD!ent. 
S. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a person possessing such 
technical qualifications and practical experience in oilseeds development 
as may be I!re5cribed, as the Executive Director to the Board. 
(2) The Executive Director shall be the chief executive of the Board 30 
and shall eXE:rcise such powers and perform such functions as may be 
prescribed. ' 
(3) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board 
who shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be 
presCribed or as may be delegated to him by the Board or the Executive 35 
Direc'tor. 
(4) The Executive Director and the Secretary shall be entitled to 
such salary and allowances Qnd shall be subject to such conditJons of: 
service in respect of leave, pension, providellt fund and other matters as 
may from time to time, be fixed by the Central Government. 40 
(5) Subject to luch control and restrictions as may be . prescribed, 
the Board may appoint such other officers and employees, as may be 
necessary, for the efficient performant'e of its functions and the method 
of appointment, the conditions of senice and the scales. of pay and 
allowances of ~lIch other officers and employees of the Board shall be 45 
such as may be provided by the Board bf regulations JIlade ,.ander ~~s 
Ae*. ,.1 l .-:.a . I .; .... ~ 

-'I' .......... 
(6) The Executive Director, the Secretary and other officers ancI 
employees of the Board shall not undertake any work unconnected with 
their duties under this Act except with the permission of the Central 
Government. 
5 7. (1) On the establishment of the Board, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government to transfer to the Board, by order, and with effect 
from such date or dates (which may be either retrospective to any date 
not earlier than the date of such establishment or prospective) as may 
be specified in the order. nny officer or other employee holding office 
10 as such in the Directorate of Oilseeds Development immediately before 
the date on which the Board is establi6hed: 
Provided that the scale of pay of the post to which such officer or 
other employee is transferred shall not be lower than the scale of pay 
of the post he was holding immediately before such transfer and the 
15 other terms and conditions of service (including pension, leave, provident 
fund and medical benefits) of the post to which he is transferred shall 
not be less favO'llrable than the terms and condltions of servke in rela-
tion to the post held by him immediately before such transfer: 
Provided further that if, immediately before the date of his transfer, 
~o any such officer or other employee is offiCiating in a higher post under 
the Central Government either in a leave vacancy or in any vacancy of a 
specified duration, his pay and other allowances, if any, on transfer, 
shall be protected for the unexpired period of such vacancy and there-
after he shall be entitled. to the scale of pay applicable to the post under 
~5 the Central Government to which he would have reverted but 'lor his 
transfer to the Board. 
(2) Before any order is made under sub-section (1), .the officers and 
other employees of the Directorate of Oi'seeds Development who are 
proposed to be transferred under that sub-section shall be given an option 
30 in such form and within such time as may be specified in that behalf by 
the Central Government, to express their willingness or otherwise to 
become employees of the Board and such option once exercised shall be 
final: 
Provided that no order under sub-section (1) shall be made in 
35 relation to any officer or other employee of the Directorate of Oilseeds 
Development who has intimated his intention of not becoming an em-
ployee of the Board within the time specified in that behalf: 
Provided fUrther that such of the persons employed by the Central 
Government in the said Directorate who do not express, within the 
40 time specified in that behalf, their intention of becoming the employees 
of the Board, shall be dpalt with in the same manner as, and in accord-
ance with the same rules as are applicable to, the employees of the Cen-
tral Government in the event of the reduction of the strength of the 
Department in which such per~on.s have bet'n employed. 
(3) An officer or other employee transferred by an order made 
45 under sub-section (1) shall, on and from the date of transfer, cease to 
be an officer or employee of the Central Government and become an 
officer or other employee of the· Board with such designation as the 
:J3o~rd may determine and shall be ~overned by the regulations made by 
Special 
provision 
for 
transfer 
of em_ 
ployees 
to the 
Board. 

Managing 
Commit-
tee and 
other 
commit-
tees of the 
Board. 
~.- .. -
8 
~... '-.. 
the Board under this Act in respect of remuneration and other conditions 
of service (including pension, leave, provident fund and medical bene-
fits) and shall continue to be an officer or other employee of the Board 
unless and until his employment is duly terminated by the Board: 
Provided that till such time as the regulations referred to above 5 
governing the conditions of service of its officers or other employees 
are made by the Board, the relevant rules and orders made by the 
Central Government shall continue to be applicable to such officers or 
other employees. 
(4) If any question arises as to whether the terms and conditions of 10 
service prescribed in the regulations made by the Board in respect of 
any matter, including rt>muneration, pension, leave, provident fund and 
medical benefits, are less favourable than those attached to the post held 
by an officer or other employee immediately before his transfer to the 
Board, the decision of the Central Government in the matter shall be 15 
fln~. I 
8. (1) Tilerc shan be a Managing Committee of the Board for the 
purpose nf exercising such of the powers and performing such of the 
functions of the Board as may be prescribed or as the Board may delegate 
~~ I 
(2) The Managing Committee of the Board shall consist of the follow-
ing members of the Board, namely:-
(a) the Vice-Chairman, who shall be the Chairman of the 
Managing Committee; 
20 
(b) the Agriculture Commissioner to the Government of India; 25 
(c) the Director-G~neral, Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research; 
(d) one member to be nominated by the Chairman from among 
the members referred to in clause (g) of sub-section (4) of section 4; 
(e) Executive Director; , 
(f) Financial Advi!ler to the Ministry of Central Government 
dealing with agriculture; 
(g) one member to be nominated by the Chairman from 
among the members referred to in clause (j) of sub-section (4) of 
secti~n 4; 35 
(h) one member to be nominated by the Chairman from 
among the members referred to in clause (k) of sub-section (4) of 
section 4; 
(i) one member to be nominated by the Chairman from among 
the memb~rs referred to in clause (l) of sub-section (4) of section 40 
4; and 
(j) one member to be nominated by the Chairman from among 
the members referred to in c]aus~s (m), (n) and (0) of sub-s~cttQl1 
'1) of Bectio~ ~ . • '. ;..._. '" 

5 
,., 
(3) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed; 
th~ Board may constitute other standing committees or ad hoc com-
mIttees for exercising any powers or performing any functions of the 
Board or for inquiring into or reporting and advising on any matter 
which the lioa!'d may re1er to them. 
(4) The Board shall have t.he power to co·opt as members of the 
Manqiug Committee or auy committee. coustituted under sub-section 
(3), such number of persons who are not members of the Board as it 
thinks fit and the persons so co-opted shall have the right to attend the 
io meetings of the committee and take part in its proceedings but shall not 
have the right to vote. ; 
15 
. (5) The persODs cu-opted as members of a committee under sub-
section (4) shall be en,itled to receive such allowances or fees for 
attendinc meetings of lhe ~ommittee as may be fixed by the Central 
(iovernment. 
9. (1) It shall be the d".1ty of the Board to promote, by such measures 
as it thinks-fit, the development under the control of the Central Gov-
ernment ot the oilseeds industry and t~e vegetable oils industry. 
(2) WIthout prejudice to the generahty of the prpvisions contained 
in sub-section (1), the measures referred to therein may provide for-ao 
25 
35 
45 
(a) taking such measurel> for the development of the o~eds 
industry and the vegetable oils industry as would enable farmers, 
particularly small farmers, to become participants in, and bene-
ficiaries of, the development and growth of the oilseeds industry and 
the vegetable oils indUstry; 
(0) recommending measures for improving the marketing of 
oilseeds, products of ollseeds and vegetable oils and for their quality 
control in lndia; 
(c) imparting technical advice to any person who is engaged in 
the cultivation of oilseeds or the processing or marketing of oilseeds 
and its products; ,. I 
(td) providing for, or recommending, financial or other assistance 
for the production aud development of adequate quantity of 
breeders' seeds, foundation seeds and certified seeds of high quality, 
arranging supply of inputs for t.he oilseeds growers, adoption of 
improved meLbods of cultivatioll of oilseeds Ilnd modern technolog)l 
for processing of oilseeds, extension of areas under oilseeds culti-
vation with a view to developing tbe Oilseed::! industry and the 
vegetoble oils industrYi 
(e) recommending such measures as may be practicable for 
asslsting oilseeds growers to get incentive prices, including recom-
mending, as and when neceti~ary, aiter consultation with the Agri· 
cultural Prices Commission, minimum and maximum prices for 
oilseeds and products of oilseeds and vegetable Oils; 
(i) recommending and tuidng such n:c;'!suj:e~ as may be neces-
sary for collection, procurement and mamtenance of bu1fer stocks 
of oilseeds for stabilising the price situation and market conditions 
in respect of oilseeds, products of oilseeds and veietable oils; 
~­
tions 
of the 
Board. 

i 
(g) reconlmending and takiue such measures as may be neceS-
sary for the-
(i) proDlotion and development of storage facilities; 
, (L~) establiliohmcnt of processing uniLs, in respect of oilse~s, 
and rendering such financial or other a~sislance as may be 
considered necessary for such pUl'poses; 5 
(iii) promotion of oilseeds growers' cooperatives and other 
appropriate agencies, with a view to achieving integration 
between production, processing and marketing of oilseed!; 
(h) recommending mea:ourcs for regulating import, export or 10 
distribution of oilseeds or products of oilseeds or vegetable oils in 
the context of an integrated policy and programme of development 
of oilseeds and vegetable oils; 
_(i) collecting ISLatlsilCS :trum growers of oilseeds, dealers in 
oilseeds, manufacturers of products of oilseeds and vegetable oils is 
and such other persons and InstitutIons as may be necessary on 
any matter l'elaLmg to the ol.l::;eeds industry or vegetable oils mdUs-
try and publishing the statistics so collected or portions thereof or 
extracts therefrom; 
(j) recomme)lding the setting up and adoption of grade standards 
fOr oilseeds and their products and vegetable oils; gO 
(k), iillancWe suhallie scilemes in cun;suiLation with the Central 
Government and the GOVC1-nlllcnts ol tbe States where oilseeds are 
Il'0wn on a large scale, So as to illC1'CaSe the production of oilseeds 
and to improve their quality and yields; and for this purpose cvolv- 25 
ing schemes for the award oi prizes or grant of incentives to growers 
pf oilseeds and the manulacturers of oilseeds products and vegetable 
oils and for proviuing marketing facilities for oilseeds products and 
ve&etable oils; 
(L) assisLiug, encouragwg, promoting, co-ordinating and fiDanciDj( 
agricultural, technological, industrial or economic: research on oUseeds, so 
their products and vegetable oils in such manner as the Board may 
deem fit by making use of available institutions; 
(m) wld~l·taking puLlidlY work Oil. the rcsearch and develop'-
ment of the oilseeds industry and the ve,~table oils industry; 
, I h 95 (n)se'tilll up of region a oill.ces and 0' er IIgcncies for the 
promotion and development of production, processing. gradin, and 
marketing of oilseeds and its products and vegetable oils in diftereDt 
states and Union territories for the efficient discharge of the fundio ... 
of die Board; 40 
(0) such other matters as may be considered necessary for the 
purpose of carrying out the functions of the Board or as mal be 
prescribed.. 
(3) The Board shall perform its functions under this section in 
accordance with, and subject to, such rules as may be made by the Cen- 45 
kal Government in this behalf. 

9 
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the omclal 
Gazette and for reasons to be specified therein, direct that the Board 
sball be dissolved from such date and for such period as may be specified 
in the notification: 
5 Provided that before iesuing any such notification, the Central Gov-
ernment shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Board to make 
representations against the proposed dissolution and shall consider the 
representations, if any, of the Board. 
(2) When the Board is dissolved 'Under the provisions of sub-
10 section (1) ,-
(a) all members, notwithstanding that their term of office has 
not expired, shall, from the date of dissolution, vacate their offices 
as such members; 
(Ib) all powers and duties of the Board shall, during the period 
15 of dissolution, be exercised and performed by such person or 
persons as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf and 
their remuneration shall be such as may be prescribed; 
(c) all funds and· other properties vested in the Board shall, 
during the period of dissolution, vest in the Central Government; and 
!ao (d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Board shall 
be reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
CHAPTER III 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
11. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
25 Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants or 
loans sueh sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for 
being utilised for tbe purposes of this Act. 
12 (1) Th~re shall be formed 11 Fund to be called the Oilseeds and 
Veg.,t..b1e Oils Development Fund and there shall be credited thereto-
(a) any fees that may be levied and collected under this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder; 
<Ib) any sums of money paid or any grants or Joans granted by the 
Central Government for the purposes of this Act; 
(c) any grants or loans that maY,be made by any person for ~he 
35 purposes of this Act (ineluding loan. obtained by the Board under set'taon 
13); 
(d) any grants or. donations from State Governments, v(\)untary 
or,anisations or other Institutions. J 
solution 
Dis-
of the 
Board. 
Grants 
and loans 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Conmitu_ 
tion of 
oilseeds 
and vegf~. 
table oils 
Devel'Op-
ment 
Fund. 

Borrow_ 
ing 
power.'! 
01 the 
Board. 
Accounts 
a:nd 
audit. 
10 
(2) The Fund shall be appUed-
(a) for meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section .; 
(b) for Jneetin, the salaries, allowances and other remUDeration 
of the members, officers and other emploYeefIi, as the cose may be, of 
the Board; 
(c) for meeting the other administrative expenses or the Board 
and any other expenses authorised by or under this Act; 
(d) {or repayment of any loans. 
5 
13. (1) The Board may, for the purposes of carrying out its functions 
under this Act, and with 'the previO'US approval of, and subject to the 10 
directions of the Central Govemment, borrow money from-
(0) the public by the issue or sale of bonds or debentures or 
both, carrying interest at such rates as may be specified therein; 
(b) any bank or other institution; 
(c) such other authority, organisation or institution as may be 15 
approved by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(2) The Central Government may guarantee the repayment of 
the monies borrowed by the Board under sub-seetion (1) and 'the payment 
of mterest thereon and other incidental charges. 
u. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 120 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Ccmptroller and Auditor-General of India . 
. (2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be spec1fted by 25 
him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall 
be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 
Board shall have the same rigbts and privileges and authority in con .. go 
nection with S'Uch audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General gene-
rally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, 
in partiC'Ular, shall have the right to demand the prQduction of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Board. 35 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at India or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
ann'Ually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause 
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 

n 
CHAPTER IV "' 
CONTRoL BY CENTRAL GoVllRNMIlNT 
15. The Board shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it Dirac... 
from time to time by the Central Government for the eftldent adminis- tiona by 
5 tration of thi6 Act. Cerrtral 
IG. (1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government at such 
time and in such 'form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Cen. 
tral Government may direct, such returns and statements and such 
particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the 
10 promotion and development of the oUseeds industry and the vegetable 
oils industry, as the Central Government may, from time to time, 
req'Uire. 
(2) The Board shall furnish a programme of its activities for each 
financial year to the Central Government for their information and 
15 directions. if any. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (.1), the Board 
shall, as soon as possible, after the end of each ftnancial year, submit 
to the Central Government a report in such form and before such date, 
as may be prescribed, giving a trUe and full account of its activities, 
20 policy and programmes during the previous financial year. 
(4) A copy of the report received under sub-section (3) shall be laid. 
as soon as may be, after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCILLANEOUS 
25 17. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Government, or the Board or any committee appointed by 
it, or any member of the Board or such committee, or any officer or 
other employee of the Central Government or of the Board or any other 
person authorised by the Central Government or the Board, for any-
30 thing which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act 
or the ru!es or regulations made thereunder. 
18. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
3S going power. such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
45 
(a) the term of office of the members (other than the u ofJicio 
members), and the manner of filUng vacancies among. and the pro-
cedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, such 
members, under sub-section (5) of section 4; 
(b) the manner in which. the conditions subject to which and 
the purposes for which any person may be associated by the Board 
under sub-section (7) of section 4; 
(e) the technical qualifications and practical experience in oil-
seeds development required for aopointment to the post of the 
Executive Director to the Board under sub-section (1) of section 6: 
Govern-
ment. 
ftetums 
and 
reports. 
Protec_ 
tion ot 
action 
taken 
in good 
faith. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

Power 
to make 
regula... 
tiOlJll. 
12 
(d) the powers which may be exercised and the functions which 
may be performed by the ExeC'Utive Director as the chief executive 
of the Board under sub-section (2) of section 6; 
(e) the powers which may be exercised and the functions which 
may be performed by the Secretary to the Board under sub-section . 5 
(3) of section 6; , 
(1) the control and restrictions' subject to which other officers 
and employees may be appointed by .the Board under sub-section 
(5) of section 6; 
(g) the powers which may be exercised and the functions IO 
which may be performed by the Managing Committee under sub-
section (1) of section 8; 
(h) the control and restrictions subject to which other standing 
committees 'or ad hoc committees may be constituted by the Board 
under sub-section (3) of section 8; 15 
(i) the matters in respect of which the Board may undertake 
measures for the purpose of carrying out its functions under clause 
(0) of sub-section (2) of section 9; 
(j) the remuneration payable to the person or persons referred 
to in clause (b)_ of sub-section (2) of section 10; 20 
(k) the form in which the accounts of the Board shall be main-
tained and the annual stah~ment of accounts shall be prepared under 
sub-section (1) of section 14; 
(l) the time at which and the form and manner in which the 
Board shall furnish returns and statements and particulars regard- 25 
ing its proposed or existing programmes to the Central Government, . 
under sub-section (1) of section 16; 
(m) the form in which and the date before which the Board 
shall furnish to the Central Government the report of its activities, 
policy and programmes during the previous financial year under 30 
sub-section (3) of section 16; 
(n) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed 
by rules under this Act. 
19. (1) The Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations 35 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary 
or expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this 
Ad I 
(2). In particular, and wit~out prejudice to the generality of the 40 
foregomg power, such regulatIOns may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(a) the times and :places of the meetings of the Board and the 
procedure to be followed for the transaction of business at such 
meetings and the number of members which shall form a quorum at 
a meeting under sub"section (9) of section 4. 45-, 

5 
13 
(b) the method of appointment, the conditions of ll'ervice and 
the scales of pay and allowances of any of the other officers ,and 
employees of the Board under sub-se,ction (5) of section 6; 
(c) generally, for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the 
Board. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, modify or rescind any regulation sanctioned by it and the 
regulation so modified or rescinded shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
10 that any such modification or rescission shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under the regu~ation. 
20., Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia-
. ment, while it i~ in session, for a total period of thirty days which m~ly 
IS be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sess'ons, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately follOwing the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in rr aking any 
modification in the rule or regUlation, as the case may be, or both Houses 
agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be, shO'llld not be 
20 made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect. only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done 'Under that rule or regulation. 
21. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
2~ Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, remove the diffiC'lllty: 
,Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
~eriod of two, years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) A copy of every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, 
'So is soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
Rules 
and regu. 
lations to 
be laid 
before 
ParliL 
ment, 
Power to 
remOVe 
diftlcul. 
ties. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Oilseeds are the principal commercial crops of India. These are grown 
on an area of about 18 million hectares annually which constitutel 
about 10 per cent. of the total cropped area in the coun~ry, Vegetable oils 
derived from oilseeds and other oil-bearing material of plant origin, 
including rice-bran and a variety of tree crops, fonn an essential part 
of hUman diet and also serve as valuable raw-material for industrial 
products such as soaps, paints, lubricants, etc. There has been persis-
tent gap between demand and supply of vegetable oils which has been 
met through imports valued at about Rs. 600 to 700 crores annually. The 
per capita consumption of vegetable oils in the country is about G kg. 
which is quite low as compared with world average of 11 Kg. and about 
26 Kg. in the developed countries. Therefore, every effort has to be 
made to increase the production and productivity of oilseeds and 
exploitation of other sources of vegetable oils with a view to progres-
sively narrow the gap between the demand and supply of vegetable 
oils and thus to attain self-suffiCiency in the production of oilseeds and 
vegetable oils. 
2. Production of oil seeds has been subject to considerable fluctua-
tions due to seasonal aberrations. Only about 8 per cent. of the total 
area under oilseeds is irrigated and the productivity in general is 
considerably low. Research efforts need to be intensified in order to 
bring about technological improvements and evolve high yielding 
varieties of oilseeds. Infra-structure for marketing needs to be 
strengthened to eliminate speculative activities resulting in large 
fluctuations in prices which have a dampening effect on production. 
Post-harvest technology needs to be modernised with a view to minimis-
ing losses in this process. Similarly, exploitation of other sources of 
vegetable oils including rice-bran, red palm oil. etc. need to be given 
greater attention. Development of oilseeds of tree origin and forest 
origin merits spec~al consideration as these oilseeds are grown in areas 
mostly inhabited by tribals and other backward classes. 
3. The processing industry for the production of vegetable oils has 
to be modernised. Technological innovations designed to increase oil 
extractions from different sources of vegetable oils have to be given due 
encouragement. By-product utilisation and diversification have also to 
be encouraged. There are rich potentialities for marketing of deoiled 
sal seed meal and other cakes and meals of tree or non-traditional oil-
seeds like Mahua, Neem, Plas, etc. 
4. In ol'der to deal effectively with these problems, under conditions 
of growing supply and demand gap in the vegetable oils sector, it is 
necessary to have an integrated approach towards oilseeds production, 
processing. procurement, marketing, storage, prices and quality control. 
The Bill seeks to provide for the integrated development of the oilseeds 
industry (excluding coconut industry) and the vegetable oils industry 

15 
under the control of the Union and for the establishment of a Board to 
be known as the National Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development 
Board. The Board will provide technical, financial and other assistance 
for the promotion of oilseeds industry and the vegetable oils industry. 
It is proposed to vest the Board with adequate powers to deal with 
various aspects of oilseeds industry and the vegetable oils industry. 
5. The Board shall have representatives of the concerned Ministries 
of the Central Government, oilseeds growing States, growers of oilseeds, 
vegetable oils industry and other connected interests. 
6. 'fhe finances of the Board will consist of sums provided by the 
Central Government out of the proceeds of cess on vegetable oils (vide 
Vegetable Oils Cess Bill, 1963), grants or loans made by the Central 
Government, or by any other person or donations from the State 
Governments, voluntary organisations and other institutions. The 
Board will also have power to borrow monp.y, with the approval of the 
Central Government, from the public, by the issue or sale of bonds and 
debentures and from any bank or any other authorities, organisation or 
institution. 
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; RAO BIRENDRA SINGH. 
The 19th April, 1983. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 25-2/82-C.A.II-ODB(i) , .dated the 23rd April, 1983 
from Rao Birendra Singh, Minister of AgrIculture to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matte~ of th: 
Ve etable Oils Development Board Blll, 1980.1 
National Oilseeds ~d ft) of article 117 of the Constitution of India, 
recommends ~nder c ause. . Lok Sabha and also recommends under 
the introductIon .of the BfIl1 hl n Constitution of India the consideration of 
clause (3) of artIcle 117 0 t e 
the Bill by Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-clauses (1) and (4) of clause 4 of the Bill provide for the 
establishment and constitution of the National Oilseeds and Vegetable 
Oils Development Board. Clause 5 provides that the members of the 
Board shall receive such allowances as may be fixed by the Central 
Government. Sub-clauses (1) and (3) of clause 6 provide for appoint-
ment of the Executive Director and Secretary to the Board. Slib-clause' 
(4) of clause 6 provides that the Executive Director and the Secretary 
shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to 
such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, etc. as may, from 
time to time. be fixed by the Central Government. Sub-clause (5) of 
clause 6 authorises the Board to appoint such other officers and em-
ployees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its 
functions. The scales of pay and allowances of such other officers and 
employees of the Board shall be such as may be provided by the Board 
by regulations made under the Act. Provision has also been made in 
clause 4 (7) for fixing the allowances or fees for the persons aSSOCiated 
,vith the Board or co-opted to committees of the Board under ~b­
clause (5) of clause 8. 
2. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the functions of the Board. These 
include, inter alia, the rendering by the Board of technical, financial 
and other assistance for the integrated development of the oilseeds and 
the vegetable oils industry. -
3. Clause 10(2) (b) provides for payment of remuneration to the 
person or persons who may be appointed by the Central Government 
to exercise and perform the powers and duties of the Board when the 
Board 1s dissolved. 
4. The afore-mentioned provisions of the- Bill involve expenditure 
towards-
(a) payment of salaries, allowances, etc., to the members of the 
Board, persons associated with the Board or co-opted to committees 
of the Board, persons appointed to exercise the powers and duties 
of the Board when the Board is dissolved and the officers and em-
ployees of the Board;, and 
(b) meeting the other administrative expenses of the Board 
and any other expenses authorised by or under the proviSions of ',the 
BUI. , 
5. Clause 11 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this beh!llf. pay 
to the Board by way of grants or loans such sums of money as it may 
. think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the Bill. 
6. Clause 12 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a fund to be 
known as the Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development Fund and the 
fund is to be applied for meeting the afore-mentioned expenditure. 
The fund will consist, inter alia, of the sums provided by the Central 
16 

17 
Government out of the proceeds of ceSf; on veeetable oils under the 
Vegetable Oils Cess Bill, 1983, grants or loans made by the Central Gov-
ernment or any person and grants or donations from the Central and 
State Governments or any other institution. 
7. Clause 13 empowers the Board to borrow money from the public 
by the issue or sale of bonds or debentures or both or from any bank 
or other institution or such other authority, organisation or institution 
as may be approved by the Central Government. Sub-clause (2) of 
clause 13 provides that the Central Government may guarantee the 
repayment of the monies borrowed by the Board and interest thereon 
::snd other incidental charges. 
8. It is not possible at this stage to indicate precisely the expenditure 
that is likely to be incurred, if the Bill is enacted and brought into ope-
ration. However, it is estimated that a non-recurring expenditure of 
Rs. 4 lakhs is likely to be incurred initially on the establishment of the 
Board. A recurring expenditure of about Rs. 6 lakhs is likely to be 
incurred by the Board during its first .. ear of operation. When the 
Board expands its activities,. expenditure may also ircrease. As 
already mentioned, the Board will haVe to meet the expenditure from 
Its own fund and from any payment made to the Board by the Central 
Government after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this 
behalf. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, to make rules to carry out the provisions 
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates 
the matters with respect to wh;ch rules may be made under this clause. 
These matters relate, inter alia, to the term of office of the members (other 
than the ex officio members) of the Board and the manner of filling vacan-
cies among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their 
functions by, such members, the technical qualifications and practical 
experience in oilseeds required for appointment to the post of the Exe-
cutiVe Director, the powers which may be exercised and the duties 
which may be performed by the Executive Director, Secretary and 
Managing Committee of the Board, the matters in respect of which the 
Bc·ard may undertake measures for the purpose of carrying out its func-
tions, the form in which the accounts of the Board shall be maintained 
and the form and manner in which and the time at which the Board 
shall furnish returns and reports to the Central Government. 
2. Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulations, 
with the previous sanction of the Central Government, not inconsistent 
with the provisions of the Bill, for enabling the Board to discharge its 
functions. These matters, inteT alia, relate to the times and places of the 
meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed thereat, the 
method of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay 
and allowances of any of the officers and other employees of the Board. 
3. As the matters with respect to which rules or regulations may be 
made under clause 18 or clause 19 pertain to matters of procedure or 
detail, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character. 
4. Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to remove 
by order any diffiC".llty which may arise in giving effect to thp. pro-
visions of the legislation. This is by way of abundant caution and for 
covering difficulties which it is not practicable to visualise. It has, 
however, been provided that no such order shall be made after the 
expiry of a period of tWQ years from the commencement of the Act. It 
has also been provided that a copy of every such order made shall be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 
I 

"~" 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the development under the control of the Union of the 
o1lseeds industry and the vegetable oils industry and for matters 
connected therewith. 
".~ 
," 
'." ". .. 
, (RAO BIRENDRA SINGH, 
,. MiniJte10 of Agrieultu7'e.) 
I 
t 