Ag wrropucep iv Lox Sapna ON

-& AUG 1975

Bill Bill No. 58 2४7७० 58 of 1975
MENT) BILL, 1975

THE ELECTION LAWS (AMEND)

A
BILL

further to amend thé Representation of the People Act, 1951 शव the
Indian Penal Code. )
Be it enacted by Parliament in the twenty-sixth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1, This Act may pe called the Election Laws (Amendment) A

entation of the Peop!

the Repres
ct), in sub-sectio’

the principal A
Explanation s

43 of 1951. 2. In section 77 of
09. (1), after Expla-

5 inafter referred to as

nation 2, the following

“Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared

that any expenditure incurred in respect of any arrangements made,
facilities provi + or thing done py any perso i

i f the Government and belonging to any of the classes
clause (7) of section 123 in the discharge of purported
8 official duty as mentioned, in the proviso to that
be expenditure in connéction with the

d or quthorized by 3 candidate. or by his election

poses of this sub-section.”.
Act, for clause (b), the हर

10
mentioned in

discharge of his

clause shall not

election incurre'

agent for the pur

3. In section 79 of the principal
clause shall be substituted, namely : —

“(b) “candidate” means a person who has been ©
peen duly nominated as 8 candidate at any electio:
person shall be deemed to have een a candidate as

publication of the notification: calling the election an
earlier date;’. 7

15
‘ollowing

r claims to have
n and any such
from the date of
d not from any

+ 20

ct, 1975. Short
title.

1९ Act, 1951 (here- Ameind~

ment of

‘hall be inserted, namely: — sail

Amend-
ment of
section
79.



Amend-
ment of
section
123.

Amend.
ment of
section
171A of
Act 45
of 1860,

Amend-
ments to
have
retrospec-
tive effect.

धर

4. In section 123 of the principal Act,—

(a) in clause (3), the following proviso shall be inserted at the
end, namely:—

“Provided that no symbol allotted under this Act to a candi-
date shall be deemed to be a religious symbol or a national -
symbol for the purposes of this clause.”;

(®) in clause (7), the following proviso shall be inserted at the
end, namely: —

“Provided that where any person, in the service of the Gov-
ernment and belonging to any of the classes aforesaid, in the dis-
charge or purported discharge of his official duty, makes any
arrangements or provides any facilities or does any other act or
thing, for, to, or in relation to, any candidate or his agent or
any other person acting with the consent of the candidate or his
election agent, (whether by reason of the office held by the candi-
date or for any other reason), such arrangements, facilities or act
or thing shall not be deemed to be assistance for the furtherance
of the prospects of that candidate’s election.”;

(c) in the Explanation at the end, the following shall be added,
namely: —

“(3) For the purposes of clause (7), notwithstanding any-
thing contained in any other law, the publication in the Official
Gazette of the appointment, resignation, termination of service,
dismissal or removal from service of a Person in the service of
the Central Government (including a person serving in connec-
tion with the administration of a Union territory) or of a State
Government shall be conclusive proof—

(i) of such appointment, resignation, termination of ser-
vice, dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be,
and

(ii) where the date of taking effect of such appointment,
resignation, termination of service, dismissal or removal from
service, as the case may be, is stated in such publication, also
of the fact that such person was appointed with effect from
the said date, or in the case of resignation, termination of
service, dismissal or removal from service, such person ceased
to be in such service with effect from the said date.”.

5. In the Indian Penal Code, in, section 171A, for clause (a), the fol-
lowing clause shall be substituted, namely: —

‘(a) “candidate” means a person who has been nominated as a
candidate at any election;’,

6. The amendments made by this Act in the principal Act shall also
have retrospective operation so as to apply to and in relation to any elec-
tion held before the commencement of this Act to either House of Parlia-
ment or to either House or the House of the Legislature of a State—

(i) in respect of which any, election, petition may be presented
after the commencement of this Act; or



~

(ii) in respect of which any election petition is pending in any
High Court immediately before such commencement; or

(iii) in respect of which any election petition has been decided
by any High Court ‘before such commencement but no appeal has
been preferred to the Supreme Court against the decision of the
High Court before such commencement and the period of limitation
for filing such appeal has not expired before such commencement; or

(iv) in respect of which appeal from any order of any High
Court made in any election petition under section 98 or section 99
of the principal Act is pending before the Supreme Court immedi-
ately before such commencement.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Section 79(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, defines
the expression “candidate” as including a person who has held himself
out as a prospective candidate. By virtue of this, a person may be deemed
to be a candidate at an election for a long period even before the issue
of the notification calling the election. So far as election expenses are
eoncerned, section 77 of the Act as substituted in 1956 limits the return-
able expenses only to the expenses incurred’ between the date of the
publication of the notification calling the election and the date of decla-
ration of the result thereof. In view of this it will be anomalous to retain
the concept of prospective candidate for other purposes. It is, therefore,
proposed to amend the definition of “candidate” in clause (b) of section
73 of the Act so as to provide that a person shall be deemed to be a
candidate at an election from the date of publication of the notification
ealling the election and not from any earlier date and also to make the
necessary consequential modification in the definition of the same ex-
pression in section 171A of the Indian Penal Code.

2. Under clause (3) of section 123 of. the Representation of the People
Act, 1951, the use of, or appeal to, religious symbols or national symbols
for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of a candidate or for
prejudicially affecting the election of a candidate constitutes a corrupt
practice. It is proposed to make it clear that symbols allotted under the
Act to candidates shall not be deemed to be religious symbols or national
symbols for the purposes of this clause. हु

3. According to clause (7) of section 123 of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951, the obtaining by a candidate of any assistance for the
furtherance of the prospects of that candidate’s election from certain
classes of persons in the service of the Government amounts to a corrupt
practice. It is proposed to make it clear that acts done for or in relation
to a candidate by a person in the service of Government in the discharge
or purported discharge of his official duty will not amount to assistance
in furtherance of the prospects of that candidate’s election. It is also
proposed to make it clear that the expenditure incurred on the perfor-
mance of such acts should not be included in the election expenditure
of the candidate for the purposes of section 77 of the Act.

4. It is further proposed to amend clause (7) of section 123 to make
it clear that the publication in the Official Gazette of the appointment,
resignation, termination of service, dismissal or removal from service
of a person in the service of the Government and of the date of taking
effect thereof shall be conclusive proof of such appointment, resignation,
termination, dismissal or removal from service and of the date of taking
effect thereof,

5. The amendments proposed to be made in the Representation of the
People Act will have retrospective effect so as to apply to elections held
before the date of enactment of the Bill in respect of which election peti-
tions may be filed or are pending.

6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deut; H. R. GOKHALE.
The 2nd August, 1975.



13 of 1974.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE Propie Act, 1951

(43 oF 1951)

* * * * *

77. (1) Every candidate at an election shall, either by himself or by
his election agent, keep a separate and correct account of all expendi-
ture in connection with the election incurred or authorized by him or
by his election agent between the date of publication of the notification
calling the election and the date of declaration of the result thereof,
both dates inclusive.

Explanation 1,_Notwithstanding any judgment, order or decision of
any court to the contrary, any expenditure incurred or authorized in
connection with the election of a candidate by a political party or by
any other association or pody of persons or by any individual (other
than the candidate or his election agent) shall not be deemed to be, and
shall not ever be deemed to have been, expenditure in connection with
the election incurred or authorized by the candidate or by his election
agent for the purposes of this sub-section:

Provided that nothing contained in this Explanation shall affect—

(a) any judgment, order or decision of the Supreme Court where-
by the election of a candidate to the House of the People or to the
Legislative Assembly of a State has been declared void or set aside
before the commencement of the Representation of the People
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1974:

(by any judgment, order or decision of a High Court whereby
the election of any such candidate has been declared void or set
aside before the commencement of. the said Ordinance if no appeal
has been preferred to the Supreme Court against such judgment,
order or decision of the High Court before such commencement and
the period of limitation for filing such appeal has expired before
such commencement.

Explanation 2.—For the purposes of Explanation 1, “political party”
shall have the same meaning as in the Election Symbols (Reservation
and Allotment) Order, 1968, as for the time being in force.

(2) The account shall contain such particulars, as may be prescribed.

(3) The total of the said expenditure shall not exceed such amount
as may be prescribed.

*” * * om

Account
of elec-
tion

expenses
and
maxi-
mum
thereof,



6
Defini. ’ 79. In this Part and in Part VII unless the context otherwise requires,—
tions,
* * * * ™
(b) “candidate” means a person who has been or claims to have
been duly nominated as a candidate at any election and any such
person shall be deemed to have been a candidate as from the time
when, with the election in prospect, he began to hold himself out
as a prospective candidate;
* * * * *
Corrupt
Practices, 123. The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the

purposes of this Act: —

* * 5 * *

(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person
with the consent of a candidat2 or his election agent to vote or refrain
from voting for any person on the ground of his religion, race, caste,
community or language or the use of, or appeal to, religious symbols or
the use of, or appeal to, national symbols, such ‘as the national flag or
the national emblem, for the furtherance of the prospects of the election
of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candi-
date.

* * * ae * *

(7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain
or procure by a candidate or his agent or, by any other person with
the consent of a candidate or his election agent, any assistance (other
than. the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of that
candidate’s election, from any person in the service of the Government
and belonging to any of the following classes, namely: —

(a) gazetted officers;

(०) stipendiary judges and magistrates;

(c) members of the armed forces of the Union;
(4) members of the police forces;

(e) excise officers;

(f) revenue officers other than village revenue officers known
as lambardars, malguzars, patels, deshmukhs or by any other name,
whose duty is to collect land revenue and who are remunerated by
a share of, or commission on, the amount of land revenue collected
by them but who do not discharge any police functions; and

(g) such other class of persons in the service of the Government
as may be prescribed.

Explanation—(1) In this section the expression “agent” includes an
election agent, a polling agent and any person who is held to have acted
as an agent in connection with the election with the consent cf the
candidate,

OEE |»


7

se (7), a person shall be deemed to assist

(2) For the purposes of clau:
in the furtherance of the prospects of a candidat

as an election agent of that candidate.

e’s election if he acts

* * * *

—_—-
JExTRACT FROM THE [npran Penal Cope

(45 oF 1860)
* * * *
VA. For the purposes of this Chapter—
(a) “candidate” means 8 person who has been nominated as a
candidate at any election and includes a person who, when an elec-
tion is in contemplation,
date thereat; provided that
date at such election;
* *

holds himself out as 8 prospective candi-
he is subsequently nominated as 8 candi-

*

“Candi-
date”,
“Flectoral
right”
defined.



+ SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and the
Indian Penal Code.

(Shri H. R. Gokhale, Minister of Law, Justice and Company . Affairs)