As INTRODUCED IN LOK SA DJIA ON 
24 APR ;990 
• Bill No. 58 of 1990 • 
THE GOLD (CONTROL) REPEAL BILL, 1990 
A 
BILL 
to repeal the Gold (COntrol) Act, 1968. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Gold (Control) Repeal Act, 1990. 
Z. The Gold (Control) Act, 1968 is hereby repealed. 
Short 
title 
Repeal of 
Act 45 
or 1968. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Gold control which regulated the domestic trade and movement of 
gold within the country wa's introduced on 9th January, 1963 as part of 
the Defence of India Rules. Later on. the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 was 
enacted with the broad objectives of controlling the production, manufac-
ture, supply, distribution, use and possession of, and business in, gold, 
ornaments and articles of gold. The said enactment was meant to supple-
ment other preventive measures to make circulation of smuggled gold 
difficult and its detection easier by extending the control over gold 
beyond the stage of import. 
2. Over the past 22 years. the results achieved under the Act have 
not been encouraging and the desired objectives for which the Act was 
introduced have not been achieved due to various socio-economic and 
cultural factors in the vast multitude of the country's population and the 
lack of adequate administrative machinery. On the ·)ther hand, this re-
gressive and purely regulatory Act has given rise to considerable dissatis-
faction in the minds of the pubHc as it has caused hardship and harass-
ment to the artisans and small 'self-employed goldsmiths who have not 
been able to develop their skills and earn proper living on account of the 
rigours which this Act imposed upon them. 
3. Taking these factors into consideration and the advice of experts 
who have examined issues related to this Act, it is proposed to repeal the 
Gold (Control) Act. 1968. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the said object. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 16th APTil, 1990. MADHU DANDAVATE. 
2 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to repeal the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 
(PTO!. Madhu Dandavate, Mi.nister of Finance) 