AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bi Ay
"A
Kt oy

us t7

Bill No. 58 of 2005

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By

~ Suri ABDULLAKUTTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (/) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2005 Short title and

commencement.
(2) It shall come into force at once

2. In section 375 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, in the Sixthly description, for the Amendment

5 words, "sixteen years", the words, "eighteen years" shall be substituted i



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS |

Incidents of rape are increasing day by day. Since there is not enough evidence in
majority of the cases, the guilty are never brought to book. Moreover, due to social stigma,
the victims do not come forth to give evidence in courts.

There is a provision in the Indian Penal Code that any sexual intercourse with a woman
under sixteen years of age, whether with or without her consent would be treated as rape. But
according to law, a person who has attained at least eighteen years of age is considered as an
adult and the same should be the age prescribed so far as definition of rape is concerned. In
a recent case in Kerala, an accused was set free in a rape case as the victim was seventeen
years old i.e. one year more than the age as is specified in the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

Therefore, it is proposed to provide that any sexual intercourse with a woman with or
without her consent upto eighteen years of age would be treated as rape.

New DELHI; ABDULLAKUTTY
March 29, 2005.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL Cope, 1860.

_ [Sexual offences]

ae &  * कक * ४ *

375. Aman is said to commit "rape" who, except in the case hereinafter excepted, has
xual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the six following
lescriptions:—

-First- हु .
Secondly- * : कर .
Thirdly- * . हे के

Fourthly- * . * :
Fifthly- की ५ के *

Sixthly- With or without her consent, when she is under sixteen years of age.

* * * * ह * के

189८.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860

(Shri Abdullakutty, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—59LS—13.04.2005.