THE PREVENTION OF TORTURE BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide punishment for torture inflicted by public servants or any person inflicting
torture with the consent or acquiescence of any public servant, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS India is a signatory to the United Nations Convention Against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
AND WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to ratify the said Convention and to provide
for more effective implementation.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Torture Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) words and expressions used in this Act shall have the same meanings
respectively assigned to them in the Indian Penal Code; and
(b) any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall in
any area in which such enactment or provision is not in force be construed as a
reference to the corresponding law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law,
if any, in force in that area.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
45 of 1860.
AS PASSED BY  LOK SABHA ON 6TH MAY, 2010
Bill No. 58-C  of  2010
5
10

2
3. Whoever, being a public servant or being abetted by a public servant or with the
consent or acquiescence of a public servant, intentionally does any act for the purposes to
obtain from him or a third person such information or a confession which causes,—
(i) grievous hurt to any person; or
(ii) danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of any   person,
is said to inflict torture:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any pain, hurt or danger
as aforementioned caused by any act, which is inflicted in accordance with any procedure
established by law or justified by law.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, 'public servant' shall, without prejudice
to section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, also include any person acting in his official capacity
under the Central Government or the State Government.
4. Where the public servant referred to in section 3 or any person abetted by or with
the consent or acquiescence of such public servant, tortures any person—
(a) for the purpose of extorting from him or from any other person interested in
him, any confession or any information which may lead to the detection of an offence
or misconduct; and
(b) on the ground of his religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste
or community or any other ground whatsoever,
shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
ten years and shall also be liable to fine.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no
court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act unless the complaint is made within
six months from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed.
6.   No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act, alleged to
have been committed by a public servant during the course of his employment, except with
the previous sanction,—
(a) in the case of a person, who is employed in connection with the affairs of the
Union and is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Central
Government, of that Government;
(b) in the case of a person, who is employed in connection with the affairs of a
State and is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the State
Government, of that Government;
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority competent to remove him
from his office.
Punishment
for torture.
Cognizance of
offences.
Previous
sanction
necessary for
prosecution.
Torture.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide punishment for torture inflicted by public servants or any person inflicting torture
with the consent or acquiescence of any public servant, and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND— 2463LS(S5)—06-05-2010.