1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SANKAR PRASAD DATTA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
Bill No. 58 of  2015
Short title.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted namely:—
‘‘21B. The State shall provide social security to every citizen in such manner
as the State may, by law, determine.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression "social security" means—
(i) provision of employment or unemployment allowance to an unemployed
citizen from the age of thirty years till he gets gainful employment or attains the age of
sixty years, whichever is earlier;
(ii) old age pension and necessary assistance for a decent livelihood to citizen
who have attained the age of sixty years and have no other source of income;
(iii) disability allowance and other assistance to all disabled citizens who have
no other source of income; and
(iv) compulsory health insurance for all old aged and disabled citizens.
3. Article 41 of the Constitution shall be omitted.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
Right to social
security.
Omission of
article 41.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Even after more than sixty-seven years of independence, the State has not secured  to
its citizens the rights envisaged under article 41 of the Constitution. There have been cases
of death due to starvation, malnutrition, inadequate health care facilities, etc. in many parts
of the country. A large section of population is lacking basic facilities and lives below
subsistence level. Social insecurities such as loss of employment, disability, old age and
ill-health, etc. are to be addressed properly. Social security needs to be viewed as a basic/
fundamental right rather than as a charity oriented intervention.
The term social security should consist of all types of measures, preventive, promotional
and protective as the case may be. The term encompasses social insurance, social assistance,
social protection, social safety net, etc.
It should be the duty of the State to provide social security to all citizens of the
country. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANKAR PRASAD DATTA
December 22, 2014
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 21B in the Constitution, which makes
the State responsible for providing social security to all the citizens. Thus, it would become
the duty of the State to provide social security according to the needs of diverse sections of
population.
The total overall financial burden due to implementation of obligations under the
proposed provision would be shared between Central and State Governments in the ratio of
seventy five and twenty five per cent, respectively.
At this stage, it is not possible to estimate the total financial implication in case this Bill
is enacted and implemented. However, if the Bill is enacted and implemented approximate
recurring expenditure of rupees five thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of India per
annum would be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five thousand crore is also likely to
be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
41. The State shall, within the limits of its ecoonomic capacity and development, make
effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in case
of unemployment, old age,  sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.
* * * * * * *
5
Right to
work, to
education and
to public
assistance in
certain cases.

GMGIPMRND—4337LS(S-3)—03.03.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Sankar Prasad Datta, M.P .)