     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 58 of 2023
THE HANDLOOM WEA VERS AND WORKERS (WELFARE)
AUTHORITY BILL, 2023
By
DR. SANJEEV KUMAR SINGARI, M.P.
A
BILL
to ensure protection and welfare mechanisms for the handloom weavers
and workers and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Handloom Weavers and Workers (Welfare)
Authority Act, 2023.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the National Handloom Weavers and Workers Welfare
Authority constituted under section 3;
(b) “Committee” means Local Committee for Handloom Weavers constituted
by the Authority at local levels under section 5;
(c) “ Fund” means National Handloom Weavers and Workers Welfare Fund
constituted by the Authority under section 6;
(d) “handloom” means any loom used for the production of cloth that is operated
fully or partly manually as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Factories Act,
1948;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under  this Act;
(f) “weaver” means a person engaged in the production of cloth on a handloom
and includes a person who owns, works or operates on handloom for the production
of cloth; and
(g) “worker” means a worker engaged in a handloom by a weaver and who
earns wages on a regular or any other basis by working in a handloom.
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute an Authority to be known as the National Handloom Weavers and
Workers Welfare Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The headquarters of this Authority shall be at Hyderabad which is the
common capital of States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
(3) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, committed to the causes of weavers or has adequate
knowledge and professional experience in the handloom sector;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, as may be prescribed;
(c)  five members to represent the Union Ministry of Finance, Labour and
Employment,  Skill  Development and  Entrepreneurship, Social  Justice and
Empowerment and Textiles;
(d) three members from the Parliament, of whom two shall be from Lok Sabha
and one shall be from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officer of
the respective Houses;
(e) five  members to be nominated  by the Central Government  who
represent the handloom weavers, provided that at  least one  Member
shall be each from amongst persons belonging to the  Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes and women, respectively.
4.(1) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office for such period, not
exceeding five years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this regard;
(2) The Chairperson or Member may, by writing and addressed to the Central
Government, resign from the office of Chairperson or, as the case may be, of the
Member at any time;
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of
Chairperson or a Member if that person—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
5
10    63 of 1948.
15
20
Constitution of
the National
Handloom
Weavers and
Workers Welfare
Authority.
Definitions.
25
30
35
40
Term of Office
and conditions
of Members.

(b) gets convicted or sentenced to imprisonment for an offense which in the
opinion of the Authority involves moral turpitude;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) in the opinion of the Authority has so abused the position of Chairperson
or Member as to render that person’s continuance in office detrimental to the
public interest.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
the service of the Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
5. (1) The Authority shall, in consideration and coordination with the State
Governments, as it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this
Act, appoint committee at the local level as may be prescribed, to be known as
the Local Committee for Handloom Weavers.
(2) The Authority shall in coordination with Local Committees and State
Governments take, steps for the overall welfare of weavers and handloom workers
including, raising their standard of living, removal of poverty and indebtedness,
ensuring their social security, making easy availability of raw materials at an affordable
price and encouraging market for the handloom sector.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Authority
shall,—
(a)  formulate and implement welfare policy for the handloom weavers and
workers;
(b) formulate and implement grievance redressal mechanisms for the
handloom weavers and workers;
(c) maintain a district-wise register of handlooms, handloom weavers and
workers with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(d) regulate the service conditions of workers including fixing of minimum
wages in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) ensure modernization of old handlooms;
(f) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to handloom weavers
cooperatives;
(g) organize  exhibitions,  meals,  and  such other activities to promote
handloom sector in different parts of the country;
(h) develop and regulate four dedicated markets in each State for hand-
loom articles, in consultation with the State Government of the respective
States;
(i) make suitable arrangements for the purchase of handloom cloth by
Government agencies on a cash and carry basis;
(j) encourage export of handloom cloth and handloom garments; and
(k) perform  such  other  functions  as may  be assigned to it by the Central
Government from time to time.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be known as the Handloom Weavers and Workers Welfare
Fund.
Functions of the
Authority.
Constitution of
the Handloom
Weavers and
Workers Welfare
Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
3

(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute
to the Fund in such a ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received
by way of donations, contributions, assistance, or otherwise from individuals and
organizations.
7. The Funds shall be utilized for the following purposes,—
(a) providing minimum unemployment allowance to handloom workers from
time to time;
(b) providing respectable pension for handloom workers above the age of
55 years;
(c) providing interest-free loans to handloom weavers and workers;
(d) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved
families of handloom weavers who die in harness;
(e) providing loans at a nominal rate of interest for purchasing cotton yarn
and other necessary raw materials to the handloom weavers;
(f) providing an annual assistance of twenty-four thousand rupees to the
families of weavers who own handloom to modernize their equipment;
(g) providing special assistance to women weavers to set up small-scale
handloom workshops;
(h) providing healthcare facilities to the handloom weavers and workers and
their dependent family members;
(i) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of
weavers and workers; and
(j) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed,
an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous
year and submit it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the report submitted to it under
sub-section (1) to be laid before each House of Parliament.
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the period of
three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force in respect of any of the matters provided under
this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Utilisation of
Fund.
Annual Report.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law in
force.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
4
Power to remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.

5
5
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Handloom Sector is one of the largest unorganized economic activities
after agriculture and constitutes an integral part of rural and semi-rural livelihood.
Handloom weaving constitutes one of the richest and most vibrant aspects of our
country’s cultural heritage. Indian handloom artists are globally known for their unique
hand-spinning, weaving, and printing style. In the financial year 2021-22, Indian
exported handloom accounted for worth Rs. 1,693 crores. It not just contributes to
the country’s economy but has also been the backbone of the rural population involved
in the handloom sector. According to the Handloom Census 2019-20, the industry
employs about 3,522,512 handloom workers across the country.
Despite the aforementioned, the sector today faces many challenges. One of
the most concerning challenges among them is the lack of social security for handloom
weavers. Long working hours and complex work accompanied by low wages have
pushed new generations of handloom weavers to look for different avenues of
employment. Such decisions are motivated by the exploitative nature of work and
non-profitable labour of procuring yarn and weaving for which handloom weavers
sometimes take loans and get stuck in the cycle of debt. The overall number of weavers
decreased by 19 per cent. from 43.31 lakh in 2009-10 to 35.25 lakh in 2019-20.
Moreover, the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production) Act, 1985 focuses
on the preservation of handloom articles with blurring attention being given to securing
the interest of the weavers, especially the women workers who constitute 72.29 per
cent. of the total handloom workers whose future are insecure.
Furthermore, less visibility of handloom products in the market has also added
to the problems of workers. Most handlooms enjoy prominence only in their locality
and people elsewhere are unaware of the existence of many other varieties. The reason
behind this is poor marketing and the industry’s inability to adopt current marketing
techniques. Promoting export of such products needs dedicated funds from the
Government to market products. Despite this Government allocations for handloom
in national and State budgets are being reduced and reversed.
The Bill, therefore, will strive to enact for the interest of handloom weavers
by establishing an authority that will look after the welfare of the workers. The
proposed authority would do so by undertaking the functions prescribed above and
by establishing local welfare committees and dedicated welfare funds for the handloom
weavers. The authority will also set up a mechanism to address the grievances and
long-pending demands of the weavers. Such an initiative would encourage and
empower the handloom sector to flourish in the domestic and global markets.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;          SANJEEV KUMAR SINGARI
January 19, 2023.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Handloom Weavers and
Workers Welfare Authority. Clause 5 provides for certain steps to be taken by the
authority for the welfare of the handloom weavers and workers. Clause 5 also provides
for the constitution of the local committee for handloom weavers. Clause 6 seeks to
constitute the National Handloom weavers fund.
This Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the consolidated fund of
India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore per annum
would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crore may also be
involved.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
8

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
 to ensure protection and welfare mechanisms for the handloom weavers
and workers and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari, M.P.)