THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007
By
SHRI TAPIR GAO, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2007.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 244 of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause ( 1), for the words "Tripura and Mizoram", the words "Tripura,
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh" shall be substituted.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  58 of 2007
Amendment
of article 244.
5

2
(ii) in clause ( 2), for the words "Tripura and Mizoram", the words "Tripura,
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh" shall be substituted.
3. In Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, in paragraph 1, for the Words "Tripura and
Mizoram", the words "Tripura, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh" shall be substituted.
4. In the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution,—
(a) in the heading, for the words "Tripura and Mizoram" the words "Tripura,
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh" shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 1, for the words and figures "and in
Part III", the words and figures "in Part III and Part IV" shall be substituted;
(c) in paragraph 17, for the words beginning with "the Legislative Assembly of
Assam" and ending with the words "the State of Assam or Meghalaya or Tripura or
Mizoram", the words " the Legislative Assembly of Assam or Meghalaya or Tripura or
Mizoram or Arunachal Pradesh, the Governor may by order declare that any area
within an autonomous district in the State of Assam or Meghalaya or Tripura or
Mizoram or Arunachal Pradesh" shall be substituted;
(d) in paragraph 20—
(i) in sub-paragraph (1)—
(A) for the words, letter and figures "Parts I, II, IIA and III", the
words, letter and figures "Parts I, II, IIA, III and IV", shall be substituted;
(B) after the words "the State of Mizoram", the words, "and the
State of Arunachal Pradesh" shall be inserted.
(ii) in sub-paragraph ( 2), for the words and figures "Any reference in
 Part I, Part II or Part III of the table below", the words and figures "Any reference
in Part I, Part II, Part III or Part IV of the table below" shall be substituted; and
(e) in the Table, after Part III and the entries relating thereto, the following Part
and entries thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
"PART IV
1. Anjaw.
2. Changlang.
3. Dibang Valley.
4. East Kameng.
5. East Siang.
6. Lohit.
7. Lower Dibang Valley.
8. Lower Subansiri.
9. Kurung Kumey.
10. Tawang.
11. Upper Siang.
12. Upper Subansiri.
13. Tirap.
14. West Kameng.
15. West Siang”.
Amendment
of the Fifth
Schedule.
Amendment
of the Sixth
Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Arunachal Pradesh is a hill State inhabitated predominantly by tribal people. The
tribals constitute about sixty-four percent of total population of the State. Many districts of
the State are exclusively inhabitated by tribals. The areas inhabitated by tribals are inaccessible
and therefore remain underdeveloped and have lower socio-economic levels of development.
The development of tribal people requires immense commitment and resources. The tribal
people have their own customs and lifestyles which are different from the mainstream. Any
attempt to impose change without the consent of tribal people would hurt their feelings and
alienate them and give rise to an apathy towards the policies and programmes of the
Government. Therefore, it is necessary that the tribal people be provided with opportunities
to manage their affairs themselves. The development of tribal areas of Arunachal Pradesh
can best be attained by combining autonomy and development perspective of the Government.
This may be achieved by placing the tribal areas of Arunachal Pradesh in the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution. Besides, such a move may give access to special funds of the Central
Government which are so essential for the development of tribal dominated districts.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; TAPIR GAO
April 23, 2007.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
* * * * * * *
PART X
THE  SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
244. (1) The provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the administration and
control of the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State other than the States of
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
(2) The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply to the administration of the tribal
areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
* * * * * * *
FIFTH  SCHEDULE
[Article 244(1)]
Provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and
Scheduled Tribes
PART A
G
ENERAL
1. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression “State” does
not include the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
* * * * * * *
SIXTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 244(2) and 275(1)]
Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya,
Tripura and Mizoram
1. (1) Subject to the provisions of this paragraph, the tribal areas in each item of
Parts I, II and IIA and in Part III of the table appended to paragraph 20 of this Schedule shall
be an autonomous district.
* * * * * * *
17. For the purposes of elections to the Legislative Assembly of  Assam or Meghalaya
or Tripura or Mizoram, the Governor may by order declare that any area within an autono-
mous district in the State of Assam or Meghalaya or Tripura or Mizoram, as the case may be,
shall not form part of any constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly reserved for any
such district but shall form part of a constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly not
so reserved to be specified in the order.
* * * * * * *
20. (1) The areas specified in Parts I, II, IIA and III of the table below shall respectively
be the tribal areas within the State of Assam, the State of Meghalaya, the State of Tripura and
the State of Mizoram.
(2) Any reference in Part I, Part II or Part III of the table below to any district shall be
construed as a reference to the territories comprised within the autonomous district of that
4
Administration
of Scheduled
Areas and
tribal areas.
Interpretation.
Autonomous
districts and
autonomous
regions.
Exclusion of
areas from
autonomous
districts in
forming
constituencies
in such
districts.
Tribal areas.

5
name existing immediately before the day appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of the
North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971:
* * * * * * *
TABLE
PART III
1. The Chakma District.
2. The Mara District.
3. The Lai District.
* * * * * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Tapir Gao, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2622LS—26-7-2007