     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 58 of 2022
THE RIGHT TO FAIR COMPENSATION AND TRANSPARENCY
IN LAND ACQUISITION, REHABILITATION AND
RESETTLEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
5

2. After section 40 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:–
“40A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 40, in case of
land required to be acquired for infrastructure projects in metropolitan city of
Mumbai, whenever the Government of the State of Maharashtra so directs, the
Collector shall, though no such award has been made, may on the
recommendation of Single Window No Objection Certificate Approval
Committee and on the expiration of thirty days from the publication of the
notice mentioned in section 21, take possession of any land needed for
infrastructure projects and such land shall thereupon vest absolutely in the
Government of the State of Maharashtra, free from all encumbrances.
(2) The Government of the State of Maharashtra shall not take possession
of any land under sub-section (1) without giving to the occupier thereof at
least thirty days notice of his intention to do so, or such longer notice not later
than forty-five days to enable such occupier to remove his movable property
from such land without unnecessary inconvenience.
(3) Before taking possession of any land under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), the Collector shall tender payment of the compensation for such
land as estimated by him to the person entitled thereto:
Provided that in case of delay in payment of compensation an additional
compensation of two per cent. of the total compensation per month shall be
paid to the person.
40B. (1) For the purpose of section 40A, the Government of the
State of Maharashtra shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
a Committee be known as Single Window No Objection Certificate
Approval Committee for metropolitan city of Mumbai for Single Window
Approval of the land acquisition.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson;
(ii) one representative to be nominated by the Central
Government, as member;
(iii) one representative to be nominated by the Government of
the State of Maharashtra, as member;
(iv) the Collector of the metropolitan city of Mumbai concerned from
where the land is acquired, as member;
(v) one representative of the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation
(BMC), as member;
(vi) one representative of the State department of Urban Development;
(vii) one representative of the State department of Rural Development;
(viii) one representative of the State department of Finance;
(ix) one representative of the State department of Home; and
(x) one representative each of the State and Central department of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of Chairperson and members of the committee shall
be such as may be prescribed.
2
5
Insertion of
new sections
40A and 40B.
30 of 2013.
Special powers
in case of
acquisition of
land in
metropolitan city
of Mumbai for
infrastructure
projects.
Single Window
No Objection
Certificate
Approval
Committee.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

(4) The Government of the State of Maharashtra shall provide the
committee with financial and other assistance as may be necessary for the
efficient functioning.
(5) The Committee shall make its recommendations to the Government
of the State of Maharashtra regarding the No Objection Certificates for land
acquisition within thirty days of request and submission of relevant documents:
Provided that in case Committee requires further time, it may make a
report in writing to the concerned parties involved appraising them of the need
for extension by fifteen more days.
(6) The Committee while recommending No Objection Certificate under
sub-section (5) shall:–
(i) uphold the socio-economic interests of local communities and
environment;
(ii) undertake activities for determining a fair compensation;
(iii) facilitate counselling for affected families to invest the
compensation amount in a prudent manner;
(iv) mediate or arbitrate disputes between interested parties; and
(v) maintain a public interface for application and disbursement,
constantly update its data pertaining to application received verses
disbursement and penalty paid in such manner as may be
prescribed.”.
5
10
15
20
3

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Major developmental projects undertaken by the Central and the Government
of the State of Maharashtra have been facing undue and unavoidable delay because
of the lengthy and time-consuming process of land acquisition in the city of Mumbai.
These projects often include time-sensitive developmental projects including those
with international funding and foreign investment similar to Mumbai Development
Plan 2034 spearheaded by the Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority.
The acquisition of land for developmental projects by the Government has
often times been delayed and called off due to procedural lapses. Given the
geographical location and the frequency of occurrence of natural disasters in Mumbai,
it becomes imperative to streamline the land acquisition process so as to expedite the
completion of the project in a time-bound manner. The objective of this Bill is to
simplify the long chain of communication which culminates in the grant of permission
for acquisition of land.
Further, this Bill seeks to expedite the process of acquisition of land in the
State of Maharashtra, by the Government, for development purposes whilst
simultaneously securing the rights of displaced citizens and land owners from whom
the land was acquired by the Government.
Through introduction of a single-window system for approval and constitution
of various other authorities, the Bill seeks to simplify the land acquisition and
compensation process by making it more time-bound. The Bill disentangles the various
authorities and departments involved in the process by constituting a single committee
with equal representation, thus bringing in a single Body which may grant or rescind
approvals received from the Government.
The proposed Bill seeks to streamline the application process, the scrutinization
process, the grant of approval for acquisition of land and timely disbursal of
compensation for land owners whose lands have been acquired.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                             RAHUL SHEWALE
2 February, 2022.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 2 of the Bill provides for constitution of  Single Window No Objection
Certificate approval committee, to ensure timely approvals and expedited land
acquisition. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure recurring and
non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not possible to
access the actual financial expenditure likely to be incurred at this stage.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
.
————
(Shri  Rahul Shewale, M.P.)