1
Short title.
THE RESERVATION IN POSTS AND SERVICES FOR KAPU
COMMUNITY OF ANDHRA PRADESH BILL, 2018
By
SHRI MUTHAMSETTI SRINIV ASA RAO, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the reservation in posts and services of the Central Government and Public
Sector Undertakings for kapu community with a view to improving their living
standard and extending them the benefits of progress made by the country after
independence and for matters connected therewith.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Reservation in Posts and Services for Kapu Community
of Andhra Pradesh Act, 2018.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "kapu" means the people belonging to the Telaga, Kapu, Ontari, Balija
communities of the State of Andhra Pradesh; and
Bill  No.  58 of  2018
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(b) "establishment" means an establishment which is owned, established,
controlled, managed or financed by the Central Government and includes—
(i) a Ministry or department or subordinate office or attached office of the
Central Government;
(ii) a public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted  under
any Central Act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up
share capital is held by the Central Government;
(iv) a Government company as defined under clause (45) of section 2 of
the Companies Act, 2013; and
(v) an autonomous body, organisation or institution receiving grant or aid
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
3. There shall be reserved such percentage of posts, not below five per cent. of total
posts in every establishment, for the persons belonging to kapu community.
4. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
5. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or anything contained in any judgment of any court of law contrary to it
including judgment regarding ceiling on reservation.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
18 of 2013.
Reservation
of posts in
establishments
for persons
belonging to
Kapu
community.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
over-riding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND REASONS
The British Government in Madras Presidency had recognized Kapus as backward
caste in 1915 and also included in the backward classes list of Andhra region. With the
formation of the State of Andhra Pradesh on 1st October, 1953, a list of Backward Classes as
existed in the Composite Madras State was adopted with slight modifications and the Kapus
continued to enjoy the status of backward classes. In 1956, the then Andhra Pradesh
Government omitted Kapus from the backward classes list. Again, though the successive
Government tried to recognize them as other backward classes through a Government Order,
the High Court struck down the Order on technical grounds.
There was a long standing demand for the inclusion of Kapu sub-castes i.e., Telaga.
Kapu, Ontari and Balija into the Backward Classes category. On the basis of an expert advice
of the Andhra Pradesh State Backward Classes Commission that Kapu community be given
reservation in appointments and educational institutions in view of their social, economic
and educational backwardness, the State Government came to a conclusion that there is
every need for inclusion of Kapus into the Backward Classes category for their upliftment
and all round advancement and passed a legislation to that effect. The need is to include the
Kapu community in the Central list of backward classes in respect of the State of
Andhra Pradesh to extend the benefits of reservation to them.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for the reservation in posts and services of the
Central Government and Public Sector Undertakings for persons belonging to Kapu
community with a view to improve their living standard and extending the benefits of
reservation to them which are available to persons belonging to other backward classes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MUTHAMSETTI SRINIVASA RAO
January 18, 2018.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the reservation in posts and services of the Central Government and
Public Sector Undertakings for kapu community with a view to improving
their living standard and extending them the benefits of progress
made by the country after independence and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Muthamsetti Srinivasa Rao, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—4150LS(S3)—23-02-2018.