22 NOV 200

‘AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bilt No. 58 of 2002

THE INDIAN PENAA CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
By
‘Suramar Renuka CuowpHury, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860
Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2002. Short title and
commencement.
(2) It shall come into force immediately.
45 of 1860 5 2, Insection 304 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code), the Amendment
following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:— 20 0

“Provided that if the victim is a woman or a girl, the person committing such
homicide shall be punished with imprisonment for life or with rigorous imprisonment
fora term which may extend to twelve years and shall also be liable to fine.”.


Amendment
“of section
3048.

Amendment
of section
312.

Amendment
of section
313.

Amendment
of section
314,

Amendment
of section
315,

Amendment
of section
316.

Amendment
of section
317.

Amendment
of section
318,

3. In section 304B of the Code, in sub-section (2), for the words “shall not be less.

than seven years”, the words “shall not be less than ten years”, shall be substituted.

4. In section 312 of the Code, before the Explanation, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—

“Provided that-in the case of miscarriage of a female foetus after sex
determination test, the person causing such miscarriage shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be
liable to fine.”.

5. In section 313 of the Code, the following proviso shall be added at the end,
namely:—

“Provided that in case of miscarriage of a female foetus committed after pre-

natal sex determination test, the person causing such miscarriage shall be punished

with imprisonment for a term which may extend to twelve years and shall also be liable
to fine.”.

6. In section 314 of the Code,—

(i) for the words “of either description”, the words “for life or with rigorous
imprisonment” shall be substituted;

(ii) before the Explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that if the miscarriage is caused after pre-natal determination
of sex of the foetus, knowing it to be a female foetus, the person causing such
miscarriage shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for life or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to twelve years and shall also be
liable to fine.”.

7. In section 315 of the Code, the following proviso shall be added, at the end,
namely:—

“Provided that if such act is done after pre-natal sex determination test,
suggesting a female foetus, the person doing such act shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to
fine.”.

8. In section 316 of the Code, before the illustration, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—

“Provided that if such act is done after a sex determination test, suggesting

that the quick-unborn child is a female child, the person doing such act shall be

punished with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to ten years and shall also
be liable to fine.”.

9. In section 317 of the Code, before the Explanation, the following proviso shall
be inserted, namely:—

“Provided that in case the child exposed or abandoned is a girl-child, the
person doing so shall pe punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.”.

10. In section 318 of the Code, the following proviso shall be added, at the end,
namely:—

“Provided that if the child whose dead body is so disposed of, is a girl-child, the
person committing such act shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.”.

15

20

25

30

35

40

45


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

While the swelling population of the country presents a serious problem to the
nation, the fast dwindling sex-ratio, that the female population bears to that of males,
presents an equally disturbing trend. Male dominated society as itis, much ofitis attributable
to male preference in Indian families. While abortion as a means for containing family-size
has been accepted as legal, abortions in large numbers are carried out to destroy female
foetus, after elaborate pre-natal sex determination tests, only to avert female child birth.
Such abortions are resorted to, often with the help of quacks, through crude methods, to
keep the matters secret, even if it involves a risk to the life of the mother, against medical
advice. In certain tribes and classes, girl child is neglected and subjected to discrimination
in matters of nutrition, health care, and education, and are exposed and even abandoned.

Even after insertion of section 3048 of the Indiati Penal Code, to specifically pro-
vide for dowry death as a heinous crime, with a minimum period of rigorous imprison-
ment, rather unusual as it is in criminal jurisprudence, dowry related atrocities and deaths
continue unabated.

The over-all impact of all this is evident, and is well reflected in the fast declining
sex ratio, which fell from 972 females per thousand males in 1901 to 927 in 1991. The
present sex ratio may well be just a little above 900 females per thousand males. There is
thus a pressing need for urgent measures to effectively curb and correct the declining sex
ratio, by providing sharper teeth to the relevant provisions of the Indian Penal Code.

New Deut, RENUKA CHOWDHURY
July 2, 2002.


Punishment
for calpable
homicide not
amounting 10
marder.

Dowry death.

Causing
miscarriage.

Causing
misca riage
withuut
wenan's
ocnseat

Death caused
by act done
with intent to
cause
miscarriage.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM INDIAN PENAL Cope.
(45 oF 1860)

* * * * *

304, Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be
punished with '[imprisonment for life} or imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if, the act by which the
death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death.

or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years,
or with fine or with both, if the act is done with the knowledge that itis likely to cause
death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely
to cause death,—

* * * * *

21304B. Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or
occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and
it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her
husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry,
such death shall be called “dowry death”, and such husband or relative shall be deemed to
have caused her death.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “dowry” shall have the same
meaning as in section 2 of the dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).

(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life).

* * * * *

Of the causing of Miscarriage of Injuries to unborn Children of the Exposure of Infants,
and of the Concealment of Births

312. Whoever voluntarily causes a woman with child to miscarry, shall, if such,
miscarriage be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both, and if the woman be quick with child, shall be punished
with improsonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation —A woman who causes herself to miscarry, is within the meaning of
this section.

313. Whoever commits the offence defined in the last preceding section without the
consent of the woman; whether the woman is quick with child or not shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten yéars, and shall also be liable to fine.

* * * * * * * *

314. Whoever, with intent to cause the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any
act which causes the death of such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

4


5

If act done without woman's consent—and if the act is done without the consent of
the woman, shall be punished either with improsonment for life, or with the punishment
above mentioned.

Explanation—It is not essential to this offence that the offender should know that
the act is likely to cause death.

315, Whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby
preventing that child from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does by
such act prevent that child from being born alive, or causes it to die after its birth, shall, if
such act be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the mother, be
punihsed with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
yeats, or with fine, or with both.

316. Whoever does any act under such circumstances, that if he thereby caused,
death be would be guilty of culpable homicide, and does by such act cause the death of a
quick unborn child, shall be punished ‘with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

A, knowing that he is likely to cause the death of pregnant woman, does an act
which, if it caused the death of the woman, would amount to culpable humicide. The
woman is injured, but does not die; but the death of an unborn quick child with which she
is pregnant is thereby caused. A is guilty of the offence defined in this section.

Illustration

317. Whoever being the father or mother of a child under the age of twelve years, oF
having the care of such child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with the

intention of wholly abandoning such child shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, OF with fine or with both.

Explanation—This section is not intended to prevent the trial of the offender for
murder vulpable homicide, a5 the case may be, if the child die in consequences of the
exposure.

318, Whoever, by secretly burying or otherwise disposing of the dead body of a
child whether such child die before or after or during its birth, intentionally conceals or
cndeavours to conceal the birth of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of
cither description for a term which may extend to two years, oF with fine, or with both. *

* * * * * * * *

‘Act done with
intent to
prevent child
being born
alive or to
‘cause it to die
after birth.

Causing death
of quick
unborn child
by act
amounting (0
culpable
homicide.

Exposure and
abandonment
of child
under twelve
years, by
parent or
person
having care
of it.

Concealment
of birth by
secret
disposal of
dead body.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

(Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—2160LS—18-07-2002.