THE ABOLITION OF DEATH PENALTY TO WOMEN, CHILDREN AND
INDIGENT PERSONS BILL, 2008
By
SHRI MOHAN SINGH, M.P .
A
BILL
to abolish death penalty to women, children and indigent persons.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the  Abolition of Death Penalty to Women, Children and
Indigent Persons Act, 2008.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise provides,—
(i) “child” means any child below the age of fifteen years;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 58 of 2008
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
Death
sentence not
to be awarded
to women,
children and
indigent
persons.
(ii) “death penalty” means a sentence of death in any form passed by a court of
law or any other authority including the Village Courts or District Councils or Regional
Councils or sentence of death passed by village panchayats or sabhas, tribal sabhas
or heads of villages or tribes, whether having legal authority or not, in accordance
with personal law, custom or usage and includes death penalty for practicing witchcraft;
and
(iii) “indigent person” means and includes any person who has attained the
age of sixty years or above and is suffering from any incurable disease or is mentally
retarded.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any other
law for the time being in force or custom or usage in practice in India, death penalty shall not
be awarded to any woman or a child or any indigent person, notwithstanding the nature of
crime committed or caused to be committed and abetted or caused to be abetted by such
woman or child or indigent person.
4. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than ten years and also with fine of rupees one
lakh.
Punishment.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It has been observed that vulnerable sections of the society, the women, the children
and the indigent persons continue to be the subject of exploitation, including sexual
exploitation and abuse and are often placed in circumstances wherein they are liable to
commit crimes attracting severe penalties including death penalty. Various customary, religious
as well as tribal laws often provide for death penalties for offences like "adultery" and
practicing "witchcraft".
A circumstance or situation can hardly be conceived when the persons belonging to
weaker sex, the children or the indigent would commit such a crime without enough provocation
as to attract the death penalty.
Cases have come to light where women, children or indigent persons have been
sentenced to death. It would only be proper to abolish death penalty for such vulnerable
sections.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MOHAN SINGH
October 3, 2008
3

LOK   SALOK   SABHABHA
————
A
BILL
to abolish death penalty to women, children and indigent persons.
————
(Shri Mohan Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3352LS(S5)—17.10.2008.