न नजिसखजाज

AS INTRODUC

IN Lok Sapya

10 20॥ जग

Bill No. 59 of 1998
————__

THE TECHNOLOGY BANK OF INDIA BILL, 1998
By
‘Surimati Javan Paryark, M.P.
IN
BILL

1 provide for the establishment of a Technology Bank 10 assist professionals engaged in
research work in various disciplines,

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (/) This Act may be called the Technology Bank of India Act, 1998.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) 1 shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “Bank” means the Technology Bank of India established under section 3;
| (b) ‘prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under the Act

(०) ‘professional’ means a researcher or a scientist engaged in research work
in space or engineering or medicine including all systems of Indian medicine or

Short title,
extent and
commence
ment

Definitions.


energy, agriculture, chemicals, defence, envir onment, food processing,
conventional energy sources, petroleum and allied products, science and techzolo,
including bio-technology, electronics and ocean development.

3. (7) The Central Government shall establish a bank to be known
“Technology Bank of India” with its headquarters at New Delhi.

Bank of India,

(2) The Central Government shall establish a branch of the Bank in eve
State capital and Union territory.

(3) The Bank shall consist of a Chairman and four other members to bi
appointed by the Central Government.

(# Every branch of the Bank shalll consist of a General Manager and su b
ether officers and staff as may be required,

(5) The terms and conditions of service and appointment, salaries an
allowances of Chairman, members and employces of the Bank shall be such as ma
be prescribed,

Object of the 4. The main object of the Bank shall be to financially assist the professionals
Bank, them
Application for 5.) Every professional wishing to avail of financial assistance from the Bank shal
Vian apply 10 the concerned branch of Bank
(2) While applying for loan the professional shall furnish all details about his research,
experience, infrastructure available with him and required and amount of loan and th
period for which it is required.
Branch to 6. ‘The concerned branch shall forward the application to the Head. Office with it
ba ia गे recommendations within a peried of fifteen days from the date of receiplof the application,
application te
head office,
Head Office to 7. (1) The Head Office shall consider the application taking into account the
decide on

recommendations of the concerned branch and arrive at a decision within a period of

sanction ofloan,
fifi

n days from the date of receipt of such application,

(2) The Head Office shall have the Power either to increase or decrease the amount
of loan applied for or the period for which it is sought and its decision thereon
shall be final

Loan, 8. (/) Upon the decision of the Head Office to sanction the loan, the loan amount
shall be given to the professional at once.

(2) The loan amount so sanctioned shall be interest free.

(3) The loan amount shall be repayable within such period as may be determined in |
the terms and conditions governing the loan.

(४) The loan shall be repayable by the professional after his research work has been
completed or after a period of five years trom the date of sanction of loan, whichever is.

earlier.
Professional to 9. Every professional who has been sanctioned a loan by the Bank shall, upon
inform completion of his research work inform the Central Government or the State Government,
ene" as the case may be and the Bank about his research work,
about his
research
Professional 90 10. (7) Every professional who applies for loan shall give an undertaking that he
to leavethe

shall not leave the country during the period of his research:
country during

research. Provided that the Central Government may, in special circumstances to be recorded



wv , aliow a professional 10 go abroad 10 acquaint himself with the new techniques
ich will promote or help in his research work,

(2) No professional who hus been sanctioned a loan by the Bank shall leave the
unul he has submitted his research work to the Central Government and repaid

11. The Central Government may, after considering the research work submitted
professional, give award to him and provide him with suitable employment in an
ce or organisation under the Central Government.

12. The Central Government shall provide housing ard stipend at such rates,
may determine, to a professional during his research for a period of five years or
e completes his research, whichever is earlier.

13, If any professional violates the provisions of section 10, deportation proceedings
proceeded against him at once and he shall be punished with imprisonment for a

14, The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
sartying out the purposes of this Act.

Employment iy
Professional.

Assistance 10
prol

jouals.

Punishment

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Due to lack of facilities and financial assistance, our young researchers and 5
are not able to do any research work or engage themselves in any project. They are lured
multinationals and foreign countries and as a result our country is not able to utilise the
talent

Therefore, itis proposed to encourage our researchers and scientists by giving
all sorts of assistance to do their research work, It is accordingly proposed that th
researchers shall be given loan by the bank for their research work and during that peri
they will be provided with housing and stipend facilities. However, the researchers wil
submit their papers or project to the Government aiter the completion of their work so t
the country can fully benefit from their work,

The Bill serves two purposes, om the one hand it helps our researchers to do th
Work peacefully and on the other it helps us 10 utilise their talent and benefit from thei
research work.

New Deut; JAYANTI PATNAT
May 26, 1998,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

| 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Technology Bank of India. It
provides for the establishment of offices and branches of the bank in every State
ital and Union Territory, The hank shall consist of a Chairman, four other members,
eral Manager and other employees. Clause 11 provides that the Central Government
give award and suitable employment to those who have completed their research
k. Clause 12 provides for houstig and stipend to researchers for a periad of tive years

The Bill, therefore, if cnacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
ia, It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred
- A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees filty crore is also likely Lo be involved


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make niles for ci
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the del
of legislative power is of a normal character.

GAGAZETTE\794LS


LOK SABHA

10 provide for the establishment of a ‘Tec
research work in various disciplines

(Shrimati Jayanti Pamaik, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—794LS—16-6-1998.

Bank to assist professionals