J70r .954. 
Mof ItS •. 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ali 
2 e Otl: 1'103 
A 
BILL 
funhe'l' to amend the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Food Adultera.. Short title 
tIon (Amendment) Act, 1963. :!:-
S (2) It shan come into force on such date as the Central Govern- ment 
10 
IS 
:ao 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 3 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 19M, AmeM. 
hereinafter referred to as the principal Act,- ~t,or 
(i) in sulHeetion (2) ,-
(4) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(d) one representative each of the Departments of 
FGOd and Agriculture in the CentrallWnlstry of Food and 
Agriculture and one representative each of the Central 
Ministries of Defence, Industry, International Trade and 
Railways, nominated by the Central Government;"; 
(b) after clause (h), the following clause shall be insert-
ed, nmnely:-
II (i) one representative nominated by the Indian 
Standards Institution referred to in clause (e) of s~ 
tJon 2 of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification 
Marks) Aet, 1952."; 
.ectioDl. 

AmeDd-mentaf 
section 7. 
SubatitutiCa 
ofasew 
IeCtiCDfor 
lectica ,. 
POOcI 
11IIpCCIDrI. 
Amend-mentor 
section 10. 
~ 
(ii) in sub-section (3), for. the brackets, letters and word 
"(g) and (h)", the brackets, letters and word" (g), (h) and (0" 
shall be substituted. 
3. In section 7 of the principal Act, in clause (iv), for the words 
"with Q view to preventing the outbreak or spread of infectious S 
diseases", the words "in the interest of public health" shall be substi-
tuted. 
4. For section 9 of ,the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"9. (1) The Central Government or a State Government 10 
may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint such persons 
as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications to be food 
inspectors for such areas as may be assigned to them by the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the ~ase may be. 
(2) No person who has any financial interest in the manu- IS 
facture, import or sale of any article of food shall be appointed 
to be a food inspector under this section. 
(3) Every food inspector shall be deemed to be a publ1e 
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal ~ of 1880. 
Code and shall be officially suJx>rdinate to such authority as the 20 
Government appointing him, may specify in this behalf.". 
5. In section 10 of the prineipal Act,-
(i) in cleuse (e) of sub-section (1), for the words "with a 
view to preventing the outbreak or spread of any infectious 
disease" the words "in the interest of public health" shall be 25 
substituted; 
(ii) after sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"Provided that whenever the food inspector keeps in the 
safe custody of the vendor such article, the vendor shall 30 
execute a bond for a sum of money equal to the value of 
such article with ohe or more sureties as the food inspector 
deems fit."j 
(iii) in sub-section (7), for the worda "as tar as possible, 
call not less than two persons to be present at the time when 35 
such action is taken and take their signatures", the words "call 
one or more persons to be present at the time when such- action 
is taken and take his or their signatures" shall be substituted. 

1 • 
2. 
3. 
LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
T HE PREVENT I ON OF FO OD ADUIJrERAT ION 
(AMENrnENT) BILL, 1963 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
Page 3, line 22,-
after II (ii)" omit" 11 - ,. 
Page 4, line 24,-
after "sale" insert ttthereof.". 
Page 5, line 20,-
~ '''the' .maS '''. the'. 
NEW DELHI, 
December 1a._t96~ 
Agrahayana 27, 1885 ( S ak a 1 

10 
20 
30 
35 
3 
•. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitu-
be substituted, namely: - tion of 
... _ new aecrion 
for 
"14 E d section 14. . very ven or of an article of food shall, if so required, Vendor to 
disclose to the food inspector thl! name, address and other parti- disclOse the 
I f th f . name of the cu ars 0 e person rom whom he purchased the article of food.", manufac-
7. In section 16 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(a) whether by himself or by any person on his 
behalf imports into India or manufactures for sale, or 
stores, sells or distributes any article of foOO-
(i) which is adulterated or the sale of which is 
for the time being prohibited by the Food (Health) 
Authority In the interest of public health; 
(ii) other than an article of food referred to in 
sub-clause (i) in contravention of any of the provi-
sions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder, or"j 
(ii) in clause (f), the word <Cor" occurring at the end 
shell be omitted; . 
(iii). clause (g) shall be omitted; 
(iv) for paragraphs (i), (ii) , and (iii), the following 
paragraphs shall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) for the first offence-
(a) if the offence is with respect to sub-clause 
(i) of clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) or 
clause (d), with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than six months but which mey extend to 
two years and with fine; and 
(b) in other cases, with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years and with fine; 
(ii) for a second offence, with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than two years but which 
may extend to three years and with fine which shall not 
be less than two thousand rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and 
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose 
turer, etc, 
Amend-
mentof 
section 18, 

4 
a sentence of Imprisonment of less than two years but 
not less than six months; 
(iii) for a third and subsequent offences, with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
four years but which may extend to six years and with 5 
fine which shall not be less than three thousand rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and 
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, Impale 
a sentence of imprisonment of less than four years but 
not less than six months."; 10 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following SUb-eectiOD shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(lA) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 14 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months or with fine which may extend to five IS 
hundred rupees or with both.". 
Amend. 8. In section 19 of the ,principal Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), 
=~~1&. the .following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
, 
Amend· mentot section 20. 
Amend· mentof 
eeetioll 23. 
.. (2) A vendor shall not be deemed to have committed an 
offence pertaining to the sale of any adulterated or misbranded 20 
article of food if he proves-
(a) that he purchas~ the article of-food-
(i) in. case where a licence is prescribed for the 
sale from . a duly licensed manufacturer, distributor or 
dealer; 25 
(ii) in any other case, from .any lhaDufaeturer. dls-
tributor or dealer; 
(b) that he did not know and could not, with reasonable 
diligence, have ascertained that the artiele of food wu 
adulterated or misbranded: and 30 
(c) that the article of food wblle in his po8IIeI8ion wu 
properly stored and remained in the same 'state as when he 
purchased it.". 
9. In seet.ion 20 of the priRcipal Act, in sub4eetion (1), for the 
words "the State Government or a local authority" wherever they 35 
occur, the words "the Central Government or the State Government 
or a local authority" shall be substituted. 
10. In section 23 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (a) of sub-sectiol'i (1), for the words 'aDd the 
fees payable therefor", ·thewords ",the fees payable therefor, the 40 

S 
10 
IS 
S 
deposit of any sum as security for the performance of the condi-
tions of the licence and the circumstances under which such 
security may be forfeited" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-sectIon (2), the follOWing sub-seetloD slwlll be 
.ubltttuted, namely:-
II (2) Every rule made by the Central Government uncler 
this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the sucees-
sivesessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in miking any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without ,prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule!'. 
U. In section 24 of the principal ARt, in cl6U1e (b) -ofsub-lection Amend-
20 (2), for the w«ds "aDd the fees payable therefor", the worda "the =t OfZ4. 
fees payable therefor, the deposit of any ,sumas security for the on 
pericmnan.ce' of the 'conditions ,of the licence aDd the circumstances 
under which such security may be forfeited" shall be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The administration of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 
1954, during the last about eight years has revealed that the machi-
nery provided by the Act is inadequate and that to cope with the 
increasing tendencies to indulge in adulteration, a revision of some 
of the provisions is necessary. The Central Council of Health at 
its meeting held in October, 1960, reviewed the position and recom-
mended inter alia that the penal provisions of the Act should be 
made more deterrent and the services of the food inspectors instead 
of being left to remain under the local authorities should be pro-
vinciaUsed. The Planning CommiSSion, while examining the pro. 
blem of prevention of food adulteration, has also suggested the cen-
tralisation of administration. 
Under the Act, the power to appoint food inspectors vests with 
the State Governments except at major ports, air ports, customs 
stations and rail'W'BY stations. The common practice followed by the 
State Governmeats is to appoint the Inspectors of local authorities 
as Food Inspectors. For the proper enforcement of the Act, it Is 
considered necessary that the Central Government also should have 
power to appoint Food Inspectors. 
It is also considered that the penal provisions of the Act are inade-
quate and that they should be blade more deterrent In order to have 
an effective check on the evil of adulteration. 
The Bill mainly seeks to give effect to the above proposals. Oppor-
tunity has alsO' been availed of to cartY out cerllain other minor 
amendments to remove dffftculties in the administration of the Act. 
Nzw Dm.BI; 
The 11th Decem.ber, 1963. SUSHILA NAY AR. 
6 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clause 4 of the Bill which seeks to substitute section 9 ot 
the Prevention Of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (97 of 1954), the 
Central Government and the State Governments have concurrent 
powers with regard to the appointment of Food Inspectors. To c0-
ordinate the work of the Food Inspectors appointed by the Central 
Government and the State 90vernments and for the rigorous en-
forcement of the provisions of the Act and the rules made there-
under, a separate unit at the Centre and five zonal offices in the 
country are proposed to be established. The expenditure involved 
on account of the appointment of Food Inspectors by the Central 
Government and the setting up of the Central and zonal oftlces, i8 
as indicated below:-
Non-recurring expenditure 
Recurring expenditure per annum 
1 
Rs. 50,000. 
Rs. 9,50,000. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 10 and 11 of the Bill respectively empower the Central 
Government and, the State Government to make rules regarding the 
depesit of security for the performance of the conditions of the 
licente and the circumstances under which such security may be 
forfeited. The matters with respect to which rules are to be made 
aTe of routine nature and the delegation of legislative powers is of • 
normal C!baraeter. 
8 

ANNEXURE 
F.xTRACTS FROM THE PREVEN'l'ION OF FOOD ADULTERATION ACT 1954 • 
(37 OF 1954) 
• • • • • 
CENTRAL COMMITTEE FOR FOOD STANDARDS AND CENTRAL FOOD 
LABORATORY 
a 0) • • • • (2) The Committee shall consist of the following members, name- ~~f 8;!: 
ly:- i ~~~!f~~~-
• • • • • dardll. 
(d) one representative each of the Central Ministries of Food 
and Agriculture, Commerce and. Industry, Railways and Defence 
nominated by the Central Government; 
• • • • • 
(8) The members of the Committee referred to in clause. (c), 
(d), (e), (1), (g) and (h) of sub-section (2) shall, unless their 
seats become vacant earlier by resignation, death or otherwise, be 
entitled to hold office for three years and shall be eligible for 
renomination. 
• • ". • • 
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO FOOD 
• • • • • 
7. No person shall himself or by any person on hi' behalf manu- Prebibl-
facture for sale, or store, sell or distribute- tion oIf manu ae-
• • • • • ture, sale, 
(iv) any article of food the sale of Which is for the time ~!~af~ 
being prohibited by the Food (Health) Authority with a view rrtieles of 
to preventing the outbreak or spread 0,£ infectious diseases; or ood. 
• 
• • • • • 
• 
ANALYSIS OF FOOD 
• • • 
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 14 the State Govern- Food ins-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint persons in pectors. 
such number as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications to 
be food inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and they shall exer-
cise their powers within such local areas as that Government may 
assign to them: 
9 

Defences 
which 
mayor may not 
be allow-
eel in pro-
aecutions under 
thltAct. 
ColDi-zanceand 
trialot 
oftences. 
such imprisonment shall not be less than two years and such 
fine shall not be less than three thousand rupees. 
'" '" '" '" '" 
U. (1) '" '" '" '" 
(2) A vendor shall not be deemed to have committed an offence 
1£ he proves-
(i) that the article of food was purchased -by him as the 
same in nature, substance and quality 8S that demanded by the 
purchaser and with a written warranty in the prescribed form, 
if any, to the effect that it was of such nature, substance and 
quality; 
(ii) that he had no reason to believe at the time when he 
sold it that the food was not of such nature, substance and qua-
lity; and 
(iii) that he sold it in the same state as he purchased it: 
Provided that such a defence shall be open to the vendor only 
if he has submitted to the food inspector or the local authority 
a copy of the warranty with a written notice stating that he intends 
to rely on it and specifying the name and address of the person 
from whom he received it, and had also sent a like notice of his 
intention to that person: 
·1 
Provided further that the warranty given by a person resident 
in any area in which this Act is not in force, shall be a defence to 
the vendor only if the vendor proves to the satisfaction of the court 
that he had taken reasonable steps to ascertain and did in fact 
believe in, the accuracy of the statement contained in the warranty. 
(3) Any :Person by whom a warranty as is referred to in sub-
section (2), is alleged to have been given shall be entitled to appear 
at the Pearing and give evidence. 
210. (1) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be 
instituted except by, or with the written consent of, the State Gov-
ernment or a local authority or a person authorised in this behalf 
by the State Government or a local authority: 
Provided that a prosecution for an offence under this Act may 
be instituted by a purchaser referred to in section 12, if he produces 
in 'court a copy of the report of the public analyst along with the com-
plaint. 
• • • '" • 

13 
23. (1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Power 
Committee and subject to the condition of previous publication, make g'eJ~~l 
rules- Govern-
ment to 
(4) specifying the articles of food or classes of food for the =:. 
import of which a licence is required and prescribing the form 
and conditions of such licence, the authority empowered to issue 
the same and the fees payable therefor; 
• • • • • 
(2) All rules made by the Central Government under this Act 
Illall, as soon as ~sible after they are made, be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament. 
1&. (1) • • • • Power 
of the 
State 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the ~:!~~-
foregoing power, such rules may- make 
• • • • • 
(b) prescribe the forms of Ittences for the manufacture for 
sale, for the storage, for the sale and for the distribution of ar-
,.1elIa ,ef~' or ;.an, s,ecrifled article -ef fbod or elass Of articles 
of food, the form of applieatlon -fat such licences, the condition. 
• subject to which such licences may be issued, the authority ern .. 
powered to issue the same and the fees payable therefor; 
• " • • • 
rules . 

LOt{ sAlliA 
A 
BILL 
Nrther to amend the Prevention of Food Adulteration 
Act, 1954-
... 
(Dr. Sushila Nayar, 
Minister of Health.) 
• 