BID No. 59 of 1"2 
THE EXTRADITION BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 19TH JUNE 1962) 

THE EXTRADITION BILL, 1962 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Applications of Act. 
CHAPTER II 
EXTRADITION OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO FOREIGN STATES AND m 
COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES TO WHICH CHAPTER III DOES 
NOT APPLY 
4. Requisition for surrender. 
5. Order for magisterial inquiry. 
6. Issue of warrant for arrest. 
7. Procedure before magistrate. 
S. Surrender of fugitive criminal. 
9. Power of magistrate to issue warrant of arrest in certain 
C.1ses. 
10. Receipt in evidence of exhibits, depositions and other docu-
ments lnd authentication thereof. 
11. Chapter not to apply to commonwealth countries to which 
Chapter III applies. 
CHAPTER III 
RETURN OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO COMMONWEALTH 
COUNTRIES WITH EXTRADITION ARRANGEMENTS. 
12. Application of Chapter. 
13. Liability of fugitive criminals from commonwealth coun-
tries to be apprehended and returned. 
14. Endorsed and provisional warrants. 
(i 
974 (B) LS-I 

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
15. Endorsed warrant for apprehension of fugitive criminal. 
16. Provisional warrant for ~pprehension of fugitive criminal. 
17. Dealing with fugitive criminal when apprehended. 
18. Return of fugitive criminal by warrant. 
CHAPTER IV 
SURRENDER OR RETURN OF ACCUSED OR CONVICTED PERSONS FROM FOREIGN 
STATES OR COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES 
19. Mode of requisition or form of warrant for the surrender or 
return to India of accused or convicted person who is in a foreign 
State or commonwealth country. 
20. Conveyance of accused or convicted person surrendered or 
returned. 
21. Accused or convicted person surrendered or returned by 
foreign State or commonwealth country not to be tried. for pre-
vious offence. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLAN'BOUS 
22. Liability of fugitive criminals to be arrested and surrender-
ed or returned. 
23. Jurisdiction as to offences committed at sea or in air. 
24. Discharge of person apprehended if not surrendered or re-
turned within two months. 
25. Release of persons arrested on bail. 
26. Abetment of extradition offences. 
27. Lawfulness of, and retaking on escape from, custody under 
warrants. 
28. Property found on fugitive criminal. 
29. Power of Central Government to discharge any fugitive cri. 
minal. 
30. Simultaneous requisitions. 
31. Restrictions on surrender. 
32. Sections 29 and 31 to apply without any, modiftcation thereof. 
33. Act not to affect the Foreigners Act, 1946. 
34. Application of Act to Republic of Ireland 

(iii) 
CLAUDI 
35. Notified orders and nDtiAcations to be laid before Parliament. 
36. Power to make rules. 
37. Repeals and savings. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 

Bnt No. 59 or I"Z 
THE EXTRADITION BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the ertradition of 
fugitive criminals. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PuLIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Extradition Act, 1962. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short title, 
elttcnt aud 
commence-
Ment. 
10 
1 ~ 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "commonwealth country" means a commonwealth coun-
try specified in the First Schedule and such other commonwealth 
country as may be added to that Schedule by the Central Gov-
ernment by notification in the Official Gazette and includes evel")' 
constituent part, colony or dependency of any commonwealth 
country so specified or added; 
974 (B) LS-2. 
DeftnltlOllIo 

2 
(b) "conviction" and "convicted" do not include or refer to 
a conviction which under foreign law is a conviction for 
contumacy, but the term "person accused" includes a person 10 
convicted for contumacy; 
(e) Clextlradition offence" means-
(i) in relation to a foreign State, being a treaty State, 
an offence provided for in the extradition treaty with that 
State; 
s 
(ii) in relation to a foreign State other than a treaty 
State or in relation to a commonwealth country an offence 10 
which is specified. in, or which may be specified by notifica-
tion under, the Second Schedule; 
(d) "extradition treaty" means a treaty or agresent made 
by India with a foreign State relating to the extradition of 
fugitive criminals, and includes any treaty or agreement relating 15 
to the extradition of fugitive criminals made before the 15th day 
of August, 1947, which extends to, and is binding on, India; 
(e) "foreign State" means any State outside India other 
than a commonwealth country, and includes every constituent 
part, colony or dependency of such State; 20 
(f) "fugitive criminal" means an individual who is accused 
or convicted of an extradition offence committed within the 
jurisdiction of a foreign State or a commonwealth country and 
Is, or Is suspected. to be, in some part of India; 
(g) "magistrate" means a magistrate of the first class or a 25 
presidency magistrate; 
(h) "notified order" means an order notified in the Ofticial 
Gazette; \ ! 
(I) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; and 30 
(j) "treaty State" means a foreign State with which an 
extradition treaty is in operation. 

I 
I. (1) The Central Government may, by notified order, direct Ap~tioDa 
that the provisions of this Act other than Chapter III shall apply- 0(, 
(a) to such foreign State or part thereof; Dr 
(b) to such commonwealth country or part thereof to 
S which Chapter III does not apply; 
as may be specified in the order. 
(2) The Central Government may, by the same notfflec1 order. 
is referred to in sub-section (1) or any subsequent notified order, 
restrict such application to fugitive criminals found, or suspected to 
10 be, in such part of India as may be specified ian the order. 
15 
20 
(3) Where the notified order relates to a treaty State,-
(a) it shall set out in full the extradition treaty with that 
State; 
(b) it shall not remain in force for any period longer than 
that treaty; and 
(e) the Central G9vernment may, by the same or any 
subsequent notified order, render the application of this Ad 
subject to such modifications, exceptions, conditions and quaU-
fications as may be deemed expedient fnr implementing the 
treaty with that State. 
CHAPTER II 
EXTRADmON OF FUGITIVE CRIMINAIS TO 1'00000ON STATBS AND TO 
COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES TO WHICH CHAPTER III DOES NOT 
APPLY 
2S 4. A requisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal of a Requflltbl 
foreign State or a commonwealth country may be made to the Central !:reDder. 
Government-
(a) by a diplomatic representatiV'E! of the foreign State or' 
commonwealth country at Delhi; or 
30 (b) by the Government of that foreign State or common-
wealth country communicating with the Central Government 
through its diplomatic representative in that State or country; 
and If neither of these modes is convenient, the requiBitiOll shall be 
made in such other mode as is settled by arrangement made by the 
35 Government of the foreign Stiite or commonwealth country with 
the Government of Jncli~, 

OldIe" ...... terial 
inquiry. 
Proce4ure 
Wore 
mqiltrate. 
Surrender 
of fugitive 
crimI_l. 
4 
5. Where such requisition is made, the Central Government may, 
if it thinks tit, issue an order to any magistrate who would have had 
jurisdiction to inquire into the offence if it had been an offence 
committed within the local limits of his jurisdiction, dil'lectlng him 
to inquire into the case. 5 
8. On receipt of an ordu of the Central Government under see-
tion 5, the magistrate shall issue a warrant for the arrest of the 
fugitive criminal. 
7. (1) When the fugitive criminal appears or is brought befon 
the magistrate, the magistrate shall inquire into the case in the sam. 10 
manner and shall have the same jurisdiction and powers, as nearl) 
as may be, as if the case were one triable by a court of session ~ 
High Court. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provi-
sions, the magistrate shall, in particular, take such evidence as may IS 
be produced in support of the requisition of the foreign State or 
commonwealth country and on behalf of the fugitive criminal, 
including any evidence to show that the offence of which the 
fugitive criminal is accused or has been convicted is an offence of 
political character or is not an extradition offence. 20 
(3) If the magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie case is not 
made out in support of the requisition of the foreign State or com-
monwealth country, he shall discha-ge the fugitive criminal. 
(4) If the magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie case is 
_de out in support of the requisition of the foreign State or com- 25 
ftlOnwealth country, he may commit the fugitive criminal to prison 
to await the orders of the Central Government, and shall report 
tbe result of his inquiry to the Central Government; and shall for-
ward together with such report, any written statement which the 
f11gitive criminal may desire to submit for the consideration of the 30 
Central Government. 
8. If, upon receipt of the report and statement under sub-seetloD 
(4) of ~ion 7. the Central Government is of opinion that the fugi-
tive c:rlminal ought to be surrendered to the foreign State or com-
mOl1weaith country, it may issue a warrant for the custody and 3S 
removal of the fugitive criminal and for his delivery at a place and 
to a person to be named in the warrant. 

5 
I. (l) Where it appears to any magistrate that a person within Pow~ of 
the local limits of his jurisdiction is a fugitive criminal of a fOl"eign :-~~:eatc 
State or commonwealth country, he may, if he thinks fit, issue a wuran.t of 
warrant for the arrest of that person on such information and on::::O m 
5 such evidence as would, in his opinion, justify the issue of a warrant calea. 
if the offence of which the person is accused or has been convicted had 
been committed within the local limits of his jurisdiction. 
(2) The magistrate shall forthwith report the issue of a warrant 
under sub-section (1) to the Central Government and shall far-
10 ward the information, and the evidence or certified copies thereof 
to that Government. 
(3) A person arrested on a wartrant issued under sub-sediol' 
(1) shall not he detained for more than three months unless within 
that period the magistrate receives from the Central Government 
15 an order made with reference to such person under section 5. 
10. (1) In any proceedings against a fugitive criminal of a foreign R~ipt in 
State or commonwealth country under this Chapter, exhibits and ~fl!hl~it., 
depositions (whether received or taken in the presence of the per .. deposition. 
son against whom they are used OIl" not) and copies thereof ana ~'!,'!:u:~~: 
20 official certificates of facts and judicial documents stating facts may. ~t' autheo-
if duly authenticated, he received as evidence. ~cr:r. 
(2) Warrants, depositions or statements on oath, which purport 
to have been issued or taken by any court of justice outside Indf.a 
or copies thereof. certificates of, or judicial documents stating the 
25 facts of, conviction before any such court shall be deemed to hE' 
duly authenticated if-
(0) the warrant purports to be signed by a judge, magis-
trate or officer of the State or country where the same waF.. 
issued or acting in or for such State or country; 
30 (b) the depositions or statements or copies thereof purport 
to he certified, under. the hand of a judge, magistrate or officer 
of the State or country w-here the same were taken, or acting 
in or for such State or country, to be the original depositions 
or statements or to be true copies thereof, as the case may 
35 require; 
(c) the certificate of, or judicial document stating the fact 
of, a conviction purports to be certified by a judge, magistrate 
or oftllcer of the State or country where the conviction took 
place or acting in or for such State; 

Chapter not 
to apply to 
common-
wealth 
countries 
to which 
Cb~ter III 
apphes. 
Application 
of ChaPter. 
8 
(d) the warrants, depositions, statements, copies, certl1icates 
and judicial documents, as the case may be, are authenticated 
by the oath of some witness or by the official seal of a minister 
of the State or country where the same were respectively issu-
ed, taken or given. 
11. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to fugitive cri-
minals of a commonwealth country to which Chapter nI applies. 
CHAPTER III 
RETUBN OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES WITH 
EXTRADmON ARRANGEMENTS 
12. (1) This Chapter shall apply only to any such commonwealth 
country to which, by reason of an extradition arrangement entered 
into with that country, it may seem expedient to the Central Gov-
ernment to apply the same. 
s 
10 
(2) Every such application shall be by notified order, and the IS 
Central Government may, by the same or any subsequent notifted 
order, direct that this Chapter and Chapters I, IV and V shall, in rela-
tion to any such commonwealth country, apply subject to such modi-
fications, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as it may think 
fit to specify in the order for the purpose of implementlne the 20 
arrangement. 
LfabWty of 13. Where a fugitive criminal of any commonwealth country to 
fu~~ve fi cri- which this Chapter applies is found in India, he shall be liable to 
::~U:On~om be apprehended and returned in the manner provided by this 
w~tb COUDbe- Chapter to that commonwealth country. 25 tnes to 
apprehended 
aDd 
returned. 
EDdoned 
and provi-
sional 
warrant .. 
It. A fugitive criminal may be apprehended in India under 
an endorsed warrant or a provisional warrant. 
Bndorsed 15. Where a warrant for the apprehension of a fugitive criminal 
;~~:h~!~r has been issued in any commonwealth country to which this Chapter 
'!on o~ fugi- applies and such fugitive criminal is, or is suspected to be. 30 
~:L crimi- in India, the Cenb-al Government may, if satisfted that the warrant 
was issued by a persoll Mvin, lawful authority to iSlue the ..... 

, 
endorse such warrant in the manner prescribed, and the warrant 80 
endorsed shall be suftlcient authority to apprehend the person named 
in the warrant and to bring him before any magistrate in India. 
16. (1) Any magistrate may issue a provisional warrant for the ProvisiC'DaJ 
S appl"ehension of a fugitive criminal from any commonwealth coun- :ar:h!n!or 
try to which ihis Chapter applies who js. or is suspected to be, in .f£ of 
or on his way to India, on such information and under such circum- !:~~~. 
stances as would, in his opinion, justify the issue of a warrant, if 
the offence of which the fugitive criminal is accused or has been 
10 convicted had been committed within his jurisdiction and such 
warrant may be executed accordingly. 
(2) A magistrate issuing a provisional warrant shall forthwith 
send a report of the issue of the warrant together with the informa-
tion or a certified copy thereof to the Central Government, and the 
15 Central Government may, if it thinks fit, discharge the person appre-
hended under such warrant. 
(3) A fugitive criminal apprehended on a provisional warrRnt 
may, from time to time, be remanded for such reasonable time, not 
exceeding seven days at anyone time, as under the circumstances 
20 seems requisite for the production of an endorsed warrant. 
17. (1) If the magistrate, before whom a person apprehended under DcaJiDl with 
this Chapter is brought, is satisfied on inquiry that the endorsed fu~vc fl-
warrant for the apprehension of the fugitive criminal is duly authen- :'pprehc~d~ 
ticated and that the offence of which the person is accused or has ca. 
25 been convicted is an extradition offence, the magistrate shall commit 
the fugitive criminal to prison to await his return and shall forthwith 
send to the Central Government a certificate of the committal. 
(2) If on such inquiry the magistrate is of opinion that the en-
dorsed warrant is not duly authenticated or that the offence of which 
30 such person is accused or has been convicted is not an extradition 
offence, the magistrate may, pending the receipt of the orders of the 
Central Government, detain such person in custody or release him on 
bail. ' 
(3) The magistrate shall report the result of his inquiry to the 
35 Central Government and shall forward together with such report any 
written statement which the fugitive criminal may desire to submit 
for the consideration of that Government. 
18. The Central Government may, at any time after a fugitive 
criminal has been committed to prison under this Chapter, issue 
40 a warrant for the custody and removal to the commonwealth coun-
try concerned of the fugitive criminal and for his delivery at a 
place and to a person to be named in the warrant. 
Rctum of 
fuJltive cnmiDalbJ 
warrant. 

8 
CHAPTER IV 
SURRENDER OR RETURN 01' ACCUSED OR CONVICTED PERSONS nOM I'OREIGN 
STATES OR COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES 
• Mode of 18. (1) A requisition for the surrender of a person accused or 
requisition convicted of an extradition offence committed in India and who is S orform of warflllt or is suspected to be, in any foreign State or a commonwealth coun-
for thed try to which Chapter III does not apply, may be made by the lurren Ct or 
return to Central Government-
!:n::edo f or (a) to a diplomatic representative of that State Ql' country 
convicted at Delhi' or 10 
penon who ' 
is ~. (b) to the Government of that State or country through 
~~~:~c the diplomatic representative of India in that State or country; 
wealth 
country. and if neither of these modes is convenient, the requisition shall 
be made in such other mode as is settled by arrangement made by 
the Government of India with that State or country. IS 
(2) A warrant issued by a magistrate in India for the apprehen-
sion of any person who is, or is suspected to be, in any common-
wealth country to which Chapter III applies shall be in such form 
as may be prescribed. 
~onveyaDCed 20. Any person accused or convicted of an extradition offence 20 
or CO~=d who is surrendered or returned by a foreign State or commonwealth 
~ d country may, under the warrant of arrest for his surrender or 
~~ re~. return issued in such State or couritry, be brought into India and 
Accused or 
convicted 
person 
IlUlTcndered 
or retumecl 
by foreign 
State or 
common-__ Ith 
country DOt 
to be tried 
for previous 
ofrcDce. 
delivered to the proper authority to be dealt with according to law. 
21. Whenever any person accused or convicted of an offence,2S 
which, if committed in India would be an extradition offence, is 
surrendered or returned by a foreign State or commonwealth coun-
try, that person shall not, until he has been restored or has had an 
opportunity of returning to that State or country, be tried in India 
for an oftence committed prior to the surrender or return, other 30 
than the extradition offence proved by the facts on which the sur-
~der or return is based. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Lability of ZZ. Every fugitive criminal of a foreign State or commonwealth 35 
fD&ittYe country shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be liable to be 
:m~'::'It- arrested and surrendered or returned, whether the offence in IreS-
cd and sur- pect of which the surrender or return is sought was committed be-
=. or fore or after the commencement of this Act, and whether or not B 
court in India has jurisdiction to try that offence. 40 

D. Where the offence in respect of which flhe surrender or re- JuriId .... 
turn of a fugitive criminal is sought was committed on board any -.:.. 
vessel on the high seas or any aircraft while in the air outside India ~0IIUDi'te4 
or the lndian territorial waters which comes into any port or aero- .~ lea or Iii 
S drome 01 lndia, the Central Government and any magistrate haviDg air. 
Jurisdictlon in such port or aerodrome may exercise the powers COIl-
ferred by this Act. 
I 
24. If a fugitive criminal who, in pursuance of this Act, has been DiICbarF 
committed. to prison to await his surrender or return to any foreign of perIOD 
10 State or commonwealth country is not conveyed put of India within ~. 
two months after such committal, the High Court, upon application rmdaecl or 
made to it by or on behBlf of the fugitive criminal and upon proof :::U~ two 
that reasonable notice of the dntention to make such application baa JDODthL 
been given to the Central Government, may order such prisoner to 
I. discharged unless sufficient cause is shown to the contmry. 
25. In the case of a person who is a fugitive cr1minaJ. arrested or Rc1cue CJl 
detaIned under this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal peno:a 
! PrOCed.ure, 1898, relating to ,baLl .sball apply in the same manner as :- oa 
they would. apply it such perSOn were accused of committing in 
lnwa the offence of which he is accused or has been convicted, and 
:'w'in relation to such ball, . the magistrate before whom the fugitive 
criminal is brought shall have, .as far as may be, the same powers 
and JUrisdiction as a court of seSSlion under that Code. 
26. A fugitive criminal who is accused or convicted of abetting Abetmerat 
any extradltion offence sballbe deemed for the purpOHa of thi.I Act of !xtr -
2S to be accused. or convicted 01 having committed. such offence and:" 
Sib.all be liable to be arrested and surrendered accordingly. 
27. It shall be lawful for any person to .whom a warrant is direct- Lawfalae •• 
ed for the Qpprehe.nsion of a fugitive crimiDal to hold in custody of, aod 
30 and convey the person mentioned ,in the warrant to the place named ~~ 
in the warrant, and if such person escapes ollt of any a.txxiy to from, cu. .. 
which he may be delivered in pursuance of such warrant, he may =-
be re-taken as a person accused of an oftence against the law of 
lndia may be re-taken upon an escape. 
3' 28. Everything found in the possession of a fugitive crimJDal at PropertY 
the time of his arrest which may ,be material 88 .evidence in proviDa ~OD 
the extradition offence may be delivered up 'W'lth the fuaitive aaL 
crimiDaJ. on his surrender or return, subject to the riehtI. if -7, 
of third parties with .-espect thereto. 
9'14(8) LS-3. 

to 
;. .. cd 21. If it appears to the Central Government that by reason of the 
.~ e: trivial nature of the case or by reason of the application for the 
411.... aurrender or return of a fugitive criminal not being made in good 
:r':~1f. faith or in the interests of justice or for political reasons Ql' other-
wise, it is unjust or inexpedient to surrender or return the fugitive 5 
criminal, it may, by order, at any time stay any proceedings under 
this Act and direct any warrant issued or endorsed under this Act 
to be cancelled and the person for whose arrest the warrant has been 
issued or endorsed to be discharged. 
....... 9Ch I~· requisitions for the surrender of a fugitive criminal are 10 
:.. ...... received from more than one foreign State or commonwealth coun-
try or from any foreign State and any commonwealth country, the 
CentJal· Government may, having regard to the circumstances of the. 
cue, surrender the fugitive criminal to such State or country as that 
GGvemmentthiDks fit. 15 
31. A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered or returned to 
a foreigft State or commonwealth country-
(<<) if the offence, in respect of which his surrender Is 
sought is of a politieal· character or if he proves to the satisfac-
tion .of the magistrate or court before whom he may be produced 20 
. or of the Central Government that the requisition or warrant 
for his surrender haa, in fact, been made with a'view to try or 
punish him for an offence of a political character; 
(b) 1£ prosecution for the offence in respect of which his 
surrender-i8sought is according to the law of that State or 25 
country barred by·time; 
(c). unless. provisionilmade by the law of the foreign State 
or commonwealth country or in the extradition treaty with the 
foreign State or. extraditiol\ arrangement with the commonwealth 
country, that the fugitive criminal shall not, until he has been 30 
restored or haa. had.an opportunity of returning to India, be 
detained or tried in that State or country for any offence com-
mitted priOr to his surrender or return, other than the extradi-
tion oftenoe proved by the. facts on which his surrender or 
return is based; 3S 
(d) if he has been accused of some offence in India, not 
being the offence for which his surrender or return is sought, 
or is undergoing sentence under any conviction in India untU 
after he has been discharged, whether by acquittal or on 
expiration of his sentence or otherwise; 40 

II 
(e) untU after the expiration of fifteen dayS from the date 
of his being committed to prison by the magistrate. 
32. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary containedftt Section. at 
section 8 or section 12, the provisions of sections 29 and 31 shan =I:~d.­
, apply without any modification to every foreign State or common- out an, I 
wealth COUD~ =~OD . ..-.- .... 
. ~~ .... " -33. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the Fore- ::ect~o ~ 
igners Act, 1946, or any order made thereunder. Poreipen 
Act. 1946. 
H. The provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to the Be-:t. .. Jicatl.)n 
10 public of Ireland in the like manner and subject to the like condi- =I; of 
tions as they apply in relation to a commonwealth country. I. 
35. Every notifled order made or notification issued under this Notified 
Aet shall, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, be laid before ::i:c.~. 
each House of Parliament. to be laid 
before 
Parliam~t. 
IS 36. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Powerto 
Official Gazette", make rules to carry out the purposes ()f this Act JUke rala. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the fol-
lowing matters, namely:-
20 (a) the form in which a requisition for the surrender of a 
30 
35 
fugitive criminal may be madej 
(b) the form in which a warrant for the apprehension of 
any person in a commonwealth countryi to which Chapter In 
applies may be made; 
(c) the manner in which any warrant may be endorsed or 
authenticated under this Act; 
(d) the removal of fugitive criminals accused or in custody 
under this Act and their control and maintenance until such 
time as they are handed over to the persons named in the war-
rant as entitled to receive them; 
(e) the seizure and disposition of any property, which i. 
the subject of, or required for proof of, any alleged offence to 
which this Act applies; 
(f) the form and manner in which or the channel through 
which a magistrate may be required to make his report to the 
Central Government under this Act; 

13 
(g) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament whUe it is 
in session for a total period of thirty, days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before th~ expiry 5 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately tol-
lowing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have e1!ect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the :ase may be; 80 however that any such modi8.cation or 10 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity, of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
= 
lad 11. (1) The Indian Extradition Act, 1903, and any law correspon- 15 of lIIOS. 
ing thereto in force at the commencement of this Act in the territor-
ies which, immediately before the 1st day of November, 1956, were IS 
comprised in Part B States and the North East Frontier Agency and 
Tuensang District (Extradition) Regulation, 1961, are hereby re- 3 of 1161. 
pealed. 
(2) The Extradition Acts, 1870 to 1932 and the Fugitive Offenders ~ ad 34 
Act, 1881, in so far as they applY' to and operate as part of the law of 20 3r-an'!i 5:; 
lncUa, are hereby repealed. Viet. c. 60; 
. 6 Bclw. 7. c-
15 • uud 
330;;. S, 
Co 39. 
44.45 
ViCl. c. 6f. 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 <a> ] 
The following are commonwealth countries:-
1. Commonwealth of Australia. 
s 2. Canada. 
3. Ceylon. 
4. Cyprus. 
5. Federation of Malaya. 
6. Ghana. 
10 7. New Zealand. 
8. Nigeria. 
9. Pakistan. 
10. Sierra Leone. 
11. Singapore. 
15 12. Tanganyika. 
13. Unitec;l KinSdolQ. 
13 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 2 (c) (ii)] 
Eztraditlicm offences in relation to foreign States other than 'treaty 
States 01' in relation to commonwealth countries 
The following list of extradition offences is to be construed aecor- S 
ding to the law in force in India on the date of the alleged offence. 
Wherever the names of the relevant Acts are not given, the sections 
referred to are the sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1880):-
,.....1, 
..-;-.... ' 
1. Culpable homicide (sections 299 to 304). 
2. Attempt to murder (section 307). 10 
S. Causing miscarriage and abandonment of ehUd (sections 312 
to 317). 
4. Kidnapping, abduction, slavery and forced labour (sections 
360 to 374). 
5. Rape and unnatural offences (sections 375 to 377). 15 
8. Theft, extortion, robbery and dacoity: (sections 378 to 402). 
'1. Criminal misappropriation and criminal breach of trust 
(sections 403 to 414). 
8. Cheating (sections 415 to 420). 
9. Mischief (sections 425 to 440). ZO 
10. Forgery, using forged documents and other offences relat-
Ing to false documents (sections 463 to 477A). 
11. Offences relating to coins and stamps 
283A). 
(sections 230 to 
,. 
12. Sinking or destroying a vessel at sea or attempting or as 
consptrlng to do so . 
13. Damaging or destroying an aircraft in the air or attempting 
or conspiring to do so. 
14. Assault on board a vessel on the high seas or an aircraft In 
the air outside India or the Indian territorial waters 30 
with Intent to destroy life or to do grievous bodily 
harm. 
15. Revolt or conspiracy to revolt by two or more persons on 
board a vessel on the high seas or an aircraft in the air 
outside India or the Indian territorial waters against 35 
the authority of the master or the pilot in command. 
.. .,. '.' ...• 14 

, 
10 
15 
16. Smuggling of gold, gold manufactures, diamonds and othet 
precious stones or of any narcotic substance [section 
167, entry 81 in column 2 of schedule, Sea Customs Act, 
1878 (8 of 1878)]. 
17. Immoral traffic in women and girls [sections 4,5, 6 and 8 of 
the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and 
Girls Act, 1956 (104 of 1956)]. 
18. Any offence which if committed in India would be pUntA. 
able under any other section of the Indian Penll Code 
or any other law, and which may, from time to· ttrtt~J 
be specified by the Central Government by I1bWU:aUon 
in the Official Gazette either generally for aU fotelgn 
States or for all commonwealth countI1es or speclmy 
for one or more such States or countries. 

STAT!MENT OF OBJr.cTS ANI) REASONA 
At present, the law of extradition applicable to India is to be 
found scattered in the United Kingdom Extradition Acts, 1870 to 
1932, the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881, and the Indian Extradition 
Act, 1903. The United Kingdom Extradition Act, 1870, in its appli-
cation to India, authorised the extradition of fugitive offenders bet-
weeD India and 'foreign States', a term which meant States to which 
that Act was made applicable by Her Britannic MajestY"s Order in 
Council. The Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881, on the other hand, pro-
vided a method whereby extradition of fugitive offenders could be 
effected between the British dominions and possessions by a simpli-
fied form of procedure. The Indian Extradition Act, 1903, modified 
and supplemented the other laws by-
(a) prescribing the procedure for the surrender of fugitive 
criminals in the case of 'foreign States'; 
(b) providing a special machinery for the surrender of fugi-
tive criminals in case of States other than 'foreign. States'; and 
(c) specifying the officers in India who may exercise the 
powers conferred by the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881. . 
2. The Indian Extradition Act, 1903, was not extended to Part B 
States in 1961 when the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, was enacted 
u it was felt eveD then that this should be done by a separate law, 
after a proper examination of the position. The result is that the legal 
positioD relating to the surrender of fugitive criminals to 'foreign 
States' aDd commonwealth countries under the existing law from the 
erstwhile Part B States is somewhat doubtful. Further, the Supreme 
Court, in its judgment in the State of Madras VB. C. G. Menon 
reported in (1955) Supreme Court Reporter 280, has held that after 
India became a Republic, the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881 has ceased 
to applY' to India. Moreover, the present law relating to extradition 
contains certain lacunae on questions such as concurrent requests 
for the surrender of a fugitive criminal from more than one State. 
3. The purpose of this Bill is to remove all such anomalies and 
ftl1 in the lacunae that exist at present in the law relating to extra-
dition and enact a consolidated aDd amended law for the extradition 
of fugitive criminals to all foreign States and commonwealth coun-
~.. -
4. A Bill OD ,the 8ubject was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 
7th August, 1961. The Bill wu referred to a Joint Committee and 
16 

t, 
the Committee presented the report on the 30th November, 1981. 'l\~ 
Bill, as reported by the Joint Committee. could not be taken up for 
consideration in Parliament for want of time and it lapsed on the dis-
solution of the Lok Sabha. The present Bill incorporates all the re-
commendations made by theJ oint CommLttee and opportunity has 
been taken to make certain minor changes. 
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the -various provisfom 
of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 8th June, 1962. 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 

N ateB Oft Clauses 
ClaUle 2.-SUb .. clau.s8 (a) .-Definition of commonwealth country 
is more or less on the same lines as in the Citizenship Act, 1955. A 
few"morecC)uniries ,which have gained independence have been add-
ed in the First Schedule. The sub-clause would enable the Ceniral 
Government to include new commonwealth countries in the Sche-
dule. , 
Sub.clause (b) .-Certain foreign laws like the French provide for 
the condemnation of an accused person par contumace but such con'" 
demnation is annulled if the accused person appears before the court, 
when his trial begins afresh. Such a person is correctly described as 
an accused person and not as a convicted person for the purposes of 
the extradition law. This sub-clause is intended to clarify this posi-
tion and follows similar definitions in the United Kingdom and Cana-
dian Acts. 
Sub-clause (c) .-The expression "extradition offence" is so de-
fined as to mean, in relation to a foreign State being a treaty State, 
an offence provided for in the extradition treaty with that State and 
in relation to a foreign State other than a treaty State or in relation 
to a commonwealth country, an offence which is specified in, or which 
may be specified by notification under, the Second Schedule. 
Sub-clause (d) .-The definition of "extradition treaty" covers even 
pre-Independence treaties. 
Clause a.-This clause covers all States outside India including 
commonwealth countries to which Chapter III does not apply. The 
Act can become operative in relatiOn to such States only on the issue 
of a notified order. Provision has been made in the clause whereby 
it may be possible to make this Act effective only in relation to cer-
tain parts of India. In regard to a treaty State, power has also been 
taken to render the application of the Act subject to such modifica-
tions, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as may be deemed ex-
pedient for implementing the treaty with that State. 
Clause 4.-This clause prescribes the channel through which a re-
quisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal of a foreign State 
or a commonwealth country to which Chapter III does not apply may 
be made to the Central Government. 
18 

19 
Clause 5.-This clause empowers the Central Government to issue 
an order to a magistrate having jurisdiction to enquire into the 
offence in respect of which requisition has been received under 
clause 4. This clause follows sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
Clauses 6 and 7.-These clauses prescribe the procedure to be 
followed by a magistrate when order is received by him under 
clause 5. These clauses more or less are based. on sub-sections ,(2), 
(3), (4) and (6) of section 3 of the Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
Clause S.-This clause is based on sub-section (8) of section 3 of 
the Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
Clause 9.-This clause more or less reproduces section 4 of ~ 
Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
Clause 10.-This clause reproduces section 17 ,of the Indian Extra-
dition Act, 1903. 
Clause n.-This clause makes it clear that Chapter II will not 
apply in respect of fugitive criminals of a commonw-ealthcountry to 
which Chapter III applies. 
'Clause 12.-This clause makes it clear that"Chapter IU will apply 
only to stich of the commonwealth countries as have entered 'into ~­
tradition arrangements with· the Central Government.:Sub-clause (2) 
of this clause further provides that every such application shall be by 
notified order. The Central Government is further empowered to 
apply the provisions of Chapter III and other Chapters 'in relation to 
any such commonwealth country subject to such modiftcations, excep-
tions, ,conditions and, qualifications as it. may thlnk fit to ,specify for 
the purposes of implemenUng theauangement. 
Cl0U8e 13.-This clause makes it clear that a fugitive crimiDallOf 
a OOIID'IlOftwealthcountry, to' which Chapter III is made applicable' 
shall· be, liable to be apprehendeciaftd returned'in the'ma:nner,Pl'ovi .. 
ded in the ,said Chapter. 
Cla.use 15.-This clause follows section 13 of the Fugitive Offend-
ers Act, ·l88l 
Clause 16.-Suh-clause (1) of this clause follows section 18 of the' 
Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881. Sub-clause (2) requires a magistrate 
issuing a 'Provisional warrant under sub-clause (1) to report the 
issue of such warrant to the Central Government. . 

20 
CltzuIe 17.-Thia clause empowers the magistrate to hear evi-
dence and satisfy himself whether the offence of which the person 
is accused or has been convicted is an extradition 
offence and also whether the warrant for the apprehension of the 
fugitive criminal has been duly authenticated. Power has also been 
conferred on him to release the fugitive criminal on bail if he is not 
satisfied on either of the two aforesaid points. 
CIcIure 18.-'nUI clause makes it clear that the power of returning 
the fugitive criminal to the commonwealth country concerned will lie 
with the Central Governmenl 
CltzuIe J.9.--S~lauae (1) of this clause prescribes the channel 
tor requisition for the surrender of a person accused or convicted of 
an extradition offence committed in India and who is or is suspected 
to be in any foreign. State or a commonwealth country to which 
Chapter ITI does not apply. 
Clau.se n.-This clause is based on section 19 of the United King-
dom Extradition Act, 1870. It provides to foreign countries the same 
aafeguards in our law 88 we insist upon from them under clause 31 (c) 
before allowing surrender of fugitive criminals. 
Clause 22.-This clause states the liability of a fugitive criminal 
in express terms even with regard to offences committed before the 
oommencemea.t of the Act. The clause corresponds to a certain ex-
tent section 18 of the Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
CltzuIe 23.-This clause follows section 20 of the Indian Extradi-
tion Act, 1903 but the scope of the clause has been widened so as also 
to cover offaDces committed In the air. 
Clause 24.-This clause is on the same lines as sub-section (10) of 
section 3 of the Indian Extradition Act, 1903. 
CI4uIe 25.-This c:lause follOW'S sub-section (4) of section 10 of the 
Indian Extradition Act, 1903. It has been made clear in this elause 
that the magistrate before whom the fugitive criminal is brought 
lIhall have the same powers and jurisdiction in relation to granting of 
bail 88 a court of session under the Code of Criminal Proeedure. 
Clause 26.-Thls elause follows section 13 of the Indian Extradf-
tl~ Act, 19Q3. 
CZaule 27.:-'nlis clause follows section 3 (9) and section 14 of the 
Indian Extradition Act, lP03. 

21 
Clcz'U8e 29.-'l'his clause follows section 10 of the Fugitive Offend-
ers Act, 1881 with this difference that power under that section is ex-
ercisable by a court whereas the power under this clause is exercis-
able by the Central Government. 
Clcz'U8e 30.-This clause makes a provision to meet a contingency 
when the surrender of a fugitive criminall;1as been requested by more 
than one State simultaneously. The claUSe is based mainly on the 
fact that there are quite a number of offences which consist of • 
series of penal transactions each one of which may be completed or 
originated in one or more States separately. Under this clause the 
Central Government would decide to which State or country a fugi-
tive criminal may be surrendered after taking into consideration all 
the circumstances of the case, namely, the respective dates on which 
the requisitions were received, the relative gravity of the offences 
alleged and the like. 
Clcz'U8e 3l.-This clause contains the usual restrictions on surrend-
er. The period of fifteen days specified in sub-clause (e) of this 
clause would enable the fugitive criminal to move the appropriate 
court for his release by filing a writ petition of habeas corpu8. 
CZa.'U8e 32.-It has been made clear in this clause that the Central 
Government cannot modify the application of the provisions of 
clauses 29 and 31 which shall apply in all cases of extradition under 
this Bill. 
Clauses 33, 34 and 35.-These clauses are self-explanatory. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Proceedings for extradition of fugitive criminals to foreign States 
and commonwealth countries under the Bill would involve arrest of 
the· fugitive criminal, an enquiry by a Magistrate and in some cases 
the remO'Yal 'Of the fugitive criminal and his delivery to the foreign 
State or commonwealth country. Such proceedings will also involve 
the detention of the· fugitive criminal in·po1ice/jail custody, and the 
State shill have to involve expenditure during such detention/cus-
tbdy. In so far as the Union territories are concerned, such expendi-
ture will be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not 
possible to estimate the amount of expenditure from the Consolidat-
ed Fund of India as that amount will depend on the number of re-
quests for extradition that may be received in any given period. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATIO~ 
Clause 36 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules by notification in the Official Gazette to carry out. the purposes 
of the Act. The matters in respect of which such rules may be made 
are specified therein. 
2. Most of those matters are of a routine character. They -i7ite'J' 
alia relate to the form in which a requisition for the surrender of 
a fugitive criminal may be made, the form in which a warrant for 
the apprehension of any person in a commonwealth country to which 
Chapter III applies may be .made, the manner in which any warraat 
may be endorsed or authenticated, the seizure and disposition of any 
property which is the subject of any extradition offence, and the 
form and manner in which or the channel through which a magis-
trate may be required to make his report to the Central Government. 
3. Under clause 3 (1), power is conferred on the Central Govern-
ment to apply by notified order the provisions of the Act (other 
than Chapter III), to such foreign State or to such commonwealth 
country to which the provisions of Chapter III do not apply, as may 
be specified in that order. Under clause 3 (2), however, power is 
reserved to the Central Government to restrict such application to 
fugitive criminals found in such part of India as may be specified 
in the order. As regards a treaty State, the Central Government 
has been empowered to make the application of the Act subject 
to such modifications and exceptions as may be deemed expedient 
for implementing the treaty with that State. The question to which 
countries or States the Act should be made applicable is a little 
difficult and complicated one. Reciprocity and other considera-
tions such as terms of a treaty may have to be weighed. It is not 
possible to specify all such considerations in the Act. The Central 
Government has therefore been vested with the necessary power in 
this regard. 
4. Under clause 12, power has been reserved to the Central Gov-
ernment to apply by notified order the provisions of Chapter III 
to such commonwealth countries as may enter into extradition 
arrangement with the Government of India. Power is also reserved 
to the Central Government to make the application of Chapter III 
and of Chapters I, IV and V subject to such modifications, exceptions, 
23 

~4 
conditions and qualifications as may be specified in the order tor the 
purpose of implementing the arrangement. It is not possible to 
visualise at this stage what sort of extradition arrangement will 
be entered into by differen.t commonwealth COWltries and conse-
quently it is difficult to specify in the Act the modifications, ex-
ceptions, conditions and qualifications subject to which the Act may 
be made applicable. 
5. Having regard to the circumstances under which powers under 
clauses 3 and 12 will be exercised by the Central Governmeat, the 
powers delegated to it are of a normal character. 

LOK ·SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the extradition 
of fugitive criminals. 
The President has, in ~ursuance of clause (3) of article 
II7 _ of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shr; Ja'fJJaharlal Nehru, 
Minister of External Affairs) 