Bill No. 69 of 1963 
THE PATENTS BILL, 1953 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THB PEoPLB) 
A 
BILL 
to amend and con8olidate the law r~ating to patentB. 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called 
the Patents Act. 1968. 5 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
~88hmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. DeflDitiODS.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.- 10 
(a) 'Advocate-General' means an Advocate-General appointed 
under the Constitution; 
(b) 'assignee' includes the legal rcpresentati~c of a deceased 
aS8ignee and references to the assignee of illly per SOil illelude refer-
ences to the assignee of the legal representative or assignee of that 15 
person; 
(r) 'Cnlltrollcr' mcanl'l tho Controller of Patellts IHld Desiglls ap-
poilltNl IlIlller section 5; 
(dj 'district court' has the meaning assigned to that expression by 
the Code of Civil l)rocedure, 1908 (Aot V of 1908); 20 
(e) 'exclusive licence' means a licence from a patentee which 
confers on the licensee or on the licensee and persons uuthorised by 
him, to the exclusion of all other persons (including the patentee), any 
tight ill !'(';;pect of t.he. patented invention, find' exclusive liCfnsee' 
",ball be eOIlRtrlled ul'cordingly; 25 

10 
Ii) 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
2 
(j) 'High Court' means,-
(i) in relation to I> Part A State or a Part B State, the Higb 
Court for that State; 
(ii) in relation to the States of Ajmer and Vindhya Pradesh. 
the High Court at AU"habad; 
(iii) in relation to the State of Bhopal. the High Court at 
Nagpur; 
(iv) in relation to the States of BilaBpur. Delhi and Himachal 
Pradesh, the High Court of Punjab; 
(v) in relation to the State of Coorg. the High Court of 
Mysore; 
(vi) in relation to the State of Kutch. the High Court 'It 
Bombay; 
(vii) in relation to the States of Manipur aud Tripura, tb j' 
High Court of Assam; 
,.;Ip (11iii) in relation to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the 
tligh Court at Calcutta; 
(g) 'India' means the territory of T ndin excluding the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir; 
(/1) 'invention' meaDS,-
U) sny new and useful manufacture; 
(ii) any new and us~ul composition of matter; 
(iii) any new and useful improvement of nny such manu-
facture or composition of matter; I 
which is capable of being used or applied in trade or industry and 
which is not previouBl~' known or used in IrHlia; 
Explanation T.-An invention shall not be deemed to be Tle~' 
unless it involves an inventive step. 
Explanation II.-An invention shall not be deemed to be useful 
unless it achieves the object which is claimed for it and makes 3 
definite contribution to the existing stock of technical knowledge it! 
India on the subject-matter of the invention; 
(t) 'legal representative' means a person who in law represents 
the estate of a deceased person; 
(j) 'manufacture', incltldes-
(i) any art or process-· 
(a) for prodncing, preparing or making all article by sub-
jecting a materia.l to manual, meohanical, chemical, elecjri-
calor tmy other like operation, or 
(") for producing any new material 01' for preserving or 
modifying the properties of any known material; 
(ii) any method or process of testing applicable to the im-
provement or control of manufacture : 
(iii) allY machinp. or appart1tuB used for any of the purpose>l. 
specified in item (a) or item (b) of sub-clause (i); a.nd 

a 
(i1JJ sny nt'ticle (lr material produced, prepared or made by 
manufacture; 
(h) 'patent' mefUl!:> a. patent granted under this Act; 
(l) 'patented article' means an article in respect of which a patent 
has been granted; 5 
(m) 'patentee' means the person for the time being enter",d on 
the register of patents kept under this Act as the grantee or proprietor 
of the patent; 
(II I 'pukut ageut' UWHllf! a person carrying on in Indiu the busi-
!WS~ of acting as agent for other persons for the purpose of applying 10 
fol' 01' oi.JtHiniug patents in lndia or elsewhere: 
(0) 'patent of addition' means a patent granted in accordance with 
section 31; 
(p) 'Patent Office' means the Patent Office established under If. 
sflctioll 4 Hnd illcl udes any branch thereof; 
(q) . prescribed , means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(r) 'priority date' has the' meaning assigned to it by section 10; 
(8) • true and first inventor' iucludes a person who first imports 
all inventioll into Indiu, or to whom an invention is first communica-
ted fl'om outside India. , 20 
3. What is not patentable.-The following shall not be patentable under 
thi!'l Al't :--
(a) au invention the use of which would be contrary to law or 
morality; 
(b) the mere discovery of new properties of a known substance: 25 
(c) a. mere duplication of known devices or juxtaposition of known 
devices which function independently of one another; 
(d) a substallce prepared or produceu by a. chemical process or 
;ntended for {ooa or medicine other than a substance prepared or pro-
duced by nny method or process of manufacturo particulari:,' described 30 
In the complete specification of the invention or by its obvious chQmi-
cal equivalent. 
Explanation .-In relation to a substance intended for food or 
medicine, a mere .admixture reSUlting only in the aggregation of the 
known properties of the ingredients of that substance shall not be 35 
deemed t.o be a method or process of manufacture. 
CHAPTER II 
PATENT OFFIOE AND ESTABLISHMENT 
~. Patent Oftlce and itl branches.-(l) There shall be established for 
the purposes of this Act an office to be called the Patent Office aud such 40 
number of branch offices as the Central Government may deem fit. 
(2) 'l'he Patent Offioe shall be under the immediate control of tht' 
Controller who shall act under the superintendence and direction of the 
Central Government. 
(3) There shall bfl a seal for the Pa.tent Office. 4E> 
5. OontrOller and other oftlcers.-(l) The Central Government may 
, appoint n ppl'f'on tll he the Controller of Patents Il.HJ Designs and as many 
Deputy Il.nd Assistant Controllers as may be necesRary. 

• 
(2) The Deputy and Assistant Controllers shall be under the I!uperiu-
tendence and directioll of the COlltroJ.ier ulld shall dil!(Jharge Iluch 
functions of the Controller under this Act 68 the Controller may from time 
to time authorise them to discharge; and any reference in this Act to the 
5 Controller shall inolude a reference to a Deputy Controller or an Assistant 
Controller when so discharging any such functions. 
10 
(3) 'I.'he Central Government may appoint for the purposes of the Patent 
Office such number of Examiners, ARllistant Examint:lrs aud other officers 
as it may deem fit for the purpose of carrying out the proviHiollH of this Act. 
CHAP'fER III 
ApPLIOATIONS FO!\ GRANT OF PATBNTS 
8. PerlODl entlt.1ed to apply for a patent.-(l) An applieation for a 
patent for an invention may be made by any of the following persons, 
that is to say,-
15 (a) by any person claiming to be the true and first inventor of 
20 
the invention; 
(b) by any person being the u&ignee of the person claiming to be 
the true and first inventor in respect of the right to make suob an 
applioation ; 
(0) by the legal representative of Ilny deceast:ld person who imme-
diately before his death, WQ8 entitled to make such an application; 
and muy be made by that pelsc.n or legal representative either alon~ or 
joindy with any other person. 
7. :rotm df &ppllcatlOD.-(l) Every application for a patent sha.ll be 
25 made in t.he prescribed form and tha.ll be filed a.t the Patent Oftioe in the 
prescribed manner. 
(2) Where thE' application is made by virtue of an assignment 9f the 
right to apply for a patent for the invention, there shall be furniabei with 
the application 01' within such period as may be prescribed after th.e filill~ 
30 of the application either- ,. 
(a) a declaration signed by the person claiming to be the true 
and first inventor or his legal representative, stating that he aasents 
to the makiog of the application; or . 
(b) the original deed of assignment executed by the true and first 
35 inventor or his legal repI·el-lentative. 
(3) Every application under this section shall state that the applicunu 
is in possession of the invention and .,hall name the person claiming to be 
the true Bnd first inventor; and where the person so claiming is not the 
applicant or one of the applicants. the application shall contain a declara-
tion that the applicant believes the person so named to be the trlll'l a.nd 
40 first inventor. 
(4) Every such application shall be accompanied by-
(a) s. provisional or s. complete specification; and 
(b) the prescribed fee. 

6 
8. Provlllonal &D4 complete IpecUlc&tl~.-(l) Where an app15.cation 
for II. patpnt iR accompnnied by a provisional specification, a complete 
specification Rhall be filed within nine months from the date of filing 
'of the applicatio:1 8ncl if the complete specification is not so filed, the 
application shall be deemed to be abandoned: 
Provided that the complete specification may be filed at any time after 
nille month,; but within twelve months from the dute aforesaid, if a request 
I/o th,at, effect is made to the Controller and the prescribed fee is paid on or 
before thp date on which the complete specification is filed. 
(2) Wherf' two or more applications in the name of the same applicant l() 
arc aC(lompanied by provisional specifications in respect of inventions which 
are cognate or of which one is a !Dodifioation of another and the Controller 
,is of 'opinion that the whole of snch inventions are'such as to constitute 
a singIe invention and may properly be included in one patent, he may 
allQwone complete specification to be filed'in respect of all such provisional 15 
specifications. 
(.1) Where lin application for a pateJlt is accompanied by a specifica-
tion p.urporting to be a complete specification, the Controller may. if tht': 
.pplip~nt 80 requests at any ,time before ~he acceptance ~ ,~~e ,app~c~t,1On, 
direct, ;i,hat such specification shall be trea.ted lor tbe, ,Pun>o~~s of this Act 20 
BS B pravisional specification aud proceed with the !,pplioation accordingly. 
(~) Where a oomplete $pecification has been filed in pursuance of an 
appJiClstioll for a patent aooompanied by a provisional specification or by 
a sp~cificution treated by virtue of a direction under sub-seotion (3) a8 a 
proTisional specification, the Controller may, if the applioant so requests at, 25 
any tit;ne before the acceptance of the applioation, canoel the provisional 
specification and post-date the application to the date of filing of the 
complete specification. 
9. Oon,tenta of ~c-.t1OD.-(l) Every specifioation, whether complete 
or provisional. shall describe the invention and shall begin with a title 30 
sufficiently indicating the subjeot-matter to whiilhthe invention relates. 
':It. I (2.) Subject to any rules tha;t may be made in this behalf under this 
Act, drawings may, and shall, if the Controller 80 requires, be supplied 
for the purposes of any specification, whether complete or provisional; and 
any drawings so supplied shall, unless the Controller otherwise directs, 35 
be clemllPd to form part of the specification and referenoes in this Aot to a 
sp~"ification shall be construed accordingly. 
(.1) Even complete specification-
(a) shall particularly describe the invention and the method by 
which it is to be performed; 40 
(b) shall disclose the best method of ,Performing the invention 
which i~ known to the applicant and for whloh he is entitled to claim 
prot,pction; and 
(r-) shall end with a claim or ('I aims defining the scope of the 
invf'nt.ion claimed. 45 
(.1-) 'I'he cIai.n or claims of a oomplete specifioa.ion shall rela.te to Il 
... single invention, shall he clenr Bnd Fmccmct and shall be fairlv based on 
tho'mnttrr disclosed in the RpecificRtion. . 

6 
(b) A declaration (IS tc the inventJorship of the invention shall, in 6uch 
cases as may be pl'escribed, be furnished in the prescribed form with the 
complete specification or witlrin such period al:! may be presoribed after 
the filing of that l:ipecificatioll. 
5 (6) Subject to the foregoing provisiolls of thi8 tWctioll, a complete speci-
ficatioll filed after a provision a\. specification, may illclude claims in respect 
of developments of, or additions to, the invention which was described ill 
the provisional ~pecification, being developments or additions in respect of 
which the applicant would be entitled under the provisions of section 6 
lO to make a st'parate -application for a patent.. 
10. Priority date of clatma of complete apecifle&Wm.-(l) Every. clttim 
of a complete specification sha1l have effect from the d,sLe specified in thi ... 
Hection in relation to that claim (in this Act referred to 8S the 'priority 
date'); and s patent shMI Ilot be invalidated bJ reuson only of the publi-
),'j cation or use of the inver1tion, so far as claimed in any claim of the com 
plete specification, on or after the pl'iority dute of that claim, or by tlw 
gl'llllt of another patent upon a specification claiming the same invention 
in ~ claim of the same or later priority date. 
. (£') Where the complete specification is filed in pursuance of II single 
20 application Hccorlipanied by a provisional specification or by 8 specificlltion 
wh,ich. is treated by virtue of a direction under sub-section (3) of section R 
as a provisi6nal specification, and the claim is fairly based on the 'mott.er 
disclosed in that specification, the priority date of that claim shall be the 
dl,lte of filing of the application. 
25 (3) Where the complete IiIpecification it>~led or proceeded with in 
pursuance of two, or more applications accompanied by >Hlch specificationI'! 
a.s are mentioned in Rub-section (£I), and the claim is fairly basf'd on the 
matter disclosed in one of those specifications, the priority elate of that 
claim shall be the date of filing of the application accompanied by that 
30 specification. 
(4) Where, under the foregoing provisions of this section, any claim of /\ 
cOlhplete specification would, but for the provisions of this sub·section, 
have two or more priority dates, the priority datE' ()f that claim shall be 
the earlier or earliest of those dntes. 
35 (5) In any case to which sub-sections (2) to (4·) do not appl)', ·the 
priority date of a claim shall., subject to the provision.,; of section 83, be th!, 
date of filing of the complete specification. 
11. J:zamiDation ofappUoatlon.-Wben the complete specification 
has been filed in respect of an application for a patent, the application 
40 Rnd the specification or speoifications relating theret.o shall be referred by 
the Controller to an Examiner for milking a report t.o him in respect of 
the following matters, namely:-
(a) whether the subject-matter of the specification or specifica-
tions is an invention within the meaning of clause (h) of section 2; 
45 (b) whether the application and the specificlltion or specifications 
relating thereto are in accordance with the requirements of this Act 
and of any rules made thereunder; 
(0) the result of investigations made uncler section 12; and 
(d) an" .,ther matter which may be prescriQed. 
00 HI. Searah fOr anticipation by previous pubUcation aDd by prior 
clalm.-(1) The examiner to whom an application for a patent is re-
ferred under section 11, shall make investiga.tion for the purpose of 8S6EIf'-

'i 
tllinillg whether the iuvention. so far as claimed in anv claim of the com-
~lete specificatiou-
(a) hag been published before the date of filing of the applicllnt's 
eompl~te specification in allY specification filed in pursuance of all 
application for a patent made in India /lnd dated within fifty years 
before that date; or 
(b) ig claimed ill any claim of allY ot.her complete specification 
published on or after the date of filing of the applicant's complete 
specification, being a "pecification filed i.1' pursuance of lin application 
fc;>r a patent made in India and dated before that date. 
(2) 'rho Examiner lIIay, in addition, make such invef;tigatioll as the 
\..:ontroller may direct for the purpose of lI~certailling whether the invention, 
so far as claimed in any claim of the complcte specificatioll, h!1s heen 
published in India before the date of filing of the applicant's complete 
"pecification in any other dooument. 
(j) The i.nvestigations made under this section shall not be held in any 
way to guaralltee the validity of any patent, anu no liability ~hall be 
incurred by the Centrhl Government or any officer by reason of, or in 
'~(lllnf'ct,ion with, fmy such invl;lstigat,ioll or any proceeding consequent 
'thereon 
13. Controller to take into coDllderatlon the report of Examiner.- When, 
iu r(~spect of any application for ,R plltent, the Controller has received the 
report of the Examiner under section 11, he 8hall, after considering the 
report, dispose of the application in Ilccordunce with the provisions herein-
llfte,' appearing. 
U. Re1U81l of appl1cation in certain caeee.~Where the Controller IS 
;sutisfied that the subject-mutter of the specifications relating to all 
application is not an . invention' within the meaning of clause (h) of 
section 2 or is not patentable under section 8, he shall refuse the I\ppli-
,l;lIt:ioJI. 
15. Order of refu .. l or amendment of appl1catloo in certain 0&188.-
\Y here t,he Controller is satisfied that the application and the specifica-
tions relating thereto do not compl.y with the requirements of this Act or 
of Ilny rules made then'under, the Controller msy, subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, refu\,e to proceed with ~he appliclltion or require 
t.hat the Ilpplicatiul1 or the specification be amended to his satisfacti:m before 
he proceed" with the applica.tion. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
16. Ot.b.&r orders on appllcatlon.-(l) Wherc a sppcification relates to 
more than one invention, the application shall, if the Controller or the 
applicant AO requires, be restricted to· one invention and the other il\ven· 40 
ti01l8 may be made thp F;llbject-maUer of fresh I:lpplications; and Bny such 
h'eRh application shall be proceeded with as a 8ubst,antive application, but 
the Controller may uirect that any such fresh application made before the 
~lcceptElnce of the crigiual application shall bear the date of the originalnppli-
cation or Buch inter date as he may fix, and the fresh application shall I.·e 45 
(leeUled, for the }HlrpOSes of this Act, to have been made on the date which 
it bt'llrfl in accordance with such direction. 
(2) At any time after all a.pplication has been tiled under ihis Act and 
before acceptance of the application, the Controller may, at the request 
·of the applicant and upon payment of the pre8cribed fee, direct that the 50 

5 
10 
8 
application shall be post-dated to such date as may be specified in the 
request, and proceed with the application accordingly: 
Pl'ovided that IlO application shall be post-dated under thh~ suh-tlectioD 
to a date later than six months from the date on which it was actually 
made ot' would, but, for the l)J"ovisions of this suIH,ection, he deemed to 
have been made. 
(3) Whprr nil Il.pplieatioll or specification filed under this Act is amended 
before acceptance of the application, the Controller ma~' direct that the 
application or Rpecificlltion shall be post-dated to the dnte 011 which it is 
amended, or if it has been returned to the applicant, to t,he date on which 
it is refiled. 
(4) Where it appears to the Controller that the invention 110 far .. 
claimed in any claim of the complete specification has been published in 
15 the maimer refermd to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 12. 
he m8~' refuse to accept the appUcation unless the applicant either-
20 
25 
30 
(a) shows to the satisfaotion of the Controller that the p'iority 
date of the claim of his complete specificatioll is not later than the 
nllte on whil~h tho.! relevant document was published in India; c.r 
(b) amends his complete specification to the satisfaction of the 
Controller. 
(5) H it appears to the Controller that the invention is claimed in .. 
claim of alJY other complete specification referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 12, he may, subject to the provisiolls hereinolter 
contained. direct that a reference to that other specification shall be 
inserted by way of notice to the public in the applicant's complete spt'ci-
- fication unless within Buch time !IS may be prescribed ,either-
(a) the applicant shows to the sQ,tisfaction of the Controller that 
the priority date of his claim is not later than the priorit~· date of 
the claim (If the said other specifictltion; or . 
(b) the complete specification is amended to the satisfaction of 
the Controller. 
(6) If it appear" to the Controller nil a reRult of Itn investigntion under 
section 12 or otherwise-
(e-) that the in~ention so far as claim&ri in any claim of the 
applicant's complete specification hits been claimed in any other com-
plete Rpecification referred to in clause (a) of Rub-section (1) of 
seetion 12; and 
(b) that such ot·her complete Rpecification was pnbliE;hed on or 
aU'Ir th:: priority date of the applicant's claim; 
40 then, unless it has been shown to the slttisfaction of the Controller thBt 
ttJe priority date of the applicant's claim is not later t.han the priority 
date of the claim of that f;pe('ification, the provisions of Rub-section (5) 
ehall apply in the same manner as they apply to a Rpecification publishecf 
on or after tht' date of filing of the applicant's complete specifica.tion. 
4!) (7) The power of the Cont,rbller lInder sub·lwctiom; (6) and (6) to direct, 
the iw~ertjoll of a reference to another specification may be exercised Bither 
before or after a patent ba.s been granted for nn invention claimed in 
that other "pecification, but, any direction given before tllC grant of Imch 
, a patent shall be of no effect unless ancl until snch It patent js grantee\. 

9 
17. SubatitUtloD 01 appUcaDts,-(l) 1£ the Controller is satisfied, on 
a cl,aim made in the prescribed manner at any t,ime before a putent haR 
been granted, that by virtue of any assignment or agreement mad~ by 
the upplicant or ')ne of the apphcants for the patent or by operatIOn of 
law, the claimant would, if the patent were thl'lJ gl'llnted, he cntitlp.d 
thereto or to the interest of the applicant ilhereiu, or t.o ar~ undivided shar;-
of the pahmt or of that intul'€st, the Con~oll.er may, 8ub]ec,t ~ the provI-
sions of this section, direct that th,e apphcatloll >lhall proceed m the name 
of the claimant or in the names of the claimant tlwl t,he applicant or the 
other joint applicant or applicants, according us the case may req llIre. 
(2) No suoh dlrection as aforesaid shall ?~ given. by virtue of an, 
assignment or agr,eement made by one of two JOint applicants for a patent 
Axcept with the oonsent of the other joint applicunt or applicanti. 
(3) No such direction as a~oreBaid shaH be given by virt1.~e of a~y assign· 
ment or agreement for the 'assIgnment of thf' benefit of any lIlventlOn unless 
eit'her-
(a) lIbl lDvemion is identi6ed therein by reference to the number 
of the application for the pat'lnt; or 
(b) there is produoed to the Controller an acknowledgment by 
the person by whom the' assignment or agreement was made that the 
aFlsignrnent or agreement relutes to the invelltion in r('f!pect of which 
that application is mode; or 
(c) the rights of the claimant in respect of thE: illvention have 
bet'n finlllly established under tbp pn,visions of this Act. 
(4) Where OJle of two or more joint applioants for a' paten t .i(ias at 'lily 
time before the pbtent hus been granted, the Controller may, upon 1\ requetl' 
in Hult b~hRlf ml!de by the survivor or survivors, and with the con!lent of 
t,lIe per-ir,nlll l'pprefoentativc of the deceased, direct that the application tball 
proc~HI in t hI' il~lllC of tbp survivor or survivors alone. 
(5) If any dispute arises between joint applicants for a patent whether 
or in whnt manner the application should be proceeded with, the Control-
jer mnv, Ilpon appli(;atioll made to him in the prescribed manner by any 
of the parties, and after giving to all parties concerned an opportunity to 
he heard, give such directions Ilg he thinks fit for enahling the applicntioll 
to proceeo in the nflme of one 01· more of the pllI·tip>! alone or for regulating 
th" JlJll\1lwr in which it shollld he proceeded with, or for both those pur-
poses, according as the case may require. 
5 
10 
15 
2() 
2G 
35 
18, Acceptance of &JlplicatiOD.-(1) Wherf'. in re~pcet of un I\ppli'l'ution 
for I\, patt'nt no ornel· is prl'ise(l by 1,he Controller under sectioll 14 or section 
15 or '1(>~·tion 16. or whel"e Iln order is paRsed by the Controller under se,..tion 
lfj or section 16 which is complied with by the applicant, the Controller 40 
III;IV. slIhjPpt to thp pl'Ov!RiollS or sub.section (2), accept the applica,tion. 
(2) UII!esR an application for a. patent is accepted within eighteen 
rrwllt hs fl'e!ID the date of the application, the application shall (except 
\\'hl~rc an appeal hns heen ]o(lgecl) be df1emed to have been refllsed: 
. Provided ~hat ~here. ~efore, or within three mouths after, the expira. 
tlOn of the ~l\Id penod of eIghteen months a )'e'qllest is made to the Control. 
Il]r f(J~· an extension ?f time. the applicat.ion shall, on payment of the 
prescrIbed fee, he contmued .for .any period 8? req~ested not exceeding in all 
three months from the expIratIOn of the saId perIod of eighteen months. 
45 
50 

10 
19. Advertisement of acceptance of appUcation.-OIl the acceptanCtl 
or an application, the Controller shall give notictl thereof to the applicant, 
and shall advertise the acceptance in the Offioial Gazette; and the appli-
r-ation and the specification with the drawings (if any) shull be open to 
.Ii public inspection. ' 
20. Jarect of acceptance of appUcation.-After the acceptance of an 
application and untllthe date of sealing a. patent in respect thereof or the 
expiration of the time for sealing, the applicant shall hav'f' the like privi. 
leges Hnc1 rights as if a patent fOl' the invention had been sea.led on the 
10 date of r..dvertiserr,f'nt of acceptance of the application: 
Provide!} that the applicant shall not be entitled to institut, nny pro-
r:eedings for infringement until the patent has been sealed. 
21. Objectlou to .aI.lng of pat8nt.---i.1) AtaD7 time within four months 
from the date of advedisement of the acoeptanoe of an a.pplioation in the 
,5 dfficial Guzette, any pet'son interested may, on pa.yment of the prescribed 
fee, fill' bf'fore th.e Controller objections in writing to the .sealing of the 
pAtent on th.:l application. such objeotions being restrlcted to the matters 
SVt.'cint'ri in clauses (a) to (d) of secti~ 11. 
. (~) Whe.·e IlnJ' objectioils have heen filed under' sub-section (I), the 
,Controller shall, after hearing the applicant and, if necessary, the person 
.tilUlg the objections anrl after making sllch further enquiry, if any. IlS he 
may deem fit, may-
(a) dismiss the objections; or 
(b) dirt/at the applicant to amend the complete specifioation to the 
sat,isfactioll of the Controller und within such time as may be specified 
in tile direob;GI' 
(c) dir~ct that thf' reference to any other specification shall be 
inserted by way of notice to (,he public in the applicant's complettl 
specification. 
(3) Where the applicant refuses or fails to carry' out any directiolls of 
the C.mtl'ollel' undt'r clause (b) or clause (e) of sub-section (.e), the Controllel 
may refuse to seal tbe patent~ 
21. KentloD of lDventor u nch bl patent.-(l) If the Controller is 
satisfied, lIpon a request or claim IIJ11,<le ill aecqr:iance with the provif;ions 
36 of this section,-
(a) tha.t the penlOn ill rp~pf'ct of or b~' whom th ' request or claim 
is made is the inventor of an invel1tioll in respect of whioh application 
for II. pat.ent haR been made, or of H Inbstantial part of that invention; 
and 
.40 (b) th.\t the application for the plltent is a di .. 'ct, consequell(:e of 
his being the inventor; 
the Controller shall, subject t6 the provisions of this section, cause him 
to be mentionerl BR inventor in any patent granted ill pursuance of thn 
applicatioll, in the complete specifh:ation. Bnd in the register of pateutK: 
J5 Provided that the mention of any person BS invf'ntor under this section 
shall not confer or derogate from any rights under the patent, 

11 
(2) For the purposes of this section, the aetual ~eviser of an i~1Vention 
-or a. part of an invention shall be deemed to be the Inventor, notwlthstand· 
in~ that any other PPrsOIl is for any of the ot,her purposes of this Act treat-
ed as the true amI first inventor; and no person shall he deemed to be the 
inVl'ntor of 811 invention 0r a part of an invention by rOBson only that it 
-was ir.ln(\rtt~d bv him into India or that it was communicated to him from out· 
side India. . 
.. (8) A request that any person shall be mentioned as aforesaid ma:\' ,be 
made in the preflcribed manner by the applicant for the patent or (where 
-t,he person alleged to be the inventor is not the applicant or one of the 
!\pplicants) by the applicant and that person, 
(4) If any person [other than Q person in respect of whom a request in 
relation to the application in question has been made under Rub-secHon 
'(3)] desires to be mentioned as aforesaid, he msy make a claim in the pre-
-criberi manner in that behalf. 
(5) A request under the foregoing 'provisions of this section shall be 
made not,lster than two months after the date of advertisement of accept-
5 
10 
15 
ance of the application or within sllch further period (not. ex~eding one 
month) II" the Controllp,r may, on an application made to him in that 
be'hnlf hefol'~ the expirAtion of the said period of two months and subject 20 
to the payment of t.he prescribed fee, allow. 
(6) Where Q claim is made under sub-section (4), ~he Contrdller shall 
give notice of the claim to every applieant far the patent (not being the 
'tllaimant) and to any other person whom the Controllpr mny cOllsider to 
-be interested; and before deciding utlOn any request. or claim made under 2~ 
-811b-section (8)' or sub~section (4), the Controller shall. if required. hear 
the person in respect of or by whom thp, request or claim is made, and. in 
the case of a claim under the aaid sub-sI':Ction (4), any· person to whom 
'notice of the claim has been given as doresaid, 
(7) Where any person has been mentioned as invElntor in pm'suance of 30 
t.his section, any other per!'.on wno anegl~s that he ought not to have hflen 
!l0 mp,ntioned mny at. any t,ime apply to the Controller for a certificate to 
that effect a.nd the Controller may nfter hparing. if required. any persOn 
whom he mav consider to be interested, issue such a certificste, and if he 
,does so. he shall rect,ify the specification and the register accordingly. 35 
28. ProVillon for secrecy of certain IDventtOlLL-(l) Where, either 
b(Jfore or Rfter the commencement of this Act, BD a.pplication for a patent 
has bMn made in respect of an invention, and it appears to the ControlIel' 
that the inVl'lltion is one of a class notified to him by the Central Govern-
ment as relevant for defence purposes, he may give directions for prohibit- 4:0 
ing or restricting the publication of information with respect to the inven-
tion, or the commnnication of Buch information to any person Or clR"R of 
persons specified in the direotions; and while such directions are in faroe, 
the application may, subject to the directions, proceed up to the stage of 
the acoeptance of the application, but thp, acceptance ~hall not be anvertis- 4:5 
ed nor the sppcificBtion published, and no patent shall be gr",utetl in 
pursuance of the application, 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
36 
12 
(2) Where the Controller gives any RIlCh directions a~ aforesaid, he shalf 
give notice of the application and of thp, directions to the Central Govern-
ment, and thereupon the following provisions shall have effeot, that is to. 
say,-
(a) the Central Goverument shall. upon receipt of such notice· 
consider whether the publication of the invention would be prejudicial 
to the defence of India and unless a notice under paragraph (c) of this 
sub-section has been previously given b:y the Central Government,' to· 
the Controller, shall reconsider that question before the expiration of 
nine months from the date of filing of the application for the patent 
and at least once in every subsequent year; 
(b) for the purpose aforf'said, the Central Government may. at 
.~y time after tbe~lication has beenacoepted or, with the consent 
of the applicant, at any time before the applioation has heen acceptE'd. 
inspect the application Ilnd,anydocl1ments furnished to the Control--
Jer in connection therewith: 
(c) if upon consideration of the invpntion at any time it appaartf 
~ the Central Government- that the publication of the invention woul<f 
Dot, or would no longer, be prejudicial to the defence of lnelia, th~· 
Central Government, shall give notice to the Controller to that Erlrect; 
(d) on reoeipt of anv such notme the Controller shall revoke -
the directionR and may, subject to such conditions. if any. &1\ he think~ 
fit, extend the time for doin~ an~thing rAQuirl'd or authorised to bp 
done by OT under this Act in connection with the applicRtlon, , whli'lther 
or not that time hu previoml:v extriTe(l. 
(-') Whpre an application for II. patent fOr an invention in respect of 
which directions have been given under this section or under s80tion 12 of 
tbfl Atomic Ener~ Act. 1948 (XXIX rA. 1(48), I. accepted during the· 
l'.ontinllQncp in forcp, of thE' dirpctiollfl. thpn-
(a) if any use of the Invention Is made duriJlg the oontinuance in· 
forCA of the direct.ions hv (,)T on hehalf of or to the ordp.r of the Govern-
ment, the provisions of sections 58, 54- and !i5 shall apply in relstion . 
to that use a8 if thA pitent had been ~anted for the invention; ann • 
(b) if it appears to the Central Government that fibe appUcant for' 
the pRtent has suffered hardship hy reason of the oonlinuf.I.mle-in force 
of the direction~. t.he (;en trll.l Gm'ernment may ma.kA to him s~ 
payment (if any) by way of compensation &8 appeaJ"8 to be reasonable . 
hRvinll re!!flr<l t,o thA nOVf\lt,v nn<l lItilitv of t.he invpntion and thp pllr-
POI'lf! for which it is <lpsi~ed. ann to any other rplevQnt circnmstancp.l\. 
40 (4) Whf'rc n PRtent is at'anted in nunmance o.f an application in reSl>eC\t 
of which direct,ion!\ have hepn civen nndpr thiR Rection or under seetion 12 
of the AtomiC'. Energy Act. 194R (XXrx of 19(8). no renewal feeR shall he 
pRYRhl£1 in r~pect of any -period nurln~ which those directions are in fMce. 
(5) No person resident in Ind~ shall. excppt under the Quthnritv of " 
liS written -permit gTantpd hv or on hphalf of the llontroller. make 01' (,Rllfle t,n 
be mad", any a.pplication outside Indil\ for the ~Qnt of II. patent for Bn inven-
tion unlrss-
(a) 8n RPplio"tion for II. patent for the same invention ha!\ hppn 
made in IndlB not le8s than six weeks before the Rpplication outsiae-
India; and 

13 
(b) either no directions have been given under sub-section (1) of 
thiR section or under section 12 of the Atomic Enet·gy Act, 1948 (XXIX 
of 19(8), in relation to the applica.tion in India, or ~ll such directions 
have beeD reTOked: 
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply in relation to an j"vention 5 
for which an application for protection has first been filed in a. country out-
side Indio. by a person resident outside Indin. 
CHAPTER IV 
GRAIilT AND SSALING OF PATENT 
2&. Glut aDd II6&ling of p&tent.-(l) Where an application in respect 10 
Gf a patent is accepted, and no objections have been filed under section 21 
Qr where .weh objections have been filed but have been dismissed, or where 
the applicant hal' carried out th.e directions of the Controller under clause 
(I) or clause (c:) of f;ub·section (2) of section 21, a patent shall on the 
prescribed requ'Jst l'..lld (1U payment of the prescribed fee, be granted subject 15 
to such conditions (if any) as the Central Government thinks expediEmt. to 
the applicant, or in the case of a joint application to the applicant" jointly, 
and the Controller sha.ll cS:use the patent to be sealed with the seal of the 
Patent, Office. 
(2) A patent; shall be sealed as soon as may be but not after the expira- 20 
;tion of a period of twent,y-rour months from the date of the application: 
Provided that--
(111) wherl'l the· Ccintrollu!' has allowed lin extension of tlme 
*ithin which an applica.Uon may be accepted, a further extension 
of four months after the said perioa of twenty-four months shall be 26 
.Uowed for the sealing of the patent; 
(b) where the sealing is delayed by an appeal against the diree-
.on, . decision or order of the Controller under s.ection 14, section 15, 
section Hl or section 17 OJ" by any proceeding ta.ken for obtaining such 
direction, decision or order, ·the patent may be sealed at such time 30 
:&8 the Controller may direot; 
(0) where the pa.tent is gra.nted to the legal representative of an 
applicant who has died before the expiration of the time which would 
otherwise be allowed for sealing the patent. the patent may be 
sealed at l1dly t·ime within twelve months after the date of his deuth 
or at such later time as the Controller may think fit; 
(d) where for any reason a patent cannot be sealed within the 
period allowed by IIny of the foregoing provisions of this s~ction, that 
period may, on payment of the prescribed fee and on compliance with 
35 
the prescribe.d cOotlditions, be extended to the extent applied for but 40 
not. exceeding three monthI'. 
25. Date of patent.-(l) Except as otherwiRe expressly provided in this 
.Act, every p'11;llnt shall be dated and sealed as of the date of filing of thp 
complete Apecification: 
Provided that no proceedings shull be taken ill respect of nn infringe- 45 
roent committed before the date of advertisement of acceptance of the ap-
plication. 
(2) 'J'he date of every patent shall 06 entered in the register· of patents. 

5 
10 
15 
a 
26: I'orm and deet of patent.-(l) Every patent shall be ill the-
prescrIbed form Rnd shall have effect throughout India_ 
_ (2) A paten~ shall be granted for one invention only; but the specifica-. 
tlOn may contain more than onf> olaim: 
Provided ~h8t it shall not be, cOI;npetent for any person in a. suit or 
?tber pl'oceedmg to ta.ke any obJectIon to B patent on the ground that, 
It has been granted for more than one invention. 
(3) Subject ~o the provisions of Chapt.er XI. a patent shall have the· 
'lIlU~ effect agamst GovernmAnt as it has against any perSOll, 
27. B.tghta of patentee.-A patent sealed with the seal of the Patent 
Office shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, confer on the· 
patentee-
(a) in the case of a patented article, the exclusive right to make 
use or sell such artiole in India and of authorising others so to do; 
(b) in the CRse of a patent relating to a process, the exclusive 
privilege of using and execisins such process in India and of using or-
selling aticles in Indio. wade loy such process and of authorising otheN. 
so to do 
.•. Patl8nt obt&lned in bud of true &1ld lilt mventor.-Where Q 
20 patent has been revoked by a High Court or the Controller on the ground 
~bat it has been obtained in fraud of the true and first inventor, the COIl' 
troller may, on the application of the true and first inventor or his leglll 
representative or &!,Iugnee madt: in accordance with the provisiolHl of this 
Act, ,grant to him a patent for the whole or any part of the inventioQ" and 
25 th~ patent so granted shall bear the same date as the patent so revoked: 
30 
35 
40 
Provided that no 8uit shall be brought for any infringement 6£ the 
patent so graJlted llommitted before the actual date on w,hich such patent. 
WUII granted. 
29. Term 01 p&t.ent,-( 1) The term limited in every patent for the 
duration thereof shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by tbis Act, 
be sixteen years from its date. 
(2) A patent shall, notwithstanding anything contained therein or in 
this Act, cease if the patentee fails to pay the prescribed fees within' the 
prescribed times: 
.!"rovided that the period prescribed for the payment of auy . fees shull 
be extended to Bllch period not being more thaIl three months longer than 
the prescribed period as may be specified in a request made to the (Jon· 
troller, if the request is made and the prescribed fees and the prescribed 
additional fee':! urc paid. 
30. J:xtendon Of term of patent.-(l) A patentee may make an appli. 
cation to the Controller that his patent may be extended for a further' 
term, 
(2) Every application made under sub·section (1)-
(a') shall be filed at the Patent Office at least six months befor~ 
-l5 the time limited for expiration of the pa.tent; 

16 
(b) shall be accompanied by the presoribed fee; and 
(c) shall be advertised by the patentee within the prescribed tinlf' 
and in the prescribed ma.nner. 
(3) Any interested person may within such time as may be prescribed 
and on payment of the prescribed fee, give notioe in the prescribed manner .'l 
to the Controller (,f opposition to the application. 
. (4) 'l'he patentee and any person who has given notioe of opposition 
under sub-section (3) shall be made part·ies to the proceedings before the 
Controller. ' -
(5) The Controller having regard to- 10 
(11) tlll~ natllre tlnd lm:rits of the invention in relation to the 
public; 
(b) the profits madjl on the patent; and 
(0) such other circumstanoes as may be relevant; 
nad attN' hearing the parties may grant or refuse the application. 15 
(6) If upon application ma.de by a. patentee in accordl:mce with this sec:-
timl the Controllp-r is satisfied that the patentee has not been adequately 
remunerated by the patent, the Controller may by order. extend the term of 
the patent, subject to sucD. restrictions, conditions und provisions, if a.ny, 
8f! .may be specified iu the order, for such period not exceeding five years, 20 
or in fin exceptional cuse, ten years as may be 80 specified: and any slIch 
order ma:y be mude notwithstanding' tllat the term of the patent has pre-
viously expired, 
81. Patents of addltton.-(l) Subject to the provisions of this section, 
where an application is made for a patent in respect of any improvement 25 
or modification of an invention (in this Act referred to as the 'main inven-
tion') and the applicant also applies or has applied for a patE\Dt for that 
invention or is the patentee in respect thereof. the Controller may t if the-
applicant so requests, grant a patent for the improvement or modification 
as a patent of I!oddition, 30' 
(2) Subjeot to the provisionF; of this section, \\"hel'e an invention being 
an improvement in or modification of another invention is the subject of an 
independent patent and the patentee in respect of that patent is also the 
patentee in respect of the patent lor the main invention, the Controller 
may, if the patentee so requests by order revoke the patent for the improve- 35 
rnent or modifioation and grant to ~e pa.tentee e. patent of addition in 
respect thereof, bearing the same date as the date of lihe patent so revoked. 
(3) A patent shall not be granted as " pa.teniJ of addition unless the date 
of filing of the complete specification was the same 8S or later than the 
date uf filing of the complete ,specificat.ion in respect of the main invell- 40 
tion. 
(4) A patent of addition shall not be sealed befol'e the sealing of the 
patent for the main invention; and if tJJe period within which, but for t·he 
provisions of this sub-section, n request for the sealing of a patent could 
he made under section 24 expires before the period within which a request 45 
for the sealing of the patent for the main inventioll may be BO made. the 

16 
re.qu~st for the sealin~ of the patent of addition may be made at any ti_. 
wlthlD the last mentIoned period. 
(5) A patent of IlIldition shall be grllnted fol' Il terr\! equtU to that of 
the patent for the main invention. or so much thereof Ils has not expired.. 
{) and shall remain in foroe during that term or until the previous cesser of 
the patent for the main invention and no longer: 
10 
15 
Provided that-
(a) if the term of the patent for the main invention is extended 
under section 30. the term of the patent of addition may also be 8X-
tended accordingly ; 
(b) if the patent for the main invention is revoked under this Act, 
the Court or the Controller. liS the cuse may be, may order thut 
the patent of addition shall become an independent patent for 
the remainder of the term of the patent for the main invention and 
thereupon the patent shall continue in force as an indpendent patent 
accordingly. " 
(6) No renewal fees shall be payable in respect of a patent, of addition. 
but. if ony such patent becomes an independent patent under sub-section 
15). the same fees shall thereafter be payable upon the S81l1e dates us if thfl 
20 patent had Ibeen originally granted as an independent patent. 
(7) The grant of a patent of addition shall not be refused, and a pa.tent 
granted RR :l patent of additioD sha.ll not be revoked or invalidated, on tbe 
ground only that the invf'tution clsimed in the "complete specification does 
not involve any inventive step having regard to any pubUcation or use of-
25 (a) the main invention described in the complete specification '·'11&t· 
ing thereto; or 
(b) a.ny improvement ill or modification of the main invention 
cleFicril,ed in thO' oomplete apeci&ation of Q patent of addition to fih~ 
plAtent for tbfl main invention or of an application for such u ll~~t 
30 of additIon; 
35 
and the validity of a pntent of nddition shall 1I0t, he questioned on thA 
wou'l tl,ut the inventior, ought to have been the subject of an indl\pen-
dent p,tf.:,)t, 
CHAPTER V 
RERTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS AND PATENT APPLICATIONS 
82. :ae.tontioD of l&plecl pat8DtI.-(1) Where a patent has ceased 
to bl\'v~ effect b,Y remlon oC failure to pay a.ny prescribed fe'El within tho pres-
eribed period or within that period nR extended under seetion 30, and tho 
Controller is satisfied upon appliclltion made within the preRcribed period 
40 from the date on which thl' patent has ceased to have effect that the failure 
WIlIO; IIn1nhmti(ln~l and t.hot no 1I1ldlle rlelBY hllR occurred in the mnking 01' 
proflFcntlor: of thp r.pplication, he shall, by order, restore the p6J;ant 0.1:(1 
any pat>6nt :)f addition specifieq in the a.pplication which has ceased to havl.' 
effect. on the cesser of that patent. 
45 (2) An application under this section may be made by the peNton who waR 
the patf'lltee or bv his legal repn,sentative; and where the patent was held 
. by two or mOle p'er!'ons jointly, the appliCl\t,ion msy, with the leave of tl.c 
rjontroller. be rmule by one or more of them without joining the o';hel'B, 

i'1 
(8) AT! upplication under this seetion shall contain a "temo!n~ (to am 
verified in such manner a8 may be prescribed) fully settinl out the circum-
stances which led to the failure to pay the prescribed fee; and the Con-
troller may require frOIr. the applicant luch further evidence 8S be may 
think necessary.S 
(4) If after hearing the applicant (where the applicant so requires or the 
Controller thinks fit) the Controller is satisfied that a prima facie case has 
been made out for an order under this section, he shall advertise the appil. 
cation in the presoribed maDDer; and within the prescribed period any per· 
son Ulay give notice to the Controller of opposition thereto on either or both 10 
of the following grounds, that is to !ay:-
(a) that the failure to pay the prescribed fee was not unintentional; 
or 
(b) that there has been undue delllY in the making of the appli. 
cation. 
«5) If notice of opposition is given within the period aforeRaid, the Con-
troller shall notify the applicant and shall give to him and to the opponent 
an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case. 
15 
'6) If no notice of opposition is givf'n within the period aforesaid or if 
in the case of opp('Sition the decision of the Controller is in favour of the 20 
applicant, the Control1.er shall upon payment of any ".lllpaid prescribed fee 
and such additional fee as may be prescribed, make all order in accorda.nce 
with thA application. 
(7) An order under this section for the restoration of the patent--
(a) may be made subject to such conditions as the COlltrollel' think", 25 
fit, includinJ:( in particular a condition requiring the registration in th" 
Register of Patents of any mattAr in respect of which the provisions of 
this Act as to tho entries in that Register have not been complied 
with; und 
'b~ shall contain such provisions as may be prescribed ror tht: pro- 30 
tection of persons who may have begun to avail themselves of the 
pat€ntec1 invention betwf.nn the date when the patent ceased to have 
effect and the date of the advertisement of the application under thia 
section;. 
and if any condition of an order under this section is not complied wit.h 35 
by the patentee, the Controller may, after giving to the patentee or his 
legal representative an opportunity to be henrd, revoke the order and give 
such directions consequential on the revocation 8.8 he thinks fit. 
83. Reatoration of I.pled appUc&ttona for p&\eDtI.-(l) Where a pa.tent 
hal not be."n F'ealtld by reason only that the prescribed request was not 40 
made within the time allowed for that purpose by or under sub-section (9) 
of section ~4, then, if the Controller is satiBfi~d upon application made with-
in the prescribe~ period after the expiration of that time by the applicant. 
fOJ' the patent that the failure to make the request was unintentional, hEl 
may order the patent to be sealed notwithstanding that the prescribed re- '" 
<}IIAf!t was not mode as aforesaid. 

18 
(~) An appscation under this section shall coutain a. sta~ement (to be 
verified in such manner as may be prescribed) iully 6~ttitig out the c~um­
stances which led to the fallure to make the prescribed request. and the 
C;o.n.troller may requir.e from the applicant such further evidence as ha 
6 thinks necessary. 
(3) If after heuring the applicant (where the applicant so requires or the 
Controller thinks fit) the Controller is satisfied that a prima. fa.oie case has 
been made out for an order under this section, he shall advertise the appli-
cation in the prescribed manner; and within the pres!)rib.ed period any 
10 I,ersoll lOlly give notice to the Controller of opposition 'thereto on the 
ground that the fuilure to mut'! the prescribed request was not uninten-
tional. 
(4) If n:>tice of cpposition is given within the period aforesaid the Con· 
15 troller shall notify the applicant and shall give to him and to the opponent 
an opportunity to be beard before he decides the case. 
·20 
(5) If no notie~ of opposition is given within the period afor~8aid or in 
the case of opposition the decision of the Controller is in favour of the appli. 
cant, the Controller shall upon payment of the prescribed fee in respect· of 
the making of the request for sealing and of such additional fee as may b", 
prescribed, mllke an order in accordance with the application. 
(6) An order undel thi" section shall contain such provisions 8S roilY he 
prescribed for the I'rotection of persons who may have begun to uvo.il th~lJl' 
selves of the invention between the date when the time allowed by or under 
sub-section (2) of sectioll 24 for the making of the prescribed request ex-
25 pired and the date of the advertisement of the o.pplication under this 
section. 
CHAPTER VI 
AMENDMENT OF APPLICATION OR SPECIFICATION 
34. Amendment of application or speciAcation by OontroUer.-(I) An 
30 applicant or a patentee nUl'y. at any time, by request in writing lodged at 
the Patent Oflice and accompanied by the prescribed fee, seek leave to 
amend his application, or specification, including draWings, if any, by 
way of disclaimer, correction or explanation, stating tha nature of, and the 
reasons for, the proposed amendment. 
35 (2) If the application for 0. patent has not been accepted, the Controller 
shall determine whether und subje'lt to what conditions tif 8ny) the 
amendment shall be allowed. 
(3) In any other case the request and the nature of the proposed 
amendment shall be advel-tisl,d in the prescribed manner and at nny 
40 time within throe months from its first adverti!!ement any person may 
give notice at the Patent Office of opposition to the amendment. , 
(4) Where such 8 notice is given, the Controller shall give notice of tho 
opposition to the person making the request, and shall hear and decide 
the caSEl!. 
4lS (5) Where no notice of opposition is given, or the pel'8on so giving notice 
of opposition does not appear, ,the Controller shall determine whether and 
subject to what conditions, if any, the amendmflnt may be· allowed. 
(6) No amendment shall be allowed that would make the applhation 
. or specificution, 8S amended, claim an invention substantially larger than, 
60 or substantially different frolD, the invention olaimed by the application 
or speeification 8S it stood before amendment. 

19 
(7) Leave to amend shall be oonclusive as to the right of the party 
allowed to make the amendment, except in oase of fraud i and the amend-
ment shall be advertised in the prescribed manner, and shall in all courts 
an~ for ull purJ;loses be deemed to form pari of the applioation or specifi-
catIOn. 
(8) No applioation or speoifioation shall be amended under this section 
when and so long as any suit for infringement or a prooeeding for the revo-
cation of the patent is pending before a court. 
U. Amendment 01 apecUloatlon by the com.-In any suit for infringe-
ment of a patent or proceeding before a court for the revocation of a 10 
patent, the court may by order ~llow the patentee to amend his specifi-
cation by way of disclaimer, correction or expla.nation in such manner, 
and subject. to such terms as to oosts, advertisement or otherwise, as the 
oourt may think fit: 
Provided that no amendment shall b,e so allowed as to make the speci- 16 
fication as amended, olaim an invention substantially larger than, or sub-
stantially different from, the invention claimed by the specification as it 
stood before the amendment: 
Provided further that notioe of the application shall be given to the 
Controller, and the Controller shall have the right. to appear and be heard. 20 
CHAPTER VII 
SURRENDER AND RBVOCATION OF PATENTS 
36. Surrender of pat&Jlt.-(l) A patentee may, at any time by giving 
notice in the prescribed manner to the Controller, offer to surrender his 
patent. 25 
(2) Where suoh aD "ffer is made, the Controller shall advertise the 
offer in the presoribed manner; and within the presoribed period after 
suoh advertisement any person interested may give. notioe to the Con-
troller of opposition to the surrender. 
(3) Where any such notice of opposition is duly given, the Controller 30 
shall notify the patentee. 
(4) If the Controller is satisfied after hearing the patentee and any 
,opponent, if desiroqs of being heard, that the patent may properly be 
surrendered, he may accept the offer and by order revoke the patent. 
37. Revocation of PatentB.-(l) Revocation of a patent in whole or in 36 
part may be obtained on Il pet~tion to a High Court or the Controller or on 
a counter-claim in a suit for infringement be~ore a High Court, on all or 
any of the grounds specified in clause (a) of sub-section (2). 
(2) A petitiob for the revocation of a patent may be presented-
(a) that the invention, 80 far as olaimed in any claim of the 
oomplete specifioation, was olaim,ed in a valid olaim of earlier priori-
'Y date contained in the complete speoification of another patent 
40 
~anted in India; 45 

10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
20 
(u) tbat the patent was granted. .. taeapplioa$ian of a per· 
IOn DOl entitl.ed under the provisioIl& of this Act to apply therefor;.' 
(iii) _ .. dle patent was obtained in contravention of the. 
rights of the petitioner or any person. under or through whom 
be claim",; 
(w) ;bat the aubjeot-mabter of the complete specification is 
not an 'invention' within the meaning o~ clause (h) of section 2 ; 
(11) that the inventiun is no4; paten_ble undeJ section 8; 
(vi) that the complete specification does not sufficiently a.nd 
lairly describe the invention and. the method by which it is tG 
be performed or does not disclose the best method of performiug 
it whioh was known to the applioant for a patent and tor whic • .) 
he was flntitled to claim protection.; 
(vii) that the scope of a.ny claim of the complete specifioation 
is not sufficiently and olearly defined or that any claim of the 
complete specification is not fairly based on the matter disclosed 
in the specifioation: 
(vii.) that the patent W8& obtained 00 a false sugge<;!t,iull 01' 
representation; 
(ix) that the primary or intended use or exeroise of the illven-
t·ion is contrary to law; 
~«:) thR.t the patentee bQ& contravened. or has not complied 
with, the conditions, if any, contained in the patent; 
(:':1) that prior to the date of. the paten.t, the patentee or othel' 
penon (not "eing the Government or any person authorised i.nthat 
behalf by the Government) s&ClIetly worked the inven~ion Qn a 
AOmmercial scale (and not tWIIJ:ely by way of reasona.ble trial or 
experiment) in India and thereby made direat or indiraet profitiJ 
in excess of such amount 8& the court or the Controller may iu 
,consideration of all the circumstances of the- C888 deem reasons,hle; 
(b) within one year from the dafle- ot sealing @f the patent to tn., 
Controller on Imy of the grounds specified in cl&l.188 (a). 
(3) A notice of any petition for re\tocation of a patent under this section 
shall be served on all persons' appearing from the register to be'proprietoL'8 
35 of that plltent or to have shares or lDtelWts thereiJlll e.n~ it shall' not be l\uce<3-
sary 10 serve a notice on any other penolll. 
(4) Without prejuaice to ·the provisious. ai: lJU~;-~atiolJ:. (2), a patent may 
be revoked on the Jletition of the Gonmment 11' ... Bigh: Court or thd Uon-
trollet, 81 the case mlly be, is .atisfied' tfJat th .. patentee hM witliout rea-
40 soDable cau .. failed to eomply w~ the reG}\le.o of ~h. Gonmment to make. 
use or exercise the patented invention 'for 'he purpoaet of'ilie UDioJ1 ';r (If 
'.' the State, llS the case may be, upon' Jle880narble ~: 

:·tl 
Provided that when __ suil; for infringement or a proceeding for the revo-
eation of a patent it1 pending in any court, a petition to the Controller u'lld.-
CIhi.s section sha.ll not geDuide except with Ule leave of the Court: . . 
Provided further that this section shalt have effect' k ~l .. tion to .tbe 
ground of ·fP:vocatiQD..,ecitled in sub-clause (il) .of clause (a.) of sub~section 5 
<2) subject to the provisiGItls of seotion 8l. 
88 . .Procedure 101f petltion of revocation to BlJh 001U't.-(1) A. petition 
for revooatiOD of a pa.tent· to a High Court may be presented- . 
(a) i:Jy the AttGrney General for Ittdia or by the Advocate General 
of a State or any person authorised by either of them; or 10 
(b) by any person alleging-
(i) that the patent was obtained in fraud of his rights, or of 
the {'ights ofa.ny person under or through whom he claims; or 
(ii) that he, or any person under or through whom he claims, 
was tbe true 8lld first inventor of any invention included in ~he 15 
claim of the patentee; or 
(iii) that. 00, or any person under or through whom he olaims 
,a.n interest in any trade, business or manufaoture, had pUblioly 
manufactur~d, used or sold, within India before the date of the 
patent, any.thi~ claimed by the patentee as his invention. 20 
(2) The High Court may. notwithstanding anything oontained in the 
Code of Civil l'rGceGoUre, l~ (Act V of 1908). require any person, other 
than the AttOl't1ll.ey General, tllle Advocate General or any person authorised 
by either of them, applying for the revocation of a pat.ent to give security 
for the payment of all costs ineurred or likely to be incurred by any person 25 
appearing Ii? appose the pEriiition. 
(8j The High Court may. if it thioks fit, direct an issue for the trial 
before itself or any dictriet court subordina.te to it. of any question arising 
upon a petition to itseLf unde.r section 37. and the issue shall be tried 
accordingly. 30 
(4) If the issue is direoted to suoh district oourt, the finding of that 
.court. shall not be subject to appeal. but the evidence taken upon the 
trial shall be reoar4ed and 8 copy thereof. certified by the Judge of the 
oCourt, sha.ll be tranBtDitted, together wihh any remarks which he' may think 
fit to make thereupon. to the High Court directing the issue, and the High 35 
-Court may thereupon act upon the finding of the district court or dispose 
·of the petition upon the evidence recorded, or direct a new trial, as the 
justice of the case may require. 
39. Procedure for petition of revocation to OontroUer.-(l) Where 'a 
petition is made to tke 'CGntroller under section 87, the Controllel'" shall '40 
give to all persona to whom & notice is issued under sub-section (8) of that 
section and the petitioner an opportunity to be heard before deciding the 
·case. 
(2) If on 8 petition nnder section 37. the Controller is satisfied that 
any of the grounds specified in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of that B.eotion 45 
-.re est9.blished. he may by order direct that the patent aheJl be revok~ld ~ithH 
unconditionally or unless within such time ail may be specified inth. order 
the complete speeification is amended to his satisfaction. 

22 
CHAPTER Vln 
;' COIrIPUL8QBY LIOBNOBS. 
~. AppUCItioIl tor Uc.ce.--{l). At any time after the expiration 01 
three years from the date of the sealing of a patent, any person interested 
G may apply to the Controller upon anyone or more of the grounds speoified 
in Bub-seotion (2) for a licence under the patent. 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(2) The grounds upon whioh an applioation under sub-section (1) ma,. 
bQ made are as follows, that is to say:-i 
(a) thl,lt the patented invention being capable of being commer-
cially worked in India, has not been commercially worked therein or 
is not being so worked to the fullest exten~ that is reasonably praotic-
able; 
t, 
(b) that a demand for the patented artiole in India is not being 
met to an adequa.te extent or on reusonable terms, or is bei.ng met 
to a substantial extent by importation of the patented article from 
oth~r oountries; 
(c) that the commercial working of the invention in India is being 
prevented or hindered b,- the importation of the pate,nted article from 
other oountries; 
(d) that by reason of the refusal of the patentee to grant 0. licence 
or licences on reaBonilble terms-
(i) fJ- market for the export of the patented artiole manu-
factured in India is not being supplied; or 
l (ii) the working. or effioient working in India of any other 
patented invention whioh makes a substantial oontribution to the 
establishment or development of oommeroial or industrial aotivities 
in India is unfairly prejudiced; 
(6) that by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee" upon 
the grant of licenoes under tile patent, or upon the purohase, , nire or 
use of the patented artiole or process, the manufaoture, use or sale 
of materials not proteoted by the patent or the establishment, or 
development of oommercial or industrial aotivities in India is unfairly 
prejudioed. 
(3) An applioation under this seotion may be made by any person 
35 notwithstanding that he is already the holder of a lioenoe under the 
patent; and DO person shall be e'Stopped from alleging any of the matters 
specified in sub-section (9) by reason of any admission made by him. 
whether in such a licence or otherwise, or by reason of his having acoepted 
suoh 8 lioenoe. 
40 (4) In 'this seotion the expression 'patented ~rtiole' includes any article 
tnade by a pa.tented process. 
U. Belief In reepect of an application UDder section iO.-(l) Where an 
application is made under seotion 40, the Controller may maKe an order 
grantins any of the following reliefs, that is to say, the Controller may-
45 (a) grant a licence to the npplicant upon such terms I1S the 
Controller thinks fit; and may also, where the oircumstances so require, 
direot that all other existing licences in respect of the patent shall 
either be amended or re~oktld, or that the patentee' shall forfeit any 
rilb~ ,,·hich may have as a patentee, to make, use, exercise or vend' 
l)O the invention or to grant licences lIndpr thfl p&tf'nt; 

23 
(b) revoke any existing licence held by the applicant and grant '. 
new licence upon such terms as the Controller thinks fit, or amend 
any licence held by the applicant in such manner as the Controller 
may think fit; 
(0) grant a licence under the patent to such customers of the 5 
applicant and on such terms as the Controller thinks fit, if the 
Controller is satisfied that the manufacture, use or sale of materials 
not protected by the patent is unfairly prejudiced by reason of condi-
tions imposed by the patentee upon the grant of licences under the 
patent or upon the. purchase, hire or uSe of the patented article or 10 
process: 
Provided that where the application is made on the ground that the 
patented invention is not being commercially work,ed in India or is not 
being worked to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable and it 
appears to the Controller that the time which has elapsed since the granting 15 
"If the patent hI'S for any reason been insufficient to enable it to be so 
worked, he may, by order, adjourn the application for such period as 
will, in his opinion, give sufficient time for the invention to be so worked. 
(2) Bxcept in Mses where the terms of a licence have been settled by 
mutual agreement and such tertns otherwise provide, any person to whom 20 
a lioenoe has been granted under sub-section (1) shall be entitled to call 
upon the patentee to take proceedings to prevent any infringement of the 
patent Rod if the patentee refuses or neglects to do so within two months 
after being so called ,upon, the licensee may institute proceedings for the 
infringement in his own name as though he were the patentee, making the 25 
patentee a defendant but R patentee so added 8S defendant shall not be 
liable for any costs unless he enters 8D appearance and takes part in the 
proceedings. ' 
'2. :Indorsement of patent on application by Qovernment.-(l) At any 
time after the expiration of three years from the date of the sealing of a 30 
patent, the Central Government may apply to the Controller upon any 
one or more of the grounds speoified in sub-section (2) of section 40 for the 
endorsel1lent of the patent with the words • Licenoes of Right'. 
(2) An application under this section may also be made on the ground 
that by the refusal of the patentee to grant a licence or lioences on reason- 35 
able terms the establishment or development of commercial or industrial 
activities in India is unfairly prejudiced or the development of an industry, 
the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to bf) 
expedient in the public interest, is being prevented or hindered. 
(3) Where a patent of addition is in force, any application under sub-I{) 
section (1) either for the endorsement of the original patent or the patent 
of addition shall be deemed to be an application for the endorsement of 
bot.h the patents and where any such application is granted or refused, it 
shall he deemed to have been granted or refused in respect of both the 
J~t9nts. 45 
(4) All endorsements of patents made under this section shall be entered 
in the Register of Patents mnintfdned under section 67. 
(5) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declftred tbat, nothing in 
this secti •. n shall affect the right of the Central Government or any State 

:Oovet'tuneut to make an application for the "rant of .. lic~noe in respeot 
uf any industrial undertaking or 'trading aotivity owned or oarried on by 
-.uch Government. 
... hoviaiOD .. to pateDY eDdol'l8d 'UCeDCII of B.tght' .-(1) Where 
5 the Controller has made an endorsement upon a patent 'Licences of 
RJght'-
(a) any person shall at any time after slluh endorsement be 
entitled as of right to a licence under the paten1) upon such terms as 
in defnult of agreement may be settled by the Controller on the appli-
10 cation either of the patentee or of the person applying for a licence; 
(b) the Controller may, on the application of a person holding a 
licence granted under the patent before the endorsement, order the 
licence to btl revoked snd grant a new lic(',nce by virt,ue of the endorse-
ment upon terms to be settled in the aforesaid manner; 
15 (0) if in proceedings for 'the infringement of the patent (other-
wise than by importation of the patented article from other (!ountries) 
the infringing defenda.nt is !"eady and willing to take a licence upon 
terms to be settled by the Controller, no injunction against him shall 
be awarded, and the amount recoverable against him by way of 
20 damages. if 8ny, shall not exceed double the amount which would bave 
he en recoverable against him as licensee jf the licenoe had been dated 
prior t{) the earliest infringement; 
(d) the renewal fees payable in respect of a patent so endorsed 
shall, as from the date of the endorsement, be one moiety only of the 
25 fees which would otherwise have been payable. 
(2) The provisions of sub_s~ction (2) of section 41 shall. apply to all! 
.licen~'3 grant~d under sub-section (1) as they apply to a hcecoegranted 
under the said seotion. 
". :lzerciae of powen on appllcatlon under seCUCIIl &0 or ItCtton 62.--(1) 
30 The powers of the Controller upon an applioation under sention 40 or 
section 42 Rhllll be ~xerdsed with a view to securing the followiug general 
purposes, that is to I&Y,- • 
(a) that inventions whioh can be worked on ,a co~mercial scale in 
India and which should in the public interest be 80 worked shall ~e 
35 worked therein without undue delay and to the fullest extent that 18 
reasonably practicable; 
(b) that the inventor or other penwn bellefhially entitled to a 
patent shall receive reasO'I1Bble remuneration haying l'egard to the 
nature C1f the invention; 
(0) that the interests of Bny person for the time being workiug 
or developing an invention in India under the proteotion of & patent 
shan not be unfairly prejudiced. 
(2), Subject to the provisions C1f sub-section (1). the Controller shall in 
determining whether to make an order in pursuance of any such appli-
4li cation or not, take account of the following matters, that is to 8&y,-
(a) the nBture of the invention, the time which has elapsed since 
the sealing of the patent and the measures already taken by th~ 
patentee or any licensee to make full use of the invention; 

fi 
(IJ) ;the 'abililiy .of any person to whom a. liCence is to be granted 
'under the order to work the invention to the public advantage; and 
(c) the ,riaka to be undertakep by that person in proviQing capital 
and workingtbe inv~ntion if the BPI'lication is gmnted; 
ibut shall not take account of matters subsequent to the making of the 6 
,application. 
66. mventieDl alatlDa to food, medtclDea, lDIectlcldH, etc.-(1) Witbout. 
prejudice to tbe foregoing provisions of tbis Act. wbere n patent is in force 
an respect of-
(a) a substance capable of being used as food. medicine. insecHc:ide, 10 
g.ermicide or fungicide or ill the production of food; medicine. insecti-
cide, germicide or fungicide. or 
(b) a process for producing sucb a suhstance as aforesaid, or 
(d any in'/E'ntion capable of being used as or as part of tl s'.JrglCal 
or curati.ve device, 16 
the Controller sball, on application made to bim by any person iutere;;te.:i. 
order the grant to the applicant of a licence under tbe patent on .u~); 
terms as he thinks fit, unless it appears to him that there are iood 1'6118011$ 
for refusing 'the application. 
(2) III settling the terms of licences under this section, tbe Controller 
shall f;ndeo:vour to secure tbat food, medicines, insecticide, germicide or 
fungicide and surgi('al and ourative devices shall be available to the publk; 
itt the lowest prices consistent with the patentees' deriving a raaaollclbl~ 
ad:vantage from th.eir patent rights. , 
(3) A licence granted under this section shall entitle the licensee to maktl. 
U8{l. exerCi8e and vend the ic.vention as food, medicine, inseeticide, germi. 
cide or fungicide or for the purposes of the production of food, medicine, 
'insecticide. germicide, or fungicide or as or as part of surgical or curt\tlv" 
-device, but for no other purposes. 
(4) Where n patent other·than a patent referred to in sub-section (1) is 00 
in force in respect of a substance or process for producing a substal1c.e alld 
the Central Government i!t satisfied that it is expedient or necessa.ry in the 
!public interest that. a licence under such a patent should be grantod. the 
'Central Government may, by notifica.tion in the Official Gazette, direct tr 
the provisions of sub-section (1). sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) respect-
ing the' grant of licences sball apply to such a patent. and on t.he issue ,_,f 
such a notifi~atien. the said provisions shall apply to the patent as they 
apply to a. patent referred to in sub-section (1). 
4e, Procedure on appUcatl.on under I8ctlO11 4.0 or section '2 or section 
45.--.(1) F;very application under, section 40 or seetion 42 or section 45 shall 40 
ilpecify the nature of the order sought by the appliaant and shall conta.in 
it statement setting out the nature of the a.pplicant·s interest, if any, a.nd 
the facts upon which the applbation is based. 
(B) Where the Controller is satisfied., upon consideratiop of any such 
application, that a prima facie case has been made out for the making of 46 
an order, he sha.ll direct the app1iaant to serve copies of the application 
upon the patentee a.nd any e>ther persons a.ppearing from the Register of 
Patents to be interested in the patent io reapeot of which the application 
is made and shall advertisetbe npplie&RcJn. 

2e 
(3) ~he. patentee. or any other person ~esiring to oppoae the applica.tion. 
may. Wlthm auah tune as may be presonbed or within such further time 
as the ControllE'r may. on applioation made either before or after the' 
e:zpiration of the prescribed time allaw. give to the Controller notice of 
I opposition. 
(4) Any suoh notice of opposition shall oontain a statement setting out. 
th.e ground,S on which the application is opposed. 
, (5) Where any su'ch notice of opposition is duly given, the Controller 
shall notify the applica.nt and shall give to the applicant and the opponent 
10 an opportunity to be heard before deciding the case. 
'7. Supplementary proviaiODI with respect to orders under this Ohapter,-
(1) Any order made by the Controller und~r this Chapter fOr the grant ot 
& licence shall, without prejudice to Bny other mode of enforcement have 
effect as if it were a deed. executed by the patentee and all other neces-
1G sary parties. granting a. licence in accordance with the order. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no order shall be-
made in pursuance of an application under section 40 or seotion 42 which· 
would be at. variance with any treaty, convention, arrangement or engnge-
mellt applying to India and any other country. 
CHAPTER IX 
ANTIOIPATIONS 
'8. Previous use and pUbllcation.-(I) An invention daimell in a com-
plete specification shall not be deemed to have been antioipated by reason 
only of the pu~lic use or knowledge of the invention if such knowledge hBS 
25 been obtained surreptitiously or in fraud of the true and first inventor 
or 'his legal representative or assignee or has been communicated to the 
public j.n fraud of such inventor or his legal representative or assignee-
or in breach of confidence: 
Provided that such inventor or his lega.l representative or Bssignee has' 
30 not acquiesced in the public use of his inven.tion and that he appliea for 
a patent within six months after the commencement of such use. 
35 
(2) An invention claimed in a complete &pecification shall not be· 
deemed to have been anticipated-
(a) by the secret use of the invention except where such secret 
use has been on 6 (\ommE'rciol scale by, or on bhalf of. the appli('lant, 
for the patent or any person deriving title from him, or 
(b) by reason only that the invention' Willi published in India-
(.) in a specification filed in pursusnce of an application for 
8 patent made in India. and dsted more than fifty years before-
the date of filing of the complete spe!.lification; or 
(ii') in A. specifiostion describing the invention for the purposes. 
of an application for protE'Ction in any country outside India. 
made more than fifty years before the date of filing of the com-
plete specification; or 
(iii) in any abridgement of, or extraot from, any such speoi-
Bcation published undar the (l.uthority of the Controllpr or of the-
Government of an,. country outaide rnd{",. 

rt 
(.:J) Notwithstanding. anything in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse· 
to accept ~he complete specUioatioDor ~,grant a. iatent.. and, the patent! 
shall not be revok.ed or invalidated, by reason only ~f ,any circumstances 
which by virtue of this seotion do not oonstitute an aDtie1pation fbr the in-
vention olaimed in' the specifioatioD. 5 
69. PreviOUl commUDlcaUon, display or worldDg..-{l) An invention 
claimed in a complete sp'ecifi{~ation shall not be deemed to have been 
anticipated by reason only of the communication of the invention to the 
Government or to any person authorised by the Government to. investi-
gate the inventiOll or its merits or of anything done, in consequence of lC) 
such a communication for the purpose of the investigation. 
(2) An invention claimed in a. complete specification shall not be deem-
ed to have been IIoIlticipated by reason only of-
(a) the display of the invention with the consent of the true Qnd 
first inventor at an industrial or other exhibition to which the provi-
sions of this section have been extended bv the Central Government 
by notification in the Official Gazette, or'the use thereof with his 
consent for the purposes of suoh an exhibition in the place where it 
is held; or 
(b) the publication of any description of the invention in conse-
quence of the display or usc of the invention at o.ny such exhibition 
as. aforesaid; or 
15 
(0) the use of the invention, after it has been displayed or used 
at any such exhibition as aforesaid and during the period of exhibition. 
by any person without the consent of the true IIoIld first inventor; or 2~ 
(d) the description of the invention in a paper read by the true 
and first inventor before a learned society or published with· his con-
sent in the transactions of such a sooiety; 
if the application for the patent is made by the true and first inventor or 
d person deriving title from him not later than six months after the open-
ing of the exhibition or the reading or publication of the paper, as the 
oase may be. 
(3) An invention olaimed in a oomplete specification shall not be 
deemed to have been antioipated by reason only tIiat at any time within 
one yoar before the priority da.te of the relevant claim of the sDecification, 
the invention was publicly worked in India--
(II) by the patentee or applicant for the patent. or any person from 
",nom he derives title; or 
, 
(b) by any other person with the consent of the patentee or 
applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title; 40 
if the working was effected for the purpose of reasona.ble trial only IIoIld if 
it was reasonably necessary, having regard to the nature of the invention, 
that the working for that purpose should be effected in public. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Controller shall nol 
refuse to accept an application for a patent or to grant a patent, and a 4~ 
patent shall not be revoked or invalidated, by reason only of the oircum-
"Itances which, by virtue of tbis section, do not constitute an anticipation 
of the invention clainied in the specification. 

.~ 
CHAPT.ER X 
JODfT Pt..,.. ... 
ao.D~~ of pa\entl.-{l) Where a.ftw the commencement of 
this Act a patent is granted to two or mor~ .pet'l9OS, ~h of th?8e [erso DJ 
~ shall, unless an agreement to the contrary is in force, be entitle to an 
equal undirided share in $he' patent. . '.: .. 
(2) Bubjeetto the provisiOns of this section and section 51, whete two 
or morl' ,p8NODS are registered as gra.ntee or proprietor of a patent, then, 
unle88 an agreement to the contrary is in fcnoce, each of those persons 
10 shall be entitled, by himself or his agents, to make, use, exercise and 
vend the ,patented invention for his own benefit without accounting to the 
other person or persons. 
(:'J) Subject to the provisions of this section and section 151, and to any 
«.greoment for the time being in force, a licence under a patent shall not 
15 De granted, and 0. share in a patent shall not pe assigned, except with 
the consent of all persons, other than the licensor or assignor, who are 
registered as grant,ee or proprietor of the patent. 
(4) Wa6l'6.an article is sold by one of two or more persons reRistered ILA 
grantee or proprietor of a patent, the purchaser and any person claiming 
~O through him mall be entitled to deal with "the article in the sa.me manner 
88 if the a~icle had been sold by a. sole patentee. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the rules of law applicable 
to the ownership and devolution of movable property generally, shall 
apply in relation to patents as tihey apply in relation to other choses in 
26 Mtion; e.nd nothing in sub-section (1) or sub-sectiol'l (2) IJhall affect the 
mutual rights or obliga.tions of trustees or of the legal representatives of 
a deceased person" or their rights or obligations sa such. 
51. Power of 00aU0ller to liVe d1rectlOD&--.(l} Where two or more 
-pet-sons are registered as grantee or proprietor of 8 patent, the Controller 
~O may, upon application made to him in the prescribed manner by any of 
-those pereons, give such directions in accordance with the application with 
respect to the sale or lease of the patent or any interest therein, the grant 
of licences under the patent, or the exercise of any right under section /SO 
in relation thereto, as he thinks fit. 
35(2) If any person registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent faile 
to execute any instrument or to do any other thing required for' the 
esrrying out of any direction given under this gection within fourteen days 
aftf!r being requested in writing so to do by any of the otherperaons so 
registered, the Controller may, upon application made to him in . the 
'0 preseribed manner by any such other person, give directions empowering 
any person to execute that instrument or to do that thing in the name 
and an behalf of the person in default. 
(3) Before giving directions in pursuance of an applicatnon under this 
section, the Controller shall give an opportunity to be heard-
45 (4) in the case of an application under lIub-section (1) to the other 
person or persons registered BS grantee or, proprietor of the patent; 
(b) in the case of an applica.tion under sub-section (2) to the per-
SOD in default. 
(4) No directions shall be given under thie section JO a. to aBeot the 
1$0 mutual right. or obligations of trustees or fA the legal representatives of 
a dece88ed person, or their right. or obliptione .. auch. 

• CHAPTER XI 
U 8Jl OF 'A'RNTBD INVP'1'l()N8BY OOVQNMBN'l' IN «lBa'J.l,lDl 0*8. 
61. DeID1Uou.-In tIlii Ohapter, unl~ .. the' ~ othemviae rea. 
quires,-
(a) 'purposes of the Government' means purposes of the Union or S 
of a State, as the case may be; 
(b) 'Government' means-
(i) in relation to the purpos.£.s of the Union, the Gentml Gov· 
ernment; and 
(ii) in relation to the purposes o! a State, the State Govern· lOt 
ment. 
A. V" of bl911lt1aa8 tor (Jovemm..' p~-<l) Notwithstanding 
anything in this Act, the Government a.nd any person authorised in writ· 
ing by it may make. use and exercise any patented invention for the pur· 
poses of the Government in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 16-
(2) If sud 60 far as the invention has, before the priority. date of rele· 
vant claim of the complete specification, been duly recorded' by or tried 
by or on behalf of the Government otherwise than in consequence of the 
communication thereof directly or indirectly by the applioant 01' the 
pa.tentee or any person from whom he deriV( s title, any use of the in· 20t 
ventioll by virtue of this section may be ma.ie free of any rOydlty or other 
payment to the pa.tentee. 
(3) If and so fllr as the invention has not been so· recorded 01' tried n.s 
afaresaid, any use oftha invention made by virtue of this seotion at any 
time after the a('(~eptance of the npplication in respect or the patent, or 20-
in consequence of IIny such ('ommunication us aforesaid, shall be made 
upon Ruch terms as may be agreed upon, eiLiier befc~ or 8fter the use, 
between t,he Government Bud the applicant or the patentee, t\s the case 
l'1t\y be, or 8S may in default of agreement be determined by the High 
Ccrort on a reference under se~tion 5ti. 30t 
(4) The authority of the Government in respect of an invention DIlty 
be given under this secti~n either before or after the patent is granted and 
either before or after the acts in respe(~t of which the authority is given 
are done, and may be given to Bny person whether ar not he is- authorised 
directly or indirectly by the applicant or the patentee to make, use, exer- 3l). 
cise or vend the invention. 
(6) Where nny URe 0.1 an invention i!'l madb by. or witli the authority of 
the Government under this section, then unle~s it' appears to the Govern· 
ment that it would he contr~ry to the publh interest RO to do, the Govern· 
ment shall notify the Bpplicant 01' the patentee as soon as practicable after 400 
the use is begun and furnish him with such infomlation 8S to the extent 
of the use as he may. from time to time, require; 
(6) The right to use an invention conferred upon the GQverllmt'ot under 
this section, or any provision for which this section is substituted shall 
include the power to sell any article made in pursuance of such right 450 
which is no longer required for the purposes of the Government. 
(7) The purchaser of any articles Bold in eXilrois8 of the powers con· 
ferred by this seotion and any perSOD cl8.iming through him sllall have 
power to -deal wi~h them in ipe same manner as if the· patent were held on 
behalf of theGQV~rnmeD~ ... '. - 500 

~ 
H. _".01 tbird.putl •• m reapt6t of· Government UII.~l) In relation 
to ~y ~se of a patented invention or an invention in respect of which an 
appbcalilGD :for.& .paten' is pending, made for tae pUl'lpOS81 of the. Govern· 
ment-- . . 
! .. t 
(a) by the Government or any pe1'lOI\ authorised by the Govern· 
ment under section 58, or . , 
(b) by the patentee or applicant for the ,patent to the order made 
by the Government, ' 
the provisions of any licence, assignment or agreement made whether 
10 before or after the commencement of this Act, be.tween the patentee or 
applicant for the patenh, or any person who derives title from him or from 
whom he derives title, and any person other than the Government shall be 
of no effect so far aB those provisions restrict tOr .regulate the use of the 
invention, or any model, document or information relating thereto, or 
US provide for t·be making of payments in respect of any such use, or cal. 
culated by reference thereto; and the rt'produl'tion or publication of any 
model or document in connuction with the said use shall not be deemed t<" 
be an infrL.gement of any cOpYriKht subsisting ift ~e model or document. 
(2) Where an exclusive licen~e granted otoerwise than for royaltieB or 
~O other benefits determined by reference to the use of the invention is in 
force under the patent, then-
(a) in relation to any use of the invention which, but for the 
provisions of this section and seotion 53, would. constitute an infringe-
ment of the rights of the licensee, sub-sedtion (3) of section 53 shall 
~5 have efJect 6S if for the reference to the patentee there were Bubs-
tituted a reference to tlhe licensee; and 
(b) in' relation to any use of the invenm()n ay the licensee by 
'virtue of an authority given under seotion 58, that section shall have 
effect as if the said Bub-section (3) were omitted. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), where the patent, or 
the right to apply for or obtain the patent, 'has been aBsigned to the 
patentee in consideration of royalties or other henafits determined by 
reference to the use of the invention, then-
(a) in relation to any use of the invention by virtue of section 
53, sub-section (3) of that section shall have efJect as if the reference 
to the patentee included a reference to the assignor, and any sum pay-
able by virtue of that sub-section shall be dividEjd between the patentee 
and the assignor in such proportion as may be agreed upon between 
them or aa may in default of agreement be determined by the High 
Court on a reference made under section 55; and 
(b) in relation to any use of the -invention made for the purposes 
of the Government by the patentee to the order of the' Government, 
sub-section (3) of section 53 shall have efJect 8S if that use were made 
by virtue of an authority give~ under ·that section. 
45 (4) Where, under sub-section ,(9) of section 58, payments are required 
to be made by the Govemmentto a patentee 'in respect of any use of 
an .invention, any person being the 'hoMer of an exclulive licence under 
patent . {not 'being suah a 'licence as is mentioned in sub·section (S) of this 
section] authorising 'him to make that use of the inverition, .halt be entitled 

31 
'tiorecover from the 'patentee such part (if any) of those payments as ma.y 
be agreed upon between that person and the patentee or the applicant, 
or as may in default of agreement be determined by the High Court under 
section 55 to he just having regar~ to any expenditure incurred by that 
person-
(a) in developing the said invention; or 
(b) in making payments to the patentee, other than royalties or 
other payments determined by reference to the use of the invention, 
in consideration of the licence; 
1LDd if, at any time before the amount of any such payment has been 
agreed upon between the Government and the patentee or the applicant, 
'that person gives notice in writing of his interest to the Government, any 
agreement as to the amount of that payment shall he of no effect unlell8 
it is made with bis consent. 
615. :R.8ference of cUsputes as to Government \118.-(1) Any dispute as 
-to the exercise by the Government or a person authorised by it of the 
'Powers conferred by section 53, or as to terms for the use of an invention 
-for the purposes of the Government thereunder, or as to the right of any 
person to receive any part of a payment made in pursuance of sub-section 
(3) of that section, may be referred to a High Court by either party to 
the dispute in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules of the High 
Court: 
Provided that, if the inventor or the patentee is a Government servant, 
or the subject-matter of the invention is certified by the Government to 
be connected with work done in the course of the normal duties of a Gov-
ernment servant, any such dispute shall be settled by the Government 
after hearing the applicant or the patentee and any other person having 
,a.n interest in the invention or patent. 
(2) In any proceedings under this section to which the Government is 
a party, the Government may-
(a) if the patentee is a party to the proceedings, apply for revo-
cation of the patent upon any ground upon which a patent may be 
revoked under section 87; and 
(b) in any CBse, put in issue the validity of the patent without 
applying for its revocation. 
(3) If in such proceedingR as. aforesaid any question arises whether an 
invention has been recorded or tried 'is i6 mentioned in section 58, and the 
disclosure of any document recording the invention, or of any evidence 
of the irilll thereof, would in thEl opinion of the Government be prejudicial 
to the public interest, the disclosure may be made confidentially to counsel 
of the other party or to an indElpendent expert mutually agreed upon. 
(4) In determining under this section any dispute between the Gov-
ernment and any person 88 to terms for the use of an invention for the 
purposes of the Government, the High Court shall have regard to any 
benefit or compensation which that person or any person from whom he 
derives title may have received, or lDay be entitled to receive, directly 
or indirectly from the Government in respect of the invention in question . 
. (6) In any proceedings under this section, the High Court may at any 
time order the whole proceedings or any question or .. issue of fact ari,.ing 
~erein to be referred to an official referee, Commissioner or an arbitrator 
10 
30 
40 
lSO 

I) 
10 
32 . 
OD .ucb termlas the High Court may direci; and "rences to the High, 
Coun ill the Ioregoing pl'Ovjsions of this section '8harll be cOnstrued accord·, 
ingly. 
H. S&'riDg.-Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the power of the 
Government or of any person der.iving title directly or indirectly from the-
Government to sell or use any artioles forfetted mld'er any law for the-
time being in force relating to customb or excise. 
CHAPTER XII 
DEOLARATORY SUITe AND SUITS FOR INFRINOEMEm! OF PATENTS 
67. POW .. of Covt to make declaraUoa' .. to nOD-l.nfrtntemant.-(l) 
Notwith.tanding anything contained in section 42 of the Specific Relief 
Act, 1877 (I of 1877), any perion who has reasonable caUB,e to doubt 
whether the use of a process or the making or using or selling of any 
article would constitute an infringement of a claim of a pstent, may 
institute a declaratory suit in the district court having jurisdiction, if it is> 
shown-
20 • 
(a) that the plaintiff has applied in writing to the patentee or-
exolusive licensee for a written acknowledgment to the effect of the 
declaration chimed, and has furnished him with full particullll'S m 
writing of the process or article in question; and 
(b) that the patentee or licensee has refused or neglected to give· 
such an acknowledgment. 
(2) The costs 'of all parties in a suit for a declaration brought by virtue-
of this section shall, unless for special reasons the district court thinks fit 
25 to order otherwise, be paid by the plaintiff. 
(3) The validity of a claim of the specification of a patent shall not be-
called in question in a suit for a declaration brought by virtue of thi. 
sect jon, and accordingly the making or refusal of such a declaration in th~ 
Gase of 11 patent shall not be deemed to imply that the patent is valid. 
30 (4) A suit for a declaration mny be brought by virtue of this section 
at any time after the date of advertisement of acceptance of the application. 
for a patent and references in this section to the patentee shall be construed 
accordingly. 
68. Suit for inCrlq ... nt of pa.telltl.-(l) A! patentee may institute a 
35 suit in the district oourt having jurisdiction to try the suit against any 
person who, during the continuanoe of a. patent acquired by him under 
this Act in respect of an invention, makes, seU. or uses the invention with-
out hiq Hcenee, 01' counterfeit~ it, or imitates it. 
(S) The holder of an exclusive licence shall have the like right &.Ii the-
40 patentee to institute 8 suit in respect of any infringement of the patent 
oommitted after the date of 'b.e licence, and in awarding damages or grant-
ing any other relief in any such suit the court shall take into consideration 
any loas adered or likely to be suffered by the exclusive licensee as such 
or, BS the case may be, the profits earned by means of the infringement so 
45 far a~ it constittlteR an infringement of the rights of the exclusive licensee-
as such. ~ 

33 
" (3) In any suit for infringement of patent by the holder of an e:a:clUlive 
licence under Rub-section (9), the patentee shall, unless he has joined as' a 
plllintiif in the suit. be added 88 " defendant: . 
Provided that a patentee so added as defendant shall not be liable for 
any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the proceed- li 
ings 
(4) Every ground on which a patent may be revoked under section 87 
sludl be available by way of defence to a suit for infringement of a patent 
instituted under this s~<ltion. 
(5) A defrndant' in a suit for infringeme;lt of a patent may apply for 10 
revocation of thr patent by way of counter-claim in the suit: 
Provided that where such a counter-claim is made. the suit along with 
tbe counter-claim shall be transferred to a High Court for decision. 
69. lteStricttOD on recovery of damages for lnfr1ngement.-(l) In a 
suit for the infringement of a patent damages shall not be awarded against 15 
the defendant who proves that at the date of infringement he was not aware, 
nor had reasonable means of making himself aWAre. of the existence of 
the patent. 
Explanation.-A person shall not be deemed to have been aW&re or to 
have had reasonable means of making himself aware as aforesaid by rM80n 20 
only of the application to nn article of the word "patent", "patented" ot' 
any word or words expressing or implying that a patent has been obtained 
for the article, unless the number of the patent accompanied the word or 
wordR in question. 
(2) In any proceeding for infringement of a patent the court may. if it 26 
thinks fit, refuse to award any damages in respect of any infringement com-
mitted after a failure to pay any renewal fee within t·he prescribed period 
Rnd hefore any extension of that period. 
(3) Where an amendment of a specification by way of disclaimer. oor-
rection or explanation has been allowed under this Act after the publi-' 30 
cation of the specification, no damages shall be awarded in Rny proceed-
ing in respect of the liSe of the invention bflfore the date of the deciRion 
allowing the amendment. unless the court is satisfied that the speoifi-
catioll as originally published was framed in good faith and with rea-son-
"ble skill and knowledge: 35 
(4) Nothing in this Rection shall affect the power of t,h!' court to grant 
an injllnction in [lny procp,edings for infringement of a patent. 
"-
60. Order of IDapectlon, ate., In lult.-In u suit for infringement 'O!f a 
pa.tenil. tb~ court may. on the application of onp. pnrty make such order 
for an injunction or inspection of accounts, and impoRe such terms and give 4(J 
such directions respecting the same and the proceedings thereon, as the 
court. may deem fit. 
81. Oertiflcate of contelted v&11cUty at apec11lcatton.-(l) If in any 
!omit for infringement of 8 patent the validity of any claim of a specifica-
tion is contested. and that claim is found by the court to be valid, the 43 
court may certify that the validity of that claim was contested in that 
suit. 

,,, 
(tJl Whc.ro 1111,'1" ltllch l'E'ditiollte baR been granted. if in allY 8ubtl6fju8l1' 
sui' before the court for infringement of the patent or for reyooation of 
the p"'tmt. 8 nnal ordpr or judgment is made or gi'fen in (.'four of .. htl 
part,y rel,ying 011 the vlI.1iliit,Y oI the patent. that party shall. lInleN tilt! 
Il court otherwitle directs, btl entitled to all coats, charges and expanlles of. 
and incidental to, the said suit propt'lrly incurred: 
Provided that this Bub·aeetion shall not apply to the costs of any appeal 
against a decree in any _uoh luit, 
II, -.a-I lor blIrIq .... , 01 partlIUJ .1114 lpecI4oat1.oll.-(l) If ill 
prooeedinp for iofriopment of , protent it ia found that any claim of the 
10 Bpecification beiog a claim io reepeofl of which infringement ~s alleged, il\ 
valid, but tbat any other claim ia invalid, the court may grant relief in 
respect of any valid claim which is infringed: 
1" 
Provilied that tbe court _han not grant relief by way of damag~ or 
costs t'xI:f'pl, in the cit'clIlllst!Ul('es mentioned ill sub-sect,ion (2). 
(2) Where the plaintiff proves that the invalid claim WIlS framed in 
i{ool! faith and with r£'lIsonBble skill anli knowledge, the court l'Ihall grant 
relief in respect of any vlllid claim which is infringed subject to the discre· 
tion o[ the court, us to co~t8 and as to the date froTII which c1ama!(es should 
20 be reckoneci, 
21> 
('11 For UlI' IHII'PO)"(' of grallting nn." relief lIT1clpr foHlh-f4(,I,tion (J) or ;1II"~ 
seclioll (~), the court, TIIa~: direct that tht' speeificution shall be 3l11e(l(l~d 
to its Klltisfaction upon nn application mllde for that purpoRt> under Flection 
M. and sudl an application mll'y be made lIccordiugly whethf>r or not 
11.11 I>ther is'mp.s in the proceeding have been c1p.termined. 
EX/,/ll/lul;on,-In exerciMing the discretion U8 to COlI" and ali to the 
dat-e fl'om which the damages should be reckOlwd, the c,ourt may takl' ink. 
~nsideration th.· conduct of the parties in inserting such illvulid daillill 
in the spt'cifieat.ion or permitting them to remain there. 
30 ..... CHAPTER XIII 
MI8CRr,['ANIeOUS I'ROVI8IONS aBLATING TO JiEVOCATION A.N'D IN~'RINGF.MKNT 01" 
PATBNT8 
13. 'l'raumilltoD of deer... aad 0Idel'I to tile OoIltroU..-A court 
JUaking ,. (/t'('rel:' ill 1\ Mil it, for infringtmlent of I"ttl:'llt, IIlIder "pct.ioll rlf4 O/' 
36 IoD order on a petition under IINlt,ion 87 .han send a copy of th~ deeree or 
o.ro.er. itS the CRse mav be, to thl.' Controller, who Hhull CanllEl lin entry 
thereof and reference thereto to be made in the register of patentH. • 
M. ~ of BIIh Ocnart to Ita,. proceedillP, etc.-A High Court III.' 
which a petition hll8 been presented undt'{' 8ection lJ7 may st'II.V prO<letldingll 
~ on, or dismiss'the petition if in its opinion the petitioll woulli be dil1poKed 
I)f morll jlh!t.Iy or conveniently h.v another Hi~h Court . 
•• BeuiIll with UlS.or.-(l) In It suit, 01' pl"oeeeding for inh'ingem6nt 
or revocation of Il patent, the court may, if it thinks fit. IIl1d shall on thtt 
rt>qI1l.'".t Qf all the p/lrtiN! t,o the prol·el.'dingH, (.11.11 ill t.bl." R,id of IHI IIRaelisor 
41 spe('intiy qualifipd, and tor," the case wholly (~!' partillU.v wit,h his aSf'istanc-6. 
(f!) A court exercising appellate jurisdic:tion in respect of Ruch suit or 
prll('('f"ding may, if it thinks fit, ('a.11 in the> "id of an assessor 8M afoteM"id, 

16"-
(3) 'l'be remuneration, if any, to be JH'id to an ... enor under this !teewou 
.hull in ever.)£. case be detennined by the court IWld be paid b~ it ,., par' 
.c)f the t'I.lptmee of the p.xecutioll of this Act. 
•• aemeclJ for pouncU... tUtau of ialriqelD.t proo .. d1 ..... --( 1) 
Wh~re any peraoll (whether entitled t.o or intel'e8~d in 110 patent or an 
.application for & pat.ent or not) by circul&rs, advertisements at' ot.herwise 
threatens lilly other perllc)n with proceedings tor infrillg!ll1wut of " pa.tent, 
.any persou aggrieved thereby may bring a suit aguinst him in a dilltric. 
court having jurisdiction to tr,v thts suit for any such I'elief a~ i" mentioned 
jll sub-section (2). 
(2) II nlt'flil in ally action brought by virtue of this section t,he dutendl\nt 
JJrows thnt the acts in respect of which the proceedings were thre8t-ened 
oCollstitutl" or, if dont' , would constitute, an infringement of a. patt'nt or 
ilf right~ arising from tbe publioation of I/o complete specification in respect. 
of " claim of the specification not 8hown by the plaintiff to be invnlid. the 
plaintiff shall be entitled to t.he following reliefs, that is to say:-: 
(II) R df.claration t(l tbe (Offeet tbat the threats are unjlll!tifiable; 
(II) o.n injunetion Against the continllance of the threats; lind 
(c) lilloh dlUliages, if any, &s the plaintiff bUll' IlUstained thertlh:--. 
10 
15 
(.1) li'or the- removal of doubts it ill hernhy declart'd that u nWrt~ noEi- 2C 
iicntiofJ of the existence of a patent dOOM uot. oOllstitute a. t,hl'f'ut of proceed • 
. ir.t{s within the menning of thili lieotion. 
(il) Nothing in t,hi!o1 seet.ion ",hfl.lI apply' if a suit for infringerrlent of .. 
IlUt.t:lllt I" eommenced and proseouted with due diligence. ' 
CHAPTEH XIV 25 
RIIOIsnm OF PATENT8, BTO, 
rI ....... of pMat8.-(l) There shall be kept at lJJ.e Patent Office 
;a register of patenti wherein shall be ent.ered-
(a) tile llame,. lAnd uddressel'l of grantees of patents; 
(") notific~t,ions of IlssiglJml"ntfi and of transmissions of pahdntl, 30 
of licences. under patents. and of amendments. extenlliolls and re-
"ocatiollR of patents; and ' 
(c) partioulars of Iuch other matters affecting the validity or pro-
prietorship of putents 811 may be pre!4crihed. 
(9) Copies rA all deeds, agrflcmentR. Iictlnoos and other dOCul1lents Ilft'ec~- 35 
i!l~ the r,ropJ'ietorsllip in "n.y patent or in flny licence t,hereunder shall be 
~l1~,)'ierl to the CO!lt,I'ol1pr in t.he preserihl"rl rn~nOfW fo" filing in the Patent 
,,)thctl 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules made t,hereUlldel' 
'the regi~ter of pate~ts shall,. at all conv~nient tim~s be open to insp.ectio~ 40 
b~ pUblw; lind oerttfied copies sealed With the seal of the Patent Offioe, 
'Of any entr.y in the register shall be given to an~ person reqlliring them 
-011 payment of the p.rescribed fee. 
(4;) The l'"gister of patents shall be prima facie evidence of anv matt.ers 
l't'fJuired or authorised by or under tbis Act to be enterl'd t.hcrei;1. 4r. 

• .~ 
(5) No notice of any trwJt, whether express, implied or conatructi" .. 
sh&ll be entered intbe ~giater of patents, and the Controller shall not be 
aff8,?ted by any auch notice. 
(6) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby deelared that· the register 
5 of patents existing attbe QOIDlIIBnoement of this Act8haJl be itacorporated 
in, and form part qf, the register of patents under this Act. . 
88. :lntry of ""pmeDta -and tr&nanjllion. In regilter.-(l) W~ere­
any person becomes entitled by lI.S6ignment, transmission or operation of 
law to a patent or to a. share in I!. patent, or becomes entitled as a m~rt-
10 gagee, licensee or otherwise to any other interest in a patent, he shall a.pply 
in writing in the prescribed manner to the Controller for the registration 
of his title, or, as the CRse may be, of notice of his interest in the register 
.of pa.tents. 
15 
20 
25 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub·section (1), an a.pplioa.-
tion for the registra.tion of the title of any person beC',oming i'!ntitled by 
assignment to a patent or Q share in a patent, or becoming entitled by virtue-
of a mortgage, licence or other instrwnent to a.ny other interest in a patent, 
may be made in the prescribed manner by the assignor, mortgagor, Iiconsor 
or other party to that instrument, as the case may be. 
(8) Where an application is made under this section for thf'l l'egistrntiolL 
of the title of any person, the Contt'oller shall upon proof of title to his. 
118tisfaction-
(4) where thR.t person is entitled to a patent or a sha.re in a patent, 
register him in the regi8ter of patents as proprietor or oo·proprietor 
of the patent, and enter in that registe.!" particulars of the instrument. 
or event by which he derives title; or 
(b) where that person is entitled to any other interest in the-
patent, enter in that register notice of his interest, with particul8l'8' 
of the instrument (if any) C!'eating it. 
30 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Act relating to co-ownership of 
patents, and pubject also to Ilny tlights vested in &l.Iy other .pel'lon of 'Which 
notioe is entered in the register of patents, the person or persons registered' 
as grantee or proprietor of a patent shall have power to assign, grant 
licences under, or otherwise deal with, the patent and to give efJectuaI 
35 reoeipta for any consideration for any such assi~nment, licence Or dealing: 
Provided tha.t any equities in respect of the patent may be enforced' 
in like manner as in respect of any other movable property. 
(5) Except for the purposes of an application t,o reotify the register of' 
patents, .... document or instrument in respect of which no entry has been' 
40 made in the register of patents under Bub,section (8), shall not be admitted 
in any court Il9 evidenCe of the title of any person to a patent or share of 
or interest in a pa.tent unless the court, for reasons to be recorded in writ· 
ing otherwise directs. 
69. BecWic&tIon of ~egilter.-(l) The Controller may, on the appliea-
45 tion in the prescribed mariner of any person aggrieved by the non·inser-
tion in, or omission from, the'regi~,t,er of patents of any entry, or of any 
entry made in such a register without sufficient cause, or of any entry 
wrongly remaining in such register, or by an E'lrl'Or or defec.t in any entry 
in such register, make such order for making, expunging or varying sud, 
00 entry as he thinks fit 'II.nd rectify the register accordingly. 

37' 
(2) iu proceedings under this section the Controller may determine auy 
~ueation whioh. it may be necessary or expedient to deoide in connection 
lIVi~ the rectification of the register. 
(3)' The Controller may 'refer anyapplioation und.er this section to a 
High Court for decision. and the High Court shall dispose of any appUca- 5 
-.tion so referred in such mauner as it thinks fit. 
(4) Any order made by a High Court rectifying the register shaH dir~t. 
that notice of the rectification be served on the ControUe.r in the prescribed 
manner, who shall upon the receipt of such notice rectify the register 
:aocordingly. 10 
(5) Nothing in this seotion shall be deemed to empower the Controller 
to rectify the reghlt,er of Pat.,lIts 0)' to decide any question relating to a. 
patent otherwise than for the purpose of correcting a mistake of fact. 
apparent from a. reference either to the patent itself. or to some order of 
.a competent authority made under any other provision of this Act. ·15 
70. I:vtdellce of entria., documlZlta, etc.-(l) A certificate purporting 
-to be under the hand of the Controller as to any entry. matter or thing 
which he is authoris~d oy this Act, or any rules made thereunder. to make 
-or do, shall be prima· ffllCi6 evidence of tbe entry having been made, and of 
tbe contents thereof, and of th(' matter or thing baving been done or left 20 
'Undone. 
()2) A copy of any entry in OIlY register or of Ilny document kept in 
ih(' Patent Office or of any patent. or an extraot from ally sucb register 
.or document purporting to be certifted by the Controller and to be' sealed 
'With the spal of the Pa.tent Office shall be admitted in evidence in 'all Courts 25 
in India, and in all proceeding!", without further proof or production of the 
-origina.l: 
Provided that a Court may, if it has reason to doubt the accuracy or 
'a1lihenticity of any. such. copy or extract tendered in evidence require the 
flt'oducti(JO of the original or such further proof as it considers necessary. 30 
CHAPTER XV 
POWElt9 OF CONTROLLER IN PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE ACT 
71. Oontl'oll. to Ju,ve certain powers of a ClvU court.-(l) Subject to an,. 
rules mad~ in ihis behalf, the Controller in any proceedings before him 
under this Act shall hRve the powers of a dvil eOllrt while trying u suit 
under the Code of Civil Procedure. 1008 (Act V of 1908) in respect of the 
10110wing matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and eonforcing the attendance of allY person and 
examining him on oath: 
(h) requiring the diseovery and production of any dor~u!:'lent· 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) issuing commissions for the exatnination of wit'l8sses CJr de ,~u­
mente: 
(e) awarding costs; and 
. ' 
(f) Rny other matter which may be prescribed. 
35 
40 

3It 
(.9) Art" cu:.W; 8wa,·ded by the C'ont.roller if I exercise of the power .. 
conferred npJu hins by clause {II) of $Ub-8eCt.ion (1) sball be eXfIC)l.Ital!tle in 
.... y oourl haying jurisdiotion ItB if it were It dl'Cre.e of that court. 
71. ... 4ue. befan &lie OoBaoIl •• -Subject to any rulel made in thia. 
a bebeU, in lUI." prooeedin~ uuder this Act before the Contro!lfor. tht! t;vid8DOe 
Bl!.all be giH'IIl by affidllovit in the absence of directions by the Controller 
to the oout.,·ary; but in auy clIose in which the Controller think. it right IQo 
to do, he DlIloY take evideJlee "i,.'a VOCt1 ill lieu of, or. in addition to, evidence 
by aBidavit or may Allow R!~:' fltl'ty to be erol!l!-ex"mined on the content.. of 
"10 hi' aftidavit. 
71_ •• 11''' of cliIcnUODII'1 power bJ OoIlUoUer.-Wbere any diR" 
eret.ionary power il! h~' 01' under this Ad l;iw!11 to the Contl'OlIf'r. hI' shaH 
not exer('i~e that power adversely t(J the appliCflnt for (I, patent, or for 
amendment of an application or of a 8pe(~ifioation witbout (if 80 required 
16 witbin tht' pres(~ribed tinlt' by tilt' Illlpliellllt \ giving tlw IlppJiel\nt lin 0ppOI'· 
tunity of being ht'ard, 
CHAPTER XVI 
PATD7 A881ft. 
76, •• _t "eD ... -Save as otherwi~e provided in this Chapter ,,'bere-
20 by or Wider thia Act Illl~' act otber thtHl lht' making t)f Ill! ,dtidllvit i~ fl'-
quired til lit' dOll(' b~' I\n~' pel't10n, the !let 1II11:-' H1hject to prt's(·,rib\.'d eon-
dition. or in "peeial caPles with the COnSf'nt of the Crntral Go\'emmcm oe 
doDe in lit'u of t.hat perlllon himself, b~ a dilly authorised agent, being a 
perIon regil'!tered in the pre8cribedmanner as u patent agent, 
26 71. 8ubalptloD ADd ftrilC&UoD or eer&abl doCa ....... -Tbe follo~ 
documents, namely:-
(i) application I for a f.atent, 
(il) applications for exte.nsion of term of ~ patent, 
(it,) application. for t·be reeMration of lapa6d pA~ntl, 
(;t:) appl;';at.ionl! for thr ilf!a'ing of If patl'l!t niter the tinll' "lIow,,:" 
fo)' tbHt P"I1"··>;(· b,v I))' un,h'r 8ub·Reeti,'n (!!) of ~(,.t,ion 24 hI" pxpired, 
(e) RppJicI\tiolJl.I for leave to amend, 
(tJ,) ItpplicRtion~ fell' c()JJ\plll~I',v lic<mce or "6¥vcatiou, 
("ii) notice!; of I;urrenue.r of pattlnts, and 
("iii) I'Pl'liea.tionl'! tn" t"H10r~f'fIIE'lit of ,ish'lIt. wit." thtl 1I1'f))'(i~ 
'LicenceFi of 1:ight', 
shall be signed KlllI "e~'ificd. in the manJl~r J)I'el!el'iLed LJ th .. pel'SOl1 making 
IUch applicatiom aI' gi"ing 8ueb notices: 
Provided thAt if HlIeh...ppr!lOll i;; ahRf'nt from India, they may be signed 
40 and verified on hit:! lwhaif b:,' II pnt{,llt ngpnt IIl1tboriflf'd h~' him in ""ritin, 
in t,h .. behalf, 
fl. IIIIIdcUau .. ....,.... ." pat.t ",Dt.I,-An individual tban not. 
either aloDe or in parkleraiip with any othE'I' pf'rllOn, practillP. describe 
biml8lf or bold bimtelf ... II a patent agent,. or permit·' himself to bf> 
.. 10 deteri}:lea or held out, nnle.,. he i~ regillt.f'l'e() Ill! R patent, ngent in ttl, 
regiMlr 01. patent ~ ... or, .. thE' ('age mll~' he. ul1leR!! h" Hnrl Idl hi, 
JI1'I*tf!lll are 10 rePt'tered ed .. COJl'lPIl11," "hnlJ not Jl~ctif!I', (ler;crit.c itllelf 
,',,'1''' ' 

st 
Bl' hold itMelf ont or permit itself to be desoribed 01' held out all a1or~Bajd 
lillie. every director of the company and th.e maJlaler (if he i8 not it 
director) 01' the man8ging ~ent8, if any, of the compaJly tU'~ rtlgist{lred 811 
810Ttl80id. 
71. Power of OoDtroUtr to retue to 4 ... with eertabl 11_".-(1) Sub· IS 
jt'et t.o /lny ruleR mlt(Je in thiM behalf, the Cont,roller Illay 1'('fuge to reeognietl 
lUI 14 gt<l1 t. ill l'el!pect of all,)' \)I)lIilleSM under thiR AClt~ 
la) :my individll,,1 who,;:" nllme hali heen I't,moved from, and not 
restored to, t.lw mgil'lt1:'1' of patent agents, 'W who iii for tll!:' time heiug 
sIliiptmll,·t1 r ... 1111 Kt:t·illg lioi:i a patt'llt ugent; 10 
(iI) all.' )ll:'l"liOlI who )1;1" IIf~c~1I eOl)vit:teJ of ~II ot'felwt\ 11.111.11:'1' ~ect·ion 
no; 
\t:) IIII,\" }14\I"I'OII who hal< "t>,P.1l foulld hoY i,he ('tlut,rKI (io\·c·.··llment 
(Kftel' " .. iug givell 1111 oI'port.ullit,v f.e.) he heard) to have been convicted 
of IInJ offellce or to have been guilty of any such milOOndllct aB, in 16 
thp. ellse of .. II illdivicillRI regil!~l'('d ill the rtlgillter of patent Bgf'JI tAl , 
would rendel' him lillhll' to have his IIIlHle 1'f'II1ov('d therefrom; 
I d) nll~' p('l'I~on. IIl1t htlinr; r"uiRtt'rt'tl RI\ 1\ pRtt'nt agf'nt, who ill the 
()pillioll of the "cl1It.r01ler ill ("'glJ~t'd wholly or JIIainlJ in acting .. 
Itgf'.nt, in I\ppl:vin~ for TlIltentll in ] ndis or eIRf'whf'I'e in t.hf' nallle or for 20 
t,he ht'flt'tit. of Ii pt\~''''t)1I h~ whom he is I'mployed; 
1/1) Kn,v COlllJlUlI,'" 01' fi1111, if all,\" pcr",on whom t,he Contro!Jt'>1' could 
rtlfuMe toO recognille HI! agent in respect. of any bU8inf.'IIR lInd"r the 
Act i ... Hding all a director 01' manager of the company or i. a partner 
in the firm. 26 
(2) Tht' Controller ",hall refuse to .l'6('.ogllise IIlI agen' in ,'espect of allJ 
hIJsine!lR IJllder thi" Aut., any person who nRit.her resides nor has a pla .. wt of 
hUfilillf'SJ! ill Jndi •. 
71. Sawa,.-Nothing in this Ohapter shall be def.',med to probibit a 
18~al pl',\dit,iollf'r ft'''''1 tukinJ.( !,lIrt in art)· prOOf'eding under thill Act. 30 
CHAPTER XVlI 
bTERNATIOHAJ. AoRlhlMBNTIl 
79. Delmtkllll.-In t.his Chapter, ·('.()nvention application' means au 
flpplic~tion fnl' .. plltfllt Wilde by virtue of section 81. 
80. BotllcatlOll a. ~ tile declaration of. OODveaUoa CCMDtl'J.-The 
Central (:OVt>rJIIlH'lIt IIII\J. with II. vit'w to th~ flilfilmPllt of a t.reat"v, con· 
""l1tioll or nJ'l'ftll~l'IIlt'llt, hy Ilotification ill the Offioial Oa&Atte, deolare 
t.Iwt an." CI.lll1t.I'.V speeifhld ill tltf' notification is n convention couutrv for 
th,> p"rpo!l(,s of this Act: . 
}'rovi,]ed thllt H ,! .. e\al·ation 1Ill\y be made loll IlfOrA8t1id for t.he purpOlles 
eithpl' of 1411 01' of ~()IJW 0111." of the PI'O\'iRions of thil' Act, lIud Q eOlllltrv 
in tI\I' 01\1'\(' I)f whidl 1\ ,If'dnrlltioll IIIMe, for the PIII'POI!"J( of Rome On 1\. ~f 
the provill.iolls ()f this Act i. ir. force shall be deemed to be a I'.OJlven'tion 
CllUlltl',V far t.hfl JlIII'Jlllllf' of those prOllifllionfl only. 
II. OoIl ... UOD appUcaUOD.-(J) Without pr~judjc. to the proviliODI of 
flect.ion 6 an application for " patent for an inYenllion in t'espec* of "'hioh 
prot.ection hall be.m al/plied for ill ~.ooD,..n~ioR Ooulltr, may b. Jl.llld. t,y t&. 
40 
46 
.' 

~ 
person by. whom the application for protection was made or by his legal 
representative or assignee eit.her alone or jointly with any· oth8l' person: 
Provid~d that no Buch application shall be made after the expiration 
of twelve months from the dat.e ot the applioation for protection in a con 
5 vE'ntion country or wham mo.re than one such applicatioufor protection 
have been made, fl'otn the date of the first application. 
(2) Where applications for protection have been made in ont' or more 
convention countries in respect of two or more inventions whioh are cognllttl 
or of which 011"' is a modification of another, a single couventiOl\ applicatiol 1 
10 may be made in respect of those inventions at any time within twelve 
months from the date of the earliest of the said appl.ications for protection: 
Provided that the fee payable on tbe making of any such application 
shall be the same as if separate applications had been mu.dtl in respect of 
8acb of the said inventions; and the requirements of clause (b) of sub-
16 88OtiOll (1) of seotion 82 shall, in the oase of any such application, apply 
separately to the applications for protection in respect of each of the said 
inventions. 
82. SpeCial provtlloDl rel&ttna to COIIlV8IltiOn appUeattoD.-(l) A 
convention application shall-
JO (a) be accompauied by a complete specification; and 
(b) specify the date on which and the conv('ntion country in 
which t\le application for protection or the first such application was 
made and shall state that no appliclttion for protection in reRpect of 
the invention had been made in a convention country before that dRte 
25 by the applican. or any. person from whom he derives title. 
(2) A complete specification filed in purJUlWce of a ooDvention applioa-
tion may include claims in respect of development of. or additions to, the 
inventio:} in respect of whioh the application for protectionw88 made in 
" convention country, being developments or additions in respect of. whiob 
30 the applicant would be entitled under the provisions of lection 6 to nftike 
a separate application for a patent. 
(3) If a convention application is not Itccepted within eighteen montb'J 
from thf\ date of the application for protection in a convention country Or 
where more than one such application for protootion have bpen made frOl1' 
35 the date of the first application, the specification shall with drawings (if 
any) supplied therewith be open to public inspection Itt the:.~ expiration of 
such period. 
88, PriOrity date of claiml of complete Ipecl4catioQ in .. e.pect of con-
vention appllcation.-Where a claim iri a complete speoification fileJ ill 
40 pursuance of 8. oonvention application is fairly based on the matte,· diR-
cloeed in the applicatIon for protection in a convention country or where 
the convention application is founded upon more than one suoh application 
for protection. in one of those applications, the priority date of that claim 
shall he 'he dRt~ of the relpvant application for protection. 
~ H. Supplementary p1'ov1llonl &I to convention appUcatioDl.-(l) Whe~ 
a perRon has applied for protec:tioJl for an invention b.y an ILpplication 
which- • (a) in accordanoe with the termll of a treaty SUbsisting hpt . .w~f'" 
"nv two or more convention countries, iF! equivale'nt to an nppI.ica-
lit . iion duly made in any 000 of those conventio.n countries; or 

;.11 
(b) in accordance ,with .the law of any conven,tion eountry is equi-
valent to an applica~ion duly made ill ~hat com:'!3ntion country; 
btl shall be deempd .for the, purposes of this Act, so lune applied in that 
oConvf\ntion country. 
(2) J:<'or the purposes of this Act, a matter shall be deemed to have been I) 
,disclosed in an application for protection in a "onvention country if it was 
claimed or disclosed (otherwil'!(l than by way of disclaimer or acknowledgp-
roent of prior art) in that Application or in documents submitted by the 
applicant for protection in support of And at the SBme time as that applica-
tion; but no account shall be taken of any disolosure effected uy any 10 
such docllment un)>'88 a copy of the document is filed at the Patens 
oOffiop- with the cOllvention application or ~ithill sllch period as may be 
prescribed after the filing of that application. 
86. OUaer prov1ltOu of tbJI Act to apply to COIlventloD. appUcaUoa.-
'Save alt otherwise provided in this Chllpter, all the provisions of this Act, 13 
shall apply in relation to 1.1. conventioll application and a patpnt granted in 
punlllance thereof as the~' apply in relation to nn ordinary application and 
-a patent granted in pursuance thereof. 
86. SpeCial proVisions .. to vellela, aircraft and land Vehiclel.-Where 
R vessel or aircraft registered in a convention oountry or a land vehicle 20 
owned by a person ordinarily resident in such country, comes into India 
.(including the territorial waters thereof) temporarily or a('cidentalI~ only, 
the rights conferred by a patent for au invention shaH not be deemed 
to be infringed by the use of the invention-
(a) in the bod~' of the vp.Rs,,1 or in the machinery, tackle, appars- 25 
tUI or other acoeseories thereof, 10 far as the inventiQn is used on 
board the ve~Rel and for its actual needs only; or 
(b) in the construction or working of the aircraft or land vehicle 
or of the aoo,easo .. ie. tb .. d,i 
'8S the Cllse may be. 30 
CHAP·TER XVIII 
ApplALs 
r .. 81 • .&.ppeaIII.-(l) An appeal shalt lie to a High Court from any direotion, 
decision 01' order of the Controller under any of the following provisiolls, 
that is to ssy,- 3li 
(a) any order under section 14: 
(b) any order under section 15 j 
«(~) sny dir£lction, decision or order under section 16; 
(d) any directioll under section 17; 
(e) any direction or decision under section 21; 
(f) any decision under section 22; 
(g) any order under section 80; 
(h) ~ny decision or order under section 81; 
(i) any order under section 82;. 
(j) any order under section 33; 45 
(1.) any decision under sub-section (4) or sub-seotion (!) of 
·section 84: 
(l) any order under Bub-section (4) of ,section 86 ; 

.t 
(ttt) any order under .ub~lIJ8ction (4) of Ie6~OD 8'1 ; 
ttl) an, Ql'der under lub-eeotion (B) of MOtion 88; 
(0) !my order under lub·eection (1) of section ,1; 
(p) any order direoting an t",ndnr~~m~nt of " ,lat.tmt witt. thtl word .. 
r; , 'lilltmoes of Hight' uDdt.r seotion 4~: 
(q) 1m,) <It'eisioll or ordt'r IlfI(lel' llhmMe (0) or cllIll"(' (b) of sub-
tied ion (1) of eeotion 48; 
(,) any order undel' sub-&eetion (1) of eection 45; 
(8) IUlJ directioll uudel' 'mh-section (1) or Ill.lb-"ectioll (!!) of lIectioD, 
10 51; 
(t) ,.ny 1)1'0('" 0\' Jeci!!;on lllldf'r lIUb-Relltiol) (1) or slIb-sectiol1 (l?) of 
Kection (\\( 
(B) Jt~,'erJ "PPMl undf>T this section uIlIIl be in writing and shall be ."Ide-
within thrf't: n1pllths from t.h., dat.I' of t,hp dirf'('.ticm, deQi",joll or order, :ts, 
u; t.hfl case mu~' be, of the COllt,\~)ller. 
\,1:; III c8lcIIlstll!g t,he slIid I'f'\\'iod of tlm'e lUouthtl til<' \,lIl1e, if ally, 
(wNlpil,d in granting a e()p~' of th .. diredioll, (\.'ei",;oll OJ' clI'eier appealed: 
againl'!t shall be exollld(>d, 
II, Procedure for heaJ1Dc of appe~"'-lJ) When 1111 "llpesl bltg been 
20 preferred to 8 High Coun under .ection 87. it shall be heard by il lleltd., 
of not less t,han two J IIdges. 
P!') Th .. Beneh heal'j"g thl' llpJWA.1 Ina,', if it thi"k" tit, 1\1111 t-lhaJl, on 
the rec\uellt of the parties to the appeal, oall in the aid of Itn assellOf' 
epecially qU81i~ed for the pUrpoIIe, and hea, the appee.l wholly or partial. 
25 I." with his 888ist"lJc(~, 
(.9.1 'HI,. temunerBti'lII. if "'11\', 1.0 he J'lIoid tt) 811 BijSesKor under this 
flfO,dinn sball in every ~~ be detennined by.he Biih Ooun and he ".., 
811 pUl't of the /'xpense8 of .. he eX","llt';on of t,his Act. 
(4) Save all otherwille provided in thil section, the High Court may make 
30 rules CODBist-ent, wit}, thn Act lUI to the procedure to be followed ill "l!lr,flCt 
of uppeals made t.o it undt'" section 87. 
- 40 
CHAPTER XIX .... 
II. Qoa.""UtioD of ."." pIoviIIODI rell.&iDt to ~nalD iIIvu\loDl,-
H I\"~; peJ'soo fails M c'omply with Any uirf'.(·,t;oll givt'''' IInder Sfll't,ioll 28 or 
make!! Clr CRlISt'R to bt! rrllvl" ao applicat,ion for the grant of a pBt,ent in 
IIOntlf'flvent,ion of t,hBt !t(ll(~t,io", hc\ "hall hI' J'III,is}lf~hlt' wit,h illl}l"iloIOnmeni 
which may extend to two :vea~, or with fine lI'hich may exte,nd to on. 
thoutJand rupees, or with both . 
•. Praetlc. by DOD-retll'ered pUent &IeJl&l.-An1 person 
trlnen,.! tht: proviKiollF! of Beetion 76 fIIball bE' punishable with 
uoeediDg two hundred rupeM in the cue of a first offeJice 
hundr~(1 rIIppes in the Cllse of B I"'cond or ~"b"'eqll .. nt o8't'IJ(',I', 
whtJ oon-
1\1l'~ not 
Bnd fh. 
Yl. :rallllO&Clon of .Il ..... III reliftlr.-lf ftn~ }J('mon UlaKflfJ Of' oalla.,. 
to .,. m..oe a falsI' entry in "J1~ rt'gil1t~\r kApt, "nd~r this Act,. or a writiDI 
tal"ly purporliDa to be 8 00))1 of .... enwy ill Illob • regilW. 01' prod"CN 

43 
or tP.oII(lel's 01 ()!iUKe,.: to lifo product',l or tol'ncJp.rf'd in f',idt'tlClI 1W:r Iluch 
writing. knowing t.ht> I'nt.r,Y 01' "'rit,in~ to b .. falHP, be shall be IJUlliHhable 
wit.h jmpl'i~onment whj(·h lJIay extend to lib mont.h., OJ' with fine which maY 
extend to one tbouHlmd rllpi>~II, 01' with bot.iJ. 
,.~. VD&1IUIortIId c .... of pMla' ripu,-ll all.Y pen;on !al\cIJ "cprelMmt8 I 
t,bat lUIy articl(l sold by him is a patented lu:tielt?, he shall ht! punishable 
wi.th illlpriACmmf'n1 whillh Irlily extend to six 11ionthK, 01' '" ilh lil1t' whit·.1t 
may extf'nd to Ollt' thol1'>Qlld rupees, 0)' wit·h both. 
N. Wl'ODJf1Il1l. of wardl .. Jlateat Oftloe".-lf all~' perSOll ulles on 
hiB piaI'll of hUllinPlIs or 011 any docUPJtmt itlsut'd by him, 01' othel'wile, the 10 
words .. Patcnt Offilll-'" OJ' lilly ot·hf'r words ~lIggtlMl.illg tbM, hiM place of 
busjnp,s!o1 ill. or is officislly I!.otmectpd with, tht' Piltent, OffiC'e. htl .. hllll be 
JlIll I l"llltbll' "it-II fint' \vhida 1111.1." extend to one t h0l18t1.nd rllpee~. lind, in the 
I~rt"" 01 II. l:"III,ill\lin~ offf'ncl~, with It further fine of fift~· rupees for '{'ach 
dH,V flll which t·h .. oR('nct' iF! ('ont.inueil a.ftf'r I'ollviction ther('~or, 15 
M. Keful&l or fallure to eupply lDform.tiOll.-An~· l'f'rHOII who refUIM 
or fails to fumish to the Controller Ilny illformlttioJl or Htat,enwnt which he 
i~ rpiluil'l'.c1 In rllrni"h IIndl'r !Ot'(ltiol1 1(1) 01' rlll'lIi~heH smeh information or 
lliafoement, which iF< fllb~t~ or which he either know" 0" haR reHlilOrl to believe 
to be rll.l"'t~ or «hn-A not belie\'e to be trlle, shall he pnuishA.ble with imprison- 2. 
nWllt, whid~ 1I11t.V I'xknd to si,. HJIIIl t.h " , 01' wit.h fint' whit·.h 1II1l." t'xtend to 
0111' ll"lIIs:tlnl rllp"t't', 01' wit," both. 
16. Ooavana\lOIl of prodIioDI of teeUoa II b7 oIlc.!'I ... d em..,... 
01 tile Patent Oftlee.---.\ny offieer or emfiJ()Yt~e of thp I)at~nt Oft\('t' who 
I'lmt.rHveneR the pro\'jRionrs of 8ec'ion 98 shall be puniahable with imprilOll- 2J". 
menl. which """ f'xll'wl t., !-lix Jlnlnth ... or ~~it.h tine whioh lOa'V t'xtend t~ 
t.wo hllrdf'!',i rll jW"'" , or with h,'th. . 
II. GaIDOli bJ Oompull.a.-(l) If the person l'ommit.ti~ au oifent'1! 
IIn,lf'r this Act, is B lIom,,811.v .• f'vf'r~ per!llon who. lit the tillle the offence 
w,,~ eotnmit.t.PII, WIUI in ,~hRrl!f' of. or W8!> rt'llpollRibl' to. t.he company, IQr 3. 
t·hfl (lonr)lIct of the busiut'M of the com pAn." , ." wpll 8" the oompany shall 
b .. deemed t<) hp jluilt;v of the oRt'noe Rnd ,uIRIl hI' Hahlt> to be Jlrne~ed 
ft,~inf!t and puniRhed Accordingly: 
l'ro"ifiEld 1 hAt, not,hinJ!' 1'f.mt:Ained ill thi!li !!ollIHit·(·tiull IlhaU r8nder any 
such ppl'lJOn liAhle to anJ pIJnishnlf'nt, provi()ed in thi" Act, if he pro .. e. 35 
that, t.he olf('nct' WRIl committpd wit,hout his 100owleoge or t·hAt htl exeroited 
qlle riilig-ellce to pre,'ent tbfo comrnif!sioll of sllch an offence. 
(t') Not,withr.;hmciing :mything cnntlliT\ed in sub-sMt.ion (1), where 8ft 
nfft'Ill· .... tlllllel' t·his Act h~l!< hl','l1 eOllllllit.tec\ h.Y :1 ('Ompllll;", nud it. ill proyed 
that, thl' offt'll(~f' WRI\ ('olJllfliitptl wit.1t th" COllRf'ut nr 1',onniv811l'{' of, or ill f,4\ 
RttributubJe t,o an~' nt'gli~ence on t,he part. of on;v oirpct.or, mAnll,-', aeert-
tar;v or otllt"r t1ffiOf'r "f t.h ... compan.". "ll(\h oil" ,~lor. mnna/tf'!r, treCrfltRr:" Qr 
ot,hp.r of'licAr ~hRII "IAI' h" r1t'f'mt',1 to hI' ~lIilh' of that I')tr .. 1108 and .haU 
hf' IiRblt> to be proceedt'd with And p\lni~hed . acC'orilin,:r1r. 
R:r"IQflt:&t.iotl..--·For the pm'pOlles of thil~ tIlf>Cf401l- <fA. 
(a) 'COllllllillJ' mearlll Rn! hnd~' oorporlljp 1\1111 i"ellld .. ~ A firm <':II' 
otber IIs80eiation of pt'rsol)', 1I11d 
(It) 'director' in relation toO a firm ~"1" .. pal·tDl'I' in .. I .... 

" CHAPTER :x,x 
1I180llLLAw.GUI 
91. BlltricUou on emplOy ... o,f P~tent OfIlce U. to ~1pt.Ol' iDter .. ~ in 
pateDt.-~ll officers. and emp~oyee~ ot the Pa~~mt'b~~4j"8han beincap-
.6 able, durl~g the per~od. for whIch they ho~d th~'r appomtments, to acquire 
or ~ake, dlr.ectly or mdlrectly, except by mherltance or bequest, any right 
or mtt'rest III allY patent iSl!ued by that office. 
98. OfIletr. UUl empioJeel BOtto ·fandIb bdormat.taa, ek.-An officer 
or employee in the Patent OfB.ce shall not, exoept when required or 
10 authorised by this Act, or under a direction in writing of the Central Gov-
ernment or the Controller or by order of • court--
. (a) furnish information on a matter which is bein8, or baa been, 
dealt with under this Act or under the Indian Patents and Designs 
Act, 1911 (II of 1911); or 
16 (b) prepare or assist in the preparation of a document required 
or permitted by or under this Act or under the Indian Patents and 
Designs Act 1911 (II of 1911), to be lodged in the Patent Office; or 
(c) conduct a search in the records of the Patent Office. 
fi. Avolclaace of certa1D ru~t1n CClDdlUa..-(l) Subject to the 
29 provisions of thiti section, any condition of a contract for the ssle or lease of 
8 patented article or of an article IDe.d,e by a paten~ed proces.s or for licence 
to use or work a patented article or process, or retating to any Buch sale, 
lease or licence. shall be void in so far as it purportB-
(a) to reqUire the purchaser, lessee or licensee to acquire from 
:25 the vendor, leBsor or licensor, or hie nominees, or prohibit him from 
acquiring from any specified person or from acquiring except from the 
vendor. lessor or licensor, or his Dominees~' my 8.rtlole& other thaa 
the patented article or an article made by the patented process; 
(b) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee' from using artides 
~ (whether patented or not) whieh are not supplied by. or liny patent.ed 
process which does not belong to, the vendor. lessor, or licensor, or 
his nominees or to reRtrict the right of the purc'haser, lesseE' or licensee 
.to use any yuch articles or process. 
(2) In proceedings against any person for infringement of a pate.nt,· it 
116 ahllll 'be 11 defence to prove that at. the time of the infringement there wa-
in force a contract relating to the patent. made by or with the consent of 
'the plaintiff alld containing a condition void by virtue of this section. 
(3) A condition of a contrRct shall not be void by virtue of this 
section, if-
40 (a) ft.' th~ time of the making of the (~ontract the venclu!'. leBsor 
or licensor was willing toO sell or lease the article or grant a licence to 
UBe or work the article or proceSA as the case may be, \0 the purchaser, 
lessee orliccHBee on reasonable, terms specified in the contract and 
without any Rucb condition as is mentioned in sub·section (1) of this 
section; and 
(b) the purchaser, lesRee or licensee is entitled under tlte contract 
io relieve himself of lUll . liability t? obs~rve. the ~o?dition upon giving 
it> the other Pflrty three months notice In wrltln/l: and suhject to 

45 
payment to him of such comp~;;sa.tion (being in the case of 11 purchase 
a lump sum, and in the C811e of n lease or licence a rent or .royalty for 
the residue of the term of the contraet) a8 may be determmed by an 
arbitra.tor 8I)pointed by ·the Centl'Bl·Uovernment. 
(4) 1£ in any proceeding it is alleged that allY condition of a con~ract is 
void by virtue of this section, it sM,U. lie on the vendor, lessor or hcensor 
to prove the ma.tters set out in clause (a) of sub-section (,1). 
(5) A condition of a contract shall not be void by virtue of this section 
by reason only that it prohibits any person from selling goods other thaD 
those supplied by a specified person, Qr,dn tM oase of a· contrQctfor the 
, lease of or licence to use a patented article, that it reserv-es to the lessor 
or licensor or his nominees the right to lIupply such new parts of the 
patented article as may be required to put or keep it in repair. 
100 •. 1' .... -(1) There &hall be paid in respect of the graq-t of patents 
and applications therefor, and ill respect of other matters in relation to 
the grant of patents under this Act, such fees as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government, 80 however that the fees preRcribea in respect 
of. the instruments and matters mentioned in the First Schedule shall not 
· exceed tb08P therein Hpecitied. 
10 
15 
(2) A proceeding in respect of .which a fee is payable under this Act J() 
or the rules mude thereunoer shall be of no effect unless the fee has been 
paid. 
101. Prtvt1ele 01 npan. of OoIlUOllft.-(l) Reports of or to the 
ControUer made under this Act shall not in 1\IIV cllse be published or be 
· open to publio inspection: . 25 
Provided that the Controller may on application made in the prescribed 
manDer by. any person disclose the result of any searoh made under 
section 12 in respeot of any application for patent where the complete 
specification has been publi&hed. 
In. Be8tiictiOD upon pabUcaUon of Ip8QUlCaUcm.--.8lubject to the SO 
· provisions of sub-section (3) of secMon 82 an application for a patent, n,nd 
any !;pecifteation filed in Jlursuance thereof, shall not, except with the 
CODsent of the applicant, be published by the Controller or be open to 
· public inspection at any time before the date of advertisement of aeeept-
ance of the application. M 
103. PubUcaUoo of patented IDveDtioD8.-T~e Controller shall i.,sue 
periodically a publication of patented inventions containing such informa-
tiorl as the Central Government may direct. 
1M. Powell of OoDtroller to correct clerical enoa.--'I'he Controller 
may, on request in writing accompaniEld by the pre!\cribed fee,-
(a) correct auy clerical error in or in connection with an applica-
tion for a patent or in any patent or any speciflcation, 
(b) correct any clerical error in the name or address of the pro-
prietor of My patent or in any other matter which is entered upon 
the register of Patents. 
106. Power of OoDtroUer t,c). call fql' ~t.loD. ~ pat.eGtea.-The 
Controller may, at ~y ~e dUring the COJitiri~anc~ of the paten.t b:v 
notice in writing reqUlre a patentee or an exclUSive bcensee to furnish to 
&5 

10 
15 
~o 
30 
4& 
him within two months f1'om the dat.e of luch notice or wi"-in lueh funb.r 
time aa the Coot.roller Dlay allow, KIICb information and such periodicmi 
statements as to the edent to whieh the paten' haa been eommercial1y 
worked in India, al may be aped6ed in the notice. 
tOi ... me. of DOtIlcIa, •• , bJ poa.-An,. notice required or autborised 
to be given by or under this _",ct. Ilnd !Ally applic!Atioll ur other documen\ 
so IIl1thoril'lt'd 01' reqllir~d to bto. nUld", or filed, PIll." lit' given. made or filed 
by post. 
un. DeclaraUou bJ bafIIlt, laDa&ic, etc.-(1) If any person is, by reasoll 
of infancy or other "ililabilit~·, incapable of making an.v Htutement or doing 
anything rt:'tpaired or permitted hy or under this Act. the lawful gllardiaD. 
committee or munager (if any) of the penon 8ubject to the disability. or 
if there be none. any persoll appointed by auy court posaeuing jurisdiction 
in re.pect pf his property, nUl.Y make such stutement or a ,tatement •• 
nearl~' correlOponding thereto as ciroumst8nm~s permit. and do KII(lh thine 
in the llame l\Od on behalf of the penon tmbjeo~ to the diaabilit.v. 
(2) An appointment may be made by the court for the purposes of 
thifll ·lIf!ction upon the flt-tition of allY person acting on behalf of thp. pel'llon 
subject to the disability or of any other pp.r!olon interested in the making 
of the statement or the doing ot the thing. 
101. leeuOt7 for OOItI.-Where a person giTing notice of any oppositioB. 
IIDder thiK Act or filing an appeal to Ii High ('ourt from any direction, 
decillion or order of thf' Controller under thiM Aot. neither reside>! 
nor carrip.II on bUliillesli in Tndia, the Controller or the High COllrt. as the 
case ma.,· lit'. rna~' rflcl'lire SlIoh person to give security for· thp payment 
of nil Ct) .. t .. illl~urrtld and lil)el ... · t.o he incurred in the proctledin!(1! or appeal, 
8S th!' cUIoIe IIIH." he. slid. in defuult of Mllch sPcllrit.~· being !liven. ma.v dis-
al1o~' the oppositior. or dismiss the appeal. 
109. 'l'l'loDIJDt.1oa of cetpieI of Ipee.UlcaUou, etc., aa4 -.pecUoD &hereof. 
-CopieR of aU such specifioations, drawinp and amendmen. left at the 
Patent Office, as become open to public in8peotion under the pro'fiaiona 
of t.hi,.: Ael. shllil be trIUl!<miu"d. all soon O~ ma.v be, after the printed 
Ilopil'''' thert'of ore 'lvailahl(" to "\lcta allth()ritiE'~ as thll Cent-rill Government 
may appoint. in thiR hphlllf. and 8hall be open to the inSpe!ltioD of an; 
penon at all r?a80nab~ times at places to \>11 appointed by those a.uthoriti'1 
and :Ipl'foved b;V the Cfmtral Government. 
110. JDforIIlatioa relatiDc to pateDtI.-A person makin. 8 request to 
the Controller in the pre~ribed manner all respects any patent 8peci6ed 
;n the reqllf!Rt 01' as respects any applicatio'l for a patent. RO apellifled, for 
informRtiOT~ t.o be furnished to him b;V the Controller of any luch mattei'll 
as may be pre8cribed affecting that patent or application. shall be entitled. 
lubjtlC't to the payment of the presorihed fee-; to have inmrmQtion If'llpplied 
t·o him Ilc(·ordinl-!);V. 
111. Lou or daatructlou of P&tent.--If a patent is lost or destroyed, or 
its non-prodlletion ill IIceollnted for to the satisfaction of the Controller. 
thE' Controller may at Imy time.' on payment of the prescribed fee, ee&I 
It duplicate thereof, 
11t. IIocleII to be IanlIIIaI4 to IIadiaD ....... -The trU8tees of !;be 
Indian MUllenm may at an;v time require It patentee to furni.h them witb 
a modl'1 or )C1i.mple of bill invention on payment to. tbe patentee of the COR\ 

ty 
d the mlDufae~ of *h. model or lample, the amoua' to be .ettled, in 
ease of dispute, by the Central Govflrnmflllb. 
111. ~ower to .u. nIII.-(l) The Central Government may. by noti· 
tication in the Offici.l G&1.ette, mftke rulell for oarrying out the pllrpoaea 
at this .\ct. , 
(2) Without prejudice to the iener&lity of the foregoing power, the 
reentral. Government may make rules to provide for all or an,. of tbe 
iellowjng fII"tt.ers, namel,.:-
(a) the establiahment of branches of the Patent Oftioe; 
(h) the fortll of applicntions for p&tellts and of any flpe~jfiCQl;iona. 1. 
drawings ttnd ot,her document. which m.y he filed at the Patent Offioe 
and fOI' requiring copies to be furnished of any such documents; 
(0) the manner in which "ny applioation fot Ii paten' or any other 
dOCllmentll may be flied at t,he Patent Oftioe; 
(d) the time within which Rnv !let or thiug rna,\' he n01l1o' IInde!' 15 
this Act; , 
(Il) the fees wbich may IJto, pay"hlf! undel' thi14 Act Ilnd u.e 
manner of payment of suoh feea; 
(f) the lJlQtten; in rel\ptl(~t, of whieh the E:C(lInintH' mll.Y make a 
-;report to the Controller; 2, 
(g) the manner in whioh and the time within whidl any mllt,ttll' 
mny be advertised under this Act; 
(II I the provil!li()l1~ which ml\~· b~ illl\erted in all order for restora-
tion of II. patent or laplled Ilppliclltioll for a patent for the prot('.()tion of 
Jj)ersons who may have availed themselves of the lIubject.matter of the 25 
potent "ite!' the patent had ceasfld; 
(i) the form of a request for the sealing of a patent; 
(j) the foml of the manner ill which and the time within whioh 
:Any notie!' may be given undel' thi. Act; 
(k) the matter!! in respect of v .. hich the Controller IIhall have 30 
tPOwers of Q civil court; 
(l) the qllalifications of patent agellttl ond the keeping. of a 
n"KiMter of patcHI, 8~t>lIt~, I ht' reJrlovnl from the regillt,er of patent. 
IlgpntH of thtl nllme of IUI~' person registered thereunder or the RUII· 
!pension of thl'! right of any suoh peNon 10 aot 8S a patent agent; 3i 
(m) the comliioionFi subject to which any aot ma,v be done b, a 
lPl.ltlmt agent on behalf of his principal; 
(n) tht> m!lnller in which all lI.pplication may be sigIled /lni 
',verified undAf this Act: 
(0) the procedure to b6 follnwetl in cOIlnection with any applies- 40 
·tion or request t.o the Cont,roller or in connection with any proceed-
ing before the Controller unli for authorising thtl red,ificlltioll of il'l't'l-
·guln.rit.iss of procedure; 
(p) the lIouthorising of pUblication Bnd sale of oopieR of specifics-
~iODS, drawidgil and other document. in the Pat.ent Office, and of 46 
,tndexe!IL or abridgement of luoh ciocu .. ent.; 

s 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
(q), the ensuring of stlcre,c.y with. respect t.o .,patents . to .whiqb 
section 23 applies; 
. (r) the regula.tion of business of the P .. te ..... t Office, aaduf aU 
. things by this Ad placed under the direction or Qontrol of the Con. 
troll.er . 
. (3) The power to make rules under this section shall be subject to the-
condition of the rules being made after previous publication: 
Provided that nothing in t.his sub-section shall apply in the' case of 
rules made for the purpose specified in clause (q) of !>ub-section (2). 
11t. SpeCW proviIlona rela" to certaln Pa~'DtI.-I<'or the removal of 
doubts, it is hereby declared that- . 
(i) any patent granted before the relevant date in any of the merged 
territories or in any Indian Statf' , 01' 8 IJart 13 State ~r part thereof, 
under any law then in force in such merged tenitory, 'State or pe.rfJ; 
Mhall havt' effect and shall be deemed I\lwl\vs to have had effect in that 
merged territory, State or part only; . 
(Ii) A.ny patent. granted ht'fore the 18th day of April, 11)50 uuder the-
Indian Patent.s and Designs Act, 1911 (II of 1911), shall have eRect Rnd 
shall be deemed always t.o have had effect in those territories only t;o. 
which the said Act applied at the date of the grant of the patent. 
Explanation.-The expression 'relevant. date' meanl'l--
(a) in relation to a merged territory, the lst day of .J anuary. 
1950; and 
(b) in relation to an Indian State, ()r a Part B State or part 
thereof. the 18th day of April, 1950. 
116. "peal, I&Wlg &lid tnDIItiODll pro9illoDa.-(1) The Indian Patents 
and Df>Rigll!'I Act. 1911 (IT of 1911), in so far as it reiuteH to patents, is here-
by r"pollled, RTid on the commencement of this Act the ~aid Act shall be 
&mended RS indicated in the Second Schedule. 
(2) Without prejudice to tht' proviRiolls cont.ained in thp Gl'llPral Clltllses 
Act, 1~97 (X of 1897), with rei\ppct to repeals,-
(0.) any notification, rule, order, require~nent, certificate, notice, 
decision, direction, authorisa.tion, consent, applica.tion, request or 
thing made, issued, given or done under the Indian Patents and 
OesignM Act, un J (II of HH 1) shall, if in force A.t. thp commence-
m>'nt of this Act. and in so far as it could ha.ve bl't'n made, issued, 
givpn or 110np 1Inder this Act, COlltiIHlP in force /lncI hrwp eiTt'ct, ItS if 
ml:\dt', iF!RIIPcl, given or clone IInnel' the corrPKpondinJ:; provisions of this 
Ac~; , . 
(b) notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1) of section 8 of 
this Act. a complete specification shall not be filed in pursuance of 
an appliea.tion which by virtue of section 4A of t.he Indian Patents 
and Designs Act, 1911 (II of 1911) was deemed to be abandoned at 
any time before the commencement of this Act; 
(c) where two or more pArsons are registered as grantee or pro-
prietor in respect of a patent whieh was granted or for which the 
. applicat.ion was made before the commencement of this Act, the 
right of each of th~ .~~on8. t() assign .the wholE" or part of tlblt 

49 
interest in the pa.tent shall not be restricted by reason only of th", 
provisions of section 50 of this Act; 
• 
(d) a condition of Bny contract in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall not be invalidated by reason only 
of the provisions of section 99 of this Act; 5 
(e) the provisions of section 9 of the Indian l)at.ents and Designs 
Act, 1911 (II of 1911) RhaU continuo to apply in relation to any pro-
ceedings ptmding under that section at the commencement of this Act; 
(f) the provisions of seetion 21A of the Indian Patents and Designs 
Act, 1911 (II of 1911) and of any rules made thereunder shall continue 10 
to apply in relation to any patent granted before the commenoement 
of this Act in pursuance of that section: 
(g) sub-section (1) of section 25 and Rub-section (1) of section 29 
of this Act shall not apply to any patent granted before the com-
menoement of this Act; 15 
(h) sub-section (1) of section 31 of this Act shall apply in relation 
to any application made before the commencement of this Act as it 
applies in relation to an application made after the commencemeni 
of i,his Act; 
(i) Ruh-seCLiollf> (9.) lind (3) of section 58 of this Act shall not 20 
Bl'ply in relation to any infringement of a patent committed before 
the commencement of this Act; 
(j) in relation to a patent granted before the commencement of 
this Act the renewal fees shall be those specified in the SchEldule to 
thll Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911 (II of 1911). 25 
(3) Bave as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the provisions of this 
Aot shall apply to any application for a patent pending at the commence-
ment of this Act and to any proceedings consequent thereon and to any 
patent granted in pursuance thereof. 
(4) References in this Act to thE-l Indian Patents Qnd Designs Act, 30 
1911 (II of 1911) are references to that Act as in force immediately before 
th~ commencement of this Act. . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 100] 
FuB 
On applioation for a patent accompanied by provisional specifloation 
On filing complete specification after provisional lpecifioation 
On applioation for a patent aooompanieci by oomplete specificatioD 
For I88ling a patent, 
Before the expiration of the 4th year from the date of the patent 
Before the ell'.piration of the 5th year from the date of the patent . 
Before the Rpiration of the 8th year from the date of the patent 
Before the Rpiration of the 7th year from the date of the patent 
35 
a .. 
20 
30 
66 
80 40 
lro 
50 
50 
50 

Before the apiration of the 8th year from the date of the p6t.ent ·100 
Before the expiration of the 9th year from t.he date of the p6tent leo 
Before the eltpiration of the lOth year from the date of the patent 125 
Before the expiration of the 11th year (!'OlD the daM! of the patent 125 
5 Wore the expiration of the 12th year from the date of the patent 1110 
Before the expiration of the 13th year from the date of the patent ltiO 
Before the expiration of the l'th year from the date of the patent 171S 
Before the eltpiratlon of the 15th year from the date of the patent 175 
Provided that the f888 for tWo or more years may be paid in advanoe 
10 011 applioation to extend the term of a patent 50 
In reapeot of each year of the extended term of a patent panted under 200 
lIII0"00 80. . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[Sce section 115(1)] 
15 Amendment.. to the Indian Patent. and Design. Aot, H)l1. 
':. 
1. In the long title and the pr.eamble, the words "Inventions and' II.nd 
the words 'inventions and' shall, respectively, be omitted. 
2 .. In section I, in sub-section (1), the words 'Indian Patents and' shall 
b6 :.>mHted. 
20 8. In section 2,-:-
25 
(a) claus!l (1) shull be omitted; 
(b) in olause (2), th.t! words and brackets '(as respects designs)' 
shall be omitted; 
(c) in climse (3), for the words 'appointed under this Act' the 
words and figures 'appoiuted under the Patents Act 1958' shall be 
substituted; 
(d) clauses (6), (8), (10), (11) and (1~) shall be omitted. 
4. Part I shall be omitted. 
17. In section 51B, for the words Ilnd figures 'The provisioDl of sectioll 
21', the words and figures 'The provisions of Chapter XI of' the Patents 
30 Act, 1958', shall be substituted. 
6. In section 54, for the words 'The provisions of this Act', the words 
and figures 'The provisions of the Patents Act, 1953' shall be substituted. 
7. In section 57, in 8U b-section (1), the words • the grant of patents 
and' and 'patents and' sball be omitted. 
e. Sectio~ 59A tlhall be omitted. 
9. In section 01, sub-section (1) shall be omitted. 
10. In section 62.-
(a) olause (a) shall be omitted; 
(h) in clause (c), the words 'any patent or' and 'the t'eglater of 
patents or' shall be omitted_ 

11. tn section 69,-
(a) in sub-section (1), the words 'to a patent or' and 'patent or', 
.hall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (2),-
(I) the words 'patent or' shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the' words 'patents or designs, as the case may be' 
the word 'designs' shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub· section (3), the words 'patent or', wherever they 
occur, shall be omitted; 
(d) in sub-section (4), the words 'patent or to' shRll be omitted_ 10 
12. In section 64,-
(4) in sub-s.ection (1)-
'(i) the words 'patents or' shall be omitted; 
(ii) the word 'either' wherever it occurs shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-sed-ion (5), clause (a) shall be olllitted_ 15 
JR. Section 6G shall be omitted . 
. 14. In section 67, the words 'for a patent, or for amendment 01. an 
application or of 1\ specifioation, or' shall be omitted. 
1;;. In section 69, in sub-section (1), the words 'grant a patent for 
an invention or to' shall be omitted. 20 
]6. In section 7lA, the words 'or. from pr.tents, specifications and 
other' shall be omitted. 
17. Hection 72 shall be omitted. 
18, F'or section 74A, the following section shall be substituted, 
, A&mely ; - 20 
"74A. Security for cosb.-Where a person giving notice to the 
Court of appeal from any deoision of the Controller under this Act, 
neither resides llor carries on business in India, the Court may require 
suoh person to give security for the payment of all costs incurred and 
Jikely to be incurred in the uppeRl and in default of such security 30 
being given may dismiss the appeaL" , 
19. Sect,ion 75 shall be omitted, 
20. In section 76,-
(a) in sub-section (1), the word 'othe~' shall be omitted; 
(b) in olause (c) of sub-section (2), the word 'opponent' shall be 8ti 
omitted. 
21. In section 77,-
(4) in sub-lIection (1),-
(I) in clause (c), the word 'specification,' shnll be omitted; 
(ii) clause (d) shall be omitted; '0 

10 
62 
(iii)' in clause (Il), the words 'specifications and other' shall 
be omitted; 
(iv) clause (eBe) shall be omitted; 
(b) sub-section (2.4) shall be omitted. 
2'2. In section 78A,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(.) the words 'invention or' and 'the patent that may be 
granted to him under this Act, for the said invention or' shall 
be omitted; 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, 
namely:-
, 'Provided that-
(a) the application is made within six months from 
the application for protection in the United Kingdom; and 
15 (b) nothing in this section shall entitle the proprietor 
of the design to recover damages for infringement 
. happening prior to the actual date on which tbe design is 
registered in India."; 
(b) in sub-s.ection (9),-
20 (i) the words ''rhe pntent granted for an invention or' shall 
be omitted; 
(ii) clause (a) shalt be omitted; and 
(iii) in clause (b), the words 'in the case of a design' shall 
be omitted; 
25 (c) in sub-section (3),-
(i) the words 'the grant of a patent or' shall be omitted; aud 
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted; 
(d) in sub-section (4), the words 'inventions or' and 'patented 
or' wherever they occur shall be omitted. 
30 28. In section 80, in the proviso, the words 'patent, permit pr lioenoe 
35 
granted or' shall be omitted. 
24. Fol' the Schedule, the following Schedule shall be substit~ted, 
namely:-
"THE SOHEDULE 
[Bee section 57] 
Fua 
·On application for registration of a design ... :sa. S/-/-,!! 

~TA.T~ENT OF OaJ1WTS ANn 1l.EASONS. 
Th~ Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911 was enacted at a time when 
Indio. had not developed industrially. The experience of the working of 
this Act coupled with th.e progress of industrial development in the country 
indicated clearly the need for 0. more comprehensive legislation 10 as to 
ensure that patent rights are not abused to the detriment of th.e consumer 
or to the prejudice of the trade or of the industrial development of the 
country. A Committe.e known as the Patents Enquiry Committee was 
appointed by the Government of India in 1948 to review the working of the 
patent 8)stem and this Committee submitted an interim report which was 
confined mainly to the provisions relating to th.e monopoly rights conferred 
by patents. The Indian Patents and Designs (Amendment) Act, 1950 was 
enacted to give effect to the main recommendations in that report and since 
then some further ad hoc amendments have been carried out from time to 
time to incorporate ohanges which were considered to be of a very urgent 
nature. The final report of the Patents Enquiry Committee was submitted 
in 19!1O. The object of this Bill is to give effect to such of the recommenda· 
tions of the final report of the Patents Enquiry Committee as have been 
accepted by Government. Opportunity has also been taken to make cer· 
tab other improvements in the patent law. 
The provisions of the Bill which make a change in the existing law 
are explnined in the Notes on Clauses. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NBW DBLHI; 
The 24th Novl'mller, 1953. 
53 

Note8 on Clau86, 
ClauI6 2.-The definitions of 'invention' and 'manufacture' have been 
amplified. 'rhe defiuitions of certain new terJ.fls whicha,r~U8ed in the Bill 
hHve been added. 
Clau,e 3.-This clause specifies what is not 'pat.entable' and is based 
upon judicial decisions ou the Bubject. 
Clau86 8.-'l'he proviso to sub-clause (1) ertends the maximum period of 
'en months to twelve months during which a complete sp.ecification IDay 
be filed after the provisional specification. 
Clau86 lO.--rThis clause . lays down the criterion for determining the 
novelty or priority date of. an inv.elltioll and stipulates. that the priority date 
of a claim in a complete specification should be determined on the basis of 
the cd.isclosure contained in a complete or a foreign specification onwhieh 
the particular claim in the complete specificution way be based . 
. . Clau8e 12.-Tbe existing Act does not contain any specific provision re-
quiring the Controller to make fl. compUlsory search for ascertaining the 
novelty of an invention before its "lICCllptanc.e". This clause makes it 
obligatory for compulsory searches to b~ made by the l)l.Itent Office in res-
pect of all putent applications.' Such a men,sure, it is considered. would 
onhance the commercial vo.lue attached to an Indilln patent. 
Clause 21.-This clause omits the provision in the existing Act (section 
9) permitting opposition proceedings before the sealing of a potent. In its 
place a. provision has been inserted under which it will be open tp any person 
to file a !;taternent of objections before the Controller of Patents and 
Designs wit.hin four months from the date of advertisement of the accept-
~uoe of th~ applicut.ion in the Official Gazette. 'l'he objectious would be 
considered by the Controller along with the Examiner's r.eport before sealing 
the patent. Experience has shown that opposition proceedings in· the past 
ha.ve proved frivolous and obstructive. They have also caus.ed serious 
delays and substantiul loss to the effective term of a patent. 
ClaU8e 22.-This claus6 makes it obligatory that the name. of the fint 
invent·or shall be mentioned in the patent specification as also in the 
. patent to be granted. The object of this clause is to recognise the right. of 
·the inventor to be Ilssociated with his invention. 
Clau8e 23.-This clause replaces the provisions of section 21A of the 
existing Act which are somewhat rigid. 'l'he revised clause etl&bles the 
Controller to enforce secrecy in r.eRpect of patent applications which may 
be relevant for defence purposes. 
Clau,e 30.-At present petitions for extension of the term of a pa~ent lie 
to the Central Government. Under this clause such petitions will have to 
be made to the Controller of Plltents. 
Clau'IJ 33.-This clause authorises the Controller of Patents to restore a 
lapsed o.pplie~tion for s pa.tent on which a patent could not be sealed within 
the p~scribed time due to an uDintentional delay or omission on the part of 
the applicant. 
Clau8e 87.-The Controller is empowered to entertain applications for 
revocation of 0. patent which power at present vests in the High Courts only. 
An order of the Controller under this clause will. however, be subjeot to an 
appeal to the High Court. 

Ol(JU'8 50.-The expression 'joint tenants' whioh in this cor~text .is 
foreign to the lndi~ law is being oDlitted. The rules of la.w apphoable. III 
this c"untry to the ownership and devolutiotl of Dlovtible property are bemg 
applied to I»!tenta. 
Clault8 51.-This clause empowers the Controller of Patents t~ give 
directiollsto joint patentees with regard to the sale, le~~e' or grant of hoenc~s 
on patents, particularly in theevtlut of a dispute II.rlSlllg between them IJl 
regard to their mutual rights. . 
Claur"es rtJ to 56.-The provil,ions of these clauses repIllee the provisiolls 
of section 21 of the existing Act. Under section 21, the Central Govem-
lDeut a:1one can use a patent for the purposes of the Union. This ptivileitl· 
is llOW being extended to the I~tute Governments. 
Clau.lJlI.57.-This clause enables 8 person who has a rellsollll.ble l7l1ll!!e to 
doubt whether the iutended manufacture or use of au 'article would consti-
tute lUi infringement of an existing plI.tent to file a. declaratory suit. Such 
u. declaratory suit at the initial stage would protect persons who act bona-
fide aud would avoid unnecessary Ilnd prolonged litigation later which other-
wise may become iuevituble. A provision like this would also be beneficial 
to industrialists Ilnd would help in promoting the industrialisation of the 
country. 
ClaulJe 58.-Thit; clause confers upon illl • exulusive licensee' the right to 
institute a suit for infringement of II patent which ut present is enjoyed by a 
patentee only. 
Claule8 74 to 78.-'l'his is a new Chapter aud provides for statutory 
control over thu profession of patent agents. A putent agent will now be 
required to register himself wlder the Act and he will also have· to pa.s a 
qualifying examination before he becomes eJigible for such registration. 
Clauses 70 to 86.~This Chapter deals with international. agreements re-
garding reciprocal arrangenwnts with foreign countries for the Ulutual pro-
tection of inveutions. 'rhese clauses repluce the provisions of the existing 
section 78A which outlines the presellt reciprocal an-angements existing 
between India., the United Kingdom, Ilud other British Commonwealth 
countries. 
Clause 87.-1'his olause provides for appeals. Under the existing Act 
appeeJs in a large majority of oases lie to the Centrul Government. Under 
the Bill, all appeals will lie to a High Court. 
Clausel 80 to OO.-These clauses provide peuulties in respect of certain 
offences. Under the existing Act, the only penalty providea is in respect 
of tlw wrongful use' of the words 'Putent Office'. 
Clause 97.-'I'his is a new clause which disquulifies tht· employec~ of the 
l'atent Office from lIcquiring allY interest in a patent, except by inheritance 
or bequest, I 
Clause 08.-This is also a new cluuse which enjoins upon employees of 
the Patent Office to observe secrecy in respect of confidentilll iniormatioll 
and documents to which they may have access in the discharge of the'ir 
duties. A contravention of the provisions of this clause is made a peDlIol 
offence. 
~na1ue 99.-'fhis c~ltuse. is intended to remove the ml\lpr~tices adopt-
ed m the- trade regardmg hcences, contracts for sale, leaseR ekl. in respect 
of pAtentR and declares that nll such im;trllments shall be void nnd un-
enforClflable whenever they tenn to impose restrictions with regard to 
purchase of articles other than patented articles. 

56 
Claull 101.-'fhis olause is based on seotion 60 of the existing Aot with 
the only dUferenoe that it pemlits the Controller of Patents to disolose, iu 
his discretion, the ~esult of investigations made in conneot·ioll with the 
examination of patent specifications to the applicant. Such a provision, it 
is considered, would be beneficial to the inventors IW it would enable them 
to know the ,extent of the prior art oited against their applications. -
Clause l02.-This clause requires the Controllar of Patents to treat ull 
applications for patents confidential before their acceptance. 
ClauI#! l05.-This clause enables the Controller of Patents to oall for 
poriodical reports from patentees regarding the commercial working of 
their patents in India. 
Th" First Schedul~.-The existing foos are being slightly enhanced. 
'1'h6 Second Schedule.-This Schedule omits from the existing Act all 
provisiolls relating to patents aud that Act will now contain provisions 
relating to designs only. 

III 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
A Patent Office already exists at Calcutta to administer the Indian 
Patents and Designs Act, 1911, but it will need to be considerably strength-
ened in order to cope with the additional functions contemplated under the 
new Bill for amending the Law relating to Patents, For example the office 
"'ill ha.ve to keep a close watch over the commercial expjoitation of Patents 
and also to exercise control over the profession of Patent Agents. The 
Controller of Patents and Designs will also have considerably enlarged 
powers of trying suits relating to Patents, 
2. 'l'wo new wings each under a Deputy Controller with Examiners and 
rninio;terial staff will have to be added to the Patent Office, The add itionll I 
expenditure involved is estimated to be Rs. 1'10 lakhs per year but this will 
be more than balanced by the increased recovery of Rs. l' 50 lakhliJ per year 
from the enhanoed rateB of feell prescribed in the new Bill" 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to amend and consolidate the law relatina to Patents. 
The President has, in pursua.nce of ~ clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to the House of the 
People the consideration of the Bi 
--
14. It K.A tTL, 
Seort-tarr. 
(Shr; T. T. Krishnamachari, 
Mi"ister for COIIIIMf'CI and Indust",) 
. -----
{ 