BIU No. 59 or 1959 
THE KERALA LOCAL AUTHORITIES 
LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
ON 24TH AUGUST, 1959) 

Trav. Act 
4 of 1116. 
Trav. Act 
%3 of 1116. 
Cochin 
Act XVIII 
of 1113· 
Bm No. 59 of 1959 
THE KERALA LOCAL AUTHORITIES LAWS (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide fO'l' the further extension of the term of office of the Mayor 
and other councillors and chairmen of standing committees of the 
Corpor(ltion of Trivandrum, (lnd of the councillors of municipali-
ties; (lnd to provide fO'l' the recovery in certain ccues of (lrre(lrB of 
cesses, r(lteB, taxes, fees 0'1' other BUms due to P(lnchayats. 
WHEREAS by virtue of the Proclamation issued by the President 
under article 356 of the Constitution on the 31st day of July, 1959, the 
powers of the legislature of the State of Kerala are now exercisable 
by or under the authority of the Parliament; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Kerala Local Authorities Laws Short title. 
(Amendment) Act, 1959. 
Z. In this Act,-
('D) "Kerala municipal laws" means,-
(i) the Trivandrum City Municipal Act, 
(ii) the Travancore District Municipalities Act, 1116, 
(iii) the Cochin Municipal Act XVIII of 1113, 
Definitions. 

Extension 
of term of 
office of 
certain 
municipal 
function-
ariel. 
Election 
and term of 
office of 
new coun-
cilloR in 
c:uea falling 
under lee-
tion 3. 
... 
(iv) the Madras District Municipalities Act, 1920, as in 
force in Malabar, 
(v) the Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 1958, and 
(vi) the Madras District Municipalities 
Act, 1958; 
(Amendment) 
(b) "Malabar" means the Malabar district referred to in sub: 
section (2) of section 5 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
3. Notwithstanding anything in any of the Kerala Municipal 
laws, the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, extend the 
S 
term of office of- 10 
(i) the Mayor and other councillors and the chairmen of 
standing committees of the Corporation of Trivandrwn constitut-
ed under Ute Trivandrum City Municipal Act; and . 
(ii) the councillors of any municipality constituted under the 
Madl'll Act 
, of 1930. 
Keral. Act 
43 of 195 
Kerala 
Act 44 of 
19,8. 
37 of 1956. 
Trav. Ac 
4 of IJJ6. 
Madras District Municipalities Act, 1920, as in force in Malabar. IS Madral Act 
or the Travancore District Municipalities Act, 1116. or the Cochin +;:v~~~· 
Municipal Act XVIII of 1113; 2:~J~~ 
which expires at noon on the 1st day of September, 1959. up to such XVIII of 
date not later than the 1st dllY of September, 1960, as may be specified JlI3· 
in the notification. 20 
4. When the term of office of the Mayor or of any chairman or 
councillor has been extended under section 3, the provisions of th& 
Kerala municipal laws shall have effect in relation thereto, subject to 
the following modifications, namely:-
(4) the Government shall cause elections- 2S 
(i) to be so held, and appointments to be so made, of 
councillors to the Corporation of Trivandrum that the newly 
elected and appointed councillors enter upon office on the 
date specified in the notification under section 3; 
(ii) to every municipality concerned to be so held that 30 
the newly elected councillors enter upon office on the date 
specified as aforesaid; 
(b) the term of office of the newly elected or appointed coun-
cillors shall expire on the day immediately succeeding the expiry 
of three years from the date referred to in clause (a); 3S 
(c) the election of the Mayor of the council of the Corpora-
tion of Trivandrum shall be held at the first meeting of the coun-
cil after the date referred to in clause (a) and the election of the 
chairman of each standing committee of the councfi ehall be held 
at the first meeting of such committee. 40 

Trav.-Co-
chin Act 2 
of 1950. 
• 
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect tQ the provisions of this Removal of 
Act, or of any of the Kerala municipal laws as modified by section 4, difficulties. 
the Government may, as occasion may arise, by order, do anything 
which appears to them necessary for the purpose of removing the 
S difficulty. -
10 
IS 
6. In the Travancore-Cochin Panchayats Act, 1950, after section 57, AmfTendment o ravan-
the following section shall be inserted, namely:- core-Co-
chin Pan-
chayatB Act 
u57A. Where a Panchayat ceases to exist, or ceases to exercise Recov~of 
jurisdiction over any local area. by reason of any notification ='"etc .• 
issued under section 3, any cess, rate, tax, fee or other sum which w~ PAll-c ... .J.ta (:CalC 
accrued due to such Panchayat before the date it ceased to so to exist or to 
exist or to exercise jurisdiction, shall be payable to such authority i::i:~OD. 
as the Government may, by general or special order, specify, and 
may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue und~r the Revenue 
Recovery Act for the time being in force.". 
. Repeal of 7. The Murucipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 1958, and the Madras Kerala 
District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1958, shall stand repealed Acts t3 ~d 
on the 1st day of September, 1959. 44 0 195 • 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
According to the Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 1958 (Kerala 
Act 43 of 1958), and the Madras District Municipalities (Amendment) 
Act, 1958 (Kerala Act 44 of 1958), the term of office of the councillors 
of the Corporation of the City of Trivandrum and the Municipalities 
in the State will expire on 1-9-1959, and the newly elected councillors 
have to come into office on the same date. Steps were taken accord-
ingly to conduct the elections to the councils of the Corporation and 
the Municipalities in July-August, 1959, but owing to the abnormal 
conditions created by the political unrest in the State and in 
deference to the recommendations of the local Chamber of Municipal 
Chainnen, the elections had to be postponed. The present enact-
ment is intended to extend the term of the councils to a date not 
later than 1-9-1960, within which it would be possible to conduct 
the elections under normal conditions, and it is on the lines that 
'- had been approved by the late Ministry in Kerala. 
2. There is no provision in tho Travancore-Cochin Panchayats Act, 
1950, for the collection of arrears of tax, fee, etc., due to a Panchayat 
after it ceases to exist. Recently, where a panchayat area in the 
State was constituted into a Municipality, difficulties have arisen 
for the collection of arrears of tax, fee, etc., which accrued to the 
Panchayat before its abolition. Hence, it is considered necessary 
to make a provision for the realisation of such arrears. Clause 6 
of the Bill is iIJ.tended for' this purpose. 
3. Under the Proclamation issued by the President under article 
356 of the Constitution on July 31, 1959, the powers of the Legislature 
of the State of Kerala are now exercisable by or under the authority 
of Parliament. This Bill has accordingly been prepared for enact-
ment by Parliament. 
NEW DELHI; G. B. PANT· 
The 22nd August, 1959· 
4 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the further extension of the term of office of the 
Mayor and other councillors and chairmen of standing 
committees of the Corporation of Trivandrum, and of the 
councillors of municipalities; and to provide for the 
recovery in certain cases of arrears of cesses, rates, taxes, 
fees or other sums due to Panchayats. 
(Shr; GOfJind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 