Bm No. S, of 1"5 
THE MANIPUR (COURTS) 
BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

5 
BIU No. S9 ef 1955-
THE MANIPUR (COURTS) BILL, 1955 
(As INTROD.UC,ED INLQK SABlIA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a JU;dicaZ Commissioners Cou.rt 
and other Courts in Manipur. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:- . 
CHAPTER I 
P~INARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Manipur (Courts) Act, 1955. 
(2) It extends to the whole €If the State of M4!,nip'\lX. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Chief Com-
missioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
Short title. 
extent RDd 
commence-
meat. 
DefinitioDB. 
10 (i) "Chief Commissioner" means the Chief Com,missioner 
IS 
of Manipurj 
• (ii) "civil suit" includes every suit of a civil nature not 
expressly or impliedly classed otherwise by any law for the time 
being in force; 
(iii) "hill areas" mean such area& in the hill tracts of the 
State of Manipur as the "Chief Commissioner may, by notifica-
tion in the Ofticial Gazette, declare to be hill ~eas; 
(iv) "district court" means the court of the district judge 
and includes the court of the additional district judgej . 
• 

2 
(v) "small cause suit" means a suit of the nature cognizable 
by a court of small causes under the Provincial Small Cause 
Courts Act, 1887; IX of 1887. 
(vi) "value" in relation to a suit means the amount or value 
of the subject-matter of the suit. S 
CHAPTER IT 
COURT OF THE JUDICIAL COMMISSIONER 
Bstablish- 3. There shall be established for the State of Manipur a court to 
~:tO~ft~he be known as the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Manipur 
Judicial which shall consist of the Judicial Commissioner and the Additional 10 
J:.is- Judicial Commissioner, if any. 
!fru~~Ft 4. (1) The Judicial Commissioner and the Additional Judicial 
Co~c;.a Commissioner, if any, shall be appointed by, and shall hold ofllee 
~~::-i~ during the pleasure of, the President. 
Judicial 
'Commis-
sioner 
Casual 
vacancy in 
the office 
of the Judi-
cial r.ommia 
sillner . 
(2) A person shall not be appointed as Judicial Commissioner or 15 
Additional Judicial Commissioner unless he is qualified to be ap-
pointed as a Judge of a High Court under clause (2) of article 217 
of the Constitution or unless he was, immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act, the Judicial Commissioner of Manipur. 
5. On the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the Judicial20 
Commissioner, the Additional Judicial Commissioner, if any, or if 
there is no Additional Judicial Commissioner, the senL.-most dis, 
trict judge shall, pending the appointment of the Judicial Com-
missioner, act as the Judicial Commissioner. 
Rank, pre- 6. The Judicial Commissioner shall have rank and precedence 25 
cedence and reaponaibili- before the Additional Judicial Commissioner and shall be respon-
ty of Ju- sible for the administration of, and generally for the distribution of 
dicial Com- b' . h C rt f th J d' , 1 C ,. missioner. . usmess m, t e ou 0 e u ICla ommlSSloner. 
Exercise of 
Jurisdiction 
by Judicial 
Commis-
sioner and 
Additional 
J~cial 
COmmis-
sioner. 
7. Subject to such orders as the Judicial Commissioner may make 
as regards the distribution of business between himself and the 30 
Additional Judicial Commissioner, the jurisdiction of the Court of 
the Judicial Commissioner may"e exercised by the Judicial Com-
missioner or by the Additional Judici,al Commissioner. 
Civil and 8. Save as otherwise provided by this Act or any other law for 
rw,r:'on the time being m forced the Court of - the Judicial Commissioner 35 
of the ~ shall with reference to any civil or criminal proceeding under any 
:t= law for the time being in force ill the State of Manipur, be the 
sloner. highest co~ti of appeal, revisio:p or r,ferenc~ • .. , ., .. 

v of 1908. 
V,.,f 18p8. 
~ 
t. (1) The Judicial Commissioner may appoint a 1tegistrar and Rct1ttat 
such other ministerial officers as may be necessary for the admini.:oo ~~ 
tratlon of justice by the Court of the Judicial Commissioner and for of the Court 
the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties eon- ~:~:i-
5 ferred or imposed on the Court by or under this Act or any other mJnioncr. 
law for the time being in force. 
(2) The Judicial Commissioner may make rules for delegating to 
the Registrar such powers and duties of a judicial, quasi-judicial or 
non-judicial nature as he thinks fit; and the ministerial officers shall 
10 exercise such powers and perform such duties of a quasi-judicial or 
non-judicial nature as the Judicial Commissioner may direct. 
10. (1) The general superintendence and control of all courts in Superinten-
the State of Manipur shall vest in, and all such courts shall be b'Ub- :n~ F} 
ordinate to, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner. lut:or~u!'.te 
IS (2) In exercise of the powers of general superintendence and 
control vested in it but without prejudice to the generality of such 
powers, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner may,-
(a) call for returns from such courts; 
(lb) direct the transfer of any suit, proceeding, case or 
20 appeal from any subordinate court to any other court of equal 
or superior jurisdiction; 
(c) make rules and issue general directions and prescribe 
forms for regulating practice and procedure of subordinate 
courts; 
25 • (d) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts 
shall be kept by the officers of any such courts. 
courts. 
11. (1) The Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall keep such Regi8ters. 
registers, books and accounts as may be necessary for the transaction boJbts, 8C-d COUD an 
of the business of the Court and shall forward to the Chief Com- statements Co 
30 missioner such of these registers, books and accounts and such state- ~: ~p~~ 
ments of the work done in the Court as may, from time to time, be c!m!u-
required by the Chief Commissioner. . lioner. 
(2) The Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall also comply 
with such requisitions as may be made by the Central Government 
35 or the Chief Commissioner for certified copies of, or extracts from, 
the records of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner or any court 
subordinate thereto. 
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Pfo:dure 
Procedure, 1908, or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, the Court ~f ~ ~ 
40 of the Judicial Commissioner shall record evidence and judgments ~ Comia-Iloner. 

4 
bl such manner and prescribe such forms to be used in proceedings 
before it, as it may direct by rules made by it with the sanction Of 
the Chief Commissioner. 
Aa'!rtMOl\ a.I '1:1. (1) The Court of the Judicial Commissioner may subject to 
~f ad~=et, such rules as it may with the sanction of the Chief Commissioner S 
vru~ aud make, admit proper persons to be advocates, valdIs and pleaders in 
p ca era. any court in the state of Manipur and may remove or suspend from 
Court of the 
Judicial 
Commis-
lioDer to be 
a court of 
record. 
practice on teasonable cause any person so admitted and may 
authorise such advocates, valdIs and pleaders to plead or to act or 
to plead. and act for parties and accused persons. 10 
(2) No person other than an advocate, vakil or pleader shall be 
allowed to plead or to act for parties and accused persons except 
that any party may appear, plead or act on his own behalf or on 
behalf of another party if so authorised. 
14. The Court of the Judidal Commissioner shall be a court of IS 
record and shall have all powers of such court including the power 
to punish for contempt of itself. 
Place of 15. The Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall sit at ImplW 
:~: or ar at such' other place or places, if any, as the Judicial Commis-
thec J~cial sioner may, with the approval of the Chief Commissioner, from time 20 
onuma- to tim . t .iOller. e, appom . • 
Classes of 
subordinate 
,civil 
1IOtUt8. 
Civil eli .. 
triOtl and 
district 
judses· 
CHAPTER m 
SUBORDINATE COURTS 
16. In addition to the Court of the Judicial Commissioner and 
the courts of small causes established under the Provincial Small 2S 
Cause Courts Act, 1887, and the courts established under any other 
1.'91 for the time being in force, there shall be the following classes 
of civil courts in the State of Manipur, namely:-
(i) the district court; 
(ii) the court of a subordinate judge; 
<iii> the court of a munsift: 
Provided that the court of a subordinate judge shall be establish-
ed only with effect from such date as the Chief Commissioner may, 
by notification in the Omcial Gazette, specify. 
30 
17. (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the Chief Commis- 3S 
sloner may, by notification in the Official Gamette, divide the State 
of Manipur into civil districts and sub-divisions, alter the limits 
or the num'ber of these districts and sub-divisions and determine 
the headquarters of each district and sub-division. 
IX of 1887 

S 
12. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words "any declara- Amendment ' 
tion". the words "any declaration or other statement" shall be subs- ofsection 14· 
utuU!d. 
,. 13. After section 15 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion. of 
S h 11 b . new sectIOn S a e mserted, namely:- 1,5A. 
"15A. If any person who has ceased to be a printer or publisher Penalty for 
of any newspaper fails or neglects to make a declaration in =re d to 
compliance with section 8, he shall, on conviction before a larat~o~ ~~­
Magistrate, bf punishable by fine not exceeding two hun- der section 8. 
10 dred rupees.". 
14. After section 16A of the Principal Act, the following section Insertion of 
shall be inserted, namely: _ ~;. section 
"16B. If any publisher of any newspaper published in India P~lty for 
neglects to deliver copies of the same in compliance with ~~ cop~~ 
I S section UB, he shall, on the complaint of the Press Registrar e8 of news-
be punishable, on conviction by a Magistrate having jur~ fhrrs Pre: 
diction in the place where the newspaper was printed, by Registrar. 
fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every default." 
15. In section 18 of the principal Act in item (12) of the partl- Amen~ent 
20cultlrs, for the words "or lithographed", the words "cyclostyled or ofsectlon 18, 
30 
. 3S 
lithographed" shall be substituted. 
16. After Part V of the principal Act, the following Part shall be Insertion of 
inserted, namely: - rye;, Part 
"PART VA 
REGISTRATION OF NEWSPAPERS 
19A. The Central Government may appoint a' Registrar of news- Appointlnent 
papers f()f India and such other officers under the general Of Preal"Re-
superint~den-ce and control of the Press Rea-istrar as may :h~fIi:~ 
be necessary for the purpose of performing the functions 
assigned to them by or under this Act and may, by general 
or special order, pro\'ide for tile distribution or allocation 
of function~ to be performed by them under this Act. 
UIB. (1) The Press Registrar shall maintain in the prescribed Reaister of 
manner a Register of newspapers. newapapera. 
(2) The Register shall, as far as may be practicable, contain the 
following particulars about every newspaper published in 
India, namely:-
(a)' the title of the newspaper; 
(b) the language in which the newspaper is published; 

Certificates 
of registra-
tion. 
.. .; 
Annual state-
ment etc., to 
be furnished 
by news-
pIpers. 
6 
(c) periodicity of the publication of the newspaper; 
(d) the name of the editor printer and publisher of the 
newspaper; 
(e) the place of. printing and publication; 
(f) the average number of pages per week; 
(9) the number of days of publication in the year; 
(h) the average number of copies printed, the average num-
ber of copies sold to the public and the average number 
of copies distributed free to the public, the average 
being calculated with reference to such period as may 10 
be prescribed; 
(i) retail selling price per copy; 
(j) the names and addresses of the owners of the newspaper 
and such other particulars relating to ownership as may 
be prescribed; IS 
(k) any other particulars which may be prescribed. 
(3) On receiving information from time to time about the afore-
said particulars, the Press Registrar shall cause relevant 
entries to be made in the Register and may make such 
necessary alterations or corrections therein as may be 20 
required for keeping the Register up-to-date. 
19C. On receiving from the Magistrate under sectoin 6 a copy 
of the declaration in respect of a newspaper, the Press 
Registrar shall cause relevant entries to be made in the 
Register in respect of the newspaper and shall, as soon as 2S 
practicable thereafter, issue a certificate of registration in 
respect of that newspaper to the publish~r thereof. 
19D. It shall be the duty of· the publisher of every newspaper:-
(4) to furnish to the Press Registrar ari annual statement in 
respect of the newspaper at such time and containing 30 
such of the particulars referred to in sub-Section (2) of 
section 19B as may be prescribed; 
(b) to publish in the newspaper at such times and such of 
the particulars relating to the newspaper referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 19B as may be specified in 3S 
this behalf by the Press Registrar. 

XLV of 
1860. 
10 
15 
20 
2S 
30 
3S 
7 
19E. The publisher of every newspaper shall furnish to the Returns anj 
Press Registrar such returns, statistics and other information ~~:~o~; 
with respect to any of the particulars referred to in sub- newspapers. 
section (2) of section 19B as the Press Registrar may from 
time to time require. 
19F. The Press Registrar or any gazetted officer authorised by Right of ac-
him in writing in this behalf shall, for the purpose of the =r~s and 
collection of any information relating to a newspaper'documents. 
under this Act, have access to any relevant record or do-
cument relating to the newspaper in the possession of the 
publisher thereof, and may enter at any reasonable time 
any premises where he believes such record or document 
to be and may inspect or take copies of the relevant re-
cords or documents or ask any question necessary for 
obtaining any information· required to be furnished under 
this Act .. 
19G. The Press Registrar shall prepare, in such form and at Annual Ce-
such time each year as may be . prescribed, an annual port. 
report containing a summary of the information obtained 
by him during the previous year in respect of the news-
papers in India and giving an account of the working of 
such :newspapers, and copies thereof shall be forwarded 
to the Central Government. 
19H. On the application of any person for the supply of the Furnis.hing 
copy of any extt'act from the Register and on payment of ~~~;:fr~~ 
such fee as may be prescribed, the Press Registrar shall Rellister. 
furnish such copy to the applicant in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
191. Subject to the provisions of this Act and regulations Delegation 
made thereunder, the Press Registrar may delegate all or of powers. 
any of his powers under this Act to any officer subordinate 
to him. 
19J. The Press Registrar and all officers appointed under this Press Regis-
Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the mean- trtahr fti and • • ~ ero ~n 
ing of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.' to be public 
f h bl ' h f servan, •• 19K. I t e pu IS er 0 any newspaper- Penalty for 
(a) refuses or neglects to comply with the provisions of contra,,:ention ., of sectIOn 
sectlon J9D Or sectlon 19E; or 19D or Bee-
(b) furnishes or causes to be furnished to the Press Regis- tion 19B, etc. 
trar any annual statement, returns, statistics or other 
information which he has reason to believe to be false; 
or 

Penalty for 
=.:0£ irif'dimation. 
8 
(c) publishes in the newspaper in pursuance of clause (b) 
of section 19D any particulars relating to the news-
paper which he has reason to believe to be false, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rUipees. , 
19L. If any person engaged in connection with the collection 
of information under this Act wilfully discloses any in-
formation or the contents of any return ~iven or fur-
nished under this Act otherwise than in the execution 
of his duties under this Act or for the purposes of the 10 
prosecution of an offenCe under this Act or under the 
Indian Penal Code, he shall be punishable with imprison-
ment for term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both.". 15 
:rmenc8:.ent 17. In section 20 of the principal Act. after the words "make 
Ie 20. such rules", the words and figures "not inconsistent with the rules 
made by the Central Government under section 20A" shall be 
inserted. 
hlacrtion . of lB. After section 20 of the principal Act, the f.ollowing section 20 new sectlon . 2oA. ~hall·be Inserted, namely:-
Power of "20A.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
~t Official Gazette, make rules-
to.ue (a) prescribing the particulars which a declaration made and 
!"uleI. subscribed under section 5 mayecontain; 25 
(b) prescribing the manner in which copies of any declaration 
attested by the official seal of a Magistrate may be for-
warded to the Press Registrar; 
(c) prescribing the manner in which copies of any newspaper 
may be sent to the Press Registrar under section HB; 30 
(d) prescribing the manner in which a Register may be 
maintained under section 19B and the particulars which 
it may contain; 
(e) prescribing the particulars which an annual statement to 
be furnished by the publisher of a newspaper to the Press 35 
Registrar mAY contain; 
<f> prescribing the form and manner in which an annual 
statement under clause (a) of section 19D, or any re-
turns, statistics or other information under section 19E, 
m~y be furnished to the Press Registrar; 40 
(g) preseribing the fees for furnishing copies of extracts from 
the Register and the manner in which sl,lch copies may be 
furnished; 
XLV of 
1860. 

9 
(h) prescribing the manner in which a certificate of regis-
tration may be issued in respect of a newspaper; 
(i) prescribing the form in which, and the time within which 
annual reports may be prepared by the Press Registrar 
S and forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as practi-
c£ble after they are made, be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.". 
It. After section 21 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion. of new section 
10 shall be inserted, namely:- :u. 
"22. This Act extends to the whole of India except the Stat.e Extent. 
of Jammu and Kashmir". 

10 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Press Laws Inquiry Committee which was set up by the 
Government to enquire into the Press laws made certain recom-
mendations in 1948 for amending the PreSs and· Registration of 
Books Act, 1867. Based partly on these r~ommendations and 
partly on recommendations made by State Governments, who had 
experienced practical difficulties in the working of the Act, the 
Press and Registration of Books (Amendment) Bill, 1952 was intro-
duced in Parliament. The Press Commission, which was appoint-
ed shortly thereafter, reviewed the entire position in respect of the 
working of the Act. They substantially endorsed the provisions of 
the above Bill and made certain further recommendations for the 
amendment of the Act. The present Bill incorporates the provi-
sions of the earlier Bill and makes certain further provisions in 
order to give effect to the recommendations of the Press Commis-
sion. 
2. The Bill makes certain provisions for practical contingencies 
like temporary changes in the place of printing or publication. It 
also provides that a declaration in respect of a newspaper shall 
cease t~ have effect if the newspaper does not commence publica-
tion wHhin a specified period or if it oeases publication for a year 
or more or if it publishes issues the number of which is less than 
half of what should have been published in accordance with the 
declaration made in respect thereof. 
3. The Act was intended to apply to all papers printed (includ-
ing posters, etc.) and, as recommended by the Press Commission, 
this intention has been clarified by removing the doubt which judi-
cial decisions seem to have created. 
4. In accordance with the recommendations of the Press Com-
mission, it is proposed to set up an organisation undet a Press Regis-
trar for the purpose of registration of all newspapers published in 
India and for the collection, maintenance and publication of infor-
mation concerning them. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 15th July, 1955. 
B. V. KESKAR. 

u 
. EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM REGARDING 
DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make regulations for carrying out certain procedural requirements 
laid down in the Bill. These are purely procedural matters of a 
routine character and relate inter alia to prescribing particulars of 
declaration, the manner of sending copies of declaration to the 
Press Registrar, the delivery of copies of newspapers to the Press 
Registrar, the maintenance of a register and the issuing of certi-
ficates by the Press Registrar and fees for furnishing copies of the 
extrac~s of register maintained by the Press Registrar. 
The delegated Legislation is of a normal character. 

12. 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The proposed section 19A in clause 16 of the Bill contemplates 
the appointment of a Press Registrar and such other officers as 
may be necessary for the purpose of performing the functions as-
signed to them. 
The nudear organisation, as at present envisaged, would re-
quire an initial non-recurring expenditure of about Rs. 20,000/-
and an annual recurring expenditure of about 50,000/-. The cost 
may increase depending upon the functions which may be assigned. 
to this organisation and it is, therefore, not possible at this stage 
to form a more accurate estimate. 
For the year 1955-56, it is expected that the following sums will 
be required:-
Non-recurring Rs. 20,0001-. 
Recurring Rs. 30,000/-. 
No provision has been made in the budget for this purpose, but 
the necessary funds will be made available by re-appropriation, if 
possible. 
Funds in respect of subsequent years will vary from year to 
year, and will be provided for in the budget estimates in the nor-
mal way. 

X.V';£1950 
t~ 
45. The Court of the Judicial Commissioner established under DeclaradOQ 
section 3 is hereby declared to be a High Court for the purposes of ~f~~f J:;. 
articles 132, 133 and 134 of the Constitution; and the provisions of missioner'1 
the Judicial Commissioners' Courts (Declaration as High Courts) ~~igh 
5 Act, 1950 shall apply to that Court as they apply to a Judicial Com· Court for 
missioner's Court in existenee at the commencement of this Act. ~:!,~ea. 
• 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ANt> llEASONS 
The constitution and organisation of courts in the plains area 
of Manipur are regulated by the Manipur State Courts Act, 1947, 
as amended by the Manipur State Courts (Amendment) Order, 
1950, while the hill areas are governed by the Manipur State Hill 
Peoples (Administration) Regulation, 1947. Even after the amend-
ment of the Manipur State Courts Act, 1947, by the aforesaid order 
several anomalies and discrepancies were found in the Act and it 
is considered necessary to recast the entire law. The present Bill 
seeks to regulate the constitution of courts in Manipur and the 
limits of their jurisdiction and will replace the Manipur State 
Courts Act, 1947, the Manipur State Courts (Amendment) Order, 
1950, and also the Manipur State Hill Peoples (Administration) 
Regulation, 1947, in so far as it relates to administration of justice 
in the hill areas. The provisions contained in the measure are 
generally on the lin,es of similar laws in other Part C States. 
Under the Bill, regular courts will now be established for the 
first time in the hill areas of Manipur. The hill' people are not 
familiar with the complexities of the procedure relating to civil 
suits. The Bill provides for a simplified procedure for the benefit 
of the hill people. 
G. B. PANT. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 24th September, 1955 
":1' 
I _.. • 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Manipur (Courts) Bill, 1955, seeks to regulate the constitu-
tion of the Courts in Manipur and the limits of their jurisdiction. 
As a result of this Bill, it will be necessary to -entertain certabt 
additional staff. The minimum additional expenditure is estimat-
ed at Rs. 38,600 per anlllolm recurring, worked out as follows:-
Section 
of 
the Act 
Designation of oftIc:er proposed to be Scale of 
appoiDted ~ per 
3. A. Additional Judicial Ctnrrmiuiorvr and hU 
I Additional Judicial Commi88ioner 
I Upper Division Clerk 
2 Lower Division Oem 
3 Peons 
Deamea Allowance 
TOT.u-Additional Judicial C0mmis-
sioner and his staff. 
18 B. Additional District JudI' anti hU st4/!. 
I Additional District Judge 
1 Upper Division Clerk 
2 Lower Division Clerks 
month 
stqJf. 
1,000 
100-5-150 
4C>-2-S0-3-
11<>-4-100 
22-1/2-28 
.. 
.. 
450-25--850 
105-5-150 
4C>-2-S0-
3--80---4-100. 
3 Peons 
Deame88 Allowance 
TOT.u-Additional District Ju~ and bialta1[ 
1 & 18 C. Corstirwmt ~ 
TOT.u-Rec:urriD&!ClOIt 
orRs •. 
2a-1/a-zS 
.. 
.. 
.. 
Averqe 
lIIIDuai 
COlt 
----
Figures in rupees 
. 
1,000 ~12,OOO 
139 ~1,668 
144 1.718 
79 94B 
281 - 3.372 . 
.. .19.706 
692 8.304 
139 1,668 
144 1,718 
7'J 948 
186 2,232 
r 
14>870 
.. 4,000 
.. 38,tl6 
.. 38,600 per 
1IDIlWD. 

EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED 
LEGISLATION 
The object of the Manipur (Courts) Bill is to pl'O'Yitte for the 
constitution and organisation of the courts of Manipur. Clauses 
9(2), 10(2)(c). 12, 13(1), 19(2), 30(3) and 40 of the Bill empower the 
Chief Commissioner and Judicial Commissioner, Manipur, to make 
rules regulating the practice and procedure el the various courts in 
Manipur and matters incidental thereto. Broadly, the rules will 
relate to the follov:ing matters: 
(a) delegation by the Judicial Commissioner of powers 
and duties of a judicial, quasi-judicial or non-judicial nature to 
the Registrar; 
(b) practice and proeedure to be followed in subordinate 
CQurts; 
(c) recording of evidence 'and judgments in the _Judicial 
Commissioner's Court; 
(d) admission a.nd, removal of advocates, vakils and 
pleaders; 
(e) qualifications of persons to be appointed as subordi-
nate judges and munsiffs; 
(f) appointment of Ministerial officers of the courts; 
(g) supervision of all courts sUDordinate to the Court of 
the Judicial Commissioner and their inspection; 
(h) translation of any papers filed in the Court of the 
Judicial CommissioRer and the preparation of paper-books for 
hearing of appeals and the copying, typing or printing of any 
such papers or translations and the recovery from the persons 
at whose instance or on whose behalf papers are filed, all the 
expenses thereby incurred; 
(i) fees to be charged for proce!lSes issued by a civil court 
or by any officer of any such court and the fee payable in any 
suit or proceeding, in any such court by any party to such suit 
or proceeding in respect of the fees of the' pleader of any other 
party to such suit or proceeding; , . 
(j) manner in which the proceedings of civii courts shall 
be kept and recorded, and the manner in which paper-books 
for the hearing shall be prepared and the granting of copies; 

·, 
(k) matters relating to the offtcers of the Judicial Commis-
sioner's Court; 
(1) persons to be permitted to act as petition-writers in 
the subordinate courts or act as pleader's clerks; 
(m) issue of licences to persons referre6to.in clause (l) 
above. conduct of business by them and the seale of fees to be 
charged by them; and 
• (n) determining the authority by which breaches of such 
rules shall be investigated and the penalty which may be 1m-poaed. . 
2. In enactments relating to the constitution of courts, provi-
sions regarding practice and procedure of the courts and matters in-
cidental thereto are generally made through rules. The power 
delegated to the Chief Commissioner and Judicial Commissioner, 
Manipur, is therefore normal. Moreover, tn the peculiar circum-
stances in Manipur with a large hill area and situated in the border, 
it is necessary that the Chief Commissioner and the Judcial Com-
missioner should have the powers proposed to be dele,ated to them. 

LOK SABHA 
.. --:-=-..,..,.. 
A 
BILL 
• 
to orovide for the establishment of a Judicial Commissioner's 
Court and other Courts in Manipur. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) ofartic1e 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Goomd Ballabh Pant 
Minister qf Home AJjairs.) 