5 
As IN'l'RODt1CBD IN LoIC SABRA ON 
IIW No. It of 1178 
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION 
(AMENDMENT) BUL, 19'18 
A 
BILL 
jv.rthe-r to amend the Kha.di and Villtlge IndUlt1'iA!. Commission Act, 1958. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (l) This Act may be called the Khadi and Villa,e Industries 
Commission (Amendment) Act, 1978. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govemment 
may, by notification in the OfIicial Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In section 2 of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 
n of 1.... 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,-
(a) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, nam. 
10 ly:-
• (bb) ''Chief Executi~e 01Bcer" means the Chief Executive 
Omcer of the Commission appointed under section 5;'; 
(b) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
Short 
title 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 2. 
namely: - ..• ; ... 
IS 
., .... 
> 
• (d) "khadi" means any cloth WOVeR on handlooml in India 
from cotton, silk, woollen or man-made fibre yam bandspun 
,in India or from a mixture of, any two or all ot such yarns;'; 
(c) fen: clause (9), the follOWing clau., lhall be su.tltuted, 
namely:- ' 
20 • (g) "aecretary" means the member-secretary of the Com-
mission; ancr. 
3. In lU1Hection (~ of HCtion 4 of the principal Act, for the word 
'"ilve", the word "seven" shall be substituted. 
r l~' • 
Amen4-
mento! 
sectton4. 

8ubet1-
tuUonol 
new,MC-
tiona for 
sectiona 
Ii and 6. 
Chief 
Executive 
OfIlcer 
of the 
Commb-
sion. 
Financial 
Aclviler 
ot the 
Commil-
110ft. 
Amend-
metot 
Metlon 13. 
Amend-
Ift8Dt of 
teetlon 14. 
AmeDd-
meto! 
..etion2S. 
Am~. 
malo! 
netion 27. 
2 
4. For sections 5 and 6 o~ the principal Act, the following section. shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"5. The Central Government shall appoint a person to be the 
Chief Executive Oftlcer of the Commission, who shall, by virtue of his 
oftlce, be the member-secretary o~ the Commission. 5 
6. The Central Government shall appoint a person to be tlie 
Financial Adviser to the Commission, who shall, by virtue of his 
office, be a member of the Commission.". 
~. In section 13 of the principal Act, for the words "the secretary and 
the other members and of the Finallcial Adviser to the Commission", the 10 
words "the Chief Executive Officer, the Financial Adviser to the 
Commi~ion and the other members" shall be substituted. 
8. In sub-section (2) of section 14 of the principal Act, the proviso 
shall be omitted. 
'1. In section 26 of the principal Act,-
(0) in sub-secti~n (2) ,-
(i) in clause (a), for the words "the secretary and the other 
members and o~ the Financial Adviser to the Commiflsion", th"e 
words "the Chief Executive Officer, the Financial Adviser to 
the Commission and the other members" shall be substituted: :10 
(ii) in clause (d), for the words "the secretary and", the 
words "the Chief Executive Officer and member-6eCretary. and 
by" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "or in two successive 
sessions and, if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 15 
or the session immediately following", the words "or in two or more 
succesSive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedi-
ately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall 
be substituted. 
8. In sub-section (2) of section 27 of the principal Act,- 30 
(0) in clause (a), for the words . "the secretary", the words "the 
Chief Bueuttve Offteer" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (c), fol" the words "the secretary", the words "the 
Chief Executive Offtcer and member-secretary" .hall be subatitute4. 

The Khadi and Village Industries CoIIU1lisai.on is a statutory body 
established under the Khadi and Village Industrles Commission Act, 1908 
(61 of 18Ci6). 
2. The Commission has recommended that in the context of the need 
to cater to the fJUt varying tastes and trends in the con&\Ui1er market, 
a stage has come when induction of man-made fibres in khadi besides the 
natural fibres has become necessary. It is proposed to accept this recom-
mendation of the Commission and suitably amend. the definition of the 
expression "kbadi", as contained in the Act, to inelude man-made fibres. 
3. After watching the working of the Commission over the years and 
in pursuance of the recommendations of the Public Aecounts Committee, 
it is felt that fot achieving tangible improvement in the working o~ the 
Commission; it would be necessary to appoint a Finance Member as well 
as a Member in-charge of Administration on the Commission and thus 
raising the existing maximum limit of members of the Commiseion from 
five to seven. It is, therefore, proposed to provide for the appointment 
of the Financial Adviser and the Chief. Executive Oftieer of the Commis-
sion, as a member and member-secretary of the Commission respectively. 
4. The sphere of operations of the Commission has considerably in-
creased with more and more emphasis on development of rural sector of 
the economy and there being scope for further expansion, it is proposed 
to invest the Commission with powers to appoint persons with higher 
salary. It is aCCOrdingly proposed to make suitable changes in the Act. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 
NEW Da.m; GEORGE FERNANDES. 
Tile 18th March, 1978. 
3 

MEMORANDUM RFDAR9ING DELEGATIttD LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 aI the Bill aeks to amend. aection 260i the Khadi ana VIDage 
tnci.wtmes Couunission. Act, 1956, to empower the Centr.al GOVemmeDt 
to make rules to provide among other things, for the term of ofttceof, 
and the powers and duties to be exercised and performed by, the Chief 
Executive Officer and the Financial AdViser ofth.e Commission, who are 
proposed to be made members of the Khadi and Villa,e Industries Com-
mission. 
2. ClaUie 8 of. the Bill proposes to amend section 27 of the Act to em-
power the sa¥i Commission to make regulations to provide for the delep-
tion of its powers and duties to the Chief Executive Officer of the Com-
mission. 
3. Ali tbe matters in respect of which rules and regulat.ions may be 
made pertain to matters of detail and procedure, the delegation. of legis-
lative power is, normal in character. 

ANNEXURE 
SX\'IIAC'lS nOM nu.l KKAD'I AND VILLAGE lNDuSTRUS COMllISSIOll Aar.. 1956 
(61 OF 1956) 
... ... ... ... 
,Z.In UUs Act, unless the context otherwise. requires,-
• ... ... ... '" 
(d) "khadi" means any cloth woven on handloom in India from 
cotton, silk. or woollen yarn handspun in India or from a mixture of, 
any two Gr·an {)fsuch y-arns; 
... • ... ... 
(g) "secretary" means the secretary of the Commission appoi:lt-
ed Wlder section 5; and 
• • • • ... 
4. (1) ... ... ... 
(2) The Commtssion shall consist of not less than three and not more 
than five members appointed by the Central Govemment, one of them 
being nominated by the Central Government to be the ehainnan thereof, 
and the members may be either whole time or part-time, as the Cen ... l· 
Gcrvernment may direct. 
• ... ... 
5. The Central Government shall appoint, after consultation with the 
Commission, a member other than the chairman or the vice-chairman, 
to. be the s~retax"y of the Commt8Bion. 
6. The Central Government shall appoint a person, not being & mem-
ber, to be the Financial Adviser to the Commission, 
• • ... ... ... 
13. The term o£ office and the terms and conditions of service of the 
dlairrnan, the vice-chairman, the secretary and the o,ther members and 
of the Financial Adviser to the Commission lihall be iuch as nlay be 
prescribed. 
141. (1)'" • ... ... ... 
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government 
in this behalf, the Commission may appoint such other officers and ser-
vants as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its func· 
tions: 
Provided that no person whose honorarium or the maximum salary 
exceeds five hundred rupees per month shall be appointed by the Com-
mission except with the previous approval of the Central Government. 
... • • ... • 
Defini-
tiona. 
Estabnah-
ment and 
constitu-
tion ot 
the Com-
mission, 
Secre-
tary 01,: , " ' 
the~ '0' 
missiCIII:. ;., . 
Finan-' , 
dalAd-
viserot 
the Com-
million. 
Termot 
oiftceand 
conditions 
of Ier-
viceot 
chaiI"lDUl, 
secretary 
and 
other 
member •• 
Officer. 
and 
tenant. 
otthe 
Cornmia-
lion. 

6 
k. (1)* * • • 
(Z) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the !oN-
JOin, power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 1ollowmr 
matters, namely:-
, . 
\" 
(a) the term of office ot, and the manner of tUling casual vacan-
" cies among, the members of the Commission., and the ~ and 
conditions of service of the chairman, the vice-chairman, the secre-
tary and the other members and of the Financial Adviler to the 
Commission including the salaries and allowances to" be paid to them 
and the travelling and daily allowances to be drawn by them when 
they are on tour; 
• * • * • 
(d) the power'S and du.ties to be exerci8ed and perfonned by the 
.ecretary and the Financial Adviser to the Commiaion; 
• • • • • 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
:in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry: of the session in which 
it .. 10 laid or the session immediately following, both HOuae5 agree in 
mekioc . any modification in the" rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
abould not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified wrm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
• • • • 
(Z) In particular, and without prejudice to the pnerality of the fore-
going power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(4) the terms and conditions of appointment and service and 
the scales of pay of officers and servants of the Commission, other 
than the secretary and the Financial Adviser to the Commission, 
- including payment of travelling and dally allowarices in respect of, 
journeys undertaken by such officers and servants for" the purpose of this Act; . ': . " . . " ." , 
• ... • • 
(c) the delegation of powers and duties to the secretary or any 
employee of the Commission; 
, J 
• • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Khadi and Village Industries Commillsion Act, 1958. 
(Shri George Femaftde., Mmieter of Inc:itultr ll.) 