As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA m: 
.- ~. r'J' .r 
( .~' ," 29- 8 68 
'-..... / 
Bill No. 59 of It" 
TIlE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORA TION (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 and to 
~ certain minor and consequential amendments to the 
Indian Trusts Act, 1882 and the Delhi Development Act, 1957. 
",, __ ,' ~ enacted. by Parliament in the Seventeenth Yea"r of the 
.:.~11H)Itc. of India as follows:-
(1) This Act" may be called the Delhi Municipal Corporation Short 
UJl1enclmlent) Act, 1966. . . title and 
t") I~ shall come into force on such date as the Central 
may, bJ notifieation in the 0IIlcial Gazette, appoint. 
COID-
Gov- meDC8-
nleot. 

Substitu-
tion of 
"Adminis-
trator" 
for 
"Central 
Govern-
ment" and 
"Mayor-
in-Coun-
cil" for 
"Standing 
Commit-
1 ee". 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3. 
. 'I ~ ." • 
. r:' ld : 
2. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, throughout the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the 66 of 1957. 
principal Act) ,-
(a) except in clause (43) of section 2, sections 42, 137, 142, 
185, 186, 187, 193, 195, 253, ~69. 271, 298, 308, sub-section (1) of 5 
section 480, sub-section (2) vf section 481 and sections 490, 503, 
508, 511 and '513, for the words "Central Government", the word 
,j Administrator" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "Standing Committee" the words "Mayor-
in-Council" shall be substituted. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-clause (b) of clause (9), for the word "Com-
missioner", the words "Mayor-in-Council" shall be substituted; 
(b) clauses (/2). (13), (19), (20) and (28) shall be omitted; 
10 . 
.' (c) for clause (14), the following clause shall be substitu- 15 
ted, namely:-
'(14) "Director of Municipal Elections" means an officer 
authorised by the Administrator to exercise the powers and 
perform the duties of the Director of Municipal Elections 
under this Act;'. . 20 
. '4. In section 3' of the principal Act,~ 
(a) in sub-section (6), for the words "on a scale of one 
councillor for not more than twenty thousand of the popula-
tion", the words "on a scale of one councillor for not less than 
twenty thousand of the population" shall be substituted; 25 
,,' (1) insub,.sec:t.ion (7). for the. word ,"~ix",the word "ten" 
shall be substituted. ':" 
Amend.;, ,;. , '&-., In~ub-section (1) of section 4 of the princSpal Act, in the 
me~t of':W "provtso, (Qz:"'~ woni-·ccit''; tile. WOI'd~'he"sJJan ·be ''SUbstituted: sectIon 4. . , , " 

10 
", 
20 
L <" ... 
3 
6. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (l)-
(i) for clause (e), the following clause shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
" (e) if he has been sentenced on conviction by a 
criminal court-
(i) to imprisonment for any of the offences 
referred to in clause (d); or 
(ii) to imprisonment for an offence involving 
moral turpitude punishable with imprisonment for 
a term exceeding six months; or 
(iii) to imprisonment for a term of not less 
than two years for any other offence, 
unless in each case a period of five years has elapsed 
since the date of the conviction or the disqualification has 
. been removed either retrospectively or prospectively by 
the Administrator;"; 
(ii) in clause (;), the words "or any of the municipal 
authorities" shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (2)-
(i) in clause ('b), for sub-clauses (ii) and (iii), the 
following sub-clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
"(ii) any salary, honorarium, fee, allowance or 
facility for serving as the Mayor or as a Deputy Mayor 
or as a councillor or an alderman; or 
(iii) any fee for attendance at meetings of any com-
mittee of the Corporation;"; 
(ii) in clause (c) ,-
(A) in sub-clause (iv) , the words "any municipal 
authority or" shall be omitted and for the words "or 
from any such authority, officer or other employee", 
the words "or from any such officer or other employee" 
shall be substituted; 
(B) for su~lause (vi), the following sub-clause 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(vi) any agreement or contract with the Cor-
poration, for taking water or eleetrj~ity or any 
Amend-
ment of 
section 9 

Amend-
ment of 
sections 
11, 12, 14 
and 30. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 13. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 22. 
An-.end-
mcnt oI 
-t';.! 'on 25. 
4 
other thing which the Corporation may generally 
supply;", 
7. In sub-section (3) of section 11, sub-section (1) of section 12, 
section 14 and sub-section (5) of section 30 of the principal Act, for 
the word "Commissioner", the words "Director of Municipal Elec- , 
tions" shall be substituted. 
8. In sub-section (1) of section 13 of the principal Act, for the 
word "six", .the word "ten" shall be substituted. 
9. In section 22 of the principal Act,-
(a) for clause (3), the following clauses shall be substltu- 10 
ted, namely:-
"(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any 
other person with the consent of a candidate to vote or re-
frain from voting for any person on the ground of his 
religion, race, caste, community or language or the use of, 15 
or appeal to, religious symholi or the use of, or appeal to, 
national symbols such as the national flag, or the national 
emblem l for the furtherance of the prospects of the election 
of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election 
of any candidate. 20 
(3A) The promo:hn of or attempt to promote, feel-
ings of enmity or hatred between different classes of the 
CItizens of India ()n grounds of religion, race, caste, 
communi ty or language, by a candidate or any other person 
with the consent of the candidate for the furtherance of the 25 
prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudi-
CIally affecting the election cf any candidate."; 
(b) in clause (4), after the words "or by any o~her person", 
the words "with the consent of a candidate" shall be inserted 
and the words "from contest" shall be omitted; 
(c) in clause (5), after the words "or by any other person", 
the words "with the consent of a candidate" shall be inserted. 
10. For sub-section (2) of section 25 of the principal Act, the 
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
., (2) No person shall convene, hold or attend any public 3S 
meeting within any ward within twenty-four hours before the 
date of conu:nencement of the poll or on the date or dates on 
which a poll· is taken for an election in that ward.". 

5 
11. In sul>-secJ;ion (1) of section 32 of the principal Act, in the Amen 
form of oath or affirmation, for the words "that I will bear true ment. 
faith aild allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law estab- seetio: 
lished and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I 
~ am about to enter", the words "that I will bear true faith and 
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I 
will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will 
faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter" shall 
"~ substituted. 
~. 
10 12. In section 33 of the principal Act,- AmC'n 
ment, 
(a) in clause (b) of sub-section (1), for the word "Com- seetio] 
missioner", the words "Municipal Secretary" shall be substitu-
ted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the word "Commissioner", the 
15 word~ "Director of Municipal Elections" shall be substituted. 
13. For section 34 of the principal Act, the following section <;hall ~ubst: 
be substituted, namely:- lion (. 
new 1'1 
tion f,. 
seetiu 
"34. (1) The councillors and aldermen shall be entitled to Parm, 
receive--
20 (a) honoraria or fees; and 
(b) allowances, 
~f hOD 
raria ( 
fees al 
'lrOW-
h>" 
anCb 
provi' 
for attendance at meetings of the Corporation and of any of· its for tel 
-;.. ", committees at such rate as may be determined by rules made phom 
in this behalf. lities 
, coun' 
t,· l:ha:::-::~~:::::::~:y:~:::::: b~::::de:~c::~:~ :~::; I'before section 35, and for sections 35 to 40 (both inolu',ive) of the lion 0' 
principal Act, the following sub-hea~ing and sections shall be suh- n('\\' ". 
lions 
.30 stituted, namely: - ~ectio 
k· ~5 to .: 
"Mayor 
:~5. The Corporation shall, at its first meeting. after a gem·ral Elect: 
elect~on, convened under sec'ion 73, elect one of its members to of Mll 
be the Mayor thereof and so often as the office of Mayor becomes 
3S vacant, the Corporation shall elect another member to be the 
.,. Mayor, 

Cesser of 
office of 
Mayor. 
Mayor 
not to 
preside 
while re-
solution 
for his 
removal 
from office 
is under 
conside-
ration.' 
Procedure 
regarding 
moving 
ofresolu-
tion for 
removal 
of Mayor, 
6 
36. (J) The Mayor shall cease to hold office as such-
(a) when he ceases to be a member of the Corporation; or, 
(b) if he resigns his office by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Administrator; or 
(c) if he is removed from his office by a resolution of the 5 
Corporation passed by a majority of all the members of the 
Corporation: , 
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (C) 
shall be moved unless a period of one year has elapsed from 
the date of election of the Mayor: 
Provided further that if a resolution under clause (c) is 
not passed by a majority of all the members of the Corpora-
tion, no other resolution for the removal of the Mayor shall 
be moved unless a period of one year has elapsed from the 
date on which the former resolution was considered. 
(2) A resignation under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall 
take effect from the date on which it is delivered to the Adminis-
trator. 
10 
37. (1) At any meeting of the Corporation, while any resolti-
tion for the removal of the Mayor from his office is under consi- 20 
deration, the Mayor shall not, though he is present, preside. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 80, the 
Mayor shall have the right to speak in, and! otherwise to take 
part in the proceedings of, the Corporation while any resolution 
for his removal from office is under consideration at any meeting 25 
of the Corporation and shall be entitled to vote on such resolu-
tion or on any other matter during such proceedings. 
:J8. A notice in writing of the intention to move a resolution 
referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 36, signed 
by not less than one-third of the total membership of the Cor- 30 
poration, together with a copy of the proposed resolution shall 
be delivered to the Administrator in accordance with such rules 
as may be made in this behalf and the Administrator shall, after 
giving not less than fifteen days' notice thereof, convene, for the 
consideration of the resolution, a meeting of the Corporation to 35 
'be held in the office of the Corporation on a date not later than 
thirty days from the date on which the notice was delivered to 
him and a councillor or an alderman, (not being a Deputy Mayor) , 
nominated by the Administrator shall preside over such meeting, 

5 
7 
;~9. (1) When th'~ office of the Mayor is vacant. the Senior D 
Deputy Mayor shall act as Mayor until a new Mayor is elected. 01 
tl, 
(2) When the Mayor is absent from his duty on account of M. 
illness or any other cause, the powers, duties and fun,:tions of the St> 
Dl Mayor shall be exercised and performed by the Senior Dtputy M: 
Mayor. 
(3) The Mayor may. by order in writing, delegate any of his 
powers, duties and functions to the Senior Deputy Mayor.". 
15. For clause (d) of section 42 of the principal Act, the following An 
10 clauses shall be substituted, namely:- me 
"(d) the purchase and distribution of water to the public: 
(dd) the purchase and distribution of electricity to the 
public;". 
SC" 
16. For the heading and sub-heading before section 44 and for sec- Sul 
15 tions 44 to 69 (both inclusive) of the principal Act, the following head- tion 
ing, sub-headings and sections shall be substituted, namely:- new 
sect 
20 
. : 
.... 
\ ' 
'MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION 
MaYOT-in-Council 
44. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, the executive power of the Corporation shall be 
exercised by the Mayor-in-Council. 
45. (1) The Mayor-in-Council shall consist of the Mayor and 
two Deputy Mayors. ' 
(2) The Deputy Mayors shall be, appointed by the Adminis-
trator on the advice "of the Mayor from amongst the members of 
the 'Corporation. 
~t (3) The order in which the Deputy Mayors shall rank among 
themselves for official purposes shall be determined by the Mayor 
and the senior among them shall be ,~igllated as. the Senior 
~ 30 Deputy Mayor. 
" . , 
46. A Deputy Mayor shallceas~ to hold, 9ffice, as such-
(a) when he ceases·tb 'be a member of the Corporation; or 
(b) if he resigns' hisomce by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Mayor; or 
(c) if he is removed from his office by the Administrator 
on the advice of the Mayor; or 
for 
secti 
44 tc 
Exec 
POWI 
Cor· 
poral 
Cons' 
tion ( 
Mayo 
Coun, 
CesseJ 
office ( 
Deput 
Mayor 

Presi-
dency 
over 
meetings 
of Mayor_ 
in-Coun_ 
cil. 
Oaths of 
office and 
of secrecy" 
Facilities 
and privi-
leges of 
Mayor and 
salaries 
and allow-
anct's 
payable. 
to Mayor 
and 
Deputy 
Mayors. 
8 
(d) when a new Mayor is elected . 
. 47. The Mayor or, in his abs~nce, the Senior Deputy Mayor 
shall preside over every meeting of : he Mayor-in-Council. 
48. Before the Mayor or a Deputy Mayor enters upon his 
office. the Administrator shall administer to him the oaths of :> 
offi~e and of se :recy according to the forms set ou~ below:-
Form 0/ Oath oj Office 
"I, AB, do.swear in the name of God - tha t I will bear true solemnly affirm 
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law 10 
p~"tablished. that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity 
of India, that I will faithiully and conscientiously discharge 
Mayor ". my du[)' the ·D M and that I wIll do nght to all manner eputy ayor 
of people in accordance with the Cons"itution and the law 15 
without fear or favour, affection or illwill." 
Form of Oath of Secrecy 
·r AB do swear In the name of God h I "II t d' tl . .. • t at WI no Irec . y 
solemnly affinn 
or indirectly communicate or reveal to any pe~son or persons 20 
any matter which shall be brought under my consideration 
or which becom~s knovJnito me as the D Mayo~ exceri. as may oputy ayor 
he required in due Jischarge of my duties as the Mayor 
Deputy Mayor 
49. (J) The Mayor may be given such facilities in respect of 
residential accommodation. conveyance and the like as may be 
determined in each cas.e by rules made !n this behalf. 
(2) The Mayor and the Depu'y Mayors shall be entitled to 
25 
receive such salaries and allowances as the Corporation may. 30 
with the approval of the Administrator, determine. 
.. . ~ 

9 
50. (1) All executive action of the Mayor-in-Council shall be Conduct 
of busi-expressed to be taken in 1 he name of the Corporation. 
s 
(2), All orders and other instruments made and .exeeuted in 
the name of the Corporation shall be authenticated in. such 
manner a, may be specified in the rules to be made in this.behalf 
and the validity of an order or instrument so authenticated shall 
not be caned in que3t~on "'"1 the !'round that it is not an order or 
instrument made or executed by the Corporation. 
(3) The' Administrator shall make rules for the more con-
10 venient transaction of the business of the Mayor-in-CoWlcil and 
for the allocation among the Mayor and the Deputy Mayors of 
the said business. 
20 
Committ~es 
51 (1) The Corporation may, with the previous approval of 
the Administrator, divide Delhi into zones not exceeding ten in 
nunibet snd constitute a Zonal Committee for each: sli-::h zone. 
(2) Each Zonal Committee shall consist of all the coun~i110rs 
eleeted from fhe wards within the zone for which it is constituted. 
(3) A Zonal Committee shall, subject to the general' ~ntrol 
and supervision of the Mayor-in-Council, discharge such fimc-
tions, in relation to the zone for which it is constituted, as the 
Corporation may require it to discharge or as may be prescribed 
by the Corporation by regulations made in this behalf. ' ' , 
(4) Each Zonal Committee shall elect one of its members to 
• - 'I' 
be the Chairman and another member to be the Vice-Chairman. 
ness of 
Mayor-in 
Council. 
Zonal 
Commit-
tees. 
52. (1) The Mayor-in-Council may cons~itute, a~_~any AdviSory' 
Advisory Committees a~ it thinks fit for inquiring into~ or report- Coinmit-
ing or advising upon, any matter which it may .refer to the,In. tees. 
(2) Each such Ad'visory Committee shall consist of' such 
30 number of members as the Corporation may elect from amongst 
its members in accordanre with the system of proportional re-
presentation by means of the single transferable Vote. 
(3) The Mayor or the Deputy Mayor concerned with the 
subject-matter shaH preside over the meeting of any such Advi-
3S sory Committee. 
1",_ 
-:0, 
t ' 
53. (I) The Corporation may constitute as many special and 
ad hoc committees as it thinks fit for the exercise of any power 
or the discharge of any function which the Corporation may, by 
resolution, delegate to them or for inquiring into, or reporting or 
(B) LS-2. 
Special 
and-cid' 
hoc ('om-
mitiees~ 

Appolnt-
mentol 
sub-com-
mitteesby 
Zonal 
Commit .. 
tees and 
Advisory 
Com-
mittees 
Vacation 
of seats 
bymem-
ben of 
tbeCom-
mittees 
aad su~ 
commi1~ 
tees. 
Advisory 
Commit-
teelto 
fW!etion 
till new 
COIDIIIlt.. 
tees are 
constitut-
ed. 
~ 
I , 
10 
advising upon, any matter which the Corporation may refer to 
them. 
(2) Any such committee shall consist of members of the 
Corporation only. 
'f' 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), 5 
an ad hoc committee may, with the previous approval of the 
Corporation, co-opt not more than three persons who are not 
members of the Corporation but who, in the opinion of the Cor-
poration, possess special qualifications for serving on such com- 10 
mittee. -
54. (1) A Zonal Committee or an Advisory Committee may 
appoint from among its own members any sub-committee con-
sisting of such number of members as that Committee may 
think fit for exe~ising any power or discharging any function 15 
of th~t Committee· under this Act or for inquiring into. or report-
ing or advising upon, any matter which that committee may 
refer to such sub-committee. 
(2) Every such sub-committee shall conform to such instruc-
tions as may be given to it by the Committee by which it has 20 
been appointed. 
r: 55~ (1) I~ a member of any Committee or sub-committee 
cea~.es to Ibe a councillor or an alderman, he shall cease to be a 
member of that Committee or sub-committee, as the case may 
be and his seat shall thereupon become. vacant. 
f,'!·rljt,. , .. . ",-, . 
(2) If a member of a Zonal Committee or an. Advisory 
C(')~mittee ~bsents himself during three conse~utive months 
from the meetings of the Committee 'except on account of illness 
?.5 
or any other cause approved by the Committee,' or absents him-
self during six consecutive months from the meetings of the 30 
Committee on account of any cause whatsoever,· whether approv-
ed by the Committee or not, he shall cease to be a member of 
the Committee and his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
56. An Advisory Committee shall continue to function until 
a new Committee is constituted in accordance with t~tP urovi- 35 
sions of this Act. 

1(' 
11 
57. Tne Co:t'poration may at any time call for any extract of Power of 
any proceedings of a Zonal Committee or an Advisory: Com- ~orpora­
mittee or of any sub-committee appointed under this Act or for ~~~::r 
any return, statement, account or report concerning or connect- extracts 
t:d with any matter with which any such Committee or sub- of pro-
committee is empowered by or under this Act to deal; and ceedings 
every such requisition shall be complied with by any such Com- cfrom 't , omnu-
mIttee or sub-committee without any unreasonalble delay.'. tees and 
sub-com-
mittees. 
17. In section 70 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1)-
Amend-
mento! 
section 7U. 
.,'> ' 
!l 
(i) in clause (a), for the words "any municipal oftI.cer 
or other municipal employee", the words "any other munici-
pal' officer or employee" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause£, (b) and (c), the words "except in re-
gard to the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking or the Delhi 
Transport Undertaking" shall be omitted; 
(b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
18. In section 71 of the principal Act,- Amend_ 
mentof 
(a) in the opening paragraph, the words "or any municipal section 71. 
20 authority" shall be omitted; 
(b) for sub-clause (i) of clause (b), the following sub-
clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) of the Mayor-in-Council, if it is incurred in the 
year next following such year; or". 
"'2S"~":!lt .. Iri sections 72 and 76 of the principal Act, for the words "De- Amend:' 
puty Mayor";wherever they occur, the words "Senior Deputy Mayor" ~~~f" 
:' b' ed. sections et . ;shall be su stltut. 72 and "Ill 
&
~,.,~ ... .. 
: .""" 
20. In section 81 of the principal Act,-
(a) sub-section (1) shall be omitted; 
(b) for Stub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
,. (2) A councillor or an alderman may, subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (3), ask the Mayor-in-Council 
questions on any matter relating to the adminjstration of 
this Act or the municipal government of Delhi and all 
Amend-
mentor 
section 81. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 82. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tions for 
sections 
83 and 84· 
Pr~~ 
otlictr" 
at meN- i 
in,g$ of'~ 
~rta1 -. 
Committee. 
Conduct 
of busi-
ness at 
meetings 
of Com-
mit-tees. 
12 
sum' questions shall be addressed to the Mayor-in-Council 
and shall be answered either by the Mayor or a Deputy 
Mayor."; 
(c) in sub-section (3), in sub-clause (v) of clause (b), the 
wor~ "or of any oftp~ munic:pal authorities" shall be omitted; S 
(d) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
(, (6) The Mayor or a Deputy Mayor shall not be bound 
to answer a question if it asks for information which has 
been communicated to him or the Mayor-in-Council in 10 
confidence or if, in his opinion, it cannot be answered with-
out prejudice to public ~te~ or the int~t of the Cor-
poration. "; 
(e) inSU:b-section (7)~ the words "by the Commissioner" 
shall b~ omitted; (5 
- (~ &ub-se<!tion i( 3) shall be omitted. 
%1. In section 82 of the principal Act, tqe proviso $all be omitted. 
. 2%. Ftn-the rub':heading ~'Transacti(}n of business by Standing 'and 
other Committees" cccurring before s=ction 83, and for sections 83 
~ ~, of the principal Act, the following sub-hEading and sections 20 
shall be substituted, namely:.....,.,.· 
"Transaction of Qus~ness by Committees 
~. q> The Chairman, ~r in his abstm.ce. t~e Vi9~-Chairman, 
~aU.~ide. 0~1' ev~ ·meeting of the ~ Co~~te~. 
(2) In the aibsen\!e of the Chairman and ·the Vice-Chalr- 2S 
man from any meeting, the members of t,he Zonal Committee 
shall choose one of their number to preside over the meeting. 
84. The Corporation may make regulations for the proce-
dure and the conduct of busjness at meetings of the Zonal Com-
mittees and all other Committees, except the Advisory Com- 30 
mittees which shall regulate their own procedure.". 
Amend- . 23. In section 85 of the principal Act, for the words "and of the 
ment of 'Standtng'Co~mittee and ,every other committee of the Corporation", 
section 8S. . . ..... 

13 
the words "and of every Committee of the Corporation except the 
Advisory Committees" shall be substituted. 
24. In Chapter VI of the principal Act, before section 89, the fol- Insertion 
• 'lowing sections shall be inserted, namely: - o'f new 
5 
~. 19, 
bo .. ' 
~ ., 
.. , 
;. .~.:. 
" 
aections 
88A, 88B, 
8BC,88D, 
88E, and 
88F. 
"88A. (1) The Mayor-in-Council shall, with the approval of Appoint-
the Administrator, appoint a suitable person as the Commission- ~ent, etc., 
f h C . of Com-er 0 t e orporatlOn. mission:er. 
. (2) The Commissioner so appointed shall hold office for a 
term of five years in the first instance: 
Provided that h:s app);ntment may be renewed frOQl time 
to time for a term not exceeding one year at a tin:W.: 
Provided further that where the Commissioner holds a lien 
on any service under the Government, the Admini$trator may 
at any time after giving reasonable notice to the Mayor-in-Coun-
cil replace his services at the disposal of the Government. 
(3) The Commi~sioner shall not undertake any work uncon-
nected with his office withcut the saaction of the Administrator 
and of the Mayor-in-Council. 
88B. The Commiss:oner Shall be paid out of the Municipal 
Fund such monthly salary and allowances, if any, a~ may from 
time to time be fixed by the Administrator and ~y be given 
such facilities (if any) in relation to residential accommodation, 
conveyance and the like, as may from time to time, be fixed by 
the Administrator: 
Provided that the salary of the Commissioner shall not be 
varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
Salary 
and allow-
ances of 
Com- . 
missioner. 
88C. (1) Leave may be granted to the Commissioner by the lAave of 
Mayor-in-Council. abeence of 
Commis-
(2) Whenever such leave is granted to the Commissioner. lioner. 
the Mayor-in-Council rhall, with the approval of Ule Administra-
tor, appoint another person to officiate as Commissioner in lUI 
l.,~o.. 

Appointment 
of otliciatine 
Commis-
sioner in case 
of death, re-
silOation, 
etc., of Com-
missi(l)ner. 
Service 
regulations 
of Commis-
sioner. 
Fun::tions 
of Com-
missioner. 
14 
BBD. If any vacancy occurs in the office of the Commissioner 
on account of death. resignation or otherwise, the Mayor-in-
Council may, with the approval of the Administrator, appoint 
another person to officiate as Comrnis .iuner in his place· for a 
term not exceeding two months pending the appointment of a 5 
Commissioner under $t.>Ction BBA, 
8BE. (1) If the C\\mm;ss~oner is an officer in the service of 
the Government, the Corporation shall make such contribution 
towards his leave alh\wances, pension and provident fund as 
may be required by the conditions of his service under the Gov- 10 
ernment, to be paid 1»1 him or for him, as the case may be. 
(2) If the Commissioner is not an officer iI) the service of 
the Government, his Ifave and leave allowances, his superannua-
tion or retirement, hi . gratuity or pension, and: the proportions 
of his pensionary or provident fund contribution payable res- IS 
pectively from h;s sal~"Y and from the Municipal Fund shall be 
gDverned by rules: 
Provided that-
(a) the amOWlt cf a.'1y such leave and leave allowances. 
gratuity or pen~oo. shall in no case exceed what would 20 
be admissible in tbe case of Government servants of similar 
standing and status; and 
(b) the conditions under which such allowances, gratui-
ty or pension ar. granted or any leave, superannuation or 
retir-ement is sanctioned, shall not be more favourable than 25 
those for the tl'lfte being prescribed 'for such Government 
servants. 
B8F. The ,Comm:~onfr shall be the principal executive offi-
cer of the Corporati\'IIl and shall, subject to the supervision and 
control of the Mayor-in-Council, also- 30 
(a) exercise ~ the powers and perform all the duties 
specifically COnf~lTed or impo.:.ed upon h:m by this Act or by 
any other law f,',l' the time being in force; 
(b) prescriW the duties of, and exercise supervlsIOn 
and control over we acts and proceedings of, all other muni- 35 
cipal officers and i"mployees other than the MuniCipal Secre-
tary and the MUIlicipaI Chief Aud'tor and the municipal offi-
cers and other f'tDployees immediately subordinate to them 
and subject to aft"v regulat'on that may be made in this be-
half, dispose of all questions relating to the service· of the 40 

5 
aforesaid other municipal officers and employees and their 
pay, privileges, allowances and other conditions of service.". 
2Q. In section 89 of the principal Act,-
(a) in rub-section (1), for the words "The Corporation shall 
appoint suitable perso'ls". the words "The Mayor-in-Council 
shall appoint suitable persons" shall be ~ubstituted; 
(b) in sub-s"'ction (2). for the words "that Government", 
the words "the Adm'nistrator" shall be substituted. 
26. In secti~n 90 of the princ;pal Act,-
Amend-
ment ot 
section 89. 
Amend-
ment Of 
10 (a) for the words "appropr;ate authority", wherever they section 90. 
occur, the word "Commissioner" and' for the words "committee 
concerned", wherever they occur, the word: "Mayor-in-Council" 
o· , Ihall be substituted; 
4)'1. 
(b) In sub-sectIon (2), for the words "three hundred and 
fifty rupees" in both the places where they occur, the words 
"four hundred ruPeE'S" ~hall be substituted; 
(e) in sub-section (4). for the words "or at the instance of 
such authority or committee", the words "or at the instance of 
the Commissioner or the Mayor-in-Council" shall be substituted; 
(d) in sUb.-sections (5) and (6), for the words "two hundred 
and fifty rupees", the words "four hundred rupees" shall be sub-
stituted; 
(e) sub-section (7) shall be omitted. 
,z7 .. For sub-section (1) of section 92 of the principal Act, the fol- Amend-
ment o'f 
g, sub-~,ection shall be substituted, namely:- section 92. 
"(1) Subject to the provi~ons of this Act, the power of a~ 
pointing municipal officers and other municipal employees, whe-
. t~er temporary or permanent- .,.,' - ", . : 
: (a) to posts carrying a minimum monthly salary (ex-
, 'elusive of allowances) of four huridred rupees or more 
';- shall vest in the Mayor-in-Council; 
(b) to posts carrying a minimum monthly salary (ex-
, '0' elusive of allowances) of less than four hundred rupees shall 
vest in the Commissioner: 
Provided that the power of appointing officers and other 
employees immediately subordinate to th~ Municipal Secretary 
. the Municipal Chief Auditor, whose minimum monthly salary 
("elusive of allowanc~) is less than four hundred rupees shall 
in the Mayor-in-Council: 

18 
Provided further that the Mayor-in-Council may delegate 
to the Municipal Secretary or the Municipal Chief Auditor the 
power of appointing officers and other employees immediat~ly 
subordinate to such Secretary or Auditor, whose minimum 
monthly salary (exclusive of allowances) is not more than two S 
hundred and fi'fty rupees.". 
Amend- 28. In section 93 of the principal Act. for the words "the Corpora-
ment of cion", the words "the authority by which he was appointed" shall be 
section 93 substituted. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
lions for 
section 96. 
Consulta-
tion with 
Union 
Public 
Service 
Commis-
Municipal 
Servile 
Commis-
sion. 
29. For section 96 of the principal Act, the following sections Rhall 10 
be substituted, namely:-
"96. (1) No appointment to any post carrying a maximum 
monthly salary of one thousand and five hundred rupees or more 
(exclusive of allowances) shall be made except after consultation 
with the Union Public Service Commission. IS 
(2) No appointment to any post carrying a maximum month-
ly salary of more than one hundred and ten rupE'es (exclusive of 
allowances) but less than one thousand and five hundred rupees 
(~elus.ive of allowances) shall be made except after consultation 
with the Municipal Service Commission constituted. under sec- 20 
tion 96A. 
(3) Notwithstanding anythlng contained in sub-sections (1) 
and (2), it shall not be necessary to consult the Union Public Ser-
vice Commission or the Municipal Service Commission, as the 
case may be, in regard to the selection fOi' appointment,- 25 
(a) to any acting or temporary post for a period not 
exceeding one year; or 
(b) to such posts as may from time to time be specified 
by the Corporation in consultation with the Union Public 
Service Commission or the Municipal Service Commission, :0 
-' 
as the case may be, when such posts are to be filled by pro-
1rIotion or by transfer; or 
(c) to a post when at the time ot such appointment the 
person to be appointed thereto is a member o~ an all-India 
Service or is in the service of the Central Government or a 3S 
State Government in a Class I post; or 
(d) to a permanent or temporary post, if the officer or 
other employee to be appointed is not likely to hold that post 
fer more than one year or if such officer or other employee 

5 
10 
15 
~. 
t .,~. 
"'35 
11:' 
a
·.'.Jt::. ..•. '.-... ., 
~ ". 
, 387 
"'-~ , ' 
17 
is likely to hold- the post for more than one year but not more 
than three years and the Union Public Service Commission 
or the Municipal Service Commission, as the case may be, 
advises that the appointment may be made without consult-
ing it. 
96A. (1) The Administrator shall, as so::>n as may be, after Constitu-
the commencement of the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Amend- tion .o~ 
ment) Act, 1966, constitute a Municipal Service Commission, con_~u~clpal 
. t' f eI"Vlce 
SIS mg 0_- Commis-
(a) a chairman who who shall be nominated by the Cen-
tral Governrrlent; and 
(b) two other members of whom one shall be nomi-
nated by the Administrator and the other by the Mayor-in-
Council. 
(2) The Administrator shall, by rules made in this behalf, 
provide for-
(a) the term of office of. the salaries arid allowal1ces pay-
able to, and other conditions of service of, the members (in-
cluding the chairman) of the Municipai Service C-ommission; 
(b) the manner in which that Commission shall per-
form the duties imposed upon it by or under this Act; 
. 
(c) the number of members of staff of that Commission 
and their 'sl'llaries, allowances and other- conditions 01. service. 
(3) The salaries and allowaTlces of the members (including 
the chairman) of the Municipal Service Commission and its staff 
shall be paid out of the Municipal Fund. 
sion. 
96B. (1) Save as otherwis~ provided in sub-section (3) of Functions 
section 96, the Municipal Service Commission shall be consuIted- of Muni--. . - . cipal Ser-
(a) in all matters relating to the methods of recruitment vice Com-
to posts referred to in sub-section (2) of sec~ion 96; mission. 
(b) on the principles to be followed in making appoint-
ments to all the posts referred to in the said sub-section (2) 
and in making promotions and transfers from one PQst to an-
other of the aforesaid posts and on 'the suitability of ·[he 
candidates for fuch appointments, promotions or transfers; 
(c) on such disciplinary matters affecting a person serV-
ing under the Corporation as may be prescribed by regula~ 
tions; 
(B) LS-3. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 97. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 98. 
Amend-
ment of 
!o'ection 91. 
18 
(d) on any claim by, or in respect of, a person who is 
serving or has served under the Corporation that any costs 
incurred by him' in defending legal proceedings instituted 
against him in respect of acts done or purporting to be done 
in the execution of his duty should be paid out of the Muni- 5 
cipal Fund, 
and it shall be the duty of the Municipal Service Commission to 
advise on any .matter so referred to it and on any other matter 
which the Mayor-in-Council may refer to it.". 
30. In section 97 of the principal Act,- 10 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "The Commission", the 
words, brackets and figures "Each of the Commissions referred to 
in sub-sections (1) and (Z) of section 96" and for the words "the 
Commission", wherever they occur. the words "that Commission" 
shill be substituted; 15 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-. 
. "(Z) In the case of any difference of opinion between the 
Union Public Service Commission and the Mayor-in-Council 
on any matter, the Mayor-in-Council shall refer the matter 20 
to the Central Government and the decision of that Govern-
ment thereon shall be final. 
(3) In the case of any difference of opinion between 
the Municipal Service Commission and the Mayor-in-
Council on any matter, the Mayor-in-Council shall refer th'e 25 
matter to the Administrator and the decision of the Admi-
nistrator thereon shall be final.". 
31. In section 98 of the principal Act,-
o (a) in sub-section (1), for the word "Corporation", where it 
occurs for the first and third times, the words "Mayor-in-Council" 30 
shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "the Commission", the 
words ''the Union Public Service Commission or the Municipal 
Service Commi~ion, as the case may be," shall be substitu~ed. 
3Z, In section 99 of the principal Act,-
(a) clause (h) of sub-section (1) shall be omitted; 
(b) for sub-section (Z). the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
35 
"(Z) The Municipal Fund shall be held by the Cor-
poration in trust for the purposes of this Act subject to the 40 

5 
19 
provisions herein contained and shall be maintained in the 
municipal account.". 
33. For section 100 of the principal Act, the following section Subs 
shall be substituted, namely: - tion 
new 
tlon 
secti( 
'100. All moneys payable to the credit of the Municipal Fund Muni 
shall be received by the Commissioner and shall be forthwith Fund 
paid into the State Bank of India to the credit of the municipal !: k~ 
account which shall be entitled "The Account of the Municipal Baen~ 
Fund' of Delhi".'. India 
10 34. For sub-section (1) of section 101 of the principal Act, the Amer 
20 
follOWing sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - ment _ sectio 
"(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no payment 
shall be made by the State Bank of India out of the Municipal 
Fund except on a cheque signed by both-
(a) the Chief Accountant or an officer subordinate to 
him authorised by the Mayor-in-Council in this behalf; and 
(b) the Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner or an 
officer subordinate to the Commissioner authorIsed by the 
Mayor-in-Council in this behalf.". 
35. In the proviso to section 102 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (c) ,-
(i) in sub-clause (i), for the words "that Government", 
the words ".the Administrator" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub~lause (v), the· words "or any of' the muni-
cipal authorities" shall be omitted; • (b) in clause (d), for the words "the Central Gov.ernment", 
the words "the Central Government or the Administrator" shall 
be substituted. 
Amenl 
ment 0 
section 
38. For section 104 of the principal Act, the following section Substitl 
shall be substituted, namely:- tion of 
Dew sel 
tiOD fOI 
section 
"104. Whenever any sum is expended under clause (c), Procedl.. 
clause (e) or clause (f) of the proviso to section 102, the Com- when 
missioner shall forthwith communicate the circumstances to the mOD~' 
Mayor-in-Council, which may take, or recommend to the :o~ge 
Corporation to take, such action under the provisions of this grant is 
Act as shall, in the circumstances, appear po§ible and expedient expendt> 
for covering the amount of the additional expenditure.". 

Amend-
ment of 
section 106. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 107. 
Surplus 
moneys in 
the Muni-
cipal Fund 
. to be de-
posited in. 
banks. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 109. 
20 
37. In section 106 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1) I the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:·-
"(1) On the written requisition of the Administrator 
or a Secretary to the Central Government, the Mayor-in 5 
Council may at any tIme require the Commissioner. to 
undertake the execution of any work certified by the Ad-
ministrator or such Secretary to be urgently required in 
public interest and for this purpose temporarily to make 
\ 
payments from the MUnIcipal Fund so far as the same can 10 
be met without unduly intcrf(>~'ing wlth the regular work 
of the municipal government."; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) On th~ receipt of any requisition under sub-section ~ 
(1), the Mayor-in-Council shall forthwith forward a cop:¥, 
thereof to the Corporation together with a report of the steps 
. taken in pursuance of the same.". 
38. For section 107 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
section 
"107. (1) Surplus moneys standing at the credit of the 
Municipal Fund shall be deposited in the State Bank of India 
or in such scheduled bC;ink or banks as the Corporation may 
select or. be invested in public securities . 
20 
(2) The loss, if any, arising from such deposit or investment 25 
shall be debited td"the Municipal Fund.". 
• 
39. In section 109 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted,namely: -
"(1) The Corporation shall, on or before the 31st day of 
March every year, adopt for the ensuing year a budge. esti- 30 
mate which shall be the estimate of the income and expen-
diture of the Corporation to be received and incurred on 
account of the municipal government of Delhi."; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 3S 
substituted, namely:-
"(3) The budget -estimate shall be prepared in such 
form, presented and adopted in such manner and shall pro-

5 
/0 
:.!l 
vide for all such matters, as may be prescribed by regula-• tions made HI this behalf.". 
40. l.n ,;;ectlOll 110 oi the princIpal Act,-
(a) 10r sub-sectio.Ll \.L), me loilo",Ving 
substituted, namely:-
Amend-
sub-section shall be ~ent of section 110 
"(1) On the recommendation of the Mayor-in-Council, 
the Corporation may, lfom time to time, during the year,-
(i) increase the amount of any. budget grant under 
any i1t:ad, 
(d) make an add.tiOnal budget grant for the purpose 
of meeLing any special or unforeseen requirements aris-
ing during the Sd.d year, 
(ii) transfer the amount or portion of the amount 
of the budget grant under any head to the amount of 
the budget grant under any other head, or 
(m) reduce the amount of the. budget grant under 
any hEad: 
Provided .hat due regard :.hall be had to all the require-
ments 01 this Act and In making any increase or any 
addIt.iona1 budget grant, the estimated cash balance at the 
close oi the year snail not be reduced below the sum of one 
lakh of rupees or such hIgher swn as the Corporation may 
determine."; 
(b) in sub-secdon (2), for the words "budget estimates", the 
words "budget estimate' shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (4), in the proviso, fc~ tte words "that 
COIIlllllttee", the words "the Mayor-in-Council" shall be substi-.. tuted; 
(d) sub-section (5) shall be omitted . 
. 41. In section 112 of the principal Act, fer the words "the Standing 
. ttee or, as the case may be·, ihe Delhi Electric Supply Com-
. mittee, or the Delhi Transport Commhtee or the Delhi Water Supply 
and Sewage Disposal Committee", the words ··the Mayor-in-Council" 
Lhall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
112. 
42. After sub-section (~) of section 113 of the principal Act, the Amend-
(ollowing sub-section shall be imerted, namely:- ment of 
"(2A) Nothing' in clause (d) of sub-section (2) shall be seGtion 113. 
deemed to empower the Corporation to levy a tax on the sale 
Or supply of electricity to the New Delhi Municipal Committee 

• 
22 
or the Military Engineer Services, Delhi Cantonment or the 
pelhi Electricity Board constituted under section 5 of the Electri-
city (Supply) Act, 1948.". 
Arnend- 43. In sub-section (4) of section 115 of the principal Act, in 
ment of clause (b), the words hand not used or intended to be used exclu- 5 
section 115. sively for the purposes of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking 
or the Delhi Transport Undertaking or the Delhi Water Supply and 
Sewage Disposal Undertaking" shall be omitted. 
Arnend- 44. In sub-section (1) of section 116 of the principal Act, for the 
ment of second proviso, the follOWing proviso shall be substituted, namely:- 10 
section 116. 
"Provided further that in respect of any land or building, the 
standard rent of which has been fixed under the Delhi Rent 
54 ( 
Control Act, 1958, the ratable value thereof shall not exceed the 59 I 
Amend-
ment of 
section 117. 
Amend- . 
ment of 
section 
118. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
124. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
150. 
annual amount of the standard rent so fixed.". 
4S. In section 117 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words "Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 
Committee", wherever they occur, the words "Mayor-in-Council" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) in su~-section (1), for the words "that Committee", the 
15 
words "the Mayor-in-Council" shall be SUbstituted. 20 
46. In sub-section (1) of iection 118 of the principal Act, for the 
words "Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee", the 
words "Mayor-in-Council" shaH be substituted. 
47. In sub-section (1) of section 124 of the principal Act, for the 
word "Corporation", the words "Mayor-in-Coun~il" shall be substi- 25 
tuted. 
48. In section 150 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2),' for the word "its", the word "his" 
and for the words "that Government", the words "the Adminis-
trator" shall be substituted; 30 
(b) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, .namely:-
" (4) After a tax has come in to force in any year in 
accordance with the foregOing provisions of this section, the 
provisions of sub-section (2) of section 109 shall apply in 35 
relation to such tax in any svbsequent year as they apply in 

23 • 
relation to any tax imposed under sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 113.". 
".. In sect ion 182 of the principal Act, for the words "CoIIector of Amend-
Land Customc;", in both the places where they occur, the words me~t ~82 
5 ··Collector of Customs" and for the words uland customs" in both the sec Ion 
places where they occur, the word "customs" shall be substituted. 
SO. In sections 190, 191 and 192 of the principal Act, for the word =;~f 
"Commissioner", wherever it occurs, the words "Mayor-in-Council" sections 
shall be substituted. 190, 191 
and 192. 
10 51. In sub-section (2) of section 195 of the principal Act, for the Ametndf-. . . men 0 
word~ u any mUnIcIpal authorIty. officer or other employee", the words section 
"any municipal officer or other employee" shall be substituted. 195. 
52. For section 198 of the principal Act, the following section ~ubstitu­bon Of shall be substituted, namely:-< . new sec-
tion 'for 
section 
198. 
e8. Whenever the Corporation decides to acquire any' Acqui. 
immovable property for the purposes of this Act, the Mayor-in- sition 
Council shall acquire such property on behalf of the Corpora- O~limmOv­
tion b~ agreement on suc~ terms ~,~ at such price as may be :e~/: . 
determmed by the Mayor-m-Council. . agreement .. 
.. 53. In section 199 of the principal Act, for the word "Commis- Amend-
sioner", in both the places where it occurs, the word~ "Mayor-in- ment of 
... ' Council" and 'for the word "Government" the word uAdministrator" section 199. . , , 
", ........ ,._'- .be substituted. 
'54. In section 200 of the principal Act,- Amend-
. ment of {a) for clauses (a) and (b), the followmg clauses shall be section 
'SU1D~,tltuted. namely:- 200. 
U (a) the Mayor-in-Council may, in its discretion, 'dis-
. '. pose of, by sale or otherwise, any movable or immovable 
property belonging to the Corporation, or let out or hire any 
movable property or grant a lease of any immovable pro-
perty belonging to the Corporation, including any ~ght of 
gathering and taking fruits and the like; 
(b) any municipal officer, authorised in this behalf by 
the Mayor-in-Council, may-
(i) dispos~ of, by ~ale or otherwise, any D}ovable. 
property 'belonging to the Corporation, the value (\f 
which does not exceed five thousand rupees; or 

Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
sectioR 
202. 
Procedure 
for mak-
ing con-
tracts, 
24 
(ii) grant a lease (other than :=I If'ase in pt-'rpetuity) 
of any immovable propf"rtv belonpi-1g to th~ Corpora-
tion; or " 
(iii) sell or grant a lease in perpetuity of any im-
movable p~operty belong!ng to the Corporation, the 5 
value of which does not exce2d fifty thousand rupees 
or the annual rent fer which clof's not exceEd three 
th01l:~and rupees;"; 
(b) clauses (c) :tnd (P) shal1 be omitted; 
(c) for clause (g), the hPowing claus" shall be substituted, 10 
namely:- - I,e: 
"(g) every case of disposal of property shall be reported 
without delay by-
(i) the Mayor-in-CounciJ to the Corporation, where 
such disposal is under clause (a); IS 
(ii) the municipal officer, authorised by the Mayor-
. in-Council under clause (b), to the· Mayor-in-CouncU, 
where such disposal is under that clause.". • 
55. For section 202 of the principal Act. the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:- 20 
"202. With respect to the making of contracts, the following 
provisions sh<lll have effect, namely:-
(a) . every such CO!1tract shall be executed on behalf of 
the Corporation by the Commissioner ot such other muni-
cipal officer as the Mayor-in-Council may direct or authorise 2S 
from time to time; 
(b) no such contract for any purpose, which in accord-
ance with any provision of this Act any munic;pal officer 
referred to in clause (a) may no! carry out without the 
approval or sanction of any authority or officer, shall be 30 
made by him until and unless such approval or sanction has 
bleen duly obtained; 
(c) no contract (other than a contract for the acquisi-
tion of immovable property) which will involve an expendi-
ture exceeding ten thousand rupees or such higher amount 3S 
as the Mayor-in-Council may fix, shall be made by any 
municipal officer referred to in clause (a) unless the same 
has been previously approved by the Mayor-in-CouncU; 

,: .' 25 
(d) every contract (other than a contract for the acqui-
sition of immovable property) made by any municipal of:H-
cer referred to in clause (a) involving expenditure exceed-
ing two thousand rupees but not exceeding ten ' thousand 
rupees or such higher amount as may be fixed under 
clause (c), shall be reported by such municipal officer 
within one month after the same has been made, to the 
Mayor-in-Council ; 
(e) no contract for the acquisition of immovable pro-
perty shall be valid unless the contract has been approved 
by the Mayor-in-Council where the price stipulated to be 
paid for such property exceeds five thousand rupees." 
Substitu-56. For section 204 of the principal Act, the following section tion of 
shall be substituted, namely: - new sec-
tionfor 
section 
204. 
"204. There shall be kept in such manner and in such form 
as~may·be prescribed by regulations an account of all receipts 
and expenditure of the Corporation.". 
57. In section ?05 of the prin.cipal Act,-
(a) in su~-section (1), for the words "municipal accounts", 
the words "municipal account" and for the words "signed by 
not less than two members of that Committee", the words 
"signed by the' Mayor and a Deputy Mayor or by the two 
Deputy fI,·layorsH shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "municipal accounts", 
the words umunicipal account" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (3). for the words "the municip~l 
accounts" and the words "all the municipai accounts", the words 
"the municipal account" shall be substituted. . 
58. In section 206 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1)-
(i) in clau~e (a), for the words "municipal accounts", 
the words "municipal account" shall be substituted; 
1387 (B) LS-4. 
Corpora-
tion to 
keep 
ac~ount of 
all reeeipts 
and expen 
dituTe. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
205. 
Amend·· 
ment of 
section' 
206. 

Amend-
ment ot 
section 
207. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
208. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
209. 
Substitu-
tion o"f 
new head-
ing for 
heading 
to Chapter 
XII. 
Omission 
of sections 
211. 212 
and 259 
to 2'70. 
26 
Gii) in clause (b). for' the words "that Committee", the 
words "the Mayor-in-Council" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3). for the words "the entire municipal 
accounts", the words "the municipal account" shall be substi-
tuted; 5 
(e) in sub-section (5), for the words "that Government", 
the words "the Administrator" shall be substituted. 
59. In sub-section (1) of section 207 of the principal Act. for t~e 
words "of any of the accounts of the Municipal Fund", the words 
"of the municipal account" shall be substituted. 10 
60. In section 208 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), for the words "the Standing Com-
mittee, the Delhi Electric Supply Committee, the Delhi Trans-
port Committee or the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 
Committee", the words "or the Mayor:in-Council" shall be sub- 15 
stituted; 
(b) in sub-section (4)., for the words "the Standing Com-
mittee or, as the case may be, the Delhi Electric Supply Com-
mittee, the Delhi Transport <;ommittee or the Delhi Water 
Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee", the words "the Mayor- 20:04 
in-Council" shall be substituted and for the word "accounts", 
the word "account" shall be substituted. 
61. In sub-section (1) of section 209 of the principal Act, for the ?J. 
words, "any of the accounts of the Corporation", the words "the ,,1 
account of the Corporation" shall be substituted. 25 ":~ ... '.:' 
62. For the heading "WATER SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE DIS-. 
POSAL" to Chaptef XII of the principal Act, the heading "WATER SUP- ':j~f\ 
PLY AND DRAINAGE" ~hall be substituted. 
.... 
, 
63. SEctions 211, 212 and 259 to 270 (both inclusive) of the prin-
cipal Act shall be omitted. 

5 
• 
27 
64. In section 213 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1)-
.. (i) in the opening paragraph, tor the words "Delhi 
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee", the words 
"Mayor-in-Council" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (b), for the word "Committee", the 
words "Mayor-in-Council" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the w~rd "Committee", the words 
"Mayor-in-Council" shall be substituted. 
\ 
Amend~ 
meJ.lt of 
section 
213. 
65. In section 215, sub-section (1) of section 221, sub-sectlon (3) 
10 of section 230 and sub-sec.ion (5) of section 272 of the principal Act. 
for the words "Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Com-
mittee", the words "Mayor-ill-Counc~l" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
sections 
215, 221, 
230 and 
272. 
66. In section 217 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Delhi Water Supply ment of 
section and Sewage Disposal Committee", the words "Mayor-in-Council" 217. 
shall be substituted; 
\0) in sub-section (2), for the words "said Conumttee", the 
words "Mayor-in-Councll" shall be substituted. 
67. In sub-section (1) of section 222 and sub-section (1) of sec- Amend-
tlOU ~:::J u1 the principal Act, for the words "whether within or ment of 
. wlthuut the local lImIts of the Corporation", the words "within the sections 
. !vca} llIruis of the Corporation" shall be substituted. 222 and 
223. 
68. F'or the sub-heading "Drainage aitd sewerage" occurring be- Amend-
fore sectwn 239 of the principal Act, the sub-heading "Dramage" ment of 
shall be substituted and in that section - section 
• ' 239 
(a) in sub-section (1), the words "and all sewage dis- . 
posal works whether constructed out of the Municipal F'und or 
otherwIse" shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (3). the words "or sewage disposal 
wurk" shall be omitted. 
69. In section 240 of the principal Act,-
\u) 111 sub-section (l), the words "all sewage 
wOl'ks" shall be omitted; 
Amend-
disposal me~t of 
section 
240. 

Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
t ion for 
section 
250. 
Places 
for 
emptying 
of drains. 
Amt'nd-
ment of 
section 
273. 
OIOlssioll 
of Chap-
ters XIII 
and XIV. 
Amend-
I ment 01 
section 
298. 
28 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-.iection shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(2) The Commissioner shall maintain and keep in 
repair all municipal drains when autr.~r. ;ed by the Mayor-
in-Council or the Corporation in this behalf and shall cons- S 
truct as many new drains as may from time to time .be 
necessary for effectual drainage.". 
70. The sub .. heading "Di$posal of sewage" occurring before sec-
tion 250 of the principal Act shall be omitted and for that section, 
the following section shall be substituted, namely: _ 10 
"250. The Commissioner may cause any or 'all of the muni-
cipal drains to empty into such place or places as may be spe-
cified, by the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Board 
constituted under the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 
Board, Act, 1966: IS 
Provided that any . place which, imm~iately before the 
constitution of 'the said Board" was used for the emp"ying of 
drains shall be deemed to be a place specified under this section 
fer the said purpose.". 
- ' 
71. In sub-section (1) of section 273 of the principal Act,- 20 
(a) in cla~e (a), for the words "Delhi Water Supply aud 
Sewage Disposal Committee", the words "Mayor-in-Council" 
~hall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (c), the words "or any water course .' by 
whlch any such water work is supplied" shall be omitted; 2S 
(c) clause (d) shall be omitted; 
(d) in clause '(e), the words "or sewage" shall be omit-
ted. 
. . 
72. Chapters XIII and XIV of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
'73. hi sub-section (2) of section 298 of the principal Act, for the 30 
words "the Commissioner" and for the word "him", the words ·'the 
Mayor-in-Council" shall be substituted. 

s 
74. In section 299 of the principal Act,- Amend-
ment of (a) in sub-section (1)- section 
(i) for the word "Commissioner", the words "Mayor- 299. 
in-Council" shall be substituted; 
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the word "Corporation" in both 
the places where it occurs. the words "Mayor-in-Couricil" shall 
be substituted. 
, 
75. In section 301 of the principal Act, for the word "Corpora- Amend-
10 tion", the words "Mayor-in-Council" shall be substituted. ment of 
section 
~O1. 
Ic:.. rr-IItj 
• 76. In sub-section (1) of section 3.03 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(a) for the words "The Commissioner may", the words "The :~~~:f 
Commissioner may, with the previous sanction of the Mayor-in- ~03. 
Council" shall be substituted; 
. 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted. 
77. In section 304 of the principal Act, for the word "Commission- Amend.-
er" and for the word "Corporation", the words "Mayor-in-Council" ment of 
shall be substituted. section 
3M. 
78. In section 305 of tl1~ principal Act,- Amend-
ment of 
(a) in sub-section (I), for the word "Corporation" in both section 
the places where it occurs, the words "Mayor-in-Council" shall 305. 
be substituted; 
(b) in the proviso to sub-section (3) , for the words "the 
Commissioner fails to take steps", the words "the Mayor-in-
Council does not take steps" shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (6), for the words "as may be prescribed 
by the Commissioner with the sanction of the Standing Com-
mittee", the words "as may be prescribed by the Mayor-in-
Council" shall be substituted. 
If" 30 79· In section 308 of· the principal Act, for the words "Com- Amend-
" missioner may, after giving to the owner of the land or building", ment of 
~'n the words "Commissioner may, with the previous approval of the section 
Ie Mayor-in-Coun~il and after giving to the owner of the land or bUll- 308. 
It~,. ding" shall be substituted. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
309. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
325. 
Alnend-
ment of 
section 
327. 
Amend-
ment Of 
section 
372. . 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
376. 
80. In sub-section (1) of section 309 of the principal Act, after tht! 
words "at the request of the owner", the words "and with the pre-
vious approval of the Mayor-in-Council" shall be inserted. 
81. In sLlb-section (1) of section 325 of the principal Act, for the 
words "a mUnicipal officer or other municipal employee", the words 5 
"any other municipal officer or employee" shall be substituted. 
" 
82. For sub-section (1) of section 327 of the principal Act, the 
following sUb-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
• 
"(1) The Mayor-in-Council may. with the sanction of the 
Corporation, determine the name or number by which any street 10 
or PUbliC place vested in the CorporatlOn shall be known . 
(1 A) The Commissioner may-
(a) cause to be put up or painted at a conspicuous part 
of any building, wall or place at or near each end, corner or 
entrance of such street or on some convenient part of such 15 
street the name or number by which it is to be known; 
(b) cause to be put UP. or painted on boards of suitable 
size the name of any public place vested in the Corpora-
tion; 
(c) o"termi.nc the number or sub-number by which any 20 
premises or part of such premi:.es shall be known and cause 
such numoer or sub-number to be fixed to the side or outer 
door of such premises or to ::.ome place at the entrance of 
the enclosure thereof.". 
83. In sub-section (2) of section 372 of the principal Act, for the 25 
words "that Government", the words -'the Administrator" shall be 
substituted. 
84. In sub-section (1) ot section 376 of the principal Act,-
(a) for the word "Commissioner", the , 
Council" shall be ~.ubstituted; 
words "Mayor-in-
(b) for the word "he" in both the places where it occurs, 
the word "it" shall be substituted; 
(c) the words "with the previous sanction of the Corpora-
tion" shall be omitted; 
(d) the proviso shall be omitted. 
30 
35 

31 
85. In sub-section (1) of section 405 of the principal Act, for the Amend-
word "Commissioner", the words "Mayor-in-CounciI" and for the ment of 
word "he", the word "it" shall be substituted. section 
405. 
86. In sub-section (1) of section 408 of the principal Act, for the Amend-
5 words "The Commissioner may", the words "The Commissioner may. me~t of 
with the previous approval of the Mayor-in-Council" shall be sub- :~~tlon 
stituted. . 
. 
87. In section 425 of the principal Act for the words "the Com- Amend-
missioner upon information in his possession", the words "the me~t of 
10 Mayor-in-Coun~q upon information in its possession" and for the :~~lon 
word "he", the words "the Mayor-in-Ccuncil" shall be substituted. 
88. In section 426 of the principal Act for the word "Commis- Amend-
sioner", wherever it occurs, the words "Mayor-in-Councir' shall be ~~~~:f 
substituted. 426. 
15 89. In sub-section (1) of section 427 of the principal Act, for the Amend-
word uCommissioner", the words "Mayor-in-Council" and for the ~~~: 
words "reject the scheme with directions to the Commissioner to 427. 
have a fresh sGheme framed according to ~.uch directions", the words 
"refer the scheme back with such observat~ons as the Corporation 
I' 
) ,20 may wish to make to the Mayor-in-Council to have a fresh scheme 
prepared in accordance with such observations" shall be subst.ituted. 
90. In section 428 of the principal Act, for the word "Commis- Amend-
sioner" the words "Mayor-in-Council" and for the word "he" the ment of , , t· 
word "it" shall be substituted. :~.lon 
25, 91. In sub-section (2) of section 430 of the principal Act, for the Amend-
. word "Commis~.ionrr", the words "Mayor-in-Council" shall be sub- met~t of . sec Ion stttuted. 430 • 
Amend-.. ;:·92. In section 431 of the principal Act,-
mental 
(a) in the opening paragraph, for the words and bra~kets section 
"The Commissioner, the General Manager (Electricity) or the 431. 
, General Man'lger (Transp:)J't) or any mU'1icipal officer or oth~r 
municipal rmployee authorised in thi~ behalf by any of the 
aforesaid municipal authorities", the words "The Commissioner 
or any other municipal officer or employee authorised in this 
'behalf by the Commissioner" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (b), for the words and brackets ~'the Com-
mirsioner, the General Manager (Electricity) or the General 
Manager (Transport) or any muniCipal officer or employee", 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
432. 
Amend-
mentot 
section 
433. 
32 
the words "the Commissioner or any other municipal offt'cer or 
employee" shall be substituted; 
(c) in clause (e), for the words "by any of the municipal 
authorities", the words "by the Commissioner" shall be ::ub-
stituted. 5 
93. In sub-section (1) of section 432 nf the principal Act, for the 
words and brackets "The Commissioner, the General Manager 
(Electricity) or the General Manager (Transport) Or any perr.on 
authorised in this behalf by any of the aforesaid municipal authori-
ties", the .words "The Commissioner or any person authorised in this 10 
behalf by the Commissioner" shall be :ubstituted. 
M. In section 433 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words and brackets "the 
Commissioner, the General Manager (Electricity) Or the General 
Manager (Transport) or any person authorised in this behalf by IS 
any of the aforesaid municipal authorities", the words "the 
Commissioner or any person authorised in this behalf by the 
Comm;s:ioner" shall be substituted; . 
(b) in sub-section (2~. the words and brackets "the General 
Manager (Electricity) or the General Manager (Transport)" 20 
shall be omitted. 
Amend- 95. In section 437 of the principal Act, for the words and figures 
ment of "or any of the municipal authorities specified in section 44", the 
section words "or the Commi-sioner" shall be substituted. 437. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
438. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
09. 
96. In section 438 of the principal Act, for the words and brackets 25 
"any of the following appropriate municipal authorities, that is to 
say, the Commissioner or the General Manager (Electricity) or the 
Genp.ral Manager (Transport) or of any municipal officer authorjsed 
in this behalf by any of the aforesaid municipal authorities", the 
words "the Commissioner or of any other municipal officer autho- 30 
rised in this behalf by the Commissioner" and for the words "the 
appropriate municipal authority", the words "the Commissioner" 
shall be substituted. 
91. In section 439 of the principal Act, for the word "Corpora- , 
tion", where it occurs for the first tim~. the words "Mayor-in-CouncU" 35.j ......... ~ 
shall be substituted. : 
, .... , 

33 
t8. In section 440 of the principal Act, for the words and brackets Amend-
«the Commissioner or the General Manager (Electricity) Or the me~t of 
General Manager (Transport) or of any municipal officer, a written ::~~lOn 
clocument signed by any such municipal authority or officer", the 
S words "the M~yor-in-Council or the Commissioner 01' any ather 
municjpal officer, a written document signed by the Commissioner 
c. _. such other municipal officer" shall be substitut~. 
99. In sub-section .(1) of section 442 of the principal Act, 'for the Amend-
words and brackets "the Commissioner or the General Manager me~t of 
10 (Electricity) or the General Manager (Transport) or of any munici- ::~.10n 
.. 1 officer, shall ~ deemed to be properly signed if it bears a 
tac:siniile of the signature of any such municipal authority or oftieer", 
~, ~ words "the !Commissioner or any other munieipal officer shall 
~~ ... tieemed to be properly signed if it bears a facsimile of' the 
~;IS sienature of the Commissioner or such other municipal officer" shall 
'.. ... ,sllbstituted. 
;t I 
_, . 100. In section 443 of the principal Act, for the words and brackets Amend-
,':' *by any of the following appropriate municipal authorities, that is me~t of 
..... to say, the Commissioner, the General Manager (Electricity) or the ::~~10n 
~~o (ieqeral Manager (Transport)", the words "by the Commissioner" 
. shall be substituted. 
r~ 
r. . 101. In sub-section (1) of section 444 of the principal Act, for the Amend-
words. and figures "or by a.ny of the municipal authorities specified me~.t of 
in section 44 or any municipal officer", the words "or by the Com- se~tlOn 
missioner or -any other muni~ipal officer" shall be substituted. 444. 
it •• rFor· section '4S0 of the prineipal Act, the follDwing section 'Substiiu~ 
sliall'be.substituted,'namely:- • tion of . 
new sec· 
tion for 
section 
450. 
"450. In any case not otherwise provided for in this Act or General 
in any bye-law made thereunder, the Commissioner, with the power to 
previous approval of the. Mayor-in-Council, may pay compensa- pay c~m-
. h t' d b f th . pensabon. hon to any person W 0 sus aIns amage y reason 0 e exercIse 
of any of the powers vested by this Act or any bye.!law in the 
Commissioner or any other municipal officer or employee.','. 
, 
103. In sub-section (1) o'f section 451 of the principal Act, for the Amend": 
words "as the appropriate municipal lluthority", the words "as the me~t of-
~missioner" shall be substituted. :~~10n 
. .... 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
453. 
Amend-
ment ot 
Metlon 
462. 
Substitu-
tion Of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 
467. 
Prosecu. 
tions. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
468. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
473. 
34 
104. In sub-section (1) of section 453 of the principal Act, the 
words "or any municipal authority" shall be omitted. 
105. In section 462 of the principal Act,-
(4) the words" , or any member, not being a councillor or 
an alderman, of the Delhi Electric Supply Committee, the Delhi 5 
Transport Committee, the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Dis-
posal Committee or of any other committee of the Corpora-
tion," shall b~ omitted; 
(b) for the words and brackets "the Commissioner, the 
General Manager (Electricity), the General Manager (Trans- 10 
port) or any municipal officer or other municipal employee", th~ 
words "the Commissioner or any ather municipal officer or em-
ployee" shall be substituted. 
106. For section 467 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely: - IS . . 
"467. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no court shall 
proceed with the trial of any offence made punishable by or 
under this Act except on the complaint of, or upon information 
received from the Commissioner or a person authorised by the 
Commissioner by a general or special ol'der in this behalf.". 20 
107. In sub-section (1) of section 468 of the principal Act,-
• (4) for the words and brackets "Any of the following 
appropriate municipal a~thorities, that is to say, the Coupnis-
sioner, the General Manager (Electricity), the General Manager 
(Transport) or any person authorised by any of them", the words 2, 
"The Commissioner or any person authorised by the Commis-
sioner" shall be substituted; 
(b) in the proviso, for the words and figures "or of any of 
the municipal authorities specified in section 44", the words 
"or of the Commissioner" shall be substituted. 30 '\ 
108. In section 473 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) The Commissioner or any other municipal oftlcer 
.~ 
.. 
or employee authorised by the Commissioner in this be- 3S 'I 

35 
half or any person who resides 'or owns property in Dellii 
may complain to a municipal magistrate of the existence 
of any nuisance."; 
(b) in sub-section (2), tor the words "any of the appro-
S priate municipal authorities", the words "the Commissioner" 
shall be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (5), the words "or any other appropriate 
municipal authority" shal1 be omitted. 
109. In section 475 of the principal Act, the words "or any other Amend-
10 appropriate municipal authority" shall be omitted. ment of 
section 
475. 
Amend-
ment of 
110. In section 476 of the principal Act,-
. (4) in sub-section (1)- section 
(i) in clause (e), for the words "or a municipal officer 476. 
or other municipal employee", the words "or any other 
municipal officer or employee" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (f), for the words "or any municipal 
officer or other municipal employee", the words "or any 
other municipal officer or employee" shall be substituted; 
1 .• 11 
(iii) in clause (g), for the words "by the Commis-
sioner", the words, brackets, letter and figures "by the 
Commissioner or any other municipal officer referred to in 
clause (a) of section 202" shall be substituted; 
(iv) in clause (i), the words "any municipal authority 
or" shall be omitted; 
(b) sub~section (2) shall be omitted; 
111.· Insedion 477 and in sub-section (1) of section 478 of the Amend. 
iprmc:tp:u Act, the words "or against any municipal authority" and Ment of 
municipal authority or" shall be omitted. sections 
477 and 
478. 
112. In sub-section (2) of section 480 of the principal Act, after the Amend-
word "Corporation", the words "or the Mayor-in-Council" shall be ment of 
inserted. section . 480. .~ 
. ; 113. In sub-section (J) of section 481 of the pr~cipal Act,- Amend£.' ,. 
(a) for the heading "B. Bye-laws relating to water ItLppZlI, ::tOf 
~inage and sewage disposal", the heading "B. Bye-law. relat- fBI. on 
ing to water supply and draiooge" shaLl be substituted; 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
482. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
483. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
485. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
486. 
Amend-
ment of 
sec.-tion 
487. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
489. 
(b) the headings' "C. Bye-laws relating to electnc suppey" 
and "D. Bye..laws relating to transport services" and the items 
enumerated thereunder shall be omitted. 
11' •. In sub-section (1) of sectio~ 482 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clal,lse (c), for the words "any municipal oftlcer", S 
the words "any other municipal officer" shall be substituted; 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted. 
115. In section'~ of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), for the word "it", the word "him" 
shall be substituted; 10 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the word "its", the word 'Ihis" 
and for the word "it", the word "he" shall be substituted. 
U'6; In clause (b) of section 485 0'£ the principal Act, the words 
"or any of'the mlinicipid authorities" shall be omitted. 
('. .'~ 
117. In section 486 of· the\ principal Act, the words "or any of the IS 
municipal authorities" and "any every municipal authority." shall be 
omitted. 
118. In· section 487 of the principal Act,--" 
(a)' in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) the words "or any municipal authority" shall be 20 
omitted'; 
(ii) for the word "it", wherever it occurs, the word. 
"he" shall be substituted; :;..~ 
it (iii) for the. word, "its", in both the places where 
occurs, the word "his" shall be substituted; :J5 
(iv) the. words "or the municipal authOrity' concerned", 
wherever they occur, shall be omitted; 
(b) sUh-:-sections (2) and (3) shall be omitted. 
119. In section 489 of the principal Act,-
\ 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word "it" and the words 30, 
"that Government", the words "the Administrator" shall be . 
substituted; 
(b) in subo-section (3), for the word "it", the 'word "he": ' 
shall be substituted. 

12(). In sub-section (I) of section 490 of the principal Act, for 
the words- 1I1f, in the opinion of the Central Government", the words 
"If the Central Government, on receipt of a report from the Admi-
nistrator or otherwise, is satisfied that" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
490. 
12L In section 493 of the principal Act, for the words "any muni- . Amend-
cipal authority", the words "the Mayor-in-Council" shall be sub- me~t of 
~~t~ ~oo . ~~ 
122. For section 495 of the principal Act, the following section Substitu-
shall be substituted, namely: - tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 
495. 
"495. No person shall obstruct or molest the Corporation or Prohibi_ 
the Mayor or any Deputy Mayor, councillor or alderman or the tion against 
. Commissioner or any person employed by the Corporation or ~.bstru;-
. h h h C .. th" Ion 0 any person WIt w om t e ommlSSlOner or any 0 er mumCl=- Mayor, 
pal offiCer refe~red to in clause (a) of section 202 has entered Deputy 
.);J.' into a· contract on behalf of the Corporation, in the performance Mayor, etc. 
of- their duty or of anything which they are empowered or re-
,: quired to do by virtue or in consequence of any provision of • 
.. this Act or of any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder.". 
123. In section 497 of the principal Act, for the words - "or any 
. pal authority or any municipal officer or other municipal em-
ployee", the words "or the Commissioner or any other municipal 
UIDl-":!r or employee" shall be substituted . 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
497. 
. 124. In sub-section (J) of section 499 of the principal Act, the Amend~ 
;·.~')mlJ:. and brackets "the Commissioner, the General Manager (Elec- ment of 
"the General Manager (Transport)" shall be omitted. ::~on 
Section 500 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered 
(1); thereof and-
as Amend-
ment of 
section 
. (a) in sUb:'section (1) as so re-numbered, the words and 500. 
DrlllCltets· "the Commissioner, the General Manager (Electricity), 
the General Manager (Transport)" shall be omitted; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following 
:~.lM'tf',;>Jub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence puni-
shable under section 161 or section 164 or section 165 of the 
: Indian Penal Code or under sub-section (2) or sub-section 
. (3A) of section 5 o'f the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, 
. alleged to have been committed by a c.ouncillor or an alder-

Amend-
ment of 
section 
501. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
502. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
504. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
507. 
man who is deemed to be a public servant under this 
section except with the previous san ;tion of the 
Administrator; and for the' court to take cognizance of any 
such offence, it shall not be necessary to obtain the sanction 
of the authority referred to in clause (c) of sulHection (1) S 
of section 6 of the said Prevention of Corruption Act, not-
withstanding anything contained in that clause." .. 
126. In section 501 of the principal Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 10 
substituted, namely:-
" ('1) As soon as may be after the 1st day of April in 
every year and not later than the 31st day of October of 
that year, the Corporation shall submit to the Administrator 
a detailed report of the municipal government of Delhi 
during the preceding year in such form as the Administrator 15 
may direct."; 
_1U 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "The Commissioner 
shall prepare such report", the words "The Mayor-in-Council 
shall cause such report to be prepared" shall be substituted. 
127. In section 502 of the principal Act, the words cior: any muni- 20 
eipal authority" shall be omitted. 
128. Sub-section (1) of section 504 of the principal Act shall be 
omitted. 
129. Section 507 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1)as so re-numbered and ~s 
before the existing Explanation to that section, the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the 
Corporation may, with the consent of a Gaon Sabha and with the 
approval of the Administrator, entrust, either conditionally or 30 
unconditionally to the Gaon Sabha, any of its functions under 
this Act. 
(3) Where, by virtue of sub-section (2), any function of the 
Corporation has been entrusted to the Gaon Sabha, there shall be 
paid by the Corporation to the Gaon Sabha such sum as may be 35 
agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by the·· 
Administrator, in respect of any extra costs of administration in-
curred by the GaOD Sabha in connection with the discharge of 
such function.". 

39 
130. Sections 509 and 510 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
131. In sub-section (2) of section 512 of the principal Act,-
Omis-
sion -of 
sections 
509 and 
510. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
(a) in clause (d), for the words "with or for the Corpora- 512. 
tion or the municipal authority concerned", the words "with or 
for and on- behalf of the Corporation" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (e), the words "by the Corporation or the 
municipal authority concerned" shall be omitted. 
132. Sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 513 of the principal Amend-ment of Act shall be omitted. section 
513. • 
~" 133. Section 515 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
1M; In' section 516 of the principal Act,-
Omission 
of section 
515. 
Amend-
ment of 
(a) in sub-section (2) - section , . ~~ 
• ek 
~t·::·'(. " ' , .. , 
(i) in the opening paragraph, the words, brackets, letter 
and figures "of this section or of clause (a) of sub-section (2) 
of section 286" shalL be omitted; . 
(ii) in clause (a), the words, brackets, letter and figures 
"of this section or under the Act , referred to in clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) of section 286' (' shall be omitted; 
(iii) in clause (b), for the words "with or for the Cor-
poration or the municipal authority concerned", the words 
"with or for and on behalf of the Corporation" shall be sub-
bi' stit1.lted; 
"n, • (iv) in clause (c), the words "by the Corporation or the 
municipal authority concerned" shall be omitted. 
, ,', (b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) 
of sub-section (2), all amounts treated as the capital pro-
T- ... · vided by the Central Government to the Delhi Road Trans-
• port Authority under sub-section (1) of section 31 of the 
Delhi Road Transport Authority Act, 1950 (prior to its re-
peaL) shall be deemed to be a loan advanced by the Central 
Government to the Corporation and shall be repayable by 

Amend-
ment of 
Tenth 
Schedule. 
Amend-
ment of 
Twelfth 
Schedule. 
Amend-
mat of 
section 
5 of Act 
6101·1957. 
40 
the Corporation to the Central Government on such terms 
and conditions as may be determined by that Government 
in this behalf.". 
135. In the Tenth Schedule to the principal Act, under the heading 
"Class V-Drugs, spices and perfumes", for the word "dextrosol", the 5 
word "dextrose" shall be substituted. 
136 .. In the Twelfth Schedule to the principal Act, against section 
251,-
(a) in the third column, for the existing entry, the entry 
"Rs. 2,000 or imprisonment which may extend to three months 10 
or both" shall be substituted; 
(b) in the fourth column, for the existing entry, the entry 
"Rs. 250" shall be sttbstituted. 
137. In sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Delhi Development Act, IS 
1957,-
(a) for clauses (d) and (e), the following clauses shall be 
substituted, namely:-
" (d) two representatives of the ¥lmicipal Corporation 
of Delhi to be elected by the councillors and aldermen from 20 
• among themselves; 
(e) two representatives of the Metropolitan Council of 
Delhi to be elected by the members of that Council from 
among themselves; 
(ee) three persons representing the Delhi IRoad Trans-
port Corporation established under lhe Road Transport Cor- 2S 
porations Act, 1950, the Delhi Electricity Board consti- 6. of 
tuted under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 194& . and the M of : 
Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Board constituted 
under the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Act, 1966, 30 
of whom-
(i) one shall be elected by the members of the afore-
said Delhi Road Transport Corporation from among 
themselves; 
(ii) one shall 
aforesaid Delhi 
themselves; and 
be elected by the members of the 
Electricity Board from among 35 
(iii) one shllI be elected by the members of the 
aforesaid Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 
Board from among themselves;". 

4· 
138. In section 20 of the Indian T:usts Act. tn3~, ill dau,;:, (tJ), Amend-
the words "by or on behalf of any municipal body", the words ment of 
or on behalf of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi or by or on section 
'he ,h. ,ali of any municipal body" shall be substituted. 20 of Act :; '} of 1382. 
139. If any difficulty arises in g~\'ing effect to the provIsIOns of Power to 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, as occasion requires. remove 
anything which appears to it to be necessary for the purposE> of difficulties. 
the difficulty: 
1.I",''nYI,rttlrt that no such order shall be made after the expiration of 
'.' years from the commencement of this Act, 
(1) All rules made by the Central Government under the Savings. 
I Act and in force immediately before the commencement of 
Act shall be deemed to have been made by the Administrator 
'the principal Act and shall continue in force until altered, 
or amended by the Administrator. 
'. A1l regulations made by the Mlmicipal Corporation o'f Delhi 
to any matter specified in section 98 of the principal 
i~ force jmmediately before the commencement of this Act 
;~ deemed to have been made by the Major-in-Council under 
~'IU\A section and shall continue in force until altered. repealed. or 
.-n........ by the Mayor-in-Council. 
LS--ti. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On the 18th August, 1965, in reply to a starred question in the 
Lok Sabha, the important changes contemplated in the organisational 
set up of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi to enable that body to 
function more efficiently were indicated by the Government. The 
Bill seeks to give effect to these changes . 
. 2. The salient features of the Bill are as under:-
,(i) Under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, the 
executive power for the purpose of carrying out the provisions 
of the Act vests in the Commissioner but in a number of cases, 
he can act only with the prevIous sanction or approval of the 
Standing ~ommittee or the Corporation. The scheme embodied 
in the Bill provides for the executive functions being vested in 
the Mayor-in-Council consisting of the Mayor who win be elected 
by the members of the Corporation and two Deputy Mayors who 
will be appointed by the Administrator on the advice of the 
Mayor. The Commissioner will be the principal executive officer 
of the Corporation and will exercise the powers and perform 
the duties conferred or imposed on him under the Act subject 
to the supervision and control of the Mayor-in-Council. In effect, 
therefore, the scheme embodied in the Bill seeks to vest in the 
representatives of the people a full measure of control over 
execution of the policies laid down by the Corporation and day 
to day civic administration. Accordingly, the provisions relating 
to the Standing Committee in the Act are proposed to be omitted 
and th~ powers of that Committee are proposed to be vested in 
the Mayor-in-Council. Certain functions which are essentially 
of executive nature, at prel)ent vested in the Corporation, will 
also be exercised by the Mayor-in-Council. 
(ii) The powers exercisable under the Act by the Central 
Government in relation to the Corporation are, to a large extent, 
proposed to be entrusted to the Administrator who will exercise 
these powers with the assistance and advice of his Executive 
Council. 
(iii) Separat.~ Bills are being introduced in Parliament for 
constituting for the Union territory of Delhi a Road Transport 
Corporation, an Electricity Board and a Water Supply and Sewage 
Disposal Board for discharging the functions relating to trans-
42 

~ 
43 
port, bulk supply of electricity and water and sewage disposal. 
As a consequence of this, it is proposed to transfer the functions 
relating to transport, bulk supply of electricity and water and 
sewage disposal from the Corporation and to abolish the various. 
municipal authorities connected with these functions. 
(iv) The Bill provides for the setting up of Zonal Committees 
consisting of members elected to the Corporation from the zones 
concerned which will be in charge of such items of work within 
their zones ~s the Corporation- may entrust to them. The Bill also 
provides for the appointment by the Mayor-in-Council of Advisory 
Committees consisting of members of the Corporation elected 
in accordance with the system of proportional representation by 
means of the single transferable vote. 
(v) The Bill seeks to amend section 20 of the Indian Trusts 
Act, 1882, so as to confer the status of "trustee securities" on the 
debentures issued by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. The 
Bill also seeks to amend the Delhi Development Act, 1957, so 
as to provide for representation on the Advisory Council of the 
Delhi Development Authority to the Metropolitan Council of 
Delhi and the proposed Delhi Road Transport Corporation, Delhi 
Electricity Board and Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 
Board. 
3. The more important provisions of the Bill are ~urther explained 
r:1n the Notes on Clauses. 
G. L. NANDA. 

NOles on Clauses 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to confer on the Administrator the 
pav/ers and functions in respect of a number of matters which are At 
present exercised in relation to the Corporation by the Central 
Government. It also provides for the Mayor-in-CouncH being vested 
with the powers and functions at present exercised or discharged 
by the Standing Committee. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides for an increase in the numher of 
aldermen from six to ten. 
Clause 6.-This clause provides that a sentence of imprisonment 
for an offence involving moral turpitude punishable with imprison-
ment for a term exceeding six months shall also be a disqualification 
for being chosen as, and for being, a councillor or an alderman. 
Clause 7.-This clause provides that the Director of Municipal 
Elections shall be in charge of municipal elections instead of the 
Commissioner because the latter will no longer be a municipal autho-
rity but will be functioning under the supervision and control of th'" 
Mayor-in-Council. 
Clause 9.-This clause seeks to incorporate in section 22 of the 
principal Act, changes similar to those incorporated in section ] 23 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
Clause 10.--This clause seeks to bring section 25 of the principal 
Act in line with section 126 (1) of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1951. 
Clause 13.-This clause seeks to amplify section 34 of the principal 
Act so as to provide also 'for the grant of honoraria or fees to the 
members of the Corporation and for the installation of telephones. 
fr,'e of charge, at their residences. 
CiaUBe 14.-This clause makes the following provisions in respc('~ 
of the Mayor:-
(a) The Mayor shall be elected by the members of the 
Corporation after each general election and so often as the office 
of MCiyor becomes \'aeant (new section 35). 
44 

45 
(b) Circumstances in which the Mayor shall cease to hold 
office (new section 36). 
(L) Procedure for removal of Mayor' (new sections 37 and 
38). 
(d) Arrangements for discharge of functions of the Mayor 
when the office of Mayor becomes vacant or when the Mayor is 
absent (new section 39). 
Clause 16.- Tl]is clause provides for the-
(a) vesting of executive powers of the Corporation in the 
Mayor-in-Council (new section 44); 
(b) constitution of Mayor-in-Council and appointment of 
Deputy Mayors by the Administrator on the advice of the Mayor 
(new section 45); 
(c) circumstances in which a Deputy Mayor shall cease to 
hold ')ffice (new section 46); 
(d) salaries and allowances payable to the Mayor and Deputy 
Mayors (new section 49); 
(e) framing of rules for the conduct of business of the 
Mayor-in-Council (new section 50); 
(f) setting up of Zonal Committees, not exceeding ten in 
number, consisting of members of the Corporation elected from 
the wards within the zone concerned (new section 51); and 
(g) setting up of Advisory Committees in accordance with 
th(! system of proportional representation and special and ad hoc 
Committees of the Corporation and matters connected therewith 
(new sections 52 to 57). 
\' Clause 20.-This clause provides that the interprellations will be 
d , 
':18.nswered by the Mayor or a Deputy Mayor. 
r 
~; Clause 24.-Provision has been made in this clause to the effect 
Ii. that the Commissioner will be appointed by the Mayor-in-Council 
r- with the approval 'of' the Administrator and that the salaries and 
If' allowances and facilit ies that may be given to the Commissioner will 
" ' be fixed by the Administrator. Thp clause also provides for other 
~1 matters rf'lating to the office of the Commissioner including hj:: func-
I" 
:'" t., j\~ns and new section 88F lays down that the Commissioner shall 
fUnction subject to the supervision and control or the Mayor-in-
. Council. 
" 

Clause 25.-This clause seeks to empower the Mayor-in-Council to 
make appointments of certain senior municipal officers. At present 
this power vests in the Corporation. 
Clause 27.-This clause seeks to vest in the Mayor-in-Coun('il the 
power of making appointments to posts carrying a minimum monthly 
salary (exclusive of allowances) of Rs. 400 or more. At present the 
power is exercisable by the Corporation in respect of the general 
wing. 
. 
CLause 29.-This clause provides for the constitution of a Municipal 
Service Commission c,onsisting of three members-one nominated hy 
th::? Central Government, one by the Administrator and the other 
by the Mayore-in-Council. This Commission will be concerned with 
recruitment to posts carrying a maximum monthly salary of Rs. 110 
or more (exclusive of allowances) but less than Rs. 1500 (exclusive 
of allowances) and will also be consulted regarding disciplinary 
matters affecting persons serving under the Corporation. Suitable 
adjustments have also been made in the proyisions relating to con-
sultation with the Union Public Service Commission as that Com-
mission will be concerned only with recruitment to posts carryin~ 
a maximum salary of Rs. 1500 or more (exclusive of allowances). 
CLause 31.-This clause seeks to confer on the Mayor-in-Council 
the power of making regulations relating to conditions of service of 
municipal employees and recruitment to municipal posts. At present 
this power is exercisable by the CorpoNtion. 
Clauses 32 to 38.-At present the Municipal Fund is kept in four 
accounts, namely, the Electricity Supply Account, the Transport 
Account, the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Account and the 
General Account. With the abolition of separate municipal authori-
ties dealing with the undertakings, it is no longer necessary to maih-
tain the separate accounts and there will only be a -single account 
for the Municipal Fund. The amendments proposed in these clauses 
are mainly consequential to this change. 
Clauses 39 to 41.-These clauses make certain consequential 
changes in the provisions relating to budget estimates of the Corpl>-
ration. 
CLause 42.-This clause seeks to provide that the Corporation 
shall not levy any tax on the sale or supply of electricity to the New 
Delhi MuniCipal Committee or the Military Engineer Services, Delhi 
Cantonment or the Delhi Electricity Board. 

47 
Clause 44.-The amendment proposed in this clause is only conse-
quential to the repeal of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, ] 952 
by the Delhi Rent Control Act. 1958. 
Clause 48.-This clause seeks to make it clear that once a non, 
obligatory municipal tax has come into force in accordance with the 
law, its continuance during subsequent years shall be regulated by 
the same provisions as are applicable to the continuance of obligatory 
taxes; 
CZause 50.-This clause seeks to confer on the Mayor-in-Council 
the functions of i'nvesting in public securities the money paid in the 
sinking funds, transfer of moneys from the sinking funds and sub-
mitting annual statement to the Corporation regarding such funds. 
At present these functions are performed by the Commissioner. 
Clau.c:e 52.-Under section 198 of the principal Act, the Com-
~, missioner has to acquire immovable properties which the Corpora-
tion may decide to acquire. The clause seeks to 'entrust this func-
~~. tion to the Mayor-in-Council. 
f.~ 
f mi~i:l1";: ~:~-~:::;e S~ti;;O!~i:: :!~o:;=;iPt~ ::.t. c~~or;~:~ 
~ within certain limits beyond which he has to obtain the sanction of 
the Standing Committee or the Corporation. This clause seeks to 
empower the Mayor-in-Council to exercise full powers in the matter 
~;: ' of disposal of properties belonging to the Corporation and also pro-
~i, vides for certain limited powers being entrusted to officers of the 
Corporation in this behalf. Provision has also been made for sub-
mittmg to the Corporation reports regarding the disposal of proper-
ties effected by the Mayor-in-Council and for similar reports being 
• !rUbrnitted to the Mayor-in-Council when the properties are disposed 
by the municipal officers empowered in that behalf. 
Clause 55.-Section 202 of the principal Act empowers the Com-
.1Bi()DE~r to enter into contracts on behalf of the Corporation subject 
apprQval of the Standing Committee or the Corporation being 
obtained in regard to contracts involving expenditure beyrmd certain 
1t;'1ts. This clause seeks to provide for the contracts being exeouted 
:\~:.;' '" the Commissioner or other municipal officers authorised by the 
,... .. ,14ayor-in-Council subject to approval of the Mayor-in-Council being 
obtained-
(a) to contracts other than those for acquisition of immov-
able property and involving expenditure exceeding Rs. 10,000 or 
luch higher amount as the Mayor-in-Council may fix; and 

48 
(b) to contracts for acquisition of immovable property 
where the price exceeds Rs. 5,000. 
Provision has also been made for reports being submitted by the 
municipal officers to the Mayor-in-Council in respect of contracts 
made without such approval where the expenditure involved is 
Rs. 2,000 or more. 
Clause 63.-This clause seeks to omit certain provisions of the 
principal Act which will become unnecessary with the setting up 
of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Board for Delhi. 
, 
Clauses 65 to 71.-These clauses make amendments consequential 
to the abolition of Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee 
and the taking away from the Corporation the functio!lS relating to 
bulk suppl~' of water and disposal of sewage. 
Clause 72.-This clause seeks to om~t the provisions of Chapters 
XIII and XIV of the principal Act relating to electricity supply 
and transport services. The Corporation will hereafter be con-
cerned with the distribution of electricity at a voltage below 33 K.V. 
Cl(tu~es 73 to 80 and 82.-These clauses seek to vest in the Mayor-
in-Council certain important functions under Chapter XV of the 
principal Act relating to streets which are at present exercisable 
by the Commissioner and in certain cases provide for the Com-
miss;o11f~r acting with the approval of the Mayor-in-Council. 
Clanse 84.-This clause seeks to empower the Mayor-in-Council 
to take special measures in the event of outbreak or threatened 
outbreak of dangerous diseases. This power is now exerciseable by 
the Commissioner. 
Cla·u.~€s 85 to 9O~-Th'ese clauses seek to vest in the Mayor-in-
Council certain powers at present exercisable by the Commissioner 
under Chapter XX (Markets, Slaughter Houses, Trades and Occupa-
tions) and Chapter XXI (Improvement) of the principal Act. 
Cl;:l'tt.~e 125.- This clause provides that no court shall take cogni-
.~ance of ('ertai~ offenc'es punishable under the Indian Penal Code 
or th~ Prevention Corruption Act, 1947. alle~ed to have been com-
mitted b:\' a councillor or an alderman except with the prevIous 
sanction of the Administrator and that the sanction of the authority 
['eft'fred to in section 6 (1) (c) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 
1"47 113mcly. the authority competent to remove th", puhlic ~ervant 
fr';111 his office will not be necessary for the purpose. 

4~ 
C14me \26.-This clause seeks to lay down the specific date by 
which the Corporation has to submit its annual reports. At present 
this date is prescribed by executive orders issued under section 501 
of the principal Act. 
Clorue· 1~.-Thi~ clause seeks to enable the Corporation to en-
trust any of its functions in the rural areas to any Gaon Sabha p.nd 
• to provide for necessary funds to such Gaon Sabha for discharging 
such functions. 
Clause 136.-' This clause provides for an enhancement of penalty 
for taking connection from any municipal water work or drain with-
out permission. 
,... Clause 137.-This clause seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 
5 of the Delhi Developmept Act, 1957, to provide for representation 
., on the Advisory Council of the Delhi Development Authority, to the 
Metropolitan Council of Delhi and the three statutory bodies for 
... transport,· electricity and water supply and sewage-dfsposal in Delhi. 
~'~:~" I ; 
r ~.. Clause 138.- This clause seeks to amend section 2() of the Indian 
~. 'Prust! Act; 1882, so. as to confer the status of "trustee securities" on 
: the debentures issued by the Municipal Corporatron of. Delhi. 
Other clauses of the Bill seek to make amendments of either 
r-~consequentia] or minor nature. 
~~ -

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 13, 16, 24 and 29 of the Bill contain inter alia provi~ions 
authorising the Administrator to make ru]('s with respect to the 
folIowing:-
(a) the rates at which honoraria or fees and allowances to 
be paid to the councillors and aldermen (clause 13); 
(b) 'the grant of facilities to the Mayor, the manner in 
,.,hfch orders and other instruments made and executed jn the 
name of the Corporation shan be authenticated, the transaction 
of business 'of the Mayor-in-Council and the allocation among 
the Mayor and the Deputy Mayors of the said business (clause 
16) ; 
(e) the leave an~ leave allowances, superannuation or re-
tirement, gratuity or pension and provident fund contrjbution 
payable in respect of the Commissioner who is not in Govern-
ment service (clause 24); 
(d) the term of office of, the salaries and allowancef; pay-
able to and other conditions of service of the chairman and mem-
bers of the Municipal Service Commission, the manner in which 
the Commission will perform its duties and the number of mem-
bers of staff of the Commission and their salaries and allQwances 
and other conditions of service (clause 29), 
2. Clauses 16, 22, 31, 39 and 56 empower the Corporation and the 
Mayor-in-Council to make regulations in respect of the following:-
(a) the functions to be discharged bv the Zonal Committees 
(Clause 16); 
" (b) the procedure and conduct of business at meetings of 
Zonal Committees and other committees except the Advisory 
Committees (clause 22); 
(c) the conditions of service of certain employees of the 
Corporation (clause 31); 
(d) the form in which the budget estimate has to be pre-
pared, the manner in whiCh it is to be presented and rldopted and 
the matters to be provided for in the budget estimate (clause 
39) ; 
(e) the manner and the form in which the account of re-
ceipts and expenditure of the Corporation has to be kept (c]au~e 
56). 
3. The above are matters of administrative detail and the dele-
gation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION Acr, 195'1 
(66 OF 1957) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• 
• 
•• • • • 
(9) "dangerous disease" means--
• • • • 
(b ) any other epidemic, endemic or infectious disease 
which the Commissioner may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare to 'be a dangerous disease for the purposes 
of this Act; 
• • • • 
(12) "Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking" means all under-
takings vested in or acquired and organised, constructed, main-
tained, extended, managed or conducted by the Corporation for 
the purposes. of generating or acquiring supplies of electricity 
and providing supplies (including bulk supplies) of electricity 
for licensees and persons other than licensees and includes all 
properties and rights vested in the Corporation for the purposes of 
such undertakings; 
(13) "Delhi Transport Undertaking" means all undertak-
ings vested in or acquired and organised, constructed, maintained, 
extended, managed or conducted by the Corporation for the 
l~. . purposes of providing road transport rervices and any ancillary 
~~I' . service knd includes all properties and rights vested in the 
~: Corporation for the purposes of such undertakings; 
l~·l:·,. (14) "Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Undertak-
~ ,nt. hig" mean~, all undertakings vested in or acquired and organised, 
"G. , . constructed, maintained, extended, managed or conducted by the 
'.' Corporation for the purposes of providing filtered and unfiltered 
r~ water supply and for the purposes of collection, treatment and 
disposal of sewage and includes all properties and rights vested 
.' in the Corporation fol the purposes of such undertakings; 
t .... L 
• • • • • 
(19) "General Manager (Electricity)" means the Genera! 
Manager of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking; 
51 
Defini-
tions. 

Establish-
mentol 
the Cor-
poration. 
Termor 
omceof 
council_ 
lors and 
. ,aldermen. 
DfsqUaH-
ficatlolll 
rormem_ 
bershlp Of 
Corpor.. 
nOlL 
.~ 
S2 
(20) "General Man;'ager (Transport)" means the Generai 
Manager of the Delhi Trans.port Undertaking; 
'" '" • • • 
(28) "municipal authority" means any of the municipal 
authorities specified in section 44. 
CHAPTER II 
THE CORPORATION 
Constitution of the C011>oration 
.3. (1) '" '" '" • • 
(6) Upon the completion of each census after the establishment 
of the Corporation, the number of councillors shall be on the basis 
of the population of Delhi as ascertained at that ceIlE.us and shall be 
detennined by the Central Government by notification in the Oftlcial 
Gazette on a scale of one councillor for not more than twenty 
thousand of the pcpulation and the number of councillors to be 
reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes shall, as nearly 
as may be. bear the same ratio to the total number of councillors 
as the population of the Scheduled Castes bears to the total population 
of Delhi: 
Provided that the total number of councillors shall in no case 
be more than one hundred or less than eighty: 
Provided further that the determination of numbers as aforesaid 
shall not affect the then composition of the Corporation until the 
expiry of the term of office of the councillor~. then holding office. 
(7) The total number of aldermen shall always be six. 
4. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of 
office of a councillor Of: an alderman shall be four years and shall 
commence on the date of publication of the result of. his election 
under section 14: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, extend for reasons, to be specified in the notification, 
the term of office of all the councillors and aldermen by such 
period as it thinks fit, so, however, that the total period so extended 
shall never exceed one year. 
• • • • • 
9. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for 
being, a councillor, on an alderaman-
• • • • • • 

S3 
(e) if he has been E.entenced on conviction by a criminal 
court to imprisonment for any of the offences referred to in 
clause (d) or to imprisonme:1t for a term of not less than two 
years for any other offence unless in each case a period of five 
years has elapsed since the date of the conviction or the disquali-
fication has been removed either retrospectively or prospectively 
by the Central dovernment; . 
• • * • • 
(j) if he is ,retained or employed in any proft:!ssional capacity 
either personally or in the name of a firm of which he is a partner 
or with which he is engaged in a professional capacity, in con-
nection with any cau~.e or proceedi.ng in which the: Corporation 
or any of the municipal authorities is interested or concerned; 
• • • • 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),-
• • • • • 
(b) a person shall not be deemed to have incurred any dis-
qualification under clause (f) or clause (g) of that sub-section 
by rearon only of his receiving-
• • • • 
(ii) any allowance or facility for serving as the Mayor 
or Deputy Mayor or as a councillor or an alderman; or 
(iii) any fee for attendance at meetings of the Delhi 
Electric Supply Committee or the Delhi Transport Commit-
tee or the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Com-
mittee or any other committee of the Corporation; 
(c) a person shall not be deemed to have any in~erest in a 
cOntract or work such as is referred to in claure (i) of that sub-
WiIE~glOll iby reason only of his having a share or interest in-
• • • • 
(iv) the sale to the Corporation or to any municipal 
., authority or any officer or other employee of the COl~poration 
On behalf of the Corporation, of any article in which he 
regularly trades or the purchase from the Corporation or 
from any such authority, officer or other employee on behalf 
of the Corporation, of any article of a value in either case 
not exceeding five thousand rupees in the aggregate in any 
year during the period of the contract or worlt; or 
• • • • 
(vi) any agreement or contract with the Corporation 
or any municipal authority for taking water or electricity 
t f). • 

General 
elections 
of co un-
cillors. 
Filling of 
casual 
vacancies 
in council_ 
lorship. 
Election 
of alder-
men. 
PUblication 
of results of 
Elections. 
Corrupt 
practices. 
"It-~ 
'.1 54 
or for hiring buses or any (lther thing which the Corporation 
may generally supply. 
. . .. . . 
11. (1) • • • • • • 
(3) For the aforesaid purposes the Commissioner shall, by one 
or more notifications published in the Official Gazette, call upon all 
the wards to elect councillors. in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules and orders made thereunder before such date 
or dates as may be specified in the notification or notifications: 
Provided that where in any ward a seat has been reserved for 
the Scheduled Castes~ such notification or notifications shall specify 
that the person to fill that seat shall belong to one of the said castes. 
12. (1) When a casual vacancy occurs in the office of a CouncillOl 
the Commissioner shall, as ~'oon as may be after the occurrence of 
such vacancy and subject to the proviSions of sub-section (2), by 8 
notification in the Official Gazette, call upon the ward concerned tc 
elect a person for the purpose of fill!ng the vacancy in accordanCE-
with the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made there-
under before such date as may be specified in the notification: 
Provided that no election shall be held to fill a casual vacancy 
occurring within four months prior to the holding of a general 
election under section 11 . 
• • • • 
13. (1) The six aldermen referred to in sub-section (7) of sec-
lion 3 shall be elected at a meeting of the councillor:: immediately 
after the publication of the results of the general election of coun-
cillors under section 14. 
14. The names of all persons elected as councillors or alderman 
shall, as soon as may be, after such election, be published by the 
Commissioner in the Official Gazette: 
• • • • • • 
Provided that the names of all the councillors elected at a 
general election shall be so published as far as possible simultaneous-
ly and the names of all the aldermen elected at a meeting of the 
councillors after such general flection shall also be so published as 
far as possible simultaneously . 
• • • * • 
Corrupt practices and elect01'al offences 
22. The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the 
purposes of this Act:-
• • * • • 
(3) The systematic appeal by a candidate or his agent or 
by any other person, to vote or refrain from voting on grounds 
of caste, race, community or religion or the use of or appeal to, 
religious symbols or, the use of or appeal to, national symbols 
• 

55 
such as the national flag or the national emblem, ·for the fur-
therance of the prospects of that candidate's election. 
(4) The publ;cation by a candidate or his agent or by any 
other person of any statement of fact which is false, and which 
he either believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in 
relation to the personal character or conduct of any candidate. 
or in relation to the candidature, Or withdrawal from contest 
of any can,didate being a statement reasonably calculated to 
prejudice the prospects of that candidate's election. 
(5) The hiring or procuring whether on payment or other-
wise of any vehicle or vessel by a candidate or his agent or by 
any other person for the conveyance of any elector (other than 
the candidate himself, and the members of his family or his 
. agent) to or from any polling station provided in accordance 
. with the rules made under this Act: 
Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector 
or by several electors at their joint costs for the purpose of 
"conveying him or them to or from any such polling station shall 
be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause if the 
.b"" 'Vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel not propelled by 
. mechanical power: 
Provided further that the use of any public transport 
vehicle or vessel or anv tram car or railway carriage by an 
,.,elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or coming 
:from any such polling station shall not be deemed to be a 
practice under this clause. 
Expla.nation.-In this clause the expression "vehicle" 
means any vehicle used or capable of being used for the pur-
of road transport whether propelled by mechanical power 
~therwise and whether used for drawing other vehicles or 
• • • • • • • • ProhibI-
tion Of 
o person shaH convene, hold or attend any public meeting canvassing 
any ward on the date or dates on which a poll is taken for an in or near 
in that ward. polling 
• • • • 
station 
and of 
publ1c 
meeting 
on elec-
tion day. 
'(1) • • • • • Other OffeD-
~o court shall take cognizance of any offence under sec- ces 8~ 
under section 28, or under clau~e (a) of sub-section (2) of ~~lfiJortte!l re . 
unless there is a complaint made 'by order of, or under 
fro~ the Commissioner. 

Oath or 
affirma-
tIon by 
councillor~ 
and alder-
men. 
Vacation 
of seats. 
Payment 
of a'low-
ances to 
council_ 
lors and 
aldermen. 
Annual 
ele~tion 
of Mayor 
and 
Deputy 
Mayor. 
Term or 
office or 
the Mayur 
and 
Deputy 
Mayor and 
facilities 
and pn-
dleges 
of the 
Mayur. 
56 
Councillors and aldermen 
32. (1) Every councillor and every alderman shall, before taking 
his seat, make and sub::-cribe at a meeting of the Corporation an oath 
or affirmation according to the following form, namely:-
"I, A.B., having been elected a councillor of the Municipal 
an alderman 
C t· f D lh' do swear in the name of God orpora IOn 0 e 1 _____ -:-_-:-_=- __ _ 
sclemnly affirm 
that I will 
bear tru~ faith and aIlrg;ance to the Constitution of India as by 
law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon 
which I am about to enter.". 
* '" • • 
33. (1) If a councillor or an alderman-
• • • • • 
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to 
the Mayor and delivered to the Commissioner, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
* • '" • • 
(3) If any question arises as to whether a councillor or an alder-
man has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 
section 9, the Commissioner shall refer the question to the district 
judge of Delhi for his decision and the decision of the district judge 
shall be final. 
34. The councillors and aldermen shall be entitled to receive 
allowances for attendance at meetings of the Corporation and of any 
of its committees at such rate as may be determined by rules made 
in this behalf~ 
Mayor and Deputy Mayor 
35. (1) The Corporation shall at its first meeting in each year 
elect one of its members to be the Mayor and another member to be 
the De,uty Mayor of the Corporation. 
(2) On the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Mayor 
or the Deputy Mayor, the Corporation shall within one month of 
the occurrence of such vacancy elect one of its members as Mayor 
or Deputy Mayor, as the case may be. 
36. (1) The Mayor or the Deputy Mayor shall hold office from the 
time of his election until the election of his successor in office, unless 
in the meantime he resigns his office as Mayor or Deputy Mayor or 
his term of office as a member of the Corporation terminates in any 
manner or unless in the case of the Deputy Mayor he is elected as 
Mayor. 
(2) The Mayor or the Deputy Mayor may be given such facilities 
in respect of residential accommodation, conveyance and the like IS 
may be determined In each case bv rules made in this behalf. . . 

57 
(3) The Mayor shall have full access to all the records of the 
Corporation and may obtain reports-
(a) from the Commis~ioner on any matter connected with 
. the municipal government of Delhi; 
(b) from the General Manager (Electricity) and the 'Gene-
ral Manager (Transport) on any matter connected respectively 
with the administration of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertak-
ing and the administration of the Delhi Transport Undertaking. 
37. (1) When the office of the Mayor is vacant, the Deputy Mayor 
shall act as Mayor until a new Mayor is elected. 
(2) When the Mayor is absent from his duty on account of iJl?"tot:;s 
or any other cause, the powers, duties and functions of the Mayor 
shall be exercised and performed by the geputy Mayor. 
Discharge 
of func_ 
tions of 
the Mayor 
by the 
Deputy 
Mayor. 
tt (3) The Mayor may by order in writing delegate any of his pow-
f~~' duties and functions to the Deputy Mayor. 
fJ~~' 38. (1) The Mayor may, by writing under his. hand addressed .to Resigna_ 
~
<.: .. ~ Deputy Mayor and delivered to the Municipal Secretary, resign tion of '. ffi . - Mayor and 
." . ~ 0 ceo Deputy 
~.~ (2) The Deputy Mayor may, by writing under his hand addressed MaJor. 
~. the Mayor and delivered to the Municipal Secretary, resign his 
'ffice. .. .' . 
. q, (3) A reslgnabon under sub-sechon (1) or sub-secbon(2} shall 
~f.8ke effect from the date on which it is delivered . 
.. ~(:" Committees of the Corporation 
(1) In addition to the Standing Committee, the Delhi Electric 
Committee, the Delhi Transport Committee and. the Delhi 
Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee refetTed to in section 
.. ' there shall be a Rural Areas Committee and an EducatiOD Com-
of the Corporation. 
.The Rural Areas Committee shall consist of all the councillors 
from the wards situated within the rural areas. 
It sh~ll be the duty of the Rural Areas Committee-
(a) to make recommendations to the Corporation-
(i) in relation to the functions of the Corporation which 
may be discharged within ·the rural areas and questions of 
policy and schemes relating to the development of such areas; 
(ii) in relation to taxes which the Corporation proposes 
, to levy in the rural areas; and 
(iii) generally in relation to the expenditure that may 
.. 'be incurred by the Corporation for tbe municipal govern-
ment in those areas; 
Rural 
Areas 
Commit-
tee and 
Education 
Commit-
tee. 

Special 
and ad hoe 
commit-
tees and 
ward com· 
mittees, 
etc. 
58 
(b) to review the progress of work of the Corporation in 
the rural areas; 
(c) to brin~ to the notice of the appropriate municipal 
authoriti~s deficiencies in the rural areas and make proposals to 
those authorities for the removal of such ~ deficiencies; 
(d) to discharge such other functions in relation to the rural 
areas as may be assigned to it by resolution made by the Cor-
poration or by regulations ~13de under this Act. 
(4) The Corporation or an~· of the municipal authorities specified 
in section 44 shall not take any action, in relation to any of the 
matters specified in sub-clauses (i). (ii) and (iii) of clause (rr) of 
sub-section (3) except in consultation with the Rural Areas Com-
mittee. 
(5) The Education Comm;ttee shall consist of seven members of 
whom such number not exceeding three as may be determined by 
the Corporation, shall be nominated by the Corporation from amon~ 
experts in education who are not members of the Corporation ann 
the ~est shan be elected by the members of the Corporation from 
among themselves at the first meetin.~ of the Corporation after f'''''h 
general election or as soon as possible at any other meeting subse-
quent thereto. 
(6) The Education Committee shall exercise and perform such 
powers, duties and functions in relation to education in Delhi as 
m:ly be determined by regulations made in this behalf. 
(7) The Rural ~reas Committee as well as the Education Com-
mittee shall a~ its first meeting in each year elect one of its mem-
bers to be the Chairman and another member to be the Deputv 
Chairman. ' .. 
40. (1) The Corporation may constitute as many special and nn 
hoc committees as it thinks fit for the exercise of any power or dis-
charge of any function which the Corporation may by resolution 
delegate to them or for inquiring into, reporting or Cldvising lInon 
any matter which the Corporation may refer to them. 
(2) Any such rommittC'P <;h(ll1 consist of members of the Cor-
poration only: 
Provided that an ad hoc committee may with the sanction of the 
Corporation co-opt not more than three persons who are not mem-
bers of the Corporation but who in the opinion of the Corporation 
possess spf'cial qualifications for servil)g on such committee. 

(3) The Corporation may constitute a ward committee for each 
ward ur for each gruup uf w:ll'<.is comprislng so many wards as the 
Corpuration may determine. 
(4) Each ward committee snall consist ,-,f--
(a) all the councillors elected from the ward or, as the cast: 
may be, from the group of wards; and 
(b) such n1}mber of other per-sons not exceeding three as 
may be de.ermined by the Corporation l'lcl'ied by the councillors 
referred to in clause (a) trom among persons registered in the 
electoral roll lor the time being in force for the ward or, as the 
case may be, registered in the electoral rolls for the time being 
in force for the wards comprised in the group. 
(5) A ward committee shall perform such functions in relation 
to the ward or, as the case may be, the group of wards as the Cor-
poration may require it to perform or as may be determined by 
regulations made in this behalf, 
(6) Each committee constituted under this section shall elect one 
of its members as the Chairman and another member as the Vice-
Chairman. I' • 
"' . ~ " i 
(7) Any matter relating to each of the committees constituted : <, 
under section 39 or this section, not expressly provided in thls Act 
may be provided by regulations made in this behalf. 
CHAPTER III 
(. FUNCTIONS OF' THE CORPORATION 
~, . • • • • , .. 
42 It shall be incumbent on the Corporation to make adequate ObI' t ' 19a ory l'OVISIOn by any means or measures which it may lawfully use or .. functions 
, for each of the following matters, namely: - of the 
- • . corpont-
•• •• tion. 
(d) the construction or purchase, maintenance, extension, 
management and conduct of-
(i) any undertaking for the generation or supply and 
distribution of electricity to the public, 
(ii) any undertaking for providing road transport ser-
vices by mechanically propelled vehicles, and 
(iii) any undertaking for providing a suftlcient supply 
of pure and wholesome water; . 
• • • • 

GO 
CHAPTER IY 
MUNICIPAL AUTHORiTIES L';DER ~nE CORPORATION 
Municipal (I utllOr;.; ~es 
Enumera. 
tionoi 
municipal 
autho-
rities. 
44. For the efficient perf'orr.1ance of ::s functions, there shall be 
the following municipal authorities under :he Corporation, namely:-
(a) the Standing Com:nittee; 
Const~tu­
tion of the 
Standing 
Commit_ 
tee. 
(b) the Delhi Electric Supply L0mmittee; 
(c) the Delhi Transport Comn-.l::ce; • 
(d) the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Com-
mittee; 
(e) the Commissioner; 
(f> the General Manager (Electricity); and 
(g) the General Manager (Tralliport). 
The Standing Committee 
45. (1) The Standing Committee shaH consist of fourteen mem-
bers who shall be elected by the councillors and aldermen from 
among themselves at the first meeting of the Corporation after each 
general 'election or as soon as possible at any other meeting subse-
quent thereto. 
(2) On and from the da le of such election the Standing Com-
mittee shall be deemed to have been cJlliitituted. 
~3) One-half of the members of the Standing Committee shall 
retire on the expiration of one year from the date of its constitu-
tion and for that purpose they shall be selected by lot before the said 
expiration in such manner as the Chainnan of the Standing Com-
mittee may determine. 
(4) During each succeeding year the members who have l:een 
longest in office shall retire therefrom: 
Provided_ that in the case of a memxr who has been re-p}cctcd 
the term of his office shall for the purpose of this sub-section b<' 
computed from the date of his re-e}ecti,l~. 
(5) The Corporation shall in an or.:i:nary meeting held before 
the occurrence of the vacancies caused by the retirement of the 
members under sub-section (3) or sub-::.e-ction (4). elect the requisite 
number of members from amongst the councillors and alderman jl" 
fill up those vacancies. 
(6) Any councillor or alderman who ceases to be a member 
the Standing Committee shall be eligible for re-election. 
of 

61 
46. (1) When a casual vacancy occurs in the office of a member 
of the Standing Committee, the Corporation shall fill up the vacancy 
as soon as may be after, and in any case within one month of, the 
occurrence of the vacancy, by the election of another councillor or 
alderman. 
(2) A member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall be elected to 
serve for the remainder of his predecessor's ~erm of office. 
47. (1) The Standing Committee shall at its first meeting in each 
year elect one of its members to be the Chairman and another memo 
ber to be the Deputy Chairman. 
(2) The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Standing Com-
mittee shall hold office from the date of his election until the election 
of his successor in office unless in the meantime he resigns his offi::e 
as Chairman or Deputy Chairman or his term of office as member o~ 
the Stan~ing Committee is in any manner determined or unless in 
the case of the Dep~ty Chairman he is elected as Chairman. 
(3) On the occurrence of any casual vacancy in the office of the 
Chairman or the l)eputy Chairman, the Standing Committee shall 
within one month of the occurrence of such vacancy elect one of its 
members as Chairman or Deputy Chairman, as the case may be, 
and the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman :-.0 elected shall hold 
office for the remainder of his predecessor's term. 
Cas.ual 
vacancies 
Chairman 
a'l '! 
Deputy 
Chairman 
of the 
Standing 
Co:nmit-
tee, 
48. (1) Any member of the Standing Committee may resign his Resigna-
office by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman; and the tion of 
Chairman may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed Chdairman an mem-
~~M~~ ~~~ 
(2) A resignation under sub-section (1) shall take effect from the Standing 
date specified for the purpose in the writing referred to in that sub- Commit-
, .. &eetion, or i·f no such date is specified, from the date of its receipt by tee. 
rtbe Chairman or the Mayor, as the case may be. 
!:' ~ 49. The Standing Committee shall exerci~e 'such powers and per- Functions 
r fonn such functions as are specifically conferred or imposed upon it of the 
,. by or under this Act. Standi~g 
Comnllt_ , 
~,,!he Delhi Electric Supply Committee, the Delhi Transport C01n-
" \'"' mittee and the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Com-
tee. 
. mittee, 
r 50. (1) The Delhi Electric Supply Committee, the Delhi Transport ~onstitu-
. C~mmittee and the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Com- ~~f the 
',W, ttee shall each consist of seven members of whom four shall be Electric 
t~ted by the councillors and aldermen from among themselves at Supply 

Commit-
tee, etc. 
62 
the first meeting of the Corporation after ea::-h gCIlC'ral clC'ction or as 
soon as possible at any other meeting subs~quent thereto: 
Provided that at any time after the second general election of 
councillors the Central Government may, if in its opinion it is neces-
sary or expedient so to do, increase the total numher (If members a:id 
the number of elected members : 0, however, as not to exceed nine 
and six respectively. 
(Z) The remaining three members of each such committee sball 
be nomina~ed by the Central Government from among persons having 
knowledge a"nd experience of administration and industrial, commer-
ciaL financial or labour matiers and having also knowledge and ex-
perience of-
(a) electrical engineering or management of any eleLtric 
supply undertaking, in the case of the Delhi Electric Supply 
Committee; 
(b) management of any transport undertaking, in the case 
of the Delhi Transport Committee; . 
(c) management af any water supply or sewage disposal 
undertaking, in the case of the Delhi Water Supply ~nd Sewa3€ 
Disposal Committee. 
(3) The nomination of the members of each such committee shall 
be made and communicated by the Central Government to the Com-
missioner before the election by the Corporation of the other members 
of that committee. 
(4) Every such committfe shall be deemed to have been consti-
tuted on and from the date of the election of those members thereof 
who are to be, electe~ by the Corporation. 
(5)' One-half of the elected members of each such commfttee shall 
retire on the expiration of one year from the date of its constitution 
and for that purpose they shall be selected by lot before the said ex-
piration in such manner as the chairman of that committee may deter-
mine. 
(6) During each succeeding year the elected m£'mbers who have 
been longest in office shall retire tt'lerefrom: 
Provided that in the case of a member who has been re-eleL"tea 
the term of his office shall tor the purpose of this sub-section be com-
puted from the date of his re-election. 
(7) The Corporation shall in an ordinary meeting held before the 
occurrence of the vacancies caused by the retirement of the elected 
members under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) elect the requisite 

~ ... 
63 
n:Jmb2r o'f members from among the councillors a'1d aldermen to fill 
up those vacancies. 
(8) A nominated mem bel' shall hold office for such period as the 
Central Government may determine in each case and shall be p.ntitled 
to receive allowances for attendance at meetings of the committee at 
such rate as may be determined by rules made in this behalf. 
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provi-
sion!' of thjs sectiol'1. no person shall be elected at the same time as a 
member of more than one of the committees constituted under this 
s2ction: 
31. (1) When a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of any 
of the committees constituted under section 50, the vacancy shan be 
filled up as soon as may be after, and in any case within one month 
of. the occurrence thereof, by the Corporation by the election a coun-
cillor or an alderman or as the case may be, by the Central Govern-
ment by the nomination 01 a suitable person as a member. 
(2) A member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall be elected to 
serve for the remainder of his predecessor's term of office. 
52. The provisions contained in sections 47 and 48 shall apply in 
relation to the Delhi Electric Supply Committee, the Delhi Trans-
port Committee and the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 
Committee as thE'~' appl~' in relation to the Standing Committee. 
53. The Delhi Electric Supply Committee, the D€lhi Transport 
Committee and the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Com-
mittee shall respectively be responsible for the conduct and manage-
.. ment of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, the Delhi Transport 
.~'!Jndertaking and the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal I 
:Underta1dng and for the efficient discharge of such respons;bility shall . 
. suC'h powers and perform such functions as are conferred or ; 
..... uu" ... :u by or under this Act. ~ 
I 1 
The Commissioner 
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the j 
"1cia~···Gazette, appoint a suitable person as the Commissioner of the n 
.... "&n .... ~. ( 
( 
/ 

Salary and 
allow_ 
ances of 
J(heCam':' 
missioner. 
64 
(2) The Commissioner 50 appointed shall hold office for a term of 
live years in the first instance: 
Provided that his appointment may be renewed from time to time 
for a term not exceeding one year at a time: 
Provided further that where the Commissioner holds a lien on any 
sfrvice under the Government, the Central Government may at any 
time aLter reasonable notice to the Corporation replace his services at 
>:he d:sposal of that Government. 
(3) The Central Government-
(a) shall remove the Commissioner 'from office if at a special 
meeting of the Corporation called for the purpos2 a resolution for 
such removal has been passed by a majority of not less than 
thre~-fifths of the total number of members; 
(b) may remove the Commissioner from office at any time if 
it appears tQ that Government that he is incapable of performing 
the duties of his office or has been guilty of neglect or misconduct 
in the discharge of such duties, which renders his removal expe-
dient. 
(4) The Commissioner shall not undertake any work unconnected 
v,th his office without the sanction of the Central GovernmfO>nt and 
')f t.he Corporation. 
55. The Commiss:oner shall be paid out of the Municipal Fund 
sllch monthly salary and such monthly allowances, if any, as may 
[tom time to time be fixed by the Central Government and may be 
given such facilities (if any) in relation to residential accommodation, 
conveyance and the like as may from time to time be fixed by that 
Government: 
Provided that the salary of the Commissioner shall not be varied 
to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
Leave of !l6. (1) Leave may be granted to the Commissioner by the Stand-
absence of ing Committee. 
Commis-
sioner. (2) Whenever such leave is granted to the Commissioner the 
Central Government shall appoint another pe1:Son to officiate as 
Commissioner in his place. 

65 
57. If any vacancy occurs in the office of the Commissioner on Appoint-
account of death, resignation or removal, the Central Government ment of 
m:ty appoint another person to officiate as Commissioner in his place ~~~::::_g 
'for a term not exce~ing two months, pending the appointment of a sioner in 
Commissioner under section 54. case of 
death, re-
signation 
or removal 
of Com-
missioner. 
58. 0) .If th~ Commissioner is an officer in the service of the Gov- Service 
ernment, the Corporation shall make such contribution towards his regulations 
" of Commis-leave allowances, pen8ion and provident fund as may be required by sioner. 
(the conditions of his service under the Government, to be paid by him 
'()r for him, as the case may be. 
'. (2) If the Commissioner is not an officer in the service of the 
'~mment, his Ieav::e and leave allowances, his suPerannuation or 
~t~tirement, his gratuity or pension and the proportions of his pen-
,onary or provident fun~ ~ontribution payable respectively from his 
>,;,~ary and from the Muruclpal Fund shall be governed 8y rules: 
r· ..RJ\ovided that- \ 
ti.~· (a) the amount of any such leave and leave allowances. 
~ .. gI:atuity orpension shall in no case, without the special sanction 
of the Central Government, exceed what would be admissible Jp 
_.n~\"U. case of Government servants of similar standing and status; 
and 
(b) the conditions under which such allowances, gratuity or 
"-~iori are granted or any leave, superannuation or retirement 
'~8anc'tioned shall not without similar sanction De moretavour-
able than those for' the time being prescribed for such Govern-
.,t;.tver <8S otherwise' provided in' this Act, the entire executiVel'unctioDi 
.,.<thepurpose of 'carrying out the provisions of this Act other of the. 
M~rt DArtaining to the Delhi 'Eleetric Supply Undertaking '01' ComJIWl-
1'''' sioner. 
lHII~[ll Transport Undertaking and of any other Act for thp. time 
in force which confers any power or imposes any duty on the 
tion, shall vest in· the Commissioner who shall also-
" . "(a) exercise all the power~ and perform.all the dut;es specf-
IfrCally conferred or imposed upon him by this Act or by any other 
law for the time being in force; 
. S~ ~ prescribe the duties of" and exercise supervision and 
cMbtro~ov~r the acts and proceedings ef, all municipal officers and 
municipal employees other than the Municipal Secretary 
the Municipal Chief Auditor and the municipal officers and 

6ti~---__ _ 
Appoint~ 
ment, etc., 
of the 
General 
Managers. 
other municipal employees immediately subordinate to them and 
subject to any regulation that may be made in this behalf, dispose 
of all questions relating to the service of the said officers and 
other employees and their pay, privileges, allowances and other 
conditions of service; 
(c) on the occurrence or threatened occurrence of any 
sudden accident or any unfore~n event or natural calamity in-
volving or likely to involve extensive damage to any property of 
the Corporation, or danger to hUman life, take such immediate 
action as he considers necessary and make a report forthwith to 
the StandiIlg Committee and the Corporation of the action he .has 
taken and the reasons for the same as also of the amount of . cost, 
if any, incurred or likely to be incurred in consequence of such 
action, which 1s not covered by a budget-grant; 
(d) exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred Or 
imposed by or under this Act upon the General Manager (Elec-
tricity) or the General Manager (Transport) in his absence or on 
failure by him to exercise or perform the same. 
The General Manager (Electricity) and the General Manager 
(Transport) 
60. (1) The Corporation shall, with the approval of the Central 
Gov~rnment, appoint two suitable persons respectively as the General 
Mcmager (Electricity) and the General Manager (Transport). 
(2) Each of the two General Managers shall be appointed for a 
tenn of five years in the first instance but such appointment may be 
renewed from time to time with the approval of the Central Govern-
ment for a term not exceeding five years at a time. 
(3) The Corporation shall remove from office any of the General 
Managers if at a special meeting of the Corporation called for the 
purpose a resolution for such removal is passed by a majority of not 
less than three-fifths of the total number of members on the ground 
of neglect or misconduct or incapacity for the duties of his office, on 
the part of such General Manager. 
(4) Any of the General Managers c;hall not undertake any work 
'unconnected with his office without th (> sanction of the Corporation. 
1 
Salary 61. Each of the General Managers shall be paid out of the Munf-
and all~w- cipa1 Fund such monthly salary and such allowances, if any, as mr.y 
~C::~l from time to time be fixed by the Corporation with the approval If ,i ...... '.' 
Managers. the Central Governmen,t. I 

62. (1) 
tion-
Leave may b~ granted with the approval 01 the Corpora- Leave 01 
absence 
(a) to the General Manager 
Electric Supply Committee; 
to the 
(Electricity) by the Delhi General 
Managers, 
etc. 
(b) to the General Manager (Transport) by the Delhi 
Transport Committee. 
(2) Whenever any such leave is granted to any of the General 
Managers, the Corporation shall appoint another person to officiate in 
.his place. 
. (3) If any vacancy occurs in the office of any 01. the General 
Managers on account of death, resignation or removal, the Corporation 
. may appoint another person to officiate in his place: 
I.': .~"; ... ~Ovided that no appointment under sub-section (2) or sub-section 
: 13)'-lor a periOd exceeding three months shall be made except with 
y·the approval of the Central Government . 
. '~i.·>:~. The Corporatio,n may make regul~tions relating to the condi- Service regula-
,'i . of service of the two General Managers. tiona of 
the 
General 
Managers. 
Save as otherwise provided in this Act,- Functions 
(a) the entire executive power for the purpos~ of carrying Of the 
the provisions of this Act pertaining to th ~ Delhi Electric ~ener~ 
,·snnni Undertaking shall vest in the General Manager (Elec- anagers. 
tricity) who shall also-
(i) exercise all the powers and perform all the duties 
.. , .~. specifically conferred or imposed upon him by or under thil 
, <:'" Act and perform such other functions in connection with the 
Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking as may be required of 
him by the Delhi Electric Supply Committee and the Cor-
poration; 
(ii) prescribe the duties of, and exercise supervision and 
control over all acts and proceedings of, all municipal officers 
and other municipal employees employed in connection with 
the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking and subject to such 
regulations as may be made in this behal1, dispose of all 
matters relating to the service of the said officers and other 
employees and their pay, privileges, allowancrs and other 
conditions of service; 
(iii) on the occurrence or threatened occurrence of any 
.. ~ , sudden accident or any unforeseen event or natural calamity 
~volvini or likely to involve extenSive damage to any pro-

Appoint-
ment of 
sub-com-
mittees 
by the 
various 
commit-
tees. 
Commis-
sioner and 
General 
Managers 
not tu be 
interested 
in any 
contract. 
etc., with 
the Cor-
poration. 
perty of the Corpurai.IU!l pertct:nl!lg :l) tnt' Delhi Electra: 
Supply Undertaking or danger to human life arising from 
or in connection Wi:!l any pan or" that Undertaking, take 
such immediate action as may Rppear necessary to him and 
after such action hac' 8een taken. n:ake a report forthwith 
to the Delhi Electric Supply Committee and the Corporation 
of the action he has taken and the reasons for the SClme as 
also the amount of cost, if any. incurred or likely to be 
incurred in consequence of such action which is not covered 
by a budget-grant: 
(b) the entire executi\'e power for the purpose of carrying 
out the p'rovisions of this _-\ct pertaining to the Delhi Transport 
Undertaking shall vest in the General 1Ianager (Transport). 
(2) The Genera] Mnnage l ' I T!'anspor t ) ~h:1ll ('xercise the same 
powers and perform the same duties in connection with the Delhi 
Transport Undertaking as are exercised and performed by the 
General Manager (ElectriCity) in connection with the Delhi Electric 
Supply Undertaking under sub-clauses (i). (ii) and (iii.) of clause 
a) of sub-section (J): 
Provided that any reference in tho~e sub-clauses to the Delhi 
Electric Supply Committee shall be construed as a reference to the 
Delhi Transport Committee. 
Miscellaneous provisions relatimg to the various municipal authorities 
65. (I) The Standing Ccmmittee. the Delhi Electric Supply 
Committee, the Delhi Transport Committee or the Delhi Water 
Supply and Sewage Dispo <.1.1 Committee may appoint from among 
its own members any sub-c :11I11lttee consisting of such number as 
that committee may think fit for exercising any power or performing 
any function of that committee under this Act or for inquiring into 
or reporting or advising upon any matter which that committee may 
refer to such sub-committee. 
(2) Every such sub-committee shall conform to such instruc(ions 
as may be given to it by the committee by which it has been 
appointed. 
66. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as the 
Commissioner, the General Manager (Electricity) Or the General 
Manager (Transport) who has. directly or indirectly, by himself or 
by a partner, or any other person. any share or interest in any con-
tract made with, or any work 'oe;ng done for, the Corporation other 
than a·' such Commissinner. or General Manager, as the case may be. 
(2) If the Commis~ioner. or any of the General Managers. RC-
quires directly or indir.ectly. by himself or by his partner, or any 

69 
l)tht'r person, any share or interest in any ,uah contract or work as is 
I'derred to in sub-secti~n (1), .he ,h"n, un\~111 the CorponlUon in any 
purticular case otherWise decIdes, be 1\ab\. to be remov('c\ [rom his 
omce ,by the order of the authority ('nmpt'1pnt to ~cmllv(~ him under 
the' provisions of this Act: 
Provided that before an order ut r.moval is made, tho Commis-
!:Iioner or such General Man.ager sholl be glven'a realonnhlo opportu-
nity of showing cause against the IIclhm proposed to bo laken in 
n!~u 1'C.1 '10 him. 
67. (1) If'JQ\1 el~ctec:J ment~er' of th., Standing Comm\tte., the 
l)ln"l ElectrlC Supply CommIttee, the Uelhl Tranaport Committee 
01' the Delhi Water Supply and Sewall DtIPola1 Commltt •• ceases 
lo be a councillor or ~n, alt\erman h' 'han gea.~ to bl • member of 
that committea. @d hlSs eat shallih.rlupon becoJn1! vacant. 
g'acation 
of seats by 
members 
efcom-
JIlittees. 
(2) If a member o~ the ~~andinll CommUtee, the Dolh\ El~ctric 
Supply Committee, the DeUh Tranlpo\'t Committ •• 01' tho Delhi 
Wilter Supply and Sewage Dispo .. ' Committee, abIJentM himleif 
durIng three successive month~ from \1\e mldtngs of the corilmlttee 
(Jxcept on account of il~ess or any other &.IIUIe approvod by the 
committee or absents himself durin", Mix Muccessive months. from 
the' meeti~gs of the committee on acc:oun~ of nny caUII whatlOever 
whether approved by thecommitteo or nut, he shall c.... to be ~ 
member of the committee and hi, •• at 'hill, thereupon 'become 
vacant. 68. The Standing Comm~~tee, tho O,lbt E~ctr1~ Supply Com- Commit-
tees to 
continue 
in of8,ce' 
till new 
commit-
. .-tees are 
1 
mittee, the Delhi Transport Committel or the DeIhl Wat~r Supply 
and' Sewage 'DisPOsal Committ~e ,h,U contInue" to' fundi'on untn a 
new: eommittee is constituted m acaordlno. with the provll\unl ot 
th\.:Act notwithstanding that the memntt1'. rrr rome of the mem1berl 
of such committee have ceased to b(~ (!(lunuU"7f. or alderm.n. constitut-
ed. 
69, The Corporation may at any tirne CIlU for any, extr",' of any 
Pl'ocl,'ndings of the Standing Commlttcsl, th .. Delhi Electrla Supply 
Committee the Delhi Transport Comrn~lt." "he, Delhl Water Supply 
and Scwa~e DisPOsal Committee', th,. Dalh1 Rural Arelll CommUtee, 
the Education Committee or of any (Jth~r I.!I}mmittee or lub-com-
, mlttec constituted or appointed under tht. Act and for any return, 
.tatement account or report conc'tI'"tnl& or connected wlth any 
matter with which any such commtttee or .ub-cqmmtttee ,. em-
pa'kered by or under this Act to deal; an4 wery suc1'l requillUon 
mall be complied with by any such committee or lu'b-commttt •• 
Without any unreasonable delay. 
power of 
Corpora-
tion to 
call for 
extracts 
of pro-
ceedings 
tromtbe 
commit-
tees. 

Power 
of Cor-
poration 
to requii'e 
the com-
missioner, 
etc., to 
produce 
documerit~ 
and fur_ 
nish re-
turns,re~ 
ports, etc, 
Exercis~ 
of pow en 
to be 
subject to 
sanction. 
70, (1) The Corporation may at any time require the CoIIUJiis-
sioner~ 
(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or other 
document which is in his pos~ession or under his control as Com-
missioner or which is recorded or filed in his office or in the 
office of any municipal officer or other municipal em.ploy-ee 
subordinate to him; 
(b) to furnish any return, plan, e.:timate, statement, account 
or statistics concerning or connected with any matter pertaining 
to the administration of this Act or the municipal government of 
Delhi except in regard to the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, 
or the Delhi Transport Undertaking; 
(e)' to furnish a report by himself or to obtain from the 
head of ~ny department subordinate to him and furnish with 
his own remarks thereon, a report. upon any subject concerning or 
connected with the administration of this Act or the Irun!cipal 
government of Delhi except in regard to the Delhi Electric Sup-
ply, tTndertaking or the Delhi Transport Undertaking . 
• • • • • 
(3) In their application to matters relating to the Delhi Electric 
Supply Undertaking or the Delhi Transport Undertaking, the pro-
visions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall have effect as if for the 
word "Commissioner", th€ words and brackets "General Manager 
(Elec,tricity) ", ,or as the case may be, the words and brackets "General 
Manager (Transport)" had been substituted. 
71. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the exercise of any 
pewer or the performance of any duty conferred or imposed upon 
the Corporation or any municipal authority by or under this Act, 
which will involve expenditure, shall be Eubject to the following 
conditions, namely:-
• • • • • 
(b) that if the exercise of such power or the performance 
of such duty involves or is likely to involve expenditure for any 
period or at any tiine after the clOse of the said year, such ex-
penditure shall not be incurred without the sanction- -
(i) of the Standing Committee or, as the caE.e may be, 
the Delhi Electr;c Supply Committee or the Delhi Trans-
port Committee or the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage 
Disposal Committee, if it is incurred in the year next follow-
ing such year, or 
• • • • • 

71 
CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE 
Transaction of business by the Corpora.tion 
72. (1) The Corporation shall ordinarily hold at least one meetin, Meetings, 
in every month for the transaction of bU'"iness. 
(2) The Mayor or in his absence the Deputy Mayor may, when-
ever he thinks fit. and shall, upon a requisition in writing by not 
less than one-fourth of the total number of councillors and aldermen, 
convene a special meeting of the Corporation. 
(3) Any meeting may be adjourned until the next or any sub-
sequent date, and an adjourned meeting may be further adjourned 
in like manner. 
• • • • • ,I 
76. (1) The Mayor or in his absence, the Deputy Mayor, r.hall Presiding 
preside at every m~eting of the Corporation. officer. 
(2) In the absence of both the Mayor and Deputy Mayor from 
the meeting, the members present shall elect one from among their 
own number to preside. 
(3) The Mayor or the person presiding over a meeting shall have 
and exercire a second or a casting vote in all cases of equality of 
, votes. 
• • • • • 
81. (1) The Commissioner or any municipal officer authorised by Right to. 
; ;1' him. in this behalf may attend, speak in, or otherwise take part in attend' -
, ,;-the proceedings of, any meet~ng of the Corporation or any of its meetingS of the committees; and the General Manager (Electricity) or any municipal Corpora-
officer authorised by him in this behalf and the General Manager tion and 
(Transport) or any municipal officer authorised by him in this behalf its com-
,may attend, speak in, or otherwise take part in the proceedings of, mittees, 
any meeting of the Delhi Electric Supply Committee and the Delhi e~h an: 
Transport Committee respectively J but none of the persons specified ~~~C~l1ors 
, herein shall by virtue of this sub-section be entitled to vote in any and alder-
~'. rnch meeting. . men to ask 
.J!r. questions 
[~,': i:.. (2) A councillor or alderman may, subject to the provisions of in relation 
,-, SUb-section (3), a~k the Commissioner questions on any matter. re- to the 
~
'.~'.",',1a .. ting to the municipal government of Delhi or the administration municipal 
." ·;~tbis Act or the functions of any of the muncipaI authorities. ~=t:i , , , 
~ .,;--' Delhi. 

Power to 
makere-
gulations. 
Presiding 
officers at 
meetings 
of the 
Standing 
and other 
commit-
tees. 
Conduct 
of business 
at meet-
ings of 
Standing 
and other 
commit. 
tees. 
72 
(3) The right to a~'k a question shall be governed by the following 
conditions, namely:-
'" * * * * 
(b) no question shall-
'" * * '" * 
(v) relate to a ma:ter \\'hich is no: primarily the con-
cern of the Corporaticn or of any of the municipal authori-
ties, 
... >I< 
* '" ... 
(6) The Cumrnissioner .: bCi:: :1Ot be bound to answt r a question 
if it asks for information Wh:C!l has been communicated to him in 
confidence or if in the opinion of the Mayor it cannot be answered 
without prejudice to public mterest or the interest of the Corpora-
tion. 
(7) Unless otherwise directed by the Mayor or the presiding 
officer of the meeting, every question shall be answered by the Com-
missioner at a meeting of the Corporation. 
(8) The General Manager (Electricity) and the General Managf:>r 
(Transport) shall without unreasonable delay furnish the Commis-
sioner with such information relating rerpectively to the Delhi 
Electric Supply Undertaking and the Delhi Transp~)rt Undertaking 
as the Commissioner may require for the purpose of answering any 
question under t.his sEction. 
82. The Corporation may make regulations for the transaction of 
business at its meeting: 
Provided that the time. place and procedure for the first meeting 
after the constitution of the Corporation under section 3 shall be 
determined by the Adm;nistrator. 
Transaction of bw;iness by Standing and other committees 
83. (1) The Chairman or in his a1bsence the Deputy Chairman 
shall preside at every meeting of the Standing Committee, the Delhi 
Electric Supply Committee. the Delhi Transport Committee and the 
Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee or any other 
committee of the CCfooration. 
(2) In the absence of t!-:~ Chairman and the D2puty Chairman 
from any meeting the members of any such committee shall choose 
one of their number to pre:-ide o,'er the meeting. 
84. The Corporation may make regulations for the procedure and 
the conduct of business at meetings, of the Standing Committee and 
all other 'committees p', ~E'pt ad hoc committees which shaH regulate 
their own procedure. 

73 
Minutes and reports of proceedings 
85, Minutes, in which shall be recorded the names of the members Keeping of 
h d ' f h ' f th 'II minutes and present at, and t e procee lllgs 0 eac meetmg 0 e counCl ors proceedings. 
for the election of any alderman and of each meeting of the Corpora-
tion and of the Standing Committee and every other committee of 
the Corporation, shall be drawn up and recorded in a book to be kept 
for that purpose, and shall be laid before the next ensuing meeting 
of the Corporation or of such committee, as the case may be, and 
signed at such meeting by the pre5iding officer thereof. 
• * * • • 
CHAPTER VI 
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND OTHER MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES 
89, (1) The Corporation shall appoint suitable persons to be 
~ respectively the Chief Engineer (Water Supply), the M~cipal 
r"':,,.;,. Engineer, the Municipal Health Officer, the Education Officer, the 
F. Municipal Chief Accountant, the Municipal Secretary and the Muni-
t, cipal Chief Auditor and may appoint one or more Deputy Commis-
~. sioners and such other officer or officers of a status eqUivalent to or 
~: higher than the status of any of the officers specified earlier in this 
k sub-section as the Corporation may deem fit on such monthly salaries 
l a,J;ld such allowances, if any, as may be fixed by the Corporation. 
~' 
(2) The appointment of the Municipal Chief Auditor shall be 
". made with the previous approval of the Central Government and 
. every other appointment referred to in sub-section (1) except that 
Of,. the Municipal Chief Accountant and the Municipal Secretary 
be subject to confirmation by that Gov~l'DIIXent: '. 
that the Municipal Chief Auditor shall not be. eligible 
any other office under the Corporation after he has ceased to hold 
IOfIlce. ' 
~
.' .'" ,90. (1) The appropriate authority shall from time to time prepare 
';'JlIld lay before the committee concerned two schedules of posts other 
..... 'than those specified in sub-section (1) of section 89 setting forth 
~lIo7' t~e. designations and grades of municipal officers and other munici-
~): .. ~l employees who should be maintained permanently in the ser-
M Vice of the Corporation indicating therein the salaries, fees and al-
which are proposed to be paid to such officers and other 
Of the two schedules referred to in sub-section U), the first 
lCIledlllle shall deal with posts with a minimum monthly salary of 
Appoint-
ment ot 
certain 
officers. 
Schedule 
of perma-
nent posts 
and crea-
tion Of 
temporary 
posts. 

74 
not less than three hundred and fifty rupees and the second with 
posts with a minimum monthly salary of less than three hundred 
and fifty rupees. 
(3) The committee concerned shall lay the first schedule with 
its comments thereon before the Corporation for its consideration 
and approval and shall sanction the second either without modifi-
cations, or with such modifications as it thinks fit and thereafter 
may amend it either on its own motion after ascertaining the views 
of the appr~priate authority or at the instance of such authority. 
(4) The Corporation shall after considering the comments of the 
committee conC'erned, sanction the first schedule either without 
modifications or with such modifications as it thinks fit and there-
after may amend it either on its own motion after a~certaining the 
views of' th~' appropriate authority and the committee concerned or 
at the instance of such authority or committee. 
(5)' The appropriate authority may create for a period not. ex-
ceeding six' months any post carrying a minimum montply salary 
(~lus~ tit' allowances) of less than two hundred, and, fifty 
rupees; , 
Provided that no such post shall be continued beyond the said 
period without the previous approval of the committee concerned. 
(6). The: committee concerned may, on the recommendation of 
the appropriate authority, create for a period not exceeding six 
months any post carrying a minimum monthly salary (exclusive of 
allowances) of two hundred and fifty rupees or more: 
Provided that no such post shall be continued beyond· the said, 
period without the previous approval of the Corporation .. 
'I: J~> . In this' se~tion. ,"iwpropri~te, authority" and "comm~ttee con-
cerriea'~ 'mean respectively,- , ,'j 
. 'Ii u" ',,' , . 
(i) in relation to officers and other employees appairiftld in: 
connection with the affairs of the Delhi Electric Supply Under-
taking, the General Manager (Electricity) and the J)Q1hi Electric 
Supply Committee; 
(ii) in relation to officers and other employees appointed ill, 
connection with the affairs of the Delhi Transport Undertaking, 
the General Manager (Transport) and ~he Delhi Transport, CO~-J 
mittee; "'.11 
(iii) in relation to officers and other employees appointee jD' 
connection with the affairs of the Delhi Water Supply and 
sewage Disposal Undertaking, the Commissioner and the De~ 
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee; '0. 

(iv) in relation to all other officers and employees in the 
service of the Corporation, the Commissioner and the Standing 
Committee. 
• • • • * 
92. (1) Subject· to the provisions of section 89 the power of 
appointing municipal officers and other municipal employees, whe-
ther temporary or permanent,-
(a) to posts carrying a minimum monthly salary (exclu-
sive of allowances) of three hundred and fifty rupees or more 
shall vest- ' 
(i) in the Delhi Electric Supply Committe~, the Delhi 
Transport Committee and the Delhi Water Supply and 
Sewage Disposal Committee respectively in the case of 
of'ilcers and other employees appointed in connection with 
the affairs of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, the 
Delhi Transport Undertaking and the Delhi Water Supply 
and Sewage Disposal Undt"rtaking, 
. (ii) in the Corporation in the case of all other ,municipal 
officers .and employees; .t. f. 
(b) to posts carrying a minimum monthly salary .(exclu-
'I" ,.sive ,of allowances) of less than three hundred and fif~ rupees, 
r.hall vest in the ·General Manager (Electricity), the General 
Manager (Transport)., or the Commissioner, as the case"Way be: 
Provided that the power of appointing officers and other 
:..;c; . employees immediately subordinate to the Municipal Secretary 
or the Municipal Chief Auditor, whose minimum monthly salary 
(exclusive of allowances) is less than three hundred and fifty 
I 'TUpe~, shall vest in the Standing Committee: 
Pr~vided further that the Standing 'CQnunittee may dele- " 
to the Municipal Secretary or the Municipal Chief Auditor 
. (..' . 
. , " of appointing officers and other employees ,imme-
-""""'6.":> .. '" subordinate to such Secretary or Auditor, whose" mini-
mum monthly salary (exclusive of allowances) is not more than 
ro h~ndred and ~fty rupees~ • • 
Power to 
make ap-
point-
ments. 
, . 
,-,., -.fl. No municipal officer or other municipal employee shall un- Officers 
~ke any work unconnected with his duties under this Act except and other 
~""'h'- the permissio~ of the Corporation. employees not ta 
• • • • • undertake 
any 
extraneous 
work. 

Consulta-
tion with 
the Union 
Public 
Service 
Commis-
~ion. 
Power of 
Commis-
sion to 
make 
regula-
tions and 
reference 
to the 
Central 
Go\'ern-
ment in 
ca~e of 
difference 
between 
tht' Com-
mi::sion 
and the 
Corporl~ 
tion. 
76 
96. No appointment to the post of the General Manager (Elec-
tricity) or the General Manager (Transport) or to any post carrying 
a minimum monthly salary of three hundred and fifty rupees or 
morc (exclusive of allowance) shall be made except after consul-
tation with the Union Public Sen'ice Commission (hereafter in 
this Chapter referred to as "th(' Commission"): 
Provided that no such consultation with the Commission shall Ill' 
necessary in regard to the selection for appointment-
«(1) to anv Clcting or temporar\' pO:'it for a period not excl'erl-
ing one year; or 
(b) to such ministerial posts as may from time to time be 
specified by the Corporation in consultation with the Com-
mission when such posts are to be filled by promotion; or 
(c) to a post when at the time of such appointment thf:' 
~rson to be appointed thereto is in the service of the Central 
Government or a State GovPTnment in :1 rlass I post; Of 
(d) to a permanent or tempornry post, if the officer or other 
('mplo~ree to be appointed is not likely to h()ld that post for mOTe 
than one year; or if such officer or other employee is likely to 
hold the post f9r more than one year but not more than three 
years and the Commission advises that the appointment may be 
made without consulting the Commission. 
97. (1) The Commission may make regulations for the followin.~ 
matters, namely:-
(a) the procedure to be followed by the Commission in 
advertising posts, inviting applications. scrutinizing the same 
and selecting candidates for interview: 
fb) the procedure to be f;>l1owed by the Commission for 
selecting cnndidntes fOf 3ppointment and hy the Corporation for 
consultation with the Commission; 
(c) any other 111:1tter \"hich is incidental to. Of necf'ssary 
for. the purpose of consultation with the Commission. 
(2) In the case of any difference of opinion between the Com-
mission and the Corporation on any matter. the COrpofCttion shall 
refer the matter to the Central Government and the decision of th1t 
Gow·rnment thpreon shall be fin(ll. 

98. (1) The Corporation may make regulations to providp f(lf 
anyone or more of the follow:ng matters. namely:-
(a) the tenure of office. salaries and allowances, provident 
funds. pensions, gratuities. leave of absence and other condi-
tions of service of officers and other emplo~'ees appointud under 
this Chapter; 
(b) the powers, duties and functions of the Municipal 
Secretary; 
(e) the qualifications of candidates for appointment to posts 
specified in sub-section (1) of section 89 and to posts dealt witll 
in the first schedule of posts referred to in sub-sectiun (2) of 
. .;ec: ;,111 9() ;mct the mClnnc:' .:' ~('k('~!r"l !()l' appointnwnf In posts 
dealt with in the second 5checlu10 (If posts referred to in th~t 
sub-section; 
(d) the procedure to be followed in imposing any penalty 
under sub-section (1) of section 95. suspension pending depart-
mental inquiries before the imposition of such penalty and the 
authority by whom such suspension may be ordered; the ofllcer 
or authority to whom an appeal shall lie under sub-section (4) 
of that section; . 
(e) any other matter which i~ incidental to, or necessary 
for. the purpose of regulating the appointment and conditions 01 
service of persons appointed to services and posts under the Cor-
poration and any other matter for which in the opinion of the 
Corporation provisions should be made by regulations. 
(2) No regulation under clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall be 
made except after consultation with the Commission. 
CHAPTER VII 
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE 
The Municipal Fund 
99. (1) Save aR otherwise pr;)vinect in this Act.-
• • * * • 
(11) all moneys received by or on behalf of the Corporation 
in respect of the operations of the Delhi Electric Supply Under-
t3\;:inB'. the Delhi Transport Unctert:1J::in~ and the Delhi WatN 
~; Supply and ~ew:lP,'e D~5posal Undertaking; 
~r (2) The MuniCipal Fund shall be held bv the Corporation in 
l trust for the purposes of this Act subject t~ the provisions herein 
it; 
Power '-'1 
Corpora-
tion to 
make l'l'-
gulations. 
Constitu-
tion of thE' 
Municipal 
Fund. 

Municipal 
Fund to 
be kept in 
the State 
Bank of 
India. 
Opera-
tion of 
the Ac-
counts. 
contained and sh~ll be maintained in the following four accoWlts, 
namcly:-
(a) the Electric Supply Account relating to all moneys re-
ceived by 'or on behalf of the Corporation in respect of the ope-
rations of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking; 
(b) the Transport Account relating to all moneys received 
by or on behalf of the Corporation in respect of the operations 
of the Delhi Transport Undertaking; 
(c) the Water Supply and Sewage Dispo~al Account relat-
ing to all moneys received by or on behalf of the Corporation 
in respect of the operations of the Delhi Water Supply and 
Sewage Disposal Undertaking; and 
(d) the ,General Account relating. to all moneys received 
py or on behalf of the Corporation other than these 'specified in 
clause (a) or clause {b) or clause (c). 
100. (1) All moneys payable to the credit of the''Municipal Fund 
in the WaterS1i,P~l~' ahd Sewage Disposal Aeeount and the ~eneral 
Account shall/be :i"eceived 'by the Commissioner and shall'be forth-
with paid into th~ 'State Bank of India .to the credit of the said 
Accounts which shall be respectively entitled "The Water Supply 
and Sewage Disposal Account of the Municipal Fund .of Delhi" and 
"The General Account, of the Municipal Fund of ,Delm". 
(2) All moneys payable to the credit of the' Muriicipal Fund in 
the Electric Supply Account shall be received by the General 
Manager (Electricity) and shall be forthwith paid into the State 
Bank of India to the . credit of the Electric Supply' Account which 
~.hall be entitl~d "The Electric Supply Account of the Municipal 
Fund of Delhi". " .... 
(3) All moneys payable to the credit of the Municipal Fund in 
the Transport Account· sbaU' . be receivPd' 'by the General Manager 
(Transport) and shall be forthwith paid into the State Bank of 
India to the credit of the Transport Account which shall be entitled 
"The Transport Account of the Municipal Fund of Delhi". 
101. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act no payment shall 
be made by the State Bank of India out of the Municipal Fund ex-
cept on a cheque signed by both-
(a) the 'Chief Accountant or an officer subordinate to him 
authori:,ed by the Standing Committee in this 'behalf; and 
(b) (i) the Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner or 
an officer subordinate to the Commissioner authorised by the 
Standing Committee in this behalf, in the case of the General 
Account. 01' 

79 
(ii) the General Manager (Electricity) or an officer subor-
dinate to him authori~ed by the Delhi Electric Supply Commit-
tee in this behalf, in. the case of the Electric Supply Account, or 
(iii~ the General Manager (Transport) or an officer subor-
dinate to him authorised' by the Delhi Transport Committee in 
this behalf, in the case of the Transport Account, or 
(iv) the Commissioner or the Chief Engineer (Water Sup-
ply) or an officer. subordinate to the Commissioner authorired 
by the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee in 
this behalf in the case of the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 
Account. 
• * * • 
I 102. No payment of any sum out of ,the Municipal Fund shall 'be 
made unless the expenditure of the same is covered by a current 
budget-grant and a sufficient balance of such budget-grant is still 
available notwithstanding any reduction or transfer thereof which 
may have been made under the provisions of this Act: . 
Payments 
not to be 
made 
unless 
covered 
by a 
budget-
Provided that this section ~hall not apply to payments made in grant. 
the following classes of cases, namely:-
• • • • * 
. ie';', (c) sums' payable in any of the following circumstance:r-
(i) under orders of the Central Government on failure 
'J, of the Corporation to take any action as r~quired by that 
, n f ' Govez;nment; or 
• • • • 
(v) on account of cost incurred in takirig. illlIriediate 
action ,by the Corporation or any of the muniCipal authorities 
I .. ,~ avert a ,sudden, thr~~ •. of danger to·.~ property of the 
"'. Corporatwa 0'" to., human life; 
(d) temporary payments for works urgently required by 
:e, the Central Government in the public interest; 
_it:. • • • • -I,oIt ,\,; M. Whenever any sum is expended under clause (c), (e) or (f) Procedure 
m the proviso to section 102 the Commissioner or as the case mav when 
::.~, the General Manager. (Electricity) or th~ General Manag~r :~~~~ot 
~~nsport) shall forthWIth communicate the circumstances to the b 
,~~,,/ Y a , .' budeet-
er8nt is 
• upended. 
l' 

Tempo-
rary pay_ 
ments 
from the 
Municipal 
Fund for 
ilforks 
urgently 
required 
for the 
public 
service. 
Transfer 
of surplus 
moneys 
from one 
RcCOunt 
to another 
80 
Standing Committee, or the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage l>ispoo 
sal Committee, or as the case may be, the Delhi Electric Supply COlO-
mittee or the Delhi Transport Committee which may take, or recom-
mend to the Corporation to take, such action under the ~rovisions of 
this Act as shall, in the circumstances appear possible and expedient 
for covering the amount of the additional eJCRenditure . 
• • • • • 
106. (1) On the written requisition of a Secretary to the Central 
Government, the General Manager (Electricity) in the case of any 
work in connection with the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, the 
General Manager (Transport) in the case of any work in connection 
with the Delhi Transport Undertaking and the Commissioner in the 
case of any o~her work, may at any time undertake the execution of 
any work certified by such Secretary to be urgently required in pub-
lic interest, and for this purpose may temporarily make payments 
from the Municipal Fund so far as the same can be met without un-
duly interfering with the regular work of the municipal government. 
• * • • • 
(3), On the receipt of any requisition' under sub-section (1) the 
Commissioner or as the case may be, the General Manager (Electri-
city) or the General Manager (Transport) shall forthwith forward 
a copy thereof to the Corporation together with a report of the steps 
taken by him in pursuance of the same. 
107. (1) Surplus moneys standing at the credit of any of the ac-
counts of the Municipal Fund which cannot immediately or at an 
early date be applied for the purposes specified in section 105 may 
be transferred by the Corporation either in whole or in part to any 
other account olthat Fund:" 
and in-
vestment 
thereof. 
Provided that no such money shall ·betranSierred permanently 
from any of the accounts (other than the Water Supply and Sewage 
\ Disposal Account) to any other of the said accounts without the pre-
vious approval of the Central Government. 
(2) Surplus moneys which are not transferred under sub-section 
(1) shall be deposited in the State Bank of India or in such Schedul-
ed bank or banks as the Corporation may select or he invested in 
public securities. 
(3) The loss, if any. arising from such deposit or investment shall 
be debited to the account concerned of the Municipal Fund . 
• • • • • 

, 
~~ ~: 
81 
Budget estimates 
109. (1) The Corporation shall, on or before the 31st day of March Adoption 
of every year, adopt for the ensuing year the following budget eiti- of budget 
estimates. mates, namely:-
(a) budget estimate (general) which shall be an estimate of 
the income and expenditure of the Corporation to be. received 
and incurred on account of the municipal government of Delhi; 
(b) budget estimate (electric supply) which shall he an esti-
mate of the income and expenditure of the Corporation to be 
received and incurred on account of the Delhi Electric Supply 
Undertaking; 
(c) budget estimate (transport) which shall be an estimate 
ef, the lncome and expenditure of the Corporation to be received 
and 'incurred on account of the Delhi Transport Und:ertaking; 
and 
(d) budget estimate (water supply and sewage disposal) 
which shall be an estimate of the income and expenditure of the 
Oorporation to·be received and incurred ,o~account of.the Delhi 
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Undertaking . 
• • • • • 
lr l, (3) Budget estimates shall be prepared in such form as may he 
." approved by the Standing Committee and'p"eseBted,and"aciopted in 
~'" ''Such manner and'shall provide for all such-matters liS are prescribed 
'by regulations made in this behaH. ' 
110. (1) On the recommendation of- Power ot Corpora-
(tz) the, Standtpg Cpmmittee in respect of the budget esti- tioo to 
+ ( 1) alter _.I',fa~e, .{enera 'budget 
....... , (b) the Delhi EJecJric Supply Committee in respect of the estimates . 
. "~udget estimate (~lectric supply), 
~, " ' 
(e) the Delhi Transport Committee in respect of the budget 
1\1"'1-. estimate (transport), and 
~" (d) the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Commit-
~ tee in respect of the budget estimate (water supply and sewage 
~ .•• ' disposal) , 
~~Jh. Corporation may from time to time during the year-
I." (t) incrfHlse the amount of any budget-grant under any 
, -,.f. head . ,~ , 
';1, , ; , 

82 
(it) make an additional budget-grant for the purp(')se of 
meeting any special or unforeseen requirement arising dur-
ing the said year, 
(iii) transfer the amount or portion of the amount of the 
budget-grant, under any head to the account of the budget-
grant under any other head, or . 
(iv) reduce the amount of the budget-grant under any 
head: 
Provided that due regard shall be had to all the requirements of 
this Act and' in making any increase or any additional budget-grant, 
the estimated cash balance 'at the close of the year shall not be reduc. 
ed below the sum of one 1akh of rupees or such higher sum as the 
Corpor.ation may determine in respect of each budget estimate, 
(2) Every increase in a budget-grant and every additional budget-
grant made in any year under sub-section (1) shal1 be deemed to be 
included in the budget estimates finally adopted for that year . 
., • • • • 
(4) The Commissioner may, from time to time during the year, 
wanction the transfer of any amount not exceeding five thousand 
rupees within a minor head if such transfer does not involve a recur-• ring liability: 
Provided that every such transfer, if it exceeds five hundrerl 
rupees, shall be reported forthwith by the Commissioner to the 
Standing Committee and the Commissioner shall lrive effect to any 
order that may be passed by that Committee in relation thereto. 
(5) In sub-section (3)or in sub-section (4),-
(a) any reference to the Standing Committee and the Com· 
missioner shall be construed. 8S a reference respectively to--
(i) the Delhi Electric Supply Committee and t~e Gene-
ral Manager (Electricity) if the reduction or transfer is in 
relation to the budget estimate (ekctrfc supply); 
(ii) the Delhi Transport Committee and the Genpr~l 
Manager (Transport) if the reduction or transfer is in rela-
tion to the budget estimate (transport); and 
(b) any reference to the Standin~ Committee shan be con-
strued as a reference to the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage 
Disposal Committee if the reduction or transfer is in relation to 
the budget -estimate (water supply and sewage disposal) . 
• • • • • 

k" 
. 1 d d' th Provisions 112 If the whole or any part of any budget-grant me u e met . as 0 un-budget estimates for a year remains unexpended at the close of that expended 
year, and the amount thereof has not been taken into account in the budget-
opening balance entered in the budget estimates of any of the next grant. 
two following years, the Standing Committee or, as the case may be, 
the Delhi Electric Supply Committee, or the Delhi Transport Com-
mittee or the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee 
may sanction the expenditure of such budget-grant or the unexpend-
ed portion thereof during the next two following years for the com-
pletion of the purppse or object for which the budget-grant was ori-
ginally made and not for any other purpose or object. 
CHAPTER VIII 
TAXATlON 
• • • • • 
Property taxes 
• • • • • 
~ -1 1115. (1)· • '" • • Premises 
.~'··-h (4)' Save as' otherwise provided in this Act, the, general tax shall ::: ~e:~t ,. 
~~ ,be 'levied in respect of a'll lands and buildings in Delhi except- property 
~ ~~ 
~t·; • • • • • to be 
~., fl'" I (b) lands and ·buildings vested in the Corporation and not levied. 
ral used or intended to be used exclusively for the purposes of the 
~\" I .Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, or the pelhi Transport, Un-
, ., {'~ertaking, or the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Un-
gertakin g, in' respect of which the said tax, if levied, would 
'lI:Dder the provisio~ of this Act be leviable primarily on the 
" Corporation; 
" .. -... ~ 
• • • • • 
: (I) ,.The/~rateable value of' any land or bWlding assessable to Determi-
taXes shall be the annual rent at which such land or build. nation of 
"',' reasonably be expected to let from year to year less- rateable 
,~ ~~~ 
~, (4) a sum equal to ten per cent. of the said annual rent lands and 
~~~h: shall be in 'lieu of all allo~ances for costs of repairs :~:=e 
." •• ' , and Insurance, and other expenses, If any, necessary to maintain to 'pro-
1'I\It~.":' the land or building in a state to command that rent, and perty 
"" : 
taxes. (b) the water tax or the scavenging tax or both, if the rent 
inclUSive of either or both of the said taxes= 
that if the rent is inclusive of charges for water supplied 
,1IU~asur'!mt~nt then, for the purpose of this section the rent shall 

Charge by 
measure. 
ment in 
lieu of 
water tax 
in certain 
cases. 
Special 
rate~ of 
sC3venc-
ing tax in 
certain 
cases. 
iS4 
be treated as inclusive of water tax on ra.teable value and the deduc-
tion of the watel' tax shall be made as provided therein: 
Provided further that in respect of any land or building the stan-
dard rent of which has been fixed under the Delhi and Ajmer Rent 
Control Act, 1952, !he rateable value thereof shall not exceed the 
annual amount of the standard rent so fixed.. 
• • • • • 
117. (1) The Commissioner may in such ca~es as the Delhi Water 
Supply and S~wage Disposal Committee may either generally or 
specifically direct, instead of levying water tax in respect of any land 
or building liable thereto under section 115, charge for the water 
supplied to such land or building by measurement at such rate as 
shall from time to time be prescribed by that Committee in this be-
half.. _ _ _ . "J...!~Ll - L _ 
(2) The Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee 
may, for the cases in which the Commissioner charges for water sup-
plied by measurement under sub-section (1), prescribe such condi-
tions a~ it may think fit regarding the use of the water and regard-
ing the charge to be paid for water consumed whilst a met~r is out 
of order or under repair: 
Provided that no condition prescribed under this sub-section shall 
be inconsistent with this Act or with any -bye-law made thereunder. 
(3) A person who is charged for water' supplied by measurement 
shall not be liable for payment of water tax, but any sum payable 
by him on account 'of water and not paid when it becomes due shalJ 
be recoverableb1 the Commissioner as an arrear of water ta~ under 
this Act. 
(4) In prescribing charges for water supplied by measurement 
under sub-section . '(1), it shall be 'lawful for the Delhi Water Supply 
and Sewage Disposal Committee to prescribe different rates in res-
pect of different classes of lands and buildings. 
118. (1) The Commissioner may, whenever he thinks fit, fix the 
scavenging tax to be paid in respect of any hotel or club or any other 
large premises at such special rate as may be approved by the Delhi 
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee in this behalf either 
generally or in. any particular case, whether the service in respect of 
which such tax is leviable is performed by scavengers or by substi-
tuted means or appliances . 
• • • • • 

85 
124. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Corporation 
shall cause an assessment list of all lands and buildings in Delhi to 
be prepared in such form and manner and containing such particu-
lars with respect to each land and building as may be prescribed by 
bye-laws. . ~ .......... -.:- .. • • • • • 
Other taxes 
Assess-
ment list. 
150. (1). • • • • Imposi-
(2) Any resolution passed under sub-section (1) shall be submit- tion of 
other ted to the Central Government for its sanction, and if sanctioned by taxes. 
that Government, shall come into force on and from such date as 
may be specified in the order of sanction. 
• • • • • 
(4) After a tax has been levied in accordance with the foregoing 
'provisions of this section, the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 
109, shall apply in relation to such tax as they apply in relation to 
any tax imposed under sub-section (1) of section 113. . 
• • • • • • 
TermimW taxes on goods 
182. Every person authorised under the provisions of this. J\ct and 
the rules made thereunder to collect the terminal tax shall have, in 
respect of the collection of such tax and of the confiscation of gopds 
in connection therewith, sall\e powers as are conferred by any law 
for the time being in force on the Collector of Land Customs, Delhi, 
and the officers subordinate to him in respect of the levy and col-
lection of land customs duties and the confiscation of goods in con-
i taection therewith and shall also be subject to the same liabilities in 
~.~. ~ 1& I of anything done by him in or for the purpose of collecting . terminal tax as the said Collector of Land Customs and the offi-
''''/S)JbOrdinate to him are subject to under any law for the .time 
~~. in force relating to land customs duties . 
. ~. . . . . . 
• • 
190. (1) • • 
CHAPrER lX 
BoRRoWING 
• 
• 
• • 
• • 
Powers 
and Jiabi-
lities of 
persons 
authorised 
to collect 
terminal 
taxes. 
Mainten-
ance and 
(2) All money paid into the sinking funds shall, as soon as possi- invest-
b~e~ b: invested by the Commissioner in public securities and every men! of 
. ~cb Investment shall be reported by the Commissioper to the Cor- :!";;.."' 
~''QRtauon within fifteen days . . ' 
~/··.·I 
'rf 
'lftiL· 
• • • • • 

Applica-
tion of 
sinking 
funds. 
Annual 
statement 
b;y Com-
missioner. 
Attach-
ment Of 
Municipal 
Fund for 
recovery 
of money 
borrowed 
from Gov-
ernment. 
Acquisi-
tion of 
immov-
able pro-
pertyby 
agree-
ment 
86 
191. A sinking fund or any part thereCJ.f shall be applied in or 
towards the discharge of the loan or a part of the loan for which 
such fund was created, and until such loan or part is wholly dis-
charged shall not be applied for any other purpose: 
Provided that when any loan or part thereof has been consolidat-
ed under section 193, the Commissioner shall transfer to the sinking 
fund of the consolidated loan such part of the sinking funds of the 
original loans .as may be proport~onate to the amount of the original 
loans incorporated in the consolidated loan. 
192. (1) The Commissioner shall, at the end of every year, IUb-
mit to the Corporation a statement showing-
(a) the amount which has been invested during the year 
under section 190; 
(b) the date of the last investment made previous to the 
submission of the statement; 
(c). the aggregate amount of the securities then in his hands; 
and 
(d) the aggregate amount which has up to the date of the 
statement been applied under section 191, in or towards discharg-
ing loans. . 
(2) Every such statement shall be published in the Official 
Gazette. 
195. (1) • * • * • 
(2) After such attachment no person except an officer appointed 
in this behalf by the Central Government shall in any way deal with 
the. attached fund; but such officer may. do all acts in respect thereof 
which any municipal authority, officer or other employee might have 
done if such attachment had not taken place, and may apply the 
proceeds in satisfaction of the arrears and of all interests and costs 
due in respect thereof and of all expenses caused by the attachment 
and subsequent proceedings: 
• 
* 
• • 
CHAPTER X 
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS 
Property 
• • 
* • 
• • 
198. Whenever the Corporation decides to acquire any immovable 
property, for the purpose of this Act, the Commissioner shall acquire 
such property on behalf of the Corporation by agreement on such 
terms and at such price as may be approved by the Standing Com· 
mittee. 

199. Whenever the Commissioner, is unable to acquire any immo-. Prhoce~ur~ w en un-
vable property under section 198 by agreement, the Central Govern- movable 
ment may at the request of the Commissioner procure the acquisi- property 
tion thereof under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, cannot be 
1 of 11194- and on payment by the Corporation of the compensation awarded 8bcQuired · . yagree-under that Act and of the charges incurred by the Government in ment. 
connection with the proceedings, the land sh11I vest in the Corpora-
tion. 
300. With respect to the disposal of property belonging to the D;sposal 
Corporation, the following provisions shall have effect, namely: - ;e~~~ 
(a) the Commissioner may, in his discretion. dispose of, by 
sale or otherwise, any movable property belonging to the Cor-
poration not exceeding in value in each instance one thousand 
rupees, or such higher amount as the Ccrporation may pres-
cribe, or let out or hire any movable property or grant a lease of 
any immovable property belonging to the Corporation, includ-
ing any right of gathering and taking fruits and the like, for a 
period not exceeding one year at a time; 
(b) the Commissioner may, with the sanction of the Stand-
ing Committee,-
I,,"' , 
(i) dispose of, by sale or otherwise, any movable pro-
perty belongin~ to the Corporation the value of which 
does not exceed five thousand rupees; 
(ii) grant a lease (other than a lease in perpetuity) of 
any immovable property belonging to the Corporation; or 
(iii) sell or grant a lease in perpetuity of any immovable 
property belonging to the Corporation the value of which 
does not exceed fifty thousand rupees or the annual rent of 
which does not exceed three thousand rupees; . " , 
(c) in cases not covered by clause (a) or clause (b), the 
Commissioner may, with the sanction of the Corporation, lease, 
sell, let out on hire or otherwise transfer any property, movable 
or immovable, belonging to the Corporation; 
• • • • • 
(p) the sAnrtion of the Standing Committee or of the Cor-
poration unner the aforpsaid clauses may be given either gene-
rally for any class of cases or specially for any particular case; 
• • • • • 
(g) every case of disposal of property under clause (a) and 
. c1aU!'le (b) shiln he reported bv the Commissioner witht1ut delay 
, . 1t;'to the Standing CommittP.e and the Corporation respectively. 
• • • • 

Procedure 
formak-
jng con-
tracts. 
88 
CONTRACTS 
202. With respect to the making of contracts, the following provi-
sions shall have effect, namely:-
(a) every such contract shall be made on behalf of the Cor-
poration by the Commissioner; 
(b) no such contract for any purpose which in accordance 
with any provision of this Act the Commissioner may not carry 
out without the approval Or sanction of the Corporation or some 
otller municipal authority, shall be made by him until and unless 
such approval or sanction has been duly obtained; 
(c) no contract (other than a contract for the acquisition of 
immovable property) which will involve an expenditure exceed-
ing ten thousand rupees or such higher amount as the Corpora-
tion may fix shall be made by the Commissioner unless the same 
is preViously approved by the Standing Committee; 
(d) every COntract (other than a contract for the aCQuisition 
of immovable property) made by the Commissioner involving 
an expertditure exceeding two thousand rupees but not exceed-
ing ten thousand rupees or such higher amount as nmy be fixed 
under clause (c) shall be reported by him within one month 
after the' same has been made to the Standing Committee; 
(e) no contract for the acquisition of immovable property 
shall be valid-
(i) unless the contract has been approved by the Stand-
ing COmmittee, where the price stipulated to be paid for 
such 'prdperty exceeds five thouSand rupees but does not 
exceed fifteen thousand rupees; or 
·(fir·t1nl@Ssth~ 'Co1ltniCt' has-' been appto~ 'by the Cor-
poration"wbt!re the'price'stipulated to be paid for such pr(')-
perty· . ~ceeds fifteen thousand rupees. 
". • • 
CHAPTER XI 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
Scrutiny and audit of accounts 
• 
Accounts 2M. There shall be kept in ~uch manner and in such form as may 
to be kept, be prescribed by regulations four separate accounts of all receipts 
and expen"diture of the Corporation, namely:-
(a) the Electric Supply Account, that is to say, accounts of 
all receipts and expenditure of the Corporation in respect of the 
operations of the Delhi Electric Suppl)' UndertakIng; 

89 
(b) the Transport Account, that is to say, accounts of all 
receipts and expenditure of the Corporation in respect of the 
operations of the Delhi Transport Undertaking; 
(c) the Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Account, that is 
to say, accounts of all receipts and expenditure of the Corpora-
tion in respect 'of the operations of the Delhi Water Supply and 
Sewage Disposal Undertnking: and 
(d) the General Account, i.ha: is to 5<1\', accounts of all re-
ceipts and expenditure of the Corporation other than those 
specified in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (r), 
205. (1) The Municipal Chief Auditor shall conduct a monthly Scrutiny 
examination and audit of the municipal accounts and shall report of acco-
thereon to the Standing Committee who shall publish monthly an unts .b.Y 
abstract of the receipts and expenditure of the month last preced- =;'81 
.,~ing, signed by not less than two members of that Committee and by Audiior 
~.Lthe Municipal Chief Auditor. and by the 
Standing 
Celnmit-
(2) The Standing Committee may also from time to time and 
li+; ,lor such period as it thinks fit conduct independently any examina-
th.:tion and audit of the municipal accounts. 
(3) ror the purpose of examination and audit of the municipal 
the St~nding Committee and the Municipal Chief Auditor 
tee. 
have access to all the municipal accounts and to all records .. 
:correspondence relating thereto and the Comm'issioner 'shall 
with! :fumi'sh to the' Standing Committee or the Municipal Chief 
any explanation concerning any receipts or expenditure 
. they may·· call for. 
(1) The Municipal Chief Auditor shall- Report 
by the 
Municipal 
(a) report to the Standing Committee any material impro- Chi~ 
. t ' 1 't h' h h t '. b . th Auditor . prle y or lrregu arl y w IC e may a any tIme 0 serve 10 e . 
~Jii.J~enc:nture or in the recovery of moneys due to the Corpora-
l~_"'''''''' or in the municipal accounts; 

Sptcial 
audit at 
the direc-
tion of the 
Central 
Govern. 
tnent. 
., . ",'t ·PT...· 9' o· 
J .'''.,''. -. •. " ,. ~. 4 
(b) furnish to the Standing Committee such information as 
that Committee may from time to time require concerning the 
progress of the audit. 
• • • • • 
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of each year the 
Municipal Chief Auditor shall deliver to the Standing Committee 
a t:eport of the entire municipal accounts for the previous year . 
• • • • • 
(5) The Commissioner shall also forward without delay to the 
Central Government so many copies of the said report as may be 
required by that Government with a brief statement of the actionj 
if any, taken or proposed to be taken thereon. 
207. (1) The Central Government may at any time appoint· a.ri 
auditor fqr the purpose of making a special audit of any of ~he 
accounts of the Municipal Fund and of reporting thereon to the 
Central Government and the costs of such audit as determined by 
the Central Government shall be ~hargeable to the Municipal Fund. 
• • • • • 
Powers and duties of the Municipal Chief Auditor 
Procedure 208. (I) • • • • 
to be fol- (3) The Municipal Chief Auditor shall examine and audit the 
~:~ b~_ statement of accounts relating to the commercial serVices conduded 
clpal ~ef in any department of the Corporation, including the t~ading, manu-
Auditor. facturing and profit and loss accounts, and the balance-sheets where 
such accounts are maintained under the orders of the Corporation, 
the Standing Committee, the Delhi Electric Supply Committee, the 
Delhi Transport Committee or the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage 
Disposal Committee, and shall certify and report upon these 
accounts. 
(4) The Municipal Chief Auditor shaU, in consultation with the 
Standing Committee or, as the case may be, the Delhi Electric Sup-
ply Committee, the Delhi Transport Committee or the Delhi Water 
Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee and subject to any direc-
tions given by the Corporation, determine the form and manner in 
which his reports on the accounts of the Corporation shall be pre-
pared and shall have authority to call upon any officer of the Cor-
poration to provide any information necessary for the preparation 
of these reports. 
Power oC 209. (1) The Municipal Chief Auditor may make such queries and I 
14unicipat observations in relation to any of the accounts of the Corporation I 

91 
. which he is required to audit and call for such vouchers, statements, Chief 
returns and explanations in relation to such accounts as he may tUditkor 
think fit. 0 rna e queries, 
• 
• 
• • • 
CHAPl'ER XII 
WATER SUPPLY1 DRAniAGE AND SgwAGE DISPOSAL 
General 
'. • • 
• 
• 
etC' .. and 
call for 
returns, 
etc. 
:211. The Central 'Government may require the Corporation to- Power to 
require 
.. it· . ,-.. 
(a) carry out a survey of the existing consumption of and Corpora-
'iemand for water supplies in Delhi and of the water resources tion to 
?:in or av~ilable for Delhi-; carry out surveys 
f. -. . and 'for. 
_.
:V, ... . ..-.. '.--," 
.'.'/: ... . 
(b) prepare an estImate of the future water supply reqUlre~ mulate 
'fuents of Delhi; proposals . 
, (e) carry out a survey of the existing quantity of sewage 
~' .. ; .... . . "',-.' .... ' 
~ '.-~ . , \" 
~;' :,' 
disposed 9f and the manner in which it is disposed of; 
(d) formulate proposals as to.-
>.; . (i) the existing or future water supply requirements 
Qf Delhi, 
(ii) the existing or future sewage disposal requirements 
in Delhi including proposals for the manner in which and 
the place or places at which such sewage should be carried, 
treated and disposed of. 
,If the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Dispesal Committee Power to 
'. opinion that the works and other properties for the time being =:fo:t 
·iIi the Corporation for the purpose of Delhi Water Supply and works. 
_age Disposal Undertaking are inadequate for the purpose of 
IIQJlCle'nt supply of water or for the pUrpose of the efficient disposal 
oI'lewage under this Act, it may take steps in accordance with the 
_~I1OIlS of this Act for the construction of additional works, 
, within or without the local limits of the Corporation and 
... ' for the acquisition of additional properties for such works. 
~f '; - _ Water Supply 
1 .. : .. !P .•........ ;;._2. 13. (1~ It shall be t~e. dU.tY of the Delhi Water S~pply ~age Disposal CommIttee to ~e steps from time to tune-
~ ';i: * ~'.. • • • 
h,~.,.',: 
and Functions 
in rela-
tion to 
water 
supplies. 

Purity of 
water for 
domestic 
purposes. 
Power to 
supply 
water for 
non-
domestic 
purpa..es. 
Public 
gratuitous 
water 
supply. 
92 
(b) for providing a supply of wholesome water in pipes to 
every part of Delhi in which there are houses, for the domestic 
purposes of the occupants thereof, and for taking the pipes 
affording that suply to such point or points as will enable the 
houses to be connected thereto at a reasonable cost, so, how-
ever, that this clause shall not require the Committee to do any-
thing which is not practicable at a reasonable cost or to provide 
such a supply to any part of Delhi where such a supply is 
already available at such point or points aforesaid; 
• * • * • 
(2) If any qupstinn arises under clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
as to whether anything is or is not practicable at a reasonable cost 
or as to the point or points to which pipes must be taken in ord~ 
to enable houses to be connected to them at a reasonable cost, or 
under clause (c) thereof, as to whether a public supply can be 
provided at a reasonable cost, the Corporation . shall determine that 
question and thereupon the Committee shall give effect to that 
determination. 
• * • • 
2I5. The Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal. Committee 
shall secure that the water in any water works belonging to the 
Corporation from which water is supplied for domestic purposes is 
wholesome. 
• * • • 
Z15. (1) The Commissioner may supply' water for any purpose 
other than a domestic purpose on s.uch terms and co.nditions con-
sistent with this Act and the bye-laws made :thereunder as may be 
laid down in this behalf by the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage 
Disposal Committee on receiving a written application specifying 
the purpose for which, the. ~uply is required an~ th6(quantity likely 
to be consumed. 
(2) When an application under sub-section (1) is re'ceived, the 
ComQ'lissioner may subject to such charges and rat~s as may be fixed 
by the said Committee, place or allow· to be placed the necessary pipes 
and water fittings of such dimensions and character as may be pres-
cribed by bye-laws and may arrange for the supply of water through 
such pipes and fittings . 
• • • • • 
221. (1) The Commissioner, with the approval of the Delhi Water 
Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee, may provide gratUitous 
supply of wholesome water to the public within Delhi and may, for 
that purpose, erect public hydrants or other conveniences . 
• • • • 

222. (1) The Commissioner mCl~' 1.3:' a m(lln whether \\ ~ 
without the local limits of the Corpuration- ,"; Power to 
lay main~. 
(a) in any street; and 
(b) with the consent of every owner and occupier of 
not forming part of a street, in, over or on that land, 
and may, from time to time, inspect, repair, alter or renew lH ~--\'.I\t 
any time remove any main SO laid wh~ther by virtue of thi~, ~, ... - ','\;1 
or otherwise: 
Provided that where a consent required for the purpo~ :'\.:',~. 
sub-section is withheld, the Commissioner may, after giving t~, ~.:.;~ 
or Qccupier of the land a written nnt:ce of his intention so . . .' .', ''''~' 
the main in, over or on that land even without such consent. 
... ... ... ... 
223. (1) The Commissioner may. in any street whether ..... ~; ').,,-,,, • 
without the local limits of the Corporation. ]av such servil"~' "," "1' 
with such stopcocks and other wat~r fittings a~ he may dCL', .,",,'~ 
,",'~, 
sary for supplying water to premises and may, from time :t.., t~", 
inspect, repair, alter or renew and may, at any time, remll'", ..- W'~ 
service pipe laid in a street whether by virtue of this seci.:,'l\ '\, 
otherwise. \'\1' 
• ... ... • .. 
2gb. (r) • ... * "-
Power to 
lay ser-
vice pipes, 
etc. 
(3) The use, rent to be paid for such use, maintenance ~ .... Power of 
fng of meters shall be regulated by orders made by the De, w._ ~ommis: 
Supp~ and Sewage Disposal Committee in this behalf. ' ~~kt~o 
• iii • • .. meters. 
~; Drainage and slruJeta(le If; 
ar" 239. (1) All public drains, all drains in,' alongside-or u~\' _ .' 
public street, and all sewage disposal works whether constn\\~,,-.a "'·t dPU~bC 
, ". "" rams, '. '. of the Municipal Fund or otherwISe, and all works, mat~~~ • tI etc., to 
things appertaining thereto, which are situated in Delhi shaU ~~,~, vest in 
'th~ .. Corporation. 1 the Cor-
.. J'. • . • • poration. 
.. ,FQr tpe purposes of enlarging, deepenin~ or otherwt_ ~Pf\l ' 
. or maintaining any such drain or sewage disposal work ", "'"~ 
'. ,sub-s~il $pper~aining thereto as may be neces~ry fal' 'l\" .ald 
~'N'",,",nC!.~ .. shall be deemed also to vest in the Corporation, 
* • • 
""., . 240. (l) All municipal drains, all sewage disposal works f\nd II 
~ ....... ~- . I d th' ta·· h h II b " Control , .. ,'wvfU, materIa s an mgs apper mIng t ereto s a e Un".'1_ tit d ' , t I f h C ., . \0 0 raInS ". con ro 0 t e ommlSSloner, nnd se-
'~~'( (2) The Commissioner shall maintain and keep in repair all 1\\\1 I Wage dis. 
'$<'~' cipal drains and sewage disposal works and when autho\,i""d ;:. posal 
the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee "I' U Y works . 
• e.(~oriJOlr<ltion in this behalf, shall construct as many new dl'tlll'.'~ 
__ 'WM dispo~al works as may from time to time be neceMI", I'y t, ~ 
1 drainage and sewage disposal. . nr 
• • • 

Appoint-
ment o"f 
places for 
the em-
ptying of 
drains 
and dis-
posal of 
sewage. 
94 
DisposaZ of sewage 
250. The Commissioner may cause any or all of the municipal 
drains to empty into, and all sewage to be disposed of at, such place . 
or places as he considers suitable: 
Provided that no place which has not been be'fore the com-
mencement of this Act used for any of tne purposes specified in this 
section shall, after such commencement be used therefor without 
the approval of the Corporation: 
Provided further that on and after such date as may be appoint-
ed' by the Central Government in this behalf no sewage shall be 
discharged into any water-course until it h1<; h~cn so treated as not 
to affect prejudicially the purity and quality of the water into 
whicl; it is discharged. 
• * 
Miscellaneous 
• * • 
Bulk sup- 259. The Corporation shall be bound to supply to the New Delhi 
ply of Municipal Committee and the Military Engineer Services. Delhi 
water to Cantonment, at the place or places at which immediately before the the New 
Delhi commencement of this Act t.he Delhi Joint Water and S£"wage Board 
Municipal constituted under the Delhi Joint Water and Sewage Board Act, 
Com- 1926, used to supply water to that Committee or those Services or 23 of I926t 
mittee at such other place or places as may be agreed between the Cor-and the Military poration and that Committee or, as the case may be, those Services, 
Engineer water in bulk up to the amount demanded by the said Committee 
Services. or .Services or. if their total demand is in excess of the available 
Delhi Can .. supply. up to such proportion as the Corporation may. on the recom-
tonment. mendation of the Delhi Wab~r Supply and Sewage Disposal Com-
New Delhi 
Municipal 
Com-
mittee 
and the 
Military 
Engineer 
Services 
to pay 
actual 
cost of 
supply to 
water. 
mittee, determine: 
. Provided that the quantity of. water supplied per ca.'Pita. to the 
New Delhi Municipal Committee by the Delhi Joint Water and 
Sewage Board immediately before tli'e commencement of this Act 
shall not be reduced after such commencement except with the pre-
vious permission of the Central Government. 
260. (1) The New Delhi Municipal Committee and the Military 
Engineer Services, Delhi Cantonment. shall pay for the water sup-
plied to them the actual cost o'f supply of such water at the rate 
in respect of each thousand gallons of water supplied (hereinafter 
referred to as "the final issue rate") calculated in the manner pres-
cribed in this section. 
(2) The final issue rate shall be calculated for each year after 
the accounts o'f the year have been closed bv dividing the amount 
of the total expenditure of the Corporation during the year by the 
nq.mber of thousand gallons of water supplied by the Corporation 
• 
" ~. 
1, 
- I l: 
J~." ... i , i 
• I 
.". I 
; I 

95 
during that year to itself and to the New Delhi Municipal Com.;. 
mittee and the Military Engineer Services. 
(3) For the purpose of sub-section (2), there shall be taken into 
account such items o'f expenditure incurred by the Corporation as 
may 'be determined by rules made by the Central Government in 
this behalf. 
261. (1) Pending the calculation of final issue rate for any year, Provision-
payments of water supplied during that year to the New Delhi a1 col.;. 
Municipal Committee or the Military Engineer Services shall be leet,ing 
blade provisio~ally at an estimated rate (hereinafter referred to as rate: 
"the col'lecting rate"). 
(2) The collecting rate shall be calculated at the time of framing 
of the :budget estimates for the year by dividing the sum of the 
,amount of the estimated expenditure of the Corporation in that 
~ear and of an addition of five per cent. of that amount 'by the 
I
~' ", number of thousand gallons of water estimated as likely to be sUp'" 
">, l.JpJ,ied, during that year. 
, ,:. (3) If any differem:e of opinion arises as to the supply of water 
i
!,"~.' .. '· .,<~o.be estimated for. the purposes o~ t~e ascertainment of the collect-
;'.',. ' irtg rate, the decislon of the AdmInIStrator thereon shall be final. 
~'.: ~ ',1JJ; .:-.. .J 
~. (4) The New Delhi Municipal Committee and the Military Engi ... 
"~'r.:"""_r,Services :shall pay on demand after the close of each quarter 
~~~r~:"",of each year the eost of the water supplied to them in that quarter 
,", calculated at the collecting rate. 
·(S): r-lothing in this section shall preclude the Corporation from 
'. , With the consent of the New Delhi Municipal Committee 
Military Engineer Services and in accordance with any order 
,~y the Ad;ministrator for advance payments by each such 
of the cost (calculated 4t the collecting rate) of such 
water as are likely to be supplied to each of them in 
or 'for such other period as may be determined by the 
If the final issue tate for any year exceeds the collecting Final 
ael:ennir.~ed for that year, the balance due shall be recovered .settle. 
''rWIP'n'W'r- the New Delhi Municipal Committee or, as the case may be, ment of 
the Military Engineer Services. accounts. 
l~l If the final issue rate is less than the collecting rate, the 
collection shall be refunded to the New .Delhi Municipal 
or, as the case may be, to the Military Engineer Ser-

96 ,-' -.", 
Supply of 263. (1) For the purpose of measuring and recording the amount 
meters. of water supplied to the New Delhi Municipal Committee or, as 
the case may be, to the Military Engineer Services, the Commis-
sioner shall affix meters at the points of junction between the com-
munication pipes of the New Delhi Municipal Committee, or as the 
case may be, of the Military Engineer Services and the mains or 
pipes belonging to the Corporation, and the cost of such meters 
shall be borne by the Corpora tion. 
(2) It snall be presumd. until the contnuy is proved, that the 
quantity of water supplied through any connection is the quantity 
indicated by the meter affixed to that connection. 
Testing or 2&1. (1) If the New Delhi Municipal Committee or, as the case 
meters. may be, the Military Engineer Services desire to have any meter 
tested, it may make an application in this behalf accompanied by a 
fee of two hundred and fifty rupees to the Cdmmissioner and on 
receipt of such appplication and fee, the Commissioner sha'll forth-
with cause the meter to be tested at a lime and place of which due 
no~~ce sh;all have been given to the authority concerned. 
Disposal 
ofse-
wage of 
New 
Delhi. 
(2) If the meter is found on being tested to be incouect, the 
Commissioner shall be bound to replace or repair the same and to 
refund the fee paid under sub-section (I) together with such sum, 
if any, as is proved to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have 
been paid in excess by reaSOn of the incorrectness of the meter. 
2~ .. (1) The Corporation shall be bound to receive in bulk from 
the New Delhi Municipal Committee all sewage delivered by that 
.. SQw~~tte~ a~d ,to Idispose of such sewagt:: 
-Il":. • 
"Pr9vided that the New Delhi Municipal Committee shall not 
eJlecu.,teany major work i:alculated to increase the normal discharge 
of sewage without the concurrence of the Corporation. 
(2) Sewage received in pursuance of the provisions of sub-
section (1) shall be the property of the Corporation and any income 
derived from the sale of effluent or sludge shall be credited to the 
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Account of the' Municipal 
Fund. 
(3) If any disagreement arises between the Corporation and the 
New Delhi Municipal Committee as to the effect of the execution 
ot any work or the doing of anything, the matter shall Pe referred 
to the Central Government whose decision shall be final. 

97 
268. (I) Subject to the proVIsIons of section 268 the total net New 
cost of the disposal of all sewage shall be borne by the Corporation Delhi 
and the New Delhi Municipal Committee in such proportion as the Munici-
Central Government may, from time to time, determine. P~ltteComt-. ml e 0 
(2) In determining the total net cost of disposal of all sewage pay .cost 
there shall be taken into account such items of expenditure incurred of d1lS- f • pasa 0 
by the Corporation as may be determmed by rules made <by the sewage. 
Central Government in this behalf. 
Manner 
267. (I) The est~mated 'net co:;;t of the disposal of sewage increas- of pay-
ed by five per cent. shall be payable on demand by the New Delhi ment by 
Municipal Committee after the close of each quarter of each year the ~ew 
in accordance with the proportions determined under sub-section ~:~lci_ 
(1) of section 2~6. pal Com-
~: (2) If the sum so paid by the New Delhi· Municipal Committee ;;~~e:r':' 
, in any vear exceeds or is less than the sum payable by it on the tion of 
basis of the actual cost as determined under section 266, the pay- cost of 
ments to be made by that' body in the folld-oting year shall be ad- disposal 
justed accordingly. of se-W8.le. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall precll;lde the Corporation from 
arranging with the consent of the New Delhi MUnicipal Committee 
and in accordance with any orders issued by the Admini~trator for 
" advance payment by that Committee of such portion of the cost 
.. of the disposal of sewage as is likely to be bom~ by it in.such quarter 
r" or such other period as may be determined by the Administrator . 
.. ,',,·'1. 
. 
011'1, 268: (1) If. any dispute arises between the Corporation and the Dis utes 
~~.' New Delhi Municipal Committee or. as the case may be, the Military as,~ 
. Engineer Services as to the liability of the said Committee or Services liability 
an.v sum demanded by the Corporation or as to the rigHt of 'fol'; pay- .. i 
'eonlJTi~ttee tiP sernc~ to an, re'fana"or as to the' aMount menU-to 
'refund, from the Cotporation, then, the New Delhi Municipal ~hlt~~,;, 
1th1ilfifftAb or, as the case may be, the Military Engineer services poration. 
require the Corporation to refer the matter in dispute to the 
:an1"-1 Government and' the decision of the Central Government 
thereon shall be final: 
Pnwided that, where the dispute relates to the liability of the 
. Delhi Municipal Committee or, as the case ~av be, the'Military 
,,-(~gineer Servi ces to make any payment to the . Corporation, thE' 
,;\~ .. . shaII be made to the Corporation pending the decision 01 
. . Central Government. 
. ,fa} In making any such reference. the Corporation shaD turnfsb 
Central Government and the New Delhi Municipal Com-
or, as the case may he, the Military Engineer ServiceB 8 fun . 

Summary 
recovery 
of sums 
due 
from the 
New 
Delhi 
Munici-
pal Com-
mittee 
or the 
Military 
. Engineer 
Services. 
Corpo-
ration 
not to 
give up 
certain 
works, 
etc., 
without 
permis-
sion of 
theCen-
tral Gov-
ernment. 
Work to . 
bedone~ 
licensed 
plumber. 
Prohibi-
tion of 
certain 
acts. 
98 
statement of the grounds of the dispute and the Central Govern-
ment shall consider that statement together with a like statement 
received from the said Committee or Services within six weeks of 
the date of the reference. 
269. If the New Delhi Municipal Committee or, as the case may 
be,· the Military Engineer Services does not. wi thin one month of 
the receipt of demand 'for any sum claimed by the Corporation, pay 
such sum. the Administrator may, on the requisition from the Cor-
pc>ration in this behalf-
(a) if the balances of the said Committee or Services are 
kept in the Government Treasury, order the officer incharge of 
the Treasury to reduce the balances at the credit of the said 
Committee or Services by the amount of the ium due and pay 
that amount to the Corporation, or 
(b) in any other case deduct the amount of the sum due· 
from any contribution OI.Swn payable by the Central Govern-
ment to the said Committee or Services and pay the amount so 
deducted to the Corporation. 
270. Without the previous pennission of the Central Government, 
the Corporation or the Pelhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 
Committee or the Commissioner shall not-
(a) give up any scheme of work approved by the Delhi 
Joint Water and Sewage Board, or 
(b) give up or·siow down the execution of any work under-
taken by the said Board in pursuance o'f any such scheme. 
• • • 
2T~ (1)· * • * • • 
(5)· The Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee 
may, from time to time, prescribe the charges to be' paid to licensed 
plumbers for any work done by them under or for any of the pur-
poses of this 'Chapter. 
• * • • • * * 
273 (1) No person shall-
(a) wilfully obstruct any person acting under the authonty 
of . the Corporation, the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Dis-
posal Committee or the CommiSSioner, in setting out the lines 
of any works or pull up or remove any pillar, post or stake 
fixed in the ground for the purpose of setting out lines of such 
work, or deface or destroy any works made for the same pur-
pose; or , • • • • 

I, 
, '/ 
.. f 1910. 
:~, 
99 
{c) unlawfully obstruct ~h€' flow or, or flush, draw off, or 
divert, or take water from any water work belonging to the 
Corporation or any water course by which any such water work 
is supplied; or 
(d) unlawfully obstruct the flow of, or flush, draw off, divert 
ur take sewage from any sewage work belonging to the Corpo-
ration or break or damage any electrical transmission line main ... 
tained by the Corporation; or 
(e) obstruct any officer or other employee of the Corpora-
tion in the discharge ot his duties under this Chapter or refuse 
or wilfully neglect to furnish him with the means necessary for 
the making of any entry, in:;pection. examination Or inquiry 
tflereujJder in relatiun to any water or sewage work; or 
• * • • 
CHAPTER XIII 
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY 
274. In this Chapter. unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) the expressions "generating station" and "main trans-
mi~sion line" have the same meanings as in the Electricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948; 
Definitions. 
(b)' the word "licensee" has the same meaning as in the' 
Indian Electricity Act. 1910. 
275. (1) It shall be the duty of the Delhi Electric Supply Commit- Functions 
tee to develop cud maintain an efficient, co-ordinated and economical in relation 
system of electricity supply for the whole of the Union territory of ~ electri-
Delhi and for that purpose to take steps from time to time- • Cl~Y 1 
(a) for generating or acquiring supplies of electricity; 
(b) for pf'uvid!ng supplies of electricity for licensees and 
persons other than licensees for whom immediately before the 
establishment of the Corporation the Delhi State Electricity 
Buard constitutpd under thl' Electricity (Supply) Act. 1948, was 
pro\·lding. or competent to pro\'ide, such supplies under that 
Act; and _,,=,;1 
(c) for preparing and carrying out in accOl dance with rules 
made in this behalf ~lhemes for the generation and supply of 
electricity: 
J ~~ ; , 
IUPP y. 

100 
Provided that without the previous permission of the Central 
Government the Corporation or the Delhi Electric Supply Commit-
tee, or the General Manager (Electricity). shall not-
(i) give up any scheme prepared ,:.::1 sanctioned by the 
Delhi State Electricity Board; or 
(ii) give up or slow down execution of any work under-
taken in pursuance of any sv.ch scheme. 
(2) In the discharge of its functions in relation to electricity E'Up-
ply, the Delhi Electric Supply Committee shaU, as far as practicable-
(a) promote the use of all economical methods of generat-
ing", trlPlS~~tting and distributing el€ctricity; 
(b) secure the development of supplies of electricity; 
(c) secure the exten!:"ion of supplies of electricity to areas 
without such supplies; 
(d) promote the standardisation of systems of supply and 
types of electrical fittings; . 
(e)_ promote the simplification aqd standardisation of me-
thods of charge for suppl!es of electricity. 
',:-:L :' . 
'Additional 21~ ,(1) The Delhi Electric Supply Committee may take steps in 
functions ac~ordance with the provisions of this Act to manufacture, purchases 
in rehtion E'ell Or let on hire on the execution of a hire purchase agreement or ' 
to electri-city otherwise, any electrical machinery, control g~~,ftttihgs, wires or 
suppl]. apparatus for lighting, heating, cooling or moijve power or for any 
other purpose for which electricity can or may be used, or any in-
,11_i".,,":t <dusuU. '~l!' agtieultW1ll machil;lwY o~ated by elect~ic~~, and to 
;,~ 'matall; eannec~ ,repair, maintaiQ OJ: remov~ '~\1ch m~~~~ryl CQn-
t(tr~l gear, fittings, W'ir~s, 01 apparatus and in res~t ~~eof d~and 
and take. such. remuneration or rent" and charges and make such 
terms and conditions as it deems fit. 
(2) The Committee may also maintain shops and show rooms for 
the display, sale or hire of machinery, control gear, fittings, wires or 
apparatus as aforesaid, conduct displays, exhibitions and demonstra-
tions thereof and generally do all things, including advertising in-
cidental to the saie or hire of such machinery, control gear, fittings, 
wires and apparatus and to the promotion and encou.ragement of 
the use of electricity. 
(31: Moneys received and expended in connection with any 
Undertakings under this section shall be '-hown separately In the 
Electric Supply Accounts. 

Wi 
277. SubJect to the provisions of this Act, the Corporation shall Corporation 
in respect of the whole of the Union territory of Delhi, have all the to have 
powers and obligations of a licensee under the Indian Electricity pObwl.erSt~ olga Ions 
Act, 1910, and this Chapter [hall be deemed to be the licence of the of licensee 
Corporation for the purposes of that Act: under Act 
9011910. 
Provided that nothing in sections 3 to 11 of, or in clauses I to IX 
of the Schedule to, that Act relating to the duties and obligations 
of a licensee shall apply to the Corporation. 
278. (1) The Delhi Electric Supply Committee may take steps in Powel' to accordance with ,the provisions of this Act,- construct 
(a) to construct Or acquire in any part of the Union terri- or acquire 
tory of Delhi subject to the prOvisions of t~e Indian Electricity :~n:,der 
Act. 1910, or of any other law for the time being in force, under- eto. 
takings for the generation or supply of electricity and for elec-
tric traction, and enter into any agreement with any person for 
the ~ upply of electricity to or by the Corporation; 
(b) to construct buildings or works of every description 
necessary or desirable for the maintenance, operation and deve-
lopment of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking in any part 
of the Union territory of Delhi; 
(c) to purchase or take on lease or hire or otherwise &c-
,;'r quire any movable prop~:ty or immovable property or any 
rights in any such proper~y in any part of the Union territory o! 
Delhi. 
(2) The General Manager (Electricity) shall, on behaH of the 
Corporation, exercise all the pcwu.'.: and be subject to all. the obli-
gations of a licensee under the Indian ElectriCity Act, 1910, or any 
':, ~~er law for the time being in force relating to the generation or 
, of electricity. ;~ 
• 
(1) For the purpcse of carrying out, renewing and repairing PoWel"-M· ... 
. in connection with th~ Delhi Electric Supply Undeftaldut. c:arijihg-' 
Manager (Electricity) may. in any pan of· the Union ~t,,:~ 
.'il(.r.y of Delhi, exercise the same powers as under .the provisions mg :..-' repa,nH," 
Chapter XII the Commissioner may exerci~e for carrying, out, re- works. 
and repa;ring works relating to water supply or sewage dis-
~bject to the same restrictions as are by this Act impo$ed on 
exerci:.e of such powers. 
(I) When a work undertaken by the ~nE'ral Manager (Electri-
'id~ .... r involves the opening Or breaking up of any street, such work 
not be commenced and carried out except in coBSUltation with 
Commissioner or with such officrer as the Commissioner mar 
1tit!P'lplBte in this behalf. 

Restriction 
on build-
ing and 
other acts 
interfering 
with the 
works 
of Under_ 
taking. 
102 
ZSO. (1) No bullding, wall or other structure shall be newly 
erected and no street or railway shall be constructed over, or in 
such a manner as to interfere with, any work constructed or main-
tained for the purposes of the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking 
except with the written pennission of the General Manager (Elec-
tricity) . 
(2) The General Manager (Electricity) may, with the approval 
of the Delhi Electric Supply Committee cause any building, wall or 
other structure, erected, Or any street or railway constructed in 
contravention of sub-section (1), to be removed or otherwise dealt 
with as he deems fit, and the expenses incurred therefor shall be 
paid by the person or authority responsible and shall be recoverable 
from Euch person or authority as an arrear of tax under this Act. 
Power of 281. (1) The Corporation may, on the recommendation of the 
Corpora- Delhi Electric Supply Committee, enter into an agreement with any 
. tion to licenSEe within the Union territory of Delhi in regard to the pur-make arrange- chase or sale of ~lectricity and the price thereof or in regard to the 
ments.with purchase, operation or control of any generating station or main 
licensees. transmission line and notwithstanding anything contained in any 
law or in any licenc~, memorandum of association or other instru-
ment regulating the" constitution and powers of the licensee, it 
shall be lawful for the licensee to enter into and carry out any such 
agreemEnt. .. " 
(2) In entering into an agreement under this ~tion the Corpo-
ration shall not show any undue preference to any licensee. 
Restriction 282. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
on esta- for the time being in force Or in any licence, it shall not be lawful 
bU&hment for a licensee or any other person, except with the permission. in 
of :pewtin .writing of· the Corporation granted on application made in this be-
:::=:a 0: half, to establish or acquire a new generating station or to extend 
major or replace any major unit of plant or works pertaining to the gene-
additions tL ration of electricity in a generating station. 
or replace-
ment of 
plant in 
generating 
stations. 
(2) There shall be stated in every application for permission 
under this section Euch particulars as the Corporation may reason-
ably require of the station, plant or works, as the case may be, in 
respect of which it is made, and where permission is given thereto. 
in acting in pursuance of such permisdon the applicant shall not, 
without the further permission of the Corporation, make any mate-
rial variation in the particulars so stated. 

< 
103 
283. Subject to the provisions oi any law for the time being in 
force, charges shall be leviable for th~ supply of electricity by the 
Corporation at such rates as may, from time to time, be fixed by 
the Delhi Electric Supply Committf.'e with the approval of the Cor-
poration. 
Charges 
lor supply 
of electri-
city. 
284. The Corporation shall be bound to provide bulk supplies of Bulk 
electricity for the New Delhi Municipal Committee and the Military supply. 
E · S' D lh' C h t't d d ofe]ectrl-ngml'er ervlCes, e I ,o.ntonmf'nt. up 10 t " nuan 1 V cman - . '1. Clty to 
ed by each of these authorities, or if the total demand is in excess the New 
(jf the available supply. up to such proportion in the case of each of Delhi 
these authorities as the Corporation may. with the approval of the Municipal 
Central Government, determine, Committee 
and 
Military 
Engineer 
Services, 
Delhi 
Canton-
ment. 
~ .. 
~' .• 285. The New Delhi Municipal Committee or, as the case may be; 
t~ the Military Engineer Services, Delhi Cantonm::.nt, shall pay for the 
electricity supplied to it the actual cost of supply of such electricity 
at such rate or rates as may be determined by agreement between 
the Corporation and the authority concerned: 
Payment 
of actual 
cost of 
supply of 
electri-
city . 
. /-'1 
Provided that in the case of any dispute between the Corporation 
and any such authority as to the rate, the dispute shall be referred to 
.:. the Central Government who"e decision thereon shall be final. 
:i~;, 
(1) The Delhi State Electricity Beard constituted under the 
(Supply) Act, 1948, shall cease to function as from, and 
be ·deemed to be dissolved on, the date of the establishment of 
€drporation under this Act. 
,.2) On the dissolution of the Board-
It .... ·' .. ·,· (a) the provisions of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, 
>','J:;'. relating to State Electricity Boardc shall cease to have effect in 
:~t~~:' the Union territory of Delhi; and 
(b) the other provisions of that Act shall have effect therein 
if the Delhi State Electricity Board had never been constituted. 
Dissolu-
tion of ,', 
the Delhi 
State Elec-
tricity 
Board. 

Defini-
tions. 
Functions 
in rela-
tion to 
transport 
services. 
to. 
CHAPTER XlV 
TRANSPORT SERVICES 
287. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "road transport service'! means a ~'ervice carrying pas-
sengers or goods or both by road in vehicles for hire or reward; 
(b) "vehicle" means any mechanically propelled vehicle, 
used or capable of being used for the purpose of road transport, 
and includes a tram car, a trolley-vehicle and a trailor; . :to 
(c) woras and expre-sions used but not defined in this 
Chapter and defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, have the 4 of 1939 
meanings assigned to them in that Act. 
288. It shall be the general duty of the Delhi Transport Committee 
to take steps from time to time for providing or securing or promot-
ing the provision of an efficient, adequate, economical and properly 
co-ordinated system of road transport services for passengers and 
goods in the Urtion territory of Delhi and in any area to which the 
operation of an, road transport rervice of the Corporation has been 
extended (hereafter in th;s Chapter referred to as "extended area") 
in the manner provided in section 292 and for that purpose-
(a) to operate road transport services in the Union territory 
of Delbi and in any extended area; 
(b), to ~rovide for any ancillary service. 
- : 
Powers in 289.(1) The Delhi Transport Committee may take steps in accord-
relation to ance with the provisions of this Act-
transport 
c;ervices. (a) to manufacture, purchase, maintain and repair rolling-
stoclt; vehicles, appliances, plant, equipment or any other thing 
required for the efficient operation of the Delhi Transport Under-
taking; 
(b) to acquire in accordance with schemes prepared under 
this Act either compulsorily in accordance with such procedure 
as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf or by 
agreement, whether absolutely or for any period, the whole or 
any part of any transport service operated by any other person 
to the extent to which the activities thereof consist of the opera-
tion 'Of road transport services or ancillary services in the Unjon 
tetritory of Delhi or in any extended area; 

,'-
105 
(c) to construct buildings or works of every description 
necessary or desirable for the maintenance. operation and dev~ 
lopment of the Delhi Transport Undertaking; 
(d) to dispose of scrap vehicles, old tyres, used oils and any 
other stores of scrap value; 
(e) to purchase vehicles of such type as may be suitable for 
use in the road transport services operated under this Act; 
(f) to purcha~e or otherwise secure by agreement vehicles, 
garages, sheds, office buildings, depots, land, workshops, equip-
ment, tools, accessories to and spare parts for vehicles or any 
other article owned or possessed by any dealer or the owner of 
any other transport service; 
(g) to do anything for the purpose of. advancing the skill 
of persons employed for the purpose of the Undertaking or the 
efficiency. of the equipment necessary for the Undertaking or of 
the manner in which that equipment is operated, including the 
prOvision of facilities for training, education and. research; 
(h) to enter into and carry out agreements with any person 
carrying on business as a carrier of passengers or goods providing 
for the carriage of passengers or goods on behaH of the Corpora-
tion by that other person at a through fare or freight; 
..,. (i) to do all other things to facilitate the proper carrying 
on of the b.\lSiness, of the Undertaking. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorising the 
t... Corporation or the Delhi Transport Committee or the Genet'al Mana· 
ger (Transport) except with the previOUS permisSion of the Central 
Government,-.... : .. 
(4) to manufacture or maintain anything which is not re-
quired direCtly or indirectly for use for the purpose.,Qf the Un-
dertaking or to repair, store or provide' any service for, any 
r ,yehic1e which does not belong to the Corporation or Is not used 
,directly or indirectly for the purpose of the Undertaking; 
;.',g;.'~ ..• ~~ ...... , ... ,4:J!\. (b) tc;> purchase any vehicle for the purpose of sale to any 
~. person, or to sell or supply to any person lubricants, spare parts 
A,~,·. or equipment for, or accessories to, vehicles; 
:,.-,~,. 
(c) to let vehicles, on hire for the carriage of passengers or 
~ save as expressly provided by or under this Act. 
The Delhi Transport Committee shall, with the previous 
d1nwl' of the Corporation and in the case of road transport service 
in any extended area also with the previous approval of 

Prepara-
tion of 
sCht:1W~' 
Sanction 
of 
schemes. 
Extension 
of opera-
tion of 
the road 
trasport 
services 
of the 
Corpora-
tion to 
areas 
within 
another 
State. 
106 
the Government of the State within which such extended area is 
situated, determine the fares and freights for the carriage of passen-
~ers and goods in any road transport service operated under this 
Act. -
290. With a view to developing road· transport services on any 
route or in any area within the Union territory of Delhi, the General 
Manager (Transport) may, from time to time, prepare schemes not 
inconsistent with this Act for starting new road transport services 
or augmenting its existing road transport services on such route or 
in such area in which provision may be made for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
(4) the purchase of chassis of motor vehicles or vehiL!p.s 
of a suitable type; 
(b) the making of arrangements for building suitable types 
of bodies for vehicles; 
(c) the erection of stands and sheds for pa~sengers and 
l 
goods; 
(d) the purchase of equipment, tools and spare parts for, 
and accessories to, vehicles; and 
(e) such supplemental incidental and consequential provi-
sions as may appear necessary or expedient for any ,of the 
purposes aforesaid. 
291. (1) The General Manager (Transport) shall, after a scheme 
has been prepared under section 290, obtain the advice of the 
Delhi Transport Committee thereon and place the scheme with the 
advice before the Corporation. 
(2) The Corporation may, after considering the advice sO 'obtain-
ed either sanction the scheme without modifications or with such 
modiflcations as it may deem necessary or reject the scheme. 
I'! 
292. (1) If the General Manager (Transport) considers it to be 
expedient in the public interest to extend the operation of any of 
the road transport services to any area within another State he may, 
with the previous approval of the Delhi Transport Committee and 
the CorporaJ~on, negotiate with the Government of that State re-
garding the proposed extension. 
(2) If the Government of that State .approves the proposed ex-
tension, the General Manager (Tran~port) shall prepare a 
scheme for the purpose and submit the same to the Corporation for 
its approval through the Delhi Transport Committee! 

107 
1~'\'" .• 
(3) Mter the scheme has been approved by the Corporation, it 
shall be competent for the General Manager (Transport) to extend 
" the operation of the road transport service to such area and when 
~. ,the ,ope~ation of such service is so extended, he shall operate the 
f. ~~,~."}.' serVIce In that. a~ea su?ject to the p~~sions of any law in force 
II" in the State wIthm whIch such area IS sItuated, 
~' 
, ' 
"" '. 293. The General Manager (Transport) may, from time to time, 
~~i~," alter or extend a scheme by a supplementary scheme prepared and 
sanctioned in the manner provided in the foregoing provisions of 
i'Lk this Chapter. 
Power to 
alt!' I' 
or extend 
the 
SChpJ1H'S 
r~~'\"" . 
294~ In carrying on the Dplhi Transport Undertaking, the Gpneral 
I.:';:::" ·.';.t,.;.Manager (Transport) shall act as far as possible on business prin-
"\ .. tffples. 
, " .~ 
:; ,1';1, 
The 
Under-
taking tn 
be run on 
business 
principles, 
'" 295. The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (in this section referred to Applica-
the said Act) shall have effect subject to the following provisions, tlon of the 
provisions 
of the 
Motor 
(a) the Central Government may, by notification in the Vehicles 
Official Gazette, authorise subject to such terms and conditions, Act, 1939. 
, .' if any, as it may deem fit to impose, any person to exercise and or} any 
s:.'V: ru es 
.. perform to the exclusion of the Licensing Authority, Regis- made 
.', tering Authority, Motor Vehicles Inspector, Traffic Inspector, there-
~,'Regional Transport Authority or State Transport Authority, under to 
. 'as the case may be, and without following the procedure laid vehicles 
, down for the purpose in the said Act all or such of the powers, afo~e:~­
functions and duties of the Licensing Authority, Registering ~f the 
AuthOrity, Motor Vehicles Inspector, Traffic Inspector, Regional Under-
Transport Authority or the State Transport Authority under the taking, 
said Act or under the rules made thereunder in relation to 
motor vehicles of the Corporation and the drivers and conduc-
tors of those vehicles as may be specified in the notification; 
(b) the Central Government rna:v. if it so thinks necessary, 
by order. cancel, suspend or vary the conditions of any stage 
carriage. contract carriage or public carrier's permit which has 
been granted or countersigned under Chapter IV of the said 
,Act by any Regional Transport Authority in the Union territory 
·,of Delhi or by the State Transport Authority, Delhi, and is 
"nlid within the whole or any part of that territory and any 
order so passed shall be final; 

Power 01 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
exempt 
vehicles 
of the 
. Corpora-
tionfrom 
payment 
of certain 
charges. 
Mainte-
nance and 
repairs 01 
portion of 
streets 
where 
tramway 
is laid. 
Vesting 
of public 
strc:ts in 
the COr-
poration. 
108 
(c) if the Central Government, by order in writing so 
directs, any Regional Transport Authority within the Union 
territory of Delhi or the State Transport Authority, Delhi, 
shall not grant, countersign or renew any permit under Chapter 
IV of the said Act other than a private carrier's permit; 
(d) the Central Government may, by order in writing, 
exempt the motor vehicles of the Ccrporatioll or the employees 
of the Undertaking from the provisions of the said Act or of any 
rules made thereunder relating to the carrying of certificates of 
registration and fitness. 
296. The Central Government may, by order in writing, exempt 
all or any of the vehicles of the Corporation from payment of any 
tolls or other charges leviable under any enactment for the use of 
the road within the Union territory of Delhi. 
297. The General Manager (Transport) shall cause to be main-
tained and kept in good condition and repair ~o much of any street 
wherein any tramway is laid as lies between the rails of the tramway 
and where two tramways are laid in any street at a distance of not 
more than six feet from each other, the portion of the street between 
the tramways and in any case as much of the street.. as extends 
eighteen inches beyon4 the rails of, and on each side of, rf!.P..:t such 
tI1lmway. . 
" 
CHAP1'ER XV 
STREETS 
C10nstru c11i.on , maintenance and improoement of stlleets 
298. (1) • • • 
(2) All public streets v~ting in the Corporation shall be under 
the control of the Commissioner and shall be mBintalDed,· (:~trolled 
and regulated by him in accordance with the bye--laws made in this 
behalf. 

299. (1) The Commissioner shall. from time to time, cause all ~'unctlOns 
public streets vfsted in the Corporation to be levelled, metalled or of.C~m-. . nUSSlOner paved, channelled, altered or repaIred, and may wIden, extend or in respect 
otherwise improve any such street or cause the soil thereof to be of pUblic 
raised, lowered or altered or may place and keep in repair fences Itreets, 
and posts for the safety of fcot-passengers: 
ProVided that no widening, extension or other improvement of 
a public street, the aggregate cost of which will exceed five thousand 
rupees, shall be undertaken by the Commi:sioner except with the 
previous sanction of the Corporation. 
(2) With the previous sanction of the Corporation the Commis-
sioner may permanently close the whole or any part of a public 
street: 
:, "Provided that before according such sanction the Corporation 
\' shall by notice published in the manner rpecified by.bye-Iaws give 
, reasonable opportunity to the frsidents likely to be affected by such 
_ closure to make suggestions or objections with re:pect to such closure 
, _ alid' 'shall consider all such suggestions or objections which may be 
~'ffi~de \vtlhin one month from the date of the publication of the said ," , ' . 
~, ·~otice. 
~~~; j. :)t.\t~ 
~ •• i;iI(,j' ,~.aiJ" ,,', ~, : I * • • • 
~~:" . . . ,",-. ,t,.. '_';' 
~"~'f301. The Commis~ioner may at any time with the previous 54!lc~. fower to 
" , 'bon of the Corporation,- .make new 
",,,. . public 
. (4) layout and make new public streets; ttreets. 
)I,"1&;:~.o, tb) construct bridges and sub-ways; 
.a:';IIo!·· ~(c) turn or divert any existing public street; and I ..; 
(d) lay down and determine the position and direction of 
J1tr.:la"~t: .. or streets in any part of Delhi notwithstanding that no 
.(easel for, the erection of any building in the vicinity has been 
;Jj • • • • 
(1) The Commissioner may- Power to 
prohibit 
(a) prohibit vehicular traffic in any public street or any use of 
, portion thereof so as to prevent danger, obstru~tion or incon- public 
I
:~ . .i '",'" venience to the public or to ensure quietness in any locality; !!:ee:!.r_ 
;,; "!\' j. • • • • • ;~in kind ." 
::. " "1' of traffic. 
::::. Provided that the Conuniaeioner aball not take action without 
" '"IIiIlI'Uon of the Corporation in cases under clause (a) and wlth-

Power to 
acquire 
lands and 
buildings 
for 
public 
streets 
and for 
publ1c 
parking 
places. 
Defining 
the 
regular 
line of 
streets. 
110 
out the sanction of the Standing Committee in cases under clause 
(c). 
• • • • • 
304. Subject to the provisions contained in Chapter X, the Com-
missioner may-
* • • • 
(b) acquire in relation to any such land or building, all such 
land with buildings, if any, thereon as the Corporation may 
think expedient to acqUire outside of the regular line, or of the 
intended regular line. of such street; 
• • • • • 
305. (1) The Commissioner may define a line on one or both 
sides of any public street in accordance with the bye-laws made 
in this behalf. and may, with the previous sanction of the Corpora-
tion, redefine at any time any such regular line: 
Provided that, before according sanction the Corporation shall by 
public notice afford reasonable opportunity to the residents of pre-
mises abutting on such public street to make suggestions or objec-
tions with respect to the proposed redefined line of the street and 
shall consider all such suggestions or objections which may be made 
within one month from the date of the publication of the said 
notice: 
• * • * • 
(3) No 'Person shall construct or reconstruct any building or a 
portion thereof or any 'boundary wall or other structure whatsoever 
within the regular line of a street except with the written permission 
of the Commissioner: 
Provided that if within sixty days after the receipt of application 
from any person for permission to construct or reconstruct a boun-
dary wall or a portion thereof, the Commissioner fails to take 
steps to acquire the land within the regular line of the street in 
accordance with section 308, then, that person may, subject to any 
vther provisions of this Act and the bye-laws made thereunder, pro-
ceed with the work of construction or reconstruction of such boundary 
wall or portion thereof. 
• • • • • 
(6) All such registers shall be open to inspection by any person 
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed by the Commissioner 
with the sanction of the Standing Committee. 
• • • • • 

111 
Acquisi-
tion of 
open land 
and land 
308. If any land, whether open or enclosed, not vesting in th~ 
Corporation and not occupied by any building is within the regular 
line of a public street or if a platform, verandah, step, compound 
wall~ hedge or fence or some other structure external to a building occupied abutting on a public street or a portion of such platform, verandah, by plat-
step, compound wall, hedge, fence or other structure is within the forms, 
regular line of such street the Commissioner may, after giving to etc., 
the owner of the land of building not less than seven clear days' within the 
notice of his intention so to do, take possession on behalf of the lr.egularr . . .., me 0 
CorporatIon of th,e saId land wIth Its enclosmg wall, hedge or fence. street, 
if any, or of the said platform, verandah, step, compound wall, 
hedge, fence or other structure or of any portion thereof which is 
within the regular line of the public street and, if necessary, clear 
the same and the land so acquired shall thereupon be deemed to be 
i~, .~ part of the public street and shall vest in the Corporation: 
, . Provided that where the land or building is vested in the Union 
,. or a State the Commissioner shall not take possession thereof with-
:' out the previous sanction of the Central Government. I{,.. • 
,:', 309, (1) Where a land or building is partly within the regular Acquisi-
f land remaining after the excision of the portion within' the said remauung 
,,',>nne will not be suitahle or fit for any benefici,al use, he may, at the ::id~~a 
. _ request of the owner, acquire such land in addition to the land with- and lan~ 
~"in' the said line and such surplus land shall be deemed to be a after their 
~'" part of the public street and shall vest in the Corporati,m. portions 
~' ., wittuJl a 
• • * * regular line of ~ 
street 
have been 
acquired • 
. ' ...... 
concerning execution of works in or near to' streets" 
• • * 
(z) No person other than the Commissioner or a 
or other municipal employee shall, without the 
"'''-Ir&'IJI&.lOliIiIUn of the Commissioner-
• 
munici- St t . ree s 
written not to be 
opened or 
broken 
up Ilnd 
(a) open, break up, displace, take up or make any altera- building 
tion in, or cause any injury to the soil or pavement or any wall, materials 
fence, post, chain or other matelial or thing forming part of any not to. be 
t deposIted s reet; or th ereon 
without 
. . . .~~~ 
sion. 

Naming 
and num-
bering of 
streets. 
Removal 
• 
112 
Naming and numbering Of streets and numbering of bu.ildings 
327. (1) The Commissioner may-
(a) with the sanction of the Corporation, determine . the 
name or number by which any street Or public place vested in 
the Corporation shall be known; 
(b) cause to be put up or painted at a conspicuous part of 
any building, wall or place, at or near each end, corner or en-
trance. of such street or on some convenient part of such street, 
the name or number by which it is to be known; 
(c) cause to be put up or painted on boards of suitable size 
the name of any .public place vested in the Corporation; 
(d) determine the number or sub-number by which any 
premises or part of such premises shall be known and cause such 
number or sub-number to be fixed to the side or outer door of 
such premises or to some . place at the entrance of the enclosure 
thereof. 
• • • 
Prevention of dangerous diseases 
* • • • 372. (z) * • • • • 
to hospital (2) The Corporation shall if required by the Central Government 
of pa~ents ereet an infectious diseases hospital of such type. and dimension as suffermg . 
from datl- that Government may direct. 
gerous 
disease. 
• • • * 
Special 376. (1) In the event of Delhi or any part thereof Being visited 
measures or threatened by an outbreak of any dangerous disease among the 
in ~. inhabitants. thereof or of any: epidemic disease among any animals 
of~~!:.·.':: therein, the Crmm'ss:ort'r, f.f he thinks that the other provisions of 
:=er'!us this ~ct and the provisions ,of any other law for the time beiJ?g in 
or epi- Jorce are insufficient for the purpose, may, with the previous sanc-
demic tion of the Corporation,-
diseases. (a) take such special measures, and 
(b) by public notice, give sUCh directions to be observed 
by the public or by any class or section of the public, 
as he thinks necessary to prevent the outbreak or spread of the 
disease: 
Provided that where in the opinion of the Commissioner imme-
diate measures are necessary, he may take action without Such sanc-
tion as aforesaid and if he does so, shall forthwith report such action 
i to the Corpora tion. 
• • J • • 

113 
CHAPTER XX 
MARKETS, SLAUGHTER HOUSES, TRADES AND OCCUPATION S 
Maintenance and regulation of mcrkets and slaughter houses 
405. (1) The Commissioner, when aujborised by the Corporation Provision 
in this behalf, may provide and maintain municipal markets and °if m1uni-, . ,. cpa 
slaughter houses in such number as he thinks fit together with stalls, markets 
shops, sheds, pens and other buildings and conveniences for the use and 
of persons carrying on trade or business in, or frequenting such mar- slaughter 
kets or slaughter houses and may provide and maintain in any such houses 
markets, buildings and places machines, we,ights, scales and mea-
surer. fOr the weighment or measurement of goods !!IoId therein . 
• • • • • 
408. (1) The Commissioner may charge such fees as hethinksftt 
l~ impose for the grant ofa licence to any person to open a private 
,market and may grant such licence subject to such conditior.s, con-
,isten,t with this Act and any bye-laws made thereunder, as he thiriks 
(oJ , • , 
-fl~ to impose, 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER XXI 
1(, . 
,!J,/\, if V' 
)i ~U5. Where the Commissioner upon information in his P088es~~~ 
.·sitisftecf'as respects any area- " '!>;N' 
" ~ ..... '; 
, I' [' .. , ~ 
(4) that the buildings in that area are by ,reasoa-7,et 
disrepair or sanitary de~cts unftt for. human babitatfo.n 
or are by reason of their bad arrangement, or the narrowness 
A or bad arrangement of the streets or the want of light, air, ven-
'.~.' Wation or proper conveniences, dangerous or injurious to the 
" .' l: health of the inhabitants of the area; and 
'~.,-
.~ (b) that the most satisfactory method of dea~ing \vitli the 
,.r:t,conditions in the area is .the re-arrangement and reeonstrueflon 
:_ of the streets and bufldinw; in the area in accordance with an 
. Julprovement scheme; , 
, ...... I - . 
. frame an improvement scheme in resp!Ct. nf the lrel :In 
DC:1an • ..,. widl the bye-laws lJlade in this heh~lf 
Conditions 
of grant of 
licence for 
private 
markel, 
.," .,..-, 
ImprQ,re_. 
m~.o-;.!be 
9cheJJ¥\ .. 
, ,,~) 
,.'J"''-''- r 

Matters 
to be pro-
videdlfor 
in an im-
," 114 
421. (1) An improvement aeme may provide for all or any of 
the following matters, namely:-
provemen, * 
scheme. • • • • 
'" 
'," I', 
, ",." ' .• 1 
p' 
, . '. 3,M ,~~tlie.~'tnat. ta-. for which, in the opinton of thBlCom-
" nlil$ionerr; ,. ~ \ t~'to· maD- pN9bton wi~ Ii , . ...., to- ~ 
1m.~vW!m~' oll,!tlte, l~ea ,to wtIittl: the scheme mat.... ,~' '. :-':!! . 
(~) Wher •. an;v . rand' fsdesignated in an improVemeM scheme as 
,su1?je6t to.:fcciu.i~~9.~"~' is '.~~ by, t~ ~e' ttli_t',1Ie~ .. ~ 
ope~ : SP,I1~~. ,nten'l tr, ~, t~e' ~fi1ttic)1l' Of·ten yeaiS' ~ ·the~d8terof 
sanction of {lie S~rIe~ bY t'ftl!'t~errtraI Gtrvel1m'1t!nt tm~ts1l1t-seetbIn 
(2) of sectibn 4~, the land is nofotacquired by the Commissioner, the 
owner of the land may serve on the Commissioner a notice requiring 
·fl;s,bi~ ill th~lalJd:=~",'SO,~uired~.'.) 'T inJ~M 
: ;,1>.'/." l:iU!+(lfJ (.;A, J;£~]~,,,L~'~" ." '.' .. 
"(3rIi'~c~~:1aiJS 'ttVaeLiUfre tlltdind wi~·".:~ 
.tfrsflc: ,:DlOllth8.fpG..-U¥. ,.~:oft ,tpe, notic~, the impJ:ovem~nr 'sCbe-
me shall have effect after the expiration of the said six mortthi'as 
.,if the land were not designated as subject to acquisition by the Com-
missioner or wer~ not required to" be kept as an o~n space.,·, .. 
Si1bDiia- ~r. (1) Every improvement, scheme shall, as soon as may be 
sion of, aftef'ft1iais"J)eE;h": 6dMed, ...... ....a. by the Comhiissioner' for 
. , =::1.'.,.. a~.R!pvai,to 'tlle' CotPoratfonand the ·Corpor.ation may; ,either approve 
seh.,rn 1D~~ ... *tWitJJ.1sacll mod.,,*~~s. it 
to ~:.!!,: .. - may corullder neCessary orreleet'tlte'WCheme witlt~..tf_,~,t~ 
Corpora- Commissioner to have it fresh scheme framed according to such 
tion for 'diretCftms. , ~',..' 
approval _ 
and to the 
Central 
• • • • 
Govern-
ment for 
sanction. 
Rehous-
ing 
scheme. 
.It .... 
428. The Commissioner. while framing an improvement scheme 
~e~~. Cll. lij)ter,~w;.~, ar~.:ql"1. ,alsofra,m~,'A ~~e~~rQt~~eafter 
In this, ¥; referred to as .,the. rehousiDg: sclieniel ~or iil~' ~Jlitruc-
tion, maintenance and management of ~_ aDd, ~,~~1.'~~ding6 
as be may. consider necessary for providing accommodation for per-
*"""'~~~ .1l4~; to 'be;dispJ,~~ by ~e executi~n o.t,.th,e i~l)rov~-ment 8CDeme. " . :t Ht' . '. 
• • • . g.:.. :".,' :.:.,. ': '. 

•• (1) 
111 
CHAPTER XXII 
POWERS, PROCEDURE, OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
Licences and written permissions 
• • * • 
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act or any bye-law Signature, 
made.thClBlU1Qm:, for every such licence or written permission a conditions, 
fee may be charged at such rate as may from time to time be ftx~d duration, 
by the Commissioner with the sanction of the Corporation and such s~pen-SIOn, re-
fee shall be payable by the person to whom the licence or written vocation, 
permission is granted. etc., of 
• • • • 
liceDces 
• and 
WritteD 
permls-
En.try and inspection siODS. 
'~' ~'C3~er, the Genefal Manager (Elect1:~city:) or tb~ Powers Of 
General'lllnager (Transport) or any municipal officer or other mwU':' entry ~d 
cilfllI~te1.fe& wthoI'ised in thiabebtUf b, lU\y of the aforeaai~ inspection. 
municipal authorities or empowered in this behalf by or under a~y 
provision of this Act, may enter into or upon any land or building 
with or without assistants and wf>rkmen-
• • * * 
(b) tor the purpose of ascertaining whether or not circU.m-
stanees e::l!:~st which would authorise or require the Commi&-
'tifilti@Y:' the"~neral Manager (Eleotrieity) or the General Mana-
"(T'11Utspc)rt), or any mllfticipal -oftlcer or employee au~ 
.~~~tIhP[)\\tle!te:d' In tbW behalf UJ,take any action 01' execute any 
·~."'6'" this Act or any bye-law made therewuier; 
i> ". ; i"., 
• • • 
(e) generally for the purpose of efficient discharge of the 
functions by any of the municipal authorities under this Act or 
any bye-law made thereunder. 
~~'~,.:Ql (1) The Commissioner, the General Manager (Electricity) Powerto 
~ ,the General Manager (Transport) or any person authorised in en~ 1~ 
\bis. behalf by any of the aforesaid municipal authoritielt or em- adjo~ 
, , his b hUb d . . f tho A" land in ' ~~eQ. in tea y or un er any prOVlSlon 0 IS e., may relation 
~~;:qa IUlY land within fifty yards of any work authorised By or to any 
I
~ Act \Vith or without assistants and workmenfMo the par- work. 
'. 
" j.l·.~.· ~f:.po.Siting thereon any soil, gravel, stone or other-matlriall 
~~~ access to such work or for any other puPpOSes con-
< '\Idtb the ex:ecut,ion of the same. 
\ -'a!.· • • • 

ll8 
Breakini 433. (1) It shall be lawful for the Commissioner, the General 
mto bui' d- Manager (Electricity) or the General Manager (Transport) or any 
ints. person authorised in this behalf by any of the aforesaid municipal 
Pl'obibi-
tion of 
obstruc-
tion or 
molesta_ 
tion in 
ex:ec:ution 
Qrwork. 
Public 
notices 
how to be 
made 
)fnown. 
authorities or empowered in his behalf by or, under any provision of 
this Act, to make any entry into any place, and to open or cause to 
be opened any door, gate or other barrier-
(a) . if he considers the opening thereof necessary' for the 
purpose of such entry; and 
.' 
(b) if the owner or occupier is absent Qr being present re-
fuses to open such door, gate or barrier. . , . 
(2) Before making any entry into any such plice or opening or 
causing to be opened any such door, gate or other barrier, the Com-
missioner, the General ~ger (Elect~city) or the General Mana-
ger (Transport) or the person authorised or empowered in this be-
half, shall call 'ripon fWo'ot more respectable·iDha~ta.nts-; Q~th~,lqca­
lity in which the place to be entered into is situate,. to witness the 
entry or opening and may issue an order in writing to them or any 
of them so to do. . . 
• • • • .. 
437. No person shall obstruct o~ J:llolest any person authorised or 
t!mpowered by or under Uris,Act Qr. any person with. whom the Cor-
poration or any of the municipal authorities s~ified ,41 8ec;U~n ~ 
has lawfully contracted,mthe executiO,ll o~ his, duty or 'of, anything 
which he is authorised 0;1' empowered or requir~ t.o do by, virtue or 
in consequence of any of the provisions of this Act or anY' bye-law 
made thereunder~ or in fulfilment of. his contract, as the case may be. 
Public notices and advertisements 
438. Every public notice given under this Act or any bye-iaw 
made thereunder shall be in writing under the signature of any of 
~he following appropriate municipal authorities, that is to say, the 
CommIssioner or the General Manager (Electricity) or the General 
Manager (Transport) or of any municipal officer authorised in thJs 
behalf by any of the aforesaid municipal authorities, and shall be 
widely mad~ ,known in the locality to be affected thereby,' by aftbdDg 
copies thereof in conspicuous public places within the said locality 
ur by publishing the same by beat of drum or by advertisement in 
local newspapers or by any two or more of these means and by any 
other means that the appropriate municipal authority may think fit.' 

11'1 
439. Whenever it is provided by this Act or any bye-law made tolews-
thereunder that notice shall be given by advertisement in local papers in 
newspapers, or that a notific~tion or. info~mation shall t>.e published ::~~~8e­
in local newspapers such notlce! notIficatIOn or information shall be menu or 
inserted, if practicable, in at least three newspapers in such langu- notices to 
ages as the Corporation may from time to time specify in this behalf: be pub-
Provided that if the Corporation publishes a municipal journ(ll, a 
publlcation in that journal shall be deemed to' 'be a publication in a 
news~per of the~nguage in which the said journal may be pub-
lished. 
Evidence " , 
lished. 
" 
440. Whenever under this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law Proof of 
made thereunder, the doing of, or the omission to do,any~hing or consent, 
" t);le: valldi~ of anything depends upon the approv~, SBn<:tjoD, con-- etc., of 
~. sent; concUrrence, declaration, opinion or satisfaction of the Commis- ~ommi8-, . 810ner, 
~" .DH~,the ~ral Manager (Electricity), or th .. Gep.eral Mana- General 
,!« ger '(Transport) or of any municipal officer, a written document Managen, 
signed by any such municipal authority or officer pUlporiing to con- etc, 
vey or set forth such approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, dec-
,,;>;. laration, opinion or satisfaction, shall be sufficient evidence thereof. 
Notices~ etc . 
.. ' 
• • , • 
, ", ,n "II .. ',',' , " ' , ,..,' . ' 
(i) ~erylicence, written permisaiOD, notice,; but, sum- Signature 
:IfIBtI.br. 'dbctiment which is required by. tbJa;Act or any' rule, on notices,! 
~lIJrwmWoW :6r'by~law made thereunder to bear the signature 'if etc., me,. , 
CODullUsllioller' 0'" the General Manager (Electricity) or the be stamp-
~nei':al Manager' (Transport) or of any municipal oftlcer, &hall be ed • 
. ,. to be properly signed if it bears a facsimile of the signa-
~~: 'ure of any such municipal authority or officer, as the case may 
~,~ be. stamped thereupon . 
• • • • 
-" 
~'~ ",443.- All notices, bills, summonses and other documents requir- Noticea 
::,., fRo. by this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made, thereunder etc.) tJ1 
~'A~ served upon, or issued to, any person, shall be' served or is- whom, 
~/I qy municipal officers or other municipal employeea or by to be 
~:;;t>B.', . ,~ODS authorise~ by any of the follOwing appropriate mum- =-or 
1~";';:' , authoriUes, that IS to say, the Commiuioner, the : Geaeral 
(~;;;~aer (Electricity) or the General Manapr (Transport). 

118 
Service of' 444. (1) Every notice, bill, summons, order, requisition or other 
doCUment required or authorised by this Act or any rule, regula-
tion or bye..:law made thereunder to be served or issued by :or ()Il 
behalf of 1he Corporation, or by any of the municipal authorities 
s~cifi~ in seat ion. 44 or any municipal officer, on any person mall, 
sate'88 otherWise :prOVided 'in. ,this Act or such rule, :regWatiDn or 
bye-law, be deepted to be duly served-
notices, 
etc, 
General 
powt>r to 
pay COlD-
pensation. 
COnipen-
satiozrto 
be,aidby 
offendera 
for 
damage 
caused by 
them. 
Applica-
tion to 
the court 
of the 
diBU'iet 
judt'':f1'l: ' 
other'~ ... · 
cas&~r:'}; 
.- .... ;. -' 
• 
(a) where, ,the person 'to be served is a coriipany-,'u 'the 
document i~- addresSed 'to the secretary of the comPai:l,yat' its 
registered o1ftce or at its principal office or place of bui;mess 
and is either-
(i) sent by registered post, or 
• • • 
, Po:ymem .of Compensation, " '., , 
~'aOAn.e&1y C8SeI n.t ~tJM.pwise provided fw in! tl:dsl.l$lIIHin~y 
bye.:law 'made tltete~r,' the'·~ with the ',p~1I&' ap-
prOVal of the Standing CGDllllittee, or with respect 18 ·mati.al8:m'" 
ting to the Delhi 'Wllter 'Supply and Sewage Dispus81 U'lldartakiag' 
with the previous 'appro'fa'l of the Delhi Water Supply .. ..ami sewage 
!)isposalCdMDiinee~ ·tJU~\ <llen:eral Mana~r (ElectricityO ~, ,tee 
General M\'Ititfget' .('!Fran~t) with the pr.evidus ~apt-dvti"respeo­
lively of the DelhiDec1tic Supply Committee and ,the JDejhi'T.-ans-
port Committee, may pay compensation to any person who sustains 
damage by reason of the eJCe1tisl! of any of the powers vested by 
this Act or any bye-law in the Ccmrnissioner or ~ General Mana-
gers or in any municipal officer or other municipal employee. 
':!. ,," ':;"" ,,:. '_ :, .. >' c, ( .) '_,; 
til. (1) Anv.perIl)ft,wl\O';has:Qeen convicted: of au,o_e.,~~~ 
this Actor aay byN.aw made ,thereunder shall"potwitlJa~apd.i.nA 
an;y pun.ishment to which he may have been sentenced far ,~esaid 
ofIeDice, be liable 1io pay such compensation for any dama,ge to the 
propert,. of ,the COl"pleJl'ation resulting from the saidj o1Ilence, as the 
aprpropriat-e m~nicipal authority may consider. ~easOllable. 
• • • • • 
453. (1) Where, in any case nl7t provided for ~ section 452, the 
Corporation or any municipal authority or any municipal officer or 
o~~ ,plUDicipal employee is req\l.ired bI this Act or by any bye-
law: made thereunder to pay any expenses or ,any coMJ'en-
~iq.o, ~~gunt to be so paid and If necesSary, th~, ~ppOrti9nrilent 
Qt' the ~,~, in case of dispute, be determin¢d by fbe court 
of~ Qis~f ~\l4~ of Delhi oDapplicatioD;,ha~'~_~de,to, it 
fftl,~ p~se at.~~ ,time within one year from the dat~ wben , 
such ~,~ cg~~iQn first became claimable. ' , 
,.; . . . '., 

119 
Offences and penaltiel 
• • • • • 
462. Any councillor or alderman, or any member, not being a Punitsfh-, , . men or 
councillor or an alderman, of the Delhi Electric Supply Committee, acq.uidng 
the Delhi Transport Committee. the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage ~hare or 
Dispo~al Committee or of any other committee of the Corporation, interest in 
who knowin,gly acquires, directly or indirectly. any ~hare or interp.st cODtr~ct, 
in any contract made with. or any work done for, the Corporation ~~-.;~~ 
not Jbetng a share or interest such as under section 9 itD; permissi- poratioD. 
ble for a councillor'to have without bein~ thereby disqualified for 
being a councillor or an alderman, and the Commissianer;the General 
MaMger (Electricity), the General Manager (Transport) or, nny 
municipal officer or other municipal employee who knowlllgl,. ac-
o quires, directly or indirectly, any share or inter'eA in any eQQhact 
Made With, or 8JlIY 'WOrk done for, the Corporation not wf:Qi.' share 
o 'Or interest sueh as under clause (i) of sub-seetioa (1) of section 9 
or su\)...claUIMs (ii) and (iii) of clause (c) ot ~ (2} of that 
section it is permissible for a councillor or an alderman to have, 
~;.-{,i ; IWiUKMt beiBg ,thNaby di&qualified for being a. ~~iW>r, : lor an 
:' alciennan, shall be- deemed to have committed the offen~ made puni-
. " mable-under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code. '" 
6t. 
~,; 
• • • • .. ;, ... , 
. I"!" 
i!~ 487. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, 'nb eourt shall pro- Prosecu-
~'ceed to the trial of any offence made punishable by 61" under this tions. 
, except on the co'm'plafnt of, or upon information )leeel_ from, 
of t~e followhig appropriate municipal authorities, that Is to 
the Comm1MOlm", the' General Manaqe; (Electricity) , the 
Manager ('Pransport) ttr a person authorised by any of them 
'a general or spedal order in this behalf. 
~t~... .4G8. (1) Any of. the following appropriate muni~ipal authorities. ConiPOSl-
~t .. tn say, the CunJ]lissioner,the General M,anager (EIectrt.city;, tiOD of 
~tbo·,Genreal Manager (Transport) or any personauthor'sed by any offences. 
1// of them by general 01' special' order in this behalf, may, either before 
,.~ or after the institution of the proceedings compound any offence 
~",.made punishable by or under this Act: 
Provided that ne offence SRall be compoundable which is com-, 
.liIIIlittt!d by failUl'e to comJ!lly with a notice, oroar a. ~tfon issued . 
"ion behalf of the Corporation or of"any. of u-e ~cipal au-
UWlrISlt. specified in section 4.f unless and until the same' bas been 
_nplltd with 80 far as the compliance is ~ble. . 
• • • • . ... ,., .. 

Com-
plaint. 
concern-
in, nui-
sances and 
procedure 
therefor. 
. ..,... ' ... -... 
120 
Magistrate. 'CInd prOceedings before magisf10ates 
• • 
473. (1) The Commissioner, the General Manager (Electriclty) 
or the General ~ger (Transport) or any municipal oftlcer or 
other municipal employee authorised by any of the aforesaid munici-
pal authorities, in th~ behalf or any person who resides or owns 
property in Delhi, may complain to a municipal magistrate of the 
existence of any nuisance. 
(2) Upon the receipt of any such complaint the magistrate, after 
mnkfri~ such inquiry as .he thinks necessary, may by written order 
direct the' person responsible for the nuisance or the owner of the 
land or building on which the nuisance has taken place, to take such 
measures as to 'such magistrate may seem practicable and reasonable. 
and within such period as may be specified in the order, for abatfn~, 
" ':preventfng, . removIng orremedymg such nuisance and, may direct 
any of the appropriate municipal authorities to put tnto foree any 
o( the provisions of tbis Act or any bye-l~w made thereunder . 
• • • • • 
(5) If the person ,directed to take action by an order under sub-
section (2) or sub-seetfon (3) fails to do, so within the period !'pe-
cified in the order, the CommISsioner. or any other appropriate muni-
cipAl authority may on the expiry of the said period proceed to take 
action as' directed in the order' or may take such other measures to 
abate. prevent, remove or remedy the nu;sance as he considers 
np.cesorv; 'and all expeilses incurred in that connection -shall be 
, . " re'Co~rable from the person' against whom the magistrate has mAde 
. tlle' nrderas an arrear of tax under this Act. 
Duties of 
police 
officers. 
Power to 
1Datltute, 
etc., ]ela' . . 
proceed- :,-
inpand 
obtaiD 
Iep).t'ficc 
• '. • • • 
Powen and duties of police officers 
• • • • • 
475. It shall be the duty of all police ofticers to give immediate 
information to the Commissioner or any other appropriate munf-
cioal authority of the commission of. or. the attempt to commit. anv 
offence against th~s Act or any rule, re~atton or bye-law made 
thereunder and to assist aD municipal ofticers and nth@r -munfefpel 
employees in the exercise of their lawful authority. 
Legal proceedings 
478 .. (1) The Commissioner may-
• • • • • 
. , '(e) cfefend, any suit or otlier l@gal proeeeding bttJagltt 
'against tbe Corporation or a~afnst the CommiufOnf!!' or a munf- : 
clpaJ oftic@r. ~r othf!!' municIPal employee in respect of anythtnll' j 
,done. or on'li~ to ~ done by anyone "f thAm tTl "h aile'''' j 
capaCIty. . :i 

121 
(f) with the approval of the Standing Committee, admit or 
oompEomise any claim, suit or other legal proceedillg brought 
against the Corporation or against the Commissioner or any 
municipal officer or other municipal employee in respect of any-
thing done or omitted to :be done as aforesaid; 
(g) withdraw or compromise any claim against any person 
in respect of a penalty payable under a contract entered into 
with such person by the Commissioner on behalf of the Cor-
poration; 
• • • • 
(i) obtain such legal advice and assistance as he from time 
to time thinks necessary or expedienf- to obtain or as he may 
be r.eCjluired by the Corporation or the Standing Co~t~e~ to 
obtain, for any of the purposes mentioned in -the ~oregoing 
clauses or for securing lawflll ex~cise or di.scll~,ie of ;lny VOwer 
or duty vesting in or iIJl1">sed upcm aD)' lIlJUlicipJI Jluthority or 
any municipal officer or other mUnicipal ~mployee. 
(2) Any reference in sub-section (1) to the Commissioner shHlI 
be construed-
(a) in relation to any matter specified in that sub-section 
pertaining to the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking as a refe-
rence to the General Manager (Electricity); 
(b) in relation to any such matter pertaining to the Delhi 
Transport Undertaking, as a reference to the General Manager 
(Transport) . 
; .... 477. No suit or prosecution shall ~ ~n~rtail)4'!d ~p. ,~n'y, (:ourt Protection 
t against the Corporation or. against any municipal authority or against of actioD 
f,any mUnicipal .oftloer or other municipal employee or against any of the, 
('_ nHn .,J +h .,J di +. f . · ...... 1 th Corpora-,; n~qJlIl.........,g un\;le,r ~ e~~~r ,or rec~l@ 0 any Pl1101Q..... au 0- tion, etc. 
~.JitY'fQI .$lVmUnioipal o~cer or .other m~ ~ploy,ee, !Cor any-
"Jb1ng w~ch .is.in ~ faith done or intended to ~ done, ,under 
this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made there\,lOder. 
Y:'''n 4..(2) 'No suit shall :be instituted against the ,CoIpQI'ation or 
against any municipal authority or against any municipal otIlcer or 
oihe,r municipal employee or against any person acting under the 
order or direction of any municipal authority or any municipal officer 
or other municipal employee, in respect of any act done, or pur-
PQliing .to have been done, in pursuance of this Act or any rule, re-
~or bye-law made thereunder, until the exp;ration of two 
~I!!'.' tha after notice in writing has been left at the municipal office 
: .. ' in t:pe case of such offi~er, employ~e or person, u~less notice 
~
~;' 1, g has also been delivered to him 01' left at hIS, office or 
~, '. of residence, and unless such notice states ewplieltly the cause 
;~,.actton, the nature of the relief sought, the amount· of com pen-
-": ~, 
Notice to 
be given 
of suits. 

Supple-
mental 
provisions 
respecttng 
regula-
tions. 
Powe'f to 
make 
bye-laws. 
122 
sat ion claimed, and the name and place of residence of the intending 
plaintiff, and unless the plaint contains a statement that such notic.? 
has been so let or delivered. 
• 
.. 
480: (1) .. 
• • • 
CHAPTER XXIII 
RULES, RJ!'.GULATIONS AND BYE-LAWS 
• • • .. .. .. 
• 
• .. .. 
(2) No regUlation made by the Corporation under this Act shall 
have effect until it has been approved by the Central Government 
and published in the Official' Gazette. 
481. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act the Corporation 
may, in addition to any bye-laws which it is empowered to make 
by any other provision of this Act, m~e bye-laws to ~rovide for all 
or any of the following matters,' namelY: ~ . . . . 
I 
A. Bye-laws relating to taxation 
(1) the maintenance of tax books and registers .1?y~ei<;:om­
missioner and the particulars which such books and registers 
should contain; 
• .. • .. .. 
B. Bye-laws relating to water supply, drainage and sewage disposal 
. .. . . . 
C. Bye-laws relating to electric supply 
all matters relating to the conduct and management of the Delhi 
Electric Supply Undertaking; . 
D. Bye-law. relating to trcInsport sennce. ,', 
(1) the issue of passes to the councillors and aldermen and 
to the employees employed in connection With the a1fafn of the 
Delhi Transport UndertaY'.g and the conditions subject to which 
. such passes may be iSIP~ed; 
(2) the grant of refund in respect of unused tickets and con-
cessional passes; 
(3) the disposal of unclaimed articles and property and the 
period after the expiration of which such unclaimed articles Bnd 
property may be sold by public auction or otherwise; 
(4) the regulation of the carriage of passengers and goods 
in the road transport services of the Undertaking including the 
levy and collection of fares and charges for such carriage; 
(5) any other matter relating to the conduct and manage-
ment of the Delhi Transport Undertaking; .' 
• • • • • 

123 
482. (1) Any bye-law made under this Act may provide that a Penalty 
contravention thereolshall be punishable- for 
• • • • • 
(c) with fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every 
day during which the contravention continues, after the receipt 
of a notice from the Commissioner or any municipal officer duly 
authorised in that behalf, by the person contravening the bye-
law requiring such person to discontinue such contravention: 
Provided that a contravention of any bye-law relating to the road 
transport services may be punishable with imprisonment which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to 
fifteen hundred rupees, or with both. 
• • * • 
' . 
• • • • 
breaches 
of bye-
laws. 
483. (1) • Supple-
(2) The Central Government in approving a bye-law may make mental 
any change therein which appears to it to be necessary. ~~~;,:~. 
(3) The Central Government may, after previous publication. of hye-laws. 
~:¥..\' !nten~on canc~l any. bye-law which it has approved', and'there-
upon the bye-law shall cease to have effect. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER XXIV 
CONTROL 
. -' 
:. _~,. 4&5. The Central Government may at any ~e require the. Com- Power of 
:. i,rl;l'~ ~LrrT} Central 
.. ., * * .. ,' .IL.·'. t- , Govern":' 
, . ! " ?Til/H,. '. mentto 
:'''1 . , • r , ' , ..' •• _ I.~ r 4" ~ - I 
, (b) to fumish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account require 
or statistics relating to the proceedings, duties' or WOrks of the produc-
. Corpc1ration or any of the municipal authorities; =u~t 
• • • • • ments. 
~~"'~". 486. The Central Government may depute any person in the ser- Inspec-
~" ce of Government to inspect or examine anY municipal department tion. 
~or office or any service or work undertaken by the Corporation or 
:a,ny of the municipal authorities or any property belonging to the 
.,Borporation and to report thereon and the Corporation and every 
. lI\~cipal authority and all municipal officers and other municipal 
.... sh.n be bound to alford the penon so deputed ....... t 
:'. "'sonable times to the premises and properties of the Corpora-
, t· 'aDd to all records, accounts and other documents the inspection 
;:~-:.~ <~e may consider necessary to enable him to discharge his 

Directions 
by Centr,,] 
Govern-
ment. 
124 
487. (1) If, whether OIl receipt of any information or report ob· 
tained under section 485 or section 486 or otherwise, thE! Central 
Government is of opinion-
(a) that any duty imposed on the Corporation or any muni-
cipal authority by or under this Act has not 'been perfoI'lDfd or 
has ~een performed in an impedect, insufficient or unsuitable 
manner, or 
(b) that adequate financial provision has not been made for 
the perfotrtiat1ee of tny such dUty, ' 
it may direct the Corporation or the municipal authority. concerned, 
within such period as it thinks fit, to make arrangements to its 
satisfaction for the proper performance of the duty, or, as the case 
may be, to make financial provision to its satisfaction for the per· 
formance of the duty and the Corporation or the municfpal autho-
rity coneehied ihall ~ly Mth fJueh ditection: 
Provided, that unless in the opinion of the Central Government the 
immediate execution of such order is necessary, it shaD before 
making any direction under this section give the Corporation or 
the municipal authority concerned an opportunity of shOWing cause 
why such direction shOUld not be made. 
(2) Without prejudice tD the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1). the Central Government may at any time issue to the 
municipal authorities concerned directions in relation to the manage-
ment, of the Delhi Electrie StIpply Undertaking or th~ ~Ihi Trans-
port Undertaking or the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Diiposal 
Undertaking or in relation to any question of pollcy concerning any 
'such Under~aking; and the municipal authorities concerned shall 
comply with such directions. 
(3) In case of any d.ifterence of opinion as to what is a question 
of policy the decision of the Central Government shall be final. 
• • • 
489. (1) The Central Government may give the CorporaUon all Power Of 
Central such directions as it considers necessary in respect of subjects, cum· 
Govern- cula, text books, standards and methods of teaching in-primary 
ment to schools vested in the Corporation or maintained wholly or partly by 
'.ive ~rec- <Trants paid out of the Municipal Fund and in respect at such other tlonsm •• . 
relation to ma~ters as that Government considen necessary and the Corporation 
primary shall comply with all such di~tions. 
schook, 
~tC'. • • • • • 

125 
(3) The Central Government, after considering the report of ins-
pection made by such officer, may give the Corporation such dh:ec-
tions as it considers necessary and the Corporation shall comply with 
stich directions. 
-1!10. (1) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Cor- Supcl'ses-
poration is not competent to perform, or persistently makes default sion of the 
in the performance of, the duties imposed on it by or under this cu,orpora-
l on, 
Act or any other law or exceeds or abuses its powers the Centra 
Government may by an order published, together with a statement 
of the reasons therefor, in the Official Gazette, declare the Corpora-
tion to be incompetent or in default or to have exceeded or abused 
its powers, as the case may be, and supersede it for .such period as 
may be specified in the ,order : 
Provided that before making an order of supersession -as afore-
said reasonable opportunity shall be given to the Corporation to show 
cause why such order of supersession should not be made. 
• 
• 
• 
CHAPTER XXV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
• 
• • 
• • 
493. A copy of any receipt, application, plan, notice, order or Admissi-
other document or of any entry in a register in the possession of any hility of 
municipal authority shall, if duly certified by' the legal keeper document 
j~ereof or other p~on authorised by the Commissioner in this be- .:re:~ 
e, ; half, be admissible' in evidenc.e' qf the' eDrtence of the document 01' 
f':"'~try, and shall ~ admitted as evidence 6f the matterS and transac-
if, '" 
tions therein recorded in every case where, and to the same extent 
to which, the original document or entry would, if produced, have 
been admissible to prove such matters and transactions. 
• • • • • 
495. No person shall obstruct Or molest the Corporation or any Probibi-
municipal authority, the Mayor or the Deputy Mayor, any councillor tion 
or aldermen or any person employed by the Corporation or any against 
• person with whom the Commissioner has entered into a contract on t~trucf -.. beh Ion 0 .... ,.. aU of the Corporation, in the performance of their duty or of Mayor or 
.. , anything which they are empowered or required to do by virtue or any Jaum': 
.~ID consequence of any provision of this Act or of any rule, regula- clpaJ 
' .. lion or bye-law made thereunder. a~Q. 
~. * :~,c," • • • • • 

Prohibi-
tion 
against 
removal 
or oblite_ 
. ration of 
notice. 
Liability 
of Com-
miSSioner, 
etc., for 
loss, waste 
or mis-
applica_ 
tionof 
Municipa. 
Fund or 
Property. 
Council-
lors and 
municipal 
officers 
and em-
ployees 
to be 
public 
IICMnts. 
AJululiii'; 
aCfmrrill':' 
trati,on' 
126 
497. No person shall, without authority in that behalf, remove,. 
destroy, deface or otherwise obliterate any notice exhibited by or 
under orders of the Corporation or any municipal authority or any 
municipal officer or other municipal employee specified by the Com-
missioner in this behalf. 
• • • • • 
499. (1) E'very councillor and aldermen, the Commissioner, the 
General Manager (Electricity), the General Manager (Transport) 
and every municipal officer and other municipal employee shall be 
liable for the loss, waste or mis-application of any money or other 
property owned by of vested in the Corporation, if such loss, waste 
or 'mis-application is a direct consequence of his neglect or mis-
conduct and a- suit for compensation may be instituted against him 
by the Corporation with the previous sanction of the Central Gov-
. e,rn,ment. or by the. Central Government. 
• ••• • • 
500. Every councillor and aldermen, the Commissioner, the Gene-
ral Manager (Electricity), the General Manager (Transport) and 
every municipal officer an.d other municipal employee shall be deem-
ed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code, and in the definition of "legal remuneration" in 45 of 
section 161 of that Code the word "Government" shall, for the pur-
pose of this section, be deemed to include the Corporation . 
.. , 5O~:, P> As .sq.ori as may be'8Iter the 1st day of April in every 
year' and not later than,~ date as may be fixed by the Central 
Government in this behait. the Corporation shall submit to that report. 
;01 Government a detailed report of the municipal government of Delhi 
Other 
laws not 
to be dis-
regarded. 
Constr'uc-
tionofre-
ferences. 
during the preceding year in such form as that Government may 
direct. 
(2) The Commissioner shall prepare such report and the Corpo-
ration shall consider it and forward the same to the Central Gov-
ernment with its resolution thereon, if any . 
• • • • • 
502· Save as provided in this Act, nothing contained in this Act 
shall be construed as authorising the disregard by the Corporation 
or any municipal authority or any municipal ofBcer or other muni-
cipal employee of any law for the time being in fo~e. . 
• • • • • 
. 504. (1) Save as expr:essly provided in this Act and unless the 
context otherwise requires,-
(a) any reference in this Act to the Commissioner and the 
Standing Committee shall be construed-

127 
the General Manager (Electricity) and the Ddhi Electric 
Supply Committee; 
(ii) in relation to any matter pertaining to the Delhi 
Transport Undertaking, as a reference respectively to the 
General Manager (Transport) and the Delhi Transport 
Committee; and 
(b) any reference in this Act to the Standing Committee 
shall be constr~ed in relation to any matter pertaining to the 
Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Undertaking, as a 
reference to the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Com-
mittee. 
• • • • • 
507. NotWithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provi- Special 
sions of this Act,- provisions 
. as to rural 
(a) the Corpot.:ation with the previous approval of the areas. 
Central Government, may, by not;fication in the Official Gazette, 
declare that any portion of the rural areas shall cease to be in-
cluded therein and upon the issue of such notification that por-
tion shall be included in and form part of the urban areas; 
(b) the .Corporation with the previous approval of the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
. Gazette,-
J
'~.~,;'(f, ,'( ,; , .(i) ,exelll~t t~~ rural a~as or any p0rt.~on thereof ,from 
, f,." such of the prOVISIons of thIS Act as ·it deems fit, ' . '.'-.'-! 
1m::· U·; ;'I;.'. '''\1., '. ,. :, . . ,;:'J'; 
tr""" .(ii) levy. taxes, rates, fees and other charges in the· .,') .)t 
.', rural areas or any portion thereof at rates lower than those ")')( 
l 
i at which such taxes, rates, fees and other charges are levied 
in the urban areas or exempt such areas or portion from 
~;", r~., any such tax, rate, fee or other charge; 
(c) the Corporation shall pay a Gaon Sabha-
(i) an amount equal to the proceeds of the tax on pro-
fession, trades, callings and employments, as and when that 
tax is levied in the Gaon Sabha area, and 
(ii) an amount equal to such portion of the proceeds 
of the property taxes on lands and buildings in that area 
as may from time to time be determined .by the Corpora-
.r tion, 
deducting the cost of collection from such proceeds. 

Power of 
CentraJ 
Govern-
ment to 
make first 
appoint-
ments. 
128 
Explanation.-In this section the expressions "Gaon Sabha" and 
"Gaon Sabha area" have the same meanings as in the Delhi Pan- Delhi Act 
chayat Raj Act, 1954. 3 ,'f 1955 . 
• • • • 
CHAPTER XXVI 
SUPPLEMENTAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
509. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 60 or in 
section 89 or section 92, the first appointment to the ~st of the 
General Manager (Electricity) or the General Manager (Transport) 
or the first appointment to the post of any municipal officer or other 
municipal employee may be made by the Central Government so 
however that the term of any such appointment shall not in any case 
exceed three years: 
Provided that the power under this sub-section shall not be 
exercised after the expiry of three years from the commencement f)f 
this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 96, in making 
any appointment uo.der sub-section (1) it shall not be necessary 
for the Central Government to consult the Union Public Service 
Commission. 
(3) Every person appointed under sub-section (1) shall receive 
such salary and allowances as the Centrai Government may deter-
mine. 
Provisions 510. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Punjab 
relating Municipal Act, 1911, or as the case may be, the Punjab District to existing local Boards Act, 1883, as in force in Delhi, as from the commet:lcement I 
authorities of 'this Act.-
in Delhi 
till the 
establish-
ment oC 
the Cor-
poration. 
(a) the persons who immediately before such commence-
ment are members of any of the local authorities specified in 
items 1 to 10 of the Second Schedule shall cease to be su~h 
members; 
(b) all the powers, duties and functions which may, under 
any of the aforesaid Acts or any other law, he exercised and 
performed by any such local authority, or by its President or 
Chairman, or by any committee thereof shall, until the estab-
lishment of the Corporation, be exercised and performed by a 
person (whether an officer of Government or not) to be appoin-
ted by the Central Government with such designation as it may 
specify: 

f29 
Provided'that the same person may be'apPOinted in respect 
of all the aforesaid local authorities. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as effecting 
or implying in any way the dissolution of .the aforesaid local autho-
rrities as bodies. colt,Porate. 
,.-
<. I. 
'. • • • • 
512. (1) • • • • • • 
(2) As from the establishment of th~ Corpor~t~~n.~., 
• •• • • • 
(d) all, de~!s. o~li,~ations and 1f~bil,.\!+~~,.~r;~Ied,. all ,(con-
tracts l!ti~il'Ito- arid all matters and things engaged to be done 
by. with or for the New Delhi MUnicipal Co~tt~ immediately 
before such establishment for or in connection witl1 the trans-
ferred area shall be deemed to have been incurred. entered 
into. ~ngaged to be done by, with or for the Corpora~iQn ~or; the 
municipal authority concerned; 
[jtJ"i, :(9) allv'8ssessMent~ •. 'valuations.tn~c!theiits ',;o~ ,divlSions 
made ~~lil!'N!\ii; ~Delhl Municipal· Com'Diltteemimediately be-
fore such establishment in or in connection with the transferred 
IillwI.rtlaf·lihaHf'irt'~~o.'fa:r as they are 'not iridj~Df(~i\b' the pro-
?~:QS'ofthis,ACt, coritinue in foree and'be'deemedto ha\7ebeen 
4lJ' made under the (provisions of this Act unless and until th£'y 
.,,,,,,·are superseded by any assessment, valuation. measurement or 
bi,.,~b;ldj.vision made by. the Corporation or the 'municipal authority 
~":lt "! concerned under the said provisionS; 
" 
• • • • • 
Special 
provisions 
as to the 
area trans-
ferred 
from New 
Delhi'to 
Delhi 
513. (1) 
~:.,~.\c, 
* * • • Expendi-
ture in 
~ (2) If in respect of the period between the establishment of the cO.nDeCtiOD 
", rporation and the adoption of the first budget by the Corporation wIth. t?e 
, " dit f th M .. I F d b muruClpal :' .• er expen, ure rom e uDlclpa un ecomes necessary affairs 
, jjllcl:abOVe'the expenditure theretofor authorised for that year from the 
: ,elei .sanctioned budget estimates of the various, Podies and local com-
."~<<<atqerltbiS specified iD., the Second Schedule, the Corporation shall mence-
rJ~~~1!dopt,a supplementary statement showing the estimated ,amount of ~~:~~ 
;';:.~PXpeDditur.. to the 

adoption 
of the 
budget by 
the Cor_ 
poration. 
Power to 
,remove 
ditftcul-
ties. 
Repeal, 
etc. and 
lavings. 
130 
(3) Every item of expenditure shown in the supplementary state-
ment as adopted by the Corporation shall be deemed to be expendi-
ture covered by a current budget-grant within the meaning of section 
102. 
(4) The supplementary statement shall be prepared, presented 
and adopted in such manner and shall provide for such matters as 
may be determined by the Corporation . 
• • • • • 
515. If any cli'fficulty arises in relation to the transition from the 
provisions of any of the enactments referred to in section 516, or in 
giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government 
may, by order as occ~ion ,requires, dq Wpung which appears to it 
to be 'neceSSary for the purpose of rerridVing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of 
two years from the establishment of the Corporation. 
516. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Notwit~ta~~ing the provlSlons of sub-section. (1) of this 
section or of 'clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 286,-;j, ~\' J I "'. 
'-d. 1 I 
I (a): any appointment, notification, order, ~cheme, rule, form, 
notice or bye-law made or issued, and any licence or permission 
granted under any of the Acts or enactments referred to in sub-
section (1) of this section or under the Act referred to in clause 
(a) of sub.,.section (2) of section 286 and in force immediately 
before the establishment of the Corporation, shall, in so far as 
it is not i.nconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue 
in force and be deemed to have been made, issued or granted 
under the provisions of this Act, unless and until it is supersed-
ed by any appOintment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form, 
notice or bye-law made or issued or any licence or permiss!on 
granted under the said provisions; 
(b) all debts, obligations and liabUfties incurred, all con-
tracts entered into and all matters and things engageeJ to be 
done by, with or for any of the bodies or local authorities speci-
fied in the Second Schedule before such establishment shall be 
deemed' to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be 

',,~. 
131 
done by, with or for the Corporation or the municipal authority 
concerned; 
-(c) all budget estimates, assessments, .valuations, measure-
ments or divisions made by any of the aforesaid bodies or local 
~( , authorities shall in so far as they are not inconsistent with the 
g:··'P.W:provisions of this Act, continue in force and be deemed to have 
fb-tt'been made under the provisions of this Act unless and until 
~~ . they are superseded by any budget estimate, assessment, valu-
ation, measurement or division made by the Corporation or 'the 
,.v~·· mUnicipal authority concerned under the said provisions; 
.~~?,~. 
• • • • • 

II' 
I 
132 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 178 (1)] , 
RATES OF TERMINAL TAXES ON GOODS 
.~ I • 
Articles 
Terminal tax payable 
per maund of gross 
weight except whe-re 
otherwise stated 
Class I.-Articles of food and drink 
• • • • • 
Class V.-Drugs, spices and perfumes 
All foreign m~d;cines including mineral waters, 
syrups and medicinal tinctures, soda bicarb and 
caustic soda (imported in packages or boxes), 
sulphur in bottles and packets, iron sulphate, 
barium sulphate h)emorsh~gic septicaemia 
serum, dextrosol, castor oil in bottles, 
potash perm'lllganate, glucose, oxygen gas, 
camphor oil, sugar of milk, medicated colou red 
and fragrant syrup. 
• • • • • 
Rs. 
• 
o 44 
• 

133 -
THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 461] 
PENALTIES 
Explanaticm.-The- entries in the -second column of the following 
table headed; "Subject'"' are not intended as definitions of the offences 
prescribed in the provisions mentioned in the first column or even 
as abstracts of those provisions, but _ are inserted merely as reference 
to the subject thereof. 
Section, sub-section, 
clause or-proviso 
.' .-
Subject 
.' . -
Fine or imprison- Daily fine 
ment whkh m"ly wh'ch m:JY 
be imposed be imposed 
Rs. Rs. 
• • 
Section 25 T Connection with municipal 200 50 
works or drains without 
written _ permission. 
• • • • • • 

Advisory 
Council. 
Invest_ 
ment of 
trust-
money. 
5. 
134 
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AcT, 1957 
(61 OF 1957) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER II 
Tm; DEllI! DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND ITS OBJECTS 
( 1~ • • • • • • • • • • 
(2) The, advisory council shaH consist of the following members, 
namely:-
• • • • • 
(d) four representatives of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi to be elected by the councillors and aldermen from among 
themselves; 
(e) three persons representing the Delhi Electrk Supply 
Committee, the Delhi Transport Committee and the Delhi Water 
Supply and Sewage ,Disposal Committee of the said Corpora-
tion, of whom- 'I 
(i) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi 
Electric Supply Committee from among themselves; 
(ii) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi 
Transport Committee from among themselves; and 
(iii) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi 
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee from among 
themselves; 
• 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN TRUSTS Aer. 1882 
(2 OF 1882) 
• • • • • 
20. Where the trust-property consists of money and cannot be 
applied immediately or at an early date to the purposes of the trust, 
the trustee is bound (subject to any direction contained in the ins-
trument of trust) to invest the money on the following securities, and 
on no others:-
II< • • • • 
(d) in debentures or other securities for money issued, 
under the authority of any Central Act or Provincial Act or 
State Act, dy or on behalf of any Municipal body post trust or City 
improvement trust in any presidency-town. or in Rangoon Town. or 
by on beh·!lf nfthe trustees of the port of Karachi: 
Provided that after the 31st day of March, 1948, no money 
shall be invested in any securities issued by or on behalf of a 
municipal body, port trust or city improvement trust in Rangoon 
town, or by or on behalf of the trustees of the port of Karachi. 
•• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
furtr,cr to amend the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 
and to make certain minor and consequential amendments 
to the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 and the Delhi Develop-
ment Act, 1957-
(Shri Gulzari/aJ Nanda, 
Minister of Home Affairs) 

., .. .' 
',' 
, 
, ........... ;.,.:..-
LOR SlJ3RJi. 
CORRIGElmA 
to 
THE ~.MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ,(AME , 
..' fot:, ~'Dtputy'~~ "Deputy" 
2. Page 8~ line 14,- .. ' 
• 'for ~Quty II . ~ 
3. Page 8, line,,24,-.'t .".,;.' ,," 
. " \" . " ... 
8, 1l.D.~ 25;-, ".-,':.,~~'.t~:. I 
. ,p ~ " . 
after· ... tlDeputy ~.ayc)'r" .~_.~ 
4. Page 
5. Page 10, c;t.ause':"1~.~.~·· 
.' '. ..".' 
. , 
'.\ ~/ . 
. ': ; .. ", 
6 •.• Page 15, li,he 12,.-'. .~' :~«iI. .',' \""" 0,": •• 
~ "word" . .d' I,', 
, ... ~ .• ::" " .. : ..... - 1.'" 
~Page 16, ~~S!3 29 ,-
0' ' .' 7. 
~n,'the " .J . ' 
, ... ..,\' .. : . ........ 
. ' ' 
.. ,,~ ',.-
8 •. 
.- , 
t .... 
. ;;,....- '.': ,. 
in the marginal hegaiiig to seotion'107,- . 
'_ befQ-re~ '~unicipai Fund" ~ 'tithe" . . ........ 
P.T.O. 

- 2 -
12. Page 21, line 13,-
oW n(ii)" :::'eg,d "(iii)" 
13. Page 28, line 15,-
14. Paee 31, liD.e 8,-
g,fter "priE~ir;81 ~ctll insert "," 
15. P'lCe 32, line 1'?l,_ 
afte r I II, inse rt 
16. Page 33, line 15,-
, I 
, 
after lI'officer" inser1 
17. Page 34, lin~ 1 t) '.-
" II , 
afte r "reee i ved from" inse ft J~, " 
18. Page 36, line 16,-
~ '''any' ~ , "and' 
19 .. rage 38, line 1 ,-
after "man" insert " " , 
20. Faee 38, line 2,-
afte .. "section" insert II 
" , 
21. Page 39, . line 12,~ 
after II (2) II ~ " " , 
22. P"'.ge 3g - , line 18,-
fqr "286'('''' ~ '1'286"f 
1fll: "Major-in-C-ouncil" ~ "Ma.yo~ounci1" 
24. ~age 45, line 11 from bottom,-
for "into. rpre llations" ~ "interpell.a.~ions" 
25. P~e 46, line 12,-
, 

f< 
'--.1-
-: 3 :-
2c. Page 46, line 13,-
after IIsalary of II, insert "r.!ore than" 
27. Page 46, line 14,-
~ "or more" 
28. Page 48, line 14 :.'ro~:l ~ottO:1,-
ill "eXGrCiS8u.tlL)" ~ "exer'.;is:;.ole n 
after "Prevention", ins~rt "of" 
3:~J. Page 52, lir.e 2 from botto:n,-
31. Page 54, line 18 from bottCCl,-
1£r "alderman", ~ "aldermen Li 
32. Pa.ge 55, in the marginal heading to section 30,-
f.2r tlpenalities" ~ "penalties" 
33. Page 58, line 19,-
i.Q.r It e eh'II re ad "eu eh " 
34. Page 60, line 4 from bot~om,-
for "alderman lt read "aldermen" 
35. Page 77, line 12,-
for "appointment" ~ "appointmentslt 
36. Page 92, line 4,-
ill II sup ly" read "sup EJ ly" 
3? Page 9?, line 10,-
.f.Qr uri ve p€ r cent. Shall be payable on demand 
U:I tL8 ;';P',,; JeH:i", ~ -
"the ':::or,or'3ti::m as [iay 00 determinecl by" ,~ 
. rules i!!ac.e ~3y the" 
38. Page 99, line 1,-
.£Q.r "flow orll ~ "flow of" 
P,.T.Cl. 
'-

-: 4 1_ 
39. Par;e 106, in the marginal heading to section 292,-
.f.QI "trasport" ~ "transport" 
40. Page 111, line 8,-
..£.ill: "of building" reyd "or building" 
or:i t "or" 
aft er "newspapers", insert 
43. Fase 119, line 10 from bottom,-
It " , 
1..-21;: "Genreal Manager" ~ "General I1anager" 
44. Page 127, line 1,-
befor e nthe General l1anag er ", insert -
"(1) in relation to any matter pertaining to 
the Delhi ~lectric Supply Undertaking, as' a 
:::-eference respectively to" 
45. t'age 132, line 6 from bottom,-
for "haemorshagic" ~ 'Ihaemorrhagic". 
46. Fage 133, line 3 from bottom,-
ill "works" .uaQ, "water works" 
47. Page 134, line 1,-
.f..Qr "3XTRAC T S" re ad" EXTR ... C T " 
48. Page 13 11, line 8 from bottom,-
(i) for tidy" read" by" ; and 
(ii) for "post" ~ "port". 
49. 1-' ag e 1 34, line 6 fror.1 bot tom,-
n ft er "by" ins ert "or" 
50. Correct line numbers on pages 1 ,10,11 ,18 to 23,33,36, 
38 and 40. 
Bhadra 5, 1888 Saka) 