AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2 9 JUL 90%

Bill No. 59 of 2005

THE NATIONAL PARKS BILL, 2005
| i
SHRI SUBODH Monit, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the establishment and control of Nationai Parks and for matter connected
therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the F ifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

1. (/) This Act may be called the National Parks Act, 2005.
(2) It extends to whole को India. |
_ (3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "Director General" means the Director-General of Wild Life and National
Parks appointed under section 7;

(0) "Gazette" means the Gazette of India;
(c) "National Park" means a National Park established under section 3; and

(4) "Officer" means the Director-General or any other person referred to in
section 7. |

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Reservation
of land and
declaration of
National
Parks.

Formation of
Advisory
Council.

Functions of
Advisory
Council.

~ Formation of

Committee
for each
National

Park.

2

3. (1) The State Government may, on the request of the Central Government, reserve

any land in the State (including any marine area) for the purpose of a National Park under a

name to be assigned to it by the Central Government.

(2) After the land is so reserved by the State Government, the Central Government
may declare its intention to constitute such area as a National Park.

(3) The area so reserved shall be placed under the control of a National Park Committee
established under section 6.

(4) The reservation of land under this section shall not be revoked except with the
concurrence of the Minister concerned in writing.

(5) Any reservation of land under this section shal! be notified in the Gazette and |

such notification shall —
(a) describe the reserved land;

(8) designate the authority having the control of the land so reserved; and

of this Act

4. (1) There shall be a National Parks Advisory Council which shall consist of the
following members, namely:—

(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;

(b) one representative nominated by the State Government from each of the

States in which there is a National Park or part thereof;

(c) the Director-General of Wild Life and National Parks appointed under
section 7;

(d) a representative of the Department of Planning and Development of the —

State;

(e) a representative of the Tourism Development Corporation, if any, of the 2

State;
(f) a representative of the Department of Forest of the State; and

(g) not more than five persons to be appointed by the Central Government.

(2) Amember appointed under clause (a) or (g) of sub-section (1) shall hold office

for such period of time as the Central Government may decide and that Government may, at
any time, remove him from office without assigning any reason therefor.

5. (7) The National Parks Advisory Council shall advise the Central Government on
matters relating to the conservation, utilization, care of National Parks, declared as such by

the Central Government, and such other matters as that Government may, from time to time, _

refer to it or on matters which it considers necessary on its own.

(2) Subject to regulations made under this Act, the Advisory Council shall determine
its procedure at its sittings

6. (1) ACommittee shall be constituted by the Central Government for each National
Park consisting of the following members, namely:—

(a) the Secretary of the Forest Department of each State within which the National _ ८

Park is situated

(b) a representative each of such departments of the Government of the State as
the Central Government may consider necessary to be represented; and

(c) such other persons not exceeding three in number as the Central Government
may appoint and the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 4 shall apply mutatis
mutandis in the case of an appointment under this clause.

(2) be conclusive evidence that the land so described is reserved for the purpose —

id



3

(2) The Secretary of the Forest Department of the State shall be the Chairperson of
the Committee, but where a National Park is situated within two States or more, the Secretaries
of Forest Departments of such States shall act as Chairpersons in rotation and, subject to
regulations made under section 1 1, the Committee shall determine its procedure at its sittings.

(3) A Committee constituted under this section shall be responsible for the
conservation, utilization, care, control, management and development of National Park for
which it is constituted and, in discharging its responsibility under this Act, the Committee shall
act on such directives as the National Parks Advisory Council may issue from time to time.

7. The Central Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, appoint a Director-
General of Wild Life and National Parks, and such other officers and employees as may be
necessary.

8. (/) The Director-General and other officers appointed by the Central Government
shall be responsible for the proper carrying out of the provisions of this Act and in so doing
persons shall be referred to by the designation given to them under this Act.

(2) The Director-General shall have the general supervision and direction of all
matters relating to National Parks.

(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, give the Director-General directions
of a general character and not inconsistent with the provisions of this act as to the exercise
of the powers conferred on, and the duties to be discharged by the Director-General under
this Act and the Director-General shall give effect to all such directions.

9. (1) The State Government may, with the concurrence of the Central Government,
lease or permit the use or occupation of any land within a National Park subject to such
conditions and restrictions as it thinks fit to impose and for any of the following purposes
only, namely: —

(a) the construction and maintenance of roads;
(6) the construction and maintenance of air strips;
(c) the construction and maintenance of dams and reservoirs;

(d) the construction and maintenance of hotels, rest houses, dwelling houses,
buildings and works of public utility, where the State Government considers any of
these purposes to be necessary and in the interests of the development of the National
Parks; and

(e) mining or prospecting in accordance with the provisions of section 10.

(2) Any land leased by the State Government or in respect of which any use or
_ occupation has been permitted by the State Government under sub-section (1), shall continue
| to form part of National Park and subject to the provisions of this Act, and of any regulations
made thereunder save in so far may be set out in any condition or restriction imposed by the
State Government under sub-section (1).

(3) Subject to this Act, any lease or permit to use or occupy land under this section
shall be issued in accordance with the regulations hereafter provided.

(4) Save by virtue of any right conferred by or acquired under or in respect of any
lease or permit under sub-section (1) or as otherwise in this Act provided, no person other
than an officer may reside on, enter, use or occupy any land within and forming part of a
National Park without the permission of the Director-General.

| 10. (/) Except as provided in sub-section (2) of this section, no mining or prospecting
9 operations shall be carried on within a National Park.

(2) If at any time the State Government has reason to believe that in a particular
portion of a National Park, a mineral deposit exists of such richness that it would be contrary
to the interests of the State that it should not be mined, the State Government may with the

Appointment
of Director-
General, etc.

Functions of
the Director-
General. -

Giving leases
“in National
Parks.

Mining leases.


Power of
Centra!
Government
to make
regulations.

_ as to any or all the following matters, namely:—

4

concurrence of the Central Government, issue under the law relating to mining, licencest
prospect that portion of the National Park and if necessary issue thereafter mining certificat
or mining leases in respect of that portion of the National Park or of any part of that po

(3) Where any mining certificate or mining lease is used in respect of any land withi
a National Park, the holder of the certificate or the lease shall have such rights of passage

licences or other facilities as may be necessary for the practical exercise of the oht
guaranteed by such certificate or lease.

(4) Notwithstanding anything in the law relating to mining, there shall be an implies
condition in a mining certificate or mining lease issued pursuant to this section that an
officer shall have such rights of entry into the land in respect of which a licence to prospect
a mining certificate or a mining lease has been issued as may be necessary in order that he
may carry out the object of this Act in respect of such land of the National Park generally,

11, (/) The Central Govérnment may make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act,

(a) the exclusion of members of public from certain areas within a National Park;

(5) the prohibition of the killing, maiming, trapping, capturing or impounding of
any wild life within a National Park and the disposal of such wild life killed, maimed,
trapped, captured or impounded;

(c) the prohibition of such animals, as may be specified, from being taken into or
remaining within a National Park; 4

(d) the prohibition of burning and cutting of vegetation within a National Park;

(९) the disposal of wild life, vegetation or other things formed within a National
Park; |

_ (f) the search of any person suspected of contravening any regulation made |
under this Act; न

(8) the periods and times within which the public may have access to a National
Park or any part thereof:

(h) the regulation of the conduct, obligation and duties of persons residing or
travelling or camping in a National Park and the safety of persons visiting such Park
and their liability for all reasonable expenses incurred in connection with searches to
find persons who have become or are reasonably believed to have become lost therein;

(i) the fees for the issue of permits to enter into or camps within a National Park,
for the admission of vehicles into and the taking of photographs within a National Park
or for the services connected with the use of enjoyment of a National Park:

(/) the protection, preservation and care of a National Park and of permanent
works and works of maintenance and of facilities and amenities and of wild life, and
regulatiorf and features of science, and scientific or historical interest therein;

(४) the regulation of traffic and carriage of passengers within a National Park:

(/) the seizure and disposal of any vehicle, vessel, animal or other article or thing
in respect of which there is a contravention of any regulation made under this Act; ५०

(m) penalties in respect of the contravention of any regulation made under this
Act;

(n) the construction and maintenance of hotels, rest houses, dwelling houses,
buildings and works of public utility; |


5

(o) the powers and duties of officers in relation to the carrying out of the
provisions of this Act and regulations made thereunder

(p) the procedure to be adopted by the National Parks Committees at their
meetings and the remuneration or allowances to be paid to members thereof; and

(4) such other matters as the Central Government may consider necessary for
the efficient control and management of a National Park or for the attainment of the
object of its establishment

(2) The Central Government may make different regulations under sub-section (1) of
| this section in respect of different National Parks.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The object of the establishment of National Parks is the preservation and protection of
wild life, plant life and objects of geological, archaeological, historical and other scientific
and scenic interest and through their conservation and utilization to promote the education,
health, aesthetic values of recreation of the people. |

Recently many tigers, leopards and other animals died in many zoos for want of proper
and adequate facilities. |

Therefore, there is an urgent need to protect the animals and environment.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; | SUBODH MOHITE
March 11,2005 :



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the formation of a National Parks Advisory Council;
Clause 6 provides for formation of a Committee for each National Park; and Clause 7 provides
for appointment ofa Director-General of Wild Life and National Parks and such other officers
and employees as may be necessary. Payment of travelling allowance, etc. to members of the
Advisory Council and National Park Committees, and salaries to Director-General and other
Officers is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore from
the Consolidated Fund of India.

An amount of about Rs. 2 crore will also be involved from the Consolidated F und of
India towards non-recurring expenditure.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Under clause 10(1), State Governments are empowered to prescribe conditions and
restrictions to be imposed on leasing out land in National Parks. Under clause 11, the Central
Government may make regulations for certain matters given under that section. Since the
regulations to be made will provide for matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative
power is of a normal character. :



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the establishment and control of National Parks and for matters
connected therewith.

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P,)

MGIPMRND—02LS(S1)—13.04.2005