1
THE FARMERS (PROTECTION FROM NATURAL CALAMITIES AND
OTHER WELFARE MEASURES)  BILL, 2011
By
DR. M AHENDRASINH P. C HAUHAN, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of farmers affected by natural calamities and for other
welfare measures and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called by Farmers (Protection from Natural Calamities and Other
Welfare Measures) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in case of a State, the Government of that
State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. 59 of 2011
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA

2
45
(b) "farmers affected by natural calamity" means a farmer whose property,
including livestock, crop, orchard, field, machine or tools, is lost, destroyed or damaged
due to natural calamity;
(c) "Fund" means the Farmers Welfare Fund established under section 5;
(d) "natural calamity" includes drought, flood, cyclone, hailstorm, cloud burst,
tsunami, landslide or earthquake or such other conditions as may be notified by the
appropriate Government from time to time;
(e) "old age farmer" means a farmer who has completed sixty years of age;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(g) "Scheme" means the Farmers Credit Scheme formulated under section 8.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, every farmer who has been affected by natural calamity, shall be paid adequate
compensation by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The amount of compensation payable to a farmer under clause (1), shall be such as
may be specified by the Central Government from time to time, by notification in the Official
Gazette.
(3) The appropriate Government, while specifying the compensation under clause (2),
shall take into account the actual loss suffered by a farmer due to the natural calamity.
(4) Every claimant, shall apply to an officer so nominated by the appropriate Government
for the purpose of payment of compensation, in the prescribed form, giving such information
as may be prescribed:
Provided that nothing in this Act shall prevent a Gram Panchayat from applying for
compensation on behalf of all the affected farmers living within the jurisdiction of such
Gram Panchayat.
(5) Every claim for compensation under this Act shall be disposed of within a period
of thirty days from the date of filing of the claim by the affected farmer or by the Gram
Panchayat, as the case may be.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be called as the Farmers Welfare Fund.
(2) The initial corpus of the Fund shall be rupees five thousand crore of which rupees
four thousand crore shall be provided by the Central Government, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, and rupees one thousand crore shall be provided
by the State Governments in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute every year
to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(4) There shall also be credited to the Fund any grants or donation that may be made
by any person or institution.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall take such measures as it may think necessary
and expedient for the removal of indebtedness amongst farmers.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the measures shall
also include measures for giving remunerative prices to farmers for their produce and provision
of a comprehensive crop insurance scheme for farmers.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall pay not be less than rupees one thousand per
month as pension to every old age farmer, in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the old age pension shall be payable to only those old age farmers whose
income from all sources is not more than two thousand rupees per month.
Every farmer
affected by
natural
calamities to be
paid adequate
compensation.
Farmers
Welfare Fund.
Appropriate
Government
to take
measures for
the removal
of
indebtedness
amongst
farmers.
Pension to old
age farmers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The appropriate Government shall revise the rate of old age pension from time to
time taking into account such criteria as it may consider necessary.
7. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the State Governments, formulate
a scheme to be called the Farmers Credit Scheme for providing loans to farmers through
banks and financial institutions.
(2) The scheme shall provide for:—
(i) terms and conditions governing the flow of credit to the farmers;
(ii) procedure of settling of outstanding loans against farmers;
(iii) guidelines regarding rate of interest to be charged on loans from farmers;
(iv) relief measures for farmers affected by natural calamities; and
(v) such other matters as the Central Government may deem necessary.
8. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to issue necessary directive to the
banks and financial institutions, from time to time, for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force in relation to any of the matters provided in this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the vailidity of anything previously done under that rule.
Farmers Credit
Scheme.
Central
Government
to issue
directive to
banks and
financial
institutions.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to make
rules.
05
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country farmers constitute nearly seventy per cent. of the total population.
Being a vast country, natural calamities do occur in one part of the country or the other
almost round the year. For instance, the whole of Rajasthan, parts of Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, etc. are drought prone.
Every year half of Bihar is flooded and the other half faces drought. Similarly, in southern
States, coastal areas are lashed with cyclones or tsunami whereas other parts face drought
conditions. Many parts of the country face earthquake, hailstorm, cloud bursts, extreme cold
conditions and other natural calamities. Farmers mostly bear the brunt of such natural
calamities. They lose their crops, livestock and many a time their dwelling units and household
items including foodgrains. Despite this, farmers are supposed to repay their loans whether
their harvest is good or not. In depression, many of them end their lives. Thousands of
farmers have committed suicide in recent years in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, etc. Indebtedness of our
farming community is a chronic and continuing problem which has to be taken care through
active efforts. Due to increase in life expectancy, the number of old age farmers is increasing
and in old age they have to suffer a number of problems compelling them to lead a miserable
life. Since ours is a welfare State, the Government is duty bound to provide social security to
the farmers by giving them old age pension, remunerative prices of their produce and also
provide them adequate compensation if their crops and property are affected by natural
calamity.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN
August 1, 2011.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the compensation to farmers affected by natural
calamity. Clause 4 provides for establishment of Farmers Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides for
old age pension to farmers. Clause 7 provides for the formulation of Farmers' Credit Scheme.
The expenditure in relation to the States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the
respective States. However, the expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out
of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five thousand crore
may be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the protection of farmers affected by natural calamities and for other
welfare measures and for matters connected therewith.
—————
(Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1342LS(S3)—25-08-2011.