THE PREVENTION OF WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE ON SPECIAL
OCCASIONS BILL, 2020
By
SHRI JASBIR SINGH GILL, M.P.
A
BILL
to prevent wasteful expenditure on special occasions such as weddings and
festivals with a view to bring positive changes in the lives of the
underprivileged and the destitute and for matter
connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Wasteful Expenditure on Special
Occasions Act, 2020.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No.  59 of  2020

2
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government
of that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "designated Authority" means an authority or an officer designated
for the purpose of registration of marriages under this Act;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "special occasion" means any event worth celebrating and includes
weddings, festivals, and such other occasions; and
(e) "supporting organization" means the any organisation engaged in
creating awareness among public for prevention of wasteful expenditure on
special occasions and encouraging people to donate for charity on such
occasions.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force or of any custom or ritual, all special occasions shall be conducted in a simple
manner without incurring extravagant or wasteful expenditure, show of wealth or
lavish spending.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in sub-section
(1), on the occasion of solemnization of marriage—
(a) not more than one hundred guests shall be invited;
(b) not more than ten number of dishes shall be served;
(c) the value of gifts given during invitation card distribution shall not
exceed rupees twenty-five hundred; and
(d) practice of donation to poor, needy, orphans or weaker sections of the
society or to non-Governmental organisations working for charity shall be
encouraged instead of extravagant gifts:
Provided that donations and gifts may be combined if amount of gift is less
than the prescribed limit as specified in clause(c).
(3) The appropriate Government shall prescribe necessary guidelines to be
followed for effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force or in any custom or usage to the contrary,—
(a) supporting organizations shall be encouraged to create awareness
among public about the importance of practice of minimum expenditure on
special occasions and disseminate the provisions of this Act, and
(b) practice of donating for charity purpose on special occasions shall be
encouraged.
5. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees;
6. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, as it appears to be necessary
or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Prevention of
wastage during
marriage
functions.
Definitions.
Encouragement
to Supporting
Organizations.
Penalty.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being applicable to marriages.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session,
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to have
overriding effect.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Power to  make
rules.
5
10
15

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
These days, it has become fashionable to spend like feudals on special occasions
such as marriages and festivals. The guest list is very long and the food menu layout
is vast which leads to lot of wastage. Not only this, a lot of wastage occurs at the time
of distribution of marriage cards or post-wedding gifts. Similarly, a lot of wastage
occurs on festivals due to practices of exchanging gifts. That also deserves significant
attention.
On weddings, practice of a vast food layout, decoration, bands, music and
number of guests invited has become a status symbol and a symbol of show-off.
Analogously, on festivals thoughtless exchange of gifts is very wasteful. Festivals
must be a time to remember the almighty and do good to society. But often, the core
concept of festivals get lost in the show-off that many do, by exchanging fancy gifts.
That money could instead be donated and smaller gifts distributed.
In fact, on special occasions, food waste and loss has been rapidly increasing
in India. According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO),
every year around 1.7 billion tonnes, or almost  one third of food produced for human
consumption, is lost or wasted globally.
As per the Global Hunger Index, 2019 India has a rank of 102 out of 117 countries.
The NFHS4 (2015 &16) estimated 46.8 million under five children in India are stunted
and this represents one-third of total stunted children across the globe. Food loss or
waste also amount to a major squandering of resources, including water, land, energy,
labour and capital and it also needlessly produce greenhouse gas emissions,
contributing to global warming and climate change.
It is high time for our country to stand up against this unmeaningful and wasteful
expenditure. So we should decide that not more than one hundred guests and not
more than ten dishes should be allowed.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; JASBIR SINGH GILL
January  22, 2020.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the
delegation of legislative power is of normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prevent wasteful expenditure on special occasions such as weddings and
festivals with a view to bring positive changes in the lives of the
underprivileged and the destitute and for matter
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Jasbir Singh Gill, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—5366LS—27.02.2020.