 As introduced in Lok Sabha
 
BillBill  NoNo. 59 . 59 ofof    20252025
THE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (ETHICS AND 
ACCOUNTABILITY) BILL, 2025
By
Smt. Bharti Pardhi, M.P.
a
BILL
to establish an Ethics and Accountability Framework for the use of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) technologies in decision-making, surveillance, and  
algorithmic systems to prevent misuse and ensure fairness,  
transparency, and accountability  and for matters  
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as  follows:–
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Artificial Intelligence (Ethics and 
Accountability) Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
5

5
10
15
20
25
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Artificial Intelligence (AI)” means computer systems or applications 
capable of performing tasks that typically require human intelligence, including 
but not limited to decision-making, language processing and visual perception;
(b) “algorithmic bias” refers to the presence of systematic errors in AI 
systems that result in unfair outcomes;
(c) “ Committee” refers to the Ethics Committee for AI Technologies 
constituted under section 3; 
(d)  “developer” means a person who design, develop, and implement AI 
models and systems;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and  
(f) “stakeholders” include developers, deployers, users of AI technologies, 
and affected individuals or communities.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Gazette, 
constitute a Committee to be known as the Ethics Committee for Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to it under this Act. 
(2) The Committee shall consist of:—
(a) Chairperson having expertise in ethics and technology;
(b) such number of representatives from academia, industry, civil 
society and government; and
(c) such number of experts in law, data science and human rights, 
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall provide the Committee with such 
officers and other employees as may be required for the proper functioning of 
the Committee. 
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions 
of service of the Chairperson, representatives, experts, officers and other 
employees appointed for the purpose of the Committee shall be such as may 
be prescribed.
4. The Committee shall,—
(a) develop and recommend ethical guidelines for AI technologies;
(b) monitor compliance with ethical standards in AI systems;
(c) review cases of misuse, bias or violations of the provisions of this Act;
(d) promote awareness and capacity-building among stakeholders;
(e) undertake such other functions as the Central Government may, from 
time to time, prescribe. 
5. (1) The use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in surveillance shall be limited to 
lawful purposes with prior approval of the Committee constituted under section 3.
(2) AI systems involved in critical decision-making including law enforcement, 
financial credit and employment shall,—
(a) not discriminate only on the basis of race, religion, gender, or any of 
them;
2
Constitution 
of Ethics 
Committee 
for AI 
Technologies.
30
Definitions.
Functions 
of the 
Committee.
Restrictions on 
Surveillance 
and Decision-
Making.
35
40

(b) be subjected to stringent ethical reviews by the Committee. 
6. Every developer shall,—
(a)  ensure transparency in AI Systems by disclosing,—
(i)  the intended purpose and limitations of the AI System;
(ii) data sources and methodologies used for training algorithms;
(iii) the reasons for any decisions made by AI systems that impact 
individuals;
(b)  ensure prevention of Algorithmic Bias by,—
(i) conducting regular audits to identify and mitigate biases in AI 
systems;
(ii) ensuring diversity and inclusivity in training datasets;
(iii) ensuring that AI systems exhibiting significant bias are withdrawn 
until corrective measures are implemented; and
(c) maintain records of compliance with ethical standards under this Act.
7. (1) Any affected individual or group may file complaints with the Committee 
regarding misuse or harm caused by AI technologies under this Act in such manner 
as may be prescribed.
(2) The Committee shall investigate complaints and recommend necessary 
actions, including penalties or remedial measures in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
8. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable to,—
(a) fine which may extend upto rupees five crore depending on the severity 
of the violation; and
(b) suspension or revocation of licenses for deploying AI systems:
Provided that in case of  repeat violations, the offender  may face criminal 
liability as prescribed. 
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide to the Committee by way of grant, 
such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised 
for the purpose of this Act. 
10. (1) The Committee shall, as soon as may be, after the end of each financial 
year, submit to the Central Government an annual report giving a full account of the 
activities, findings, and recommendations undertaken during the previous financial 
year, in such form and on such date, as may be prescribed. 
(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section (1) shall be laid before the 
Parliament within six months after it is received by the Central Government. 
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any 
other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
3
Responsibility 
of Developers.
Penalties 
for Non-
Compliance.
Grievance 
Redressal 
Mechanism.
Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds.
Application of 
other laws not 
barred.
Annual 
Report.
Power to make 
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
4
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The rapid proliferation of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies presents 
immense opportunities for societal advancement but also poses significant 
ethical and regulatory challenges. These include risks of algorithmic bias, 
misuse of surveillance capabilities, lack of transparency and accountability in  
decision-making systems.
The proposed Bill aims to address these challenges by:
(a) establishing a comprehensive framework for ethical AI deployment;
(b) ensuring transparency, fairness, and accountability in AI systems;
(c) protecting individuals and communities from harm caused by unethical 
or biased AI applications; and
(d) promoting innovation and trust in AI technologies through clear 
regulatory guidelines.
The Bill emphasizes the importance of a balanced approach to foster AI’s 
positive impacts while safeguarding against its potential misuse. By empowering 
an independent Ethics Committee and prescribing robust penalties for violations, 
this legislation seeks to ensure AI technologies serve the greater good and uphold 
democratic values.
 The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
  New Delhi;             BHARTI PARDHI
January 20, 2025.
 
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of an Ethics Committee for 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform 
the functions assigned to it under this Act. It also provides for appointment of 
Chairperson, representatives, experts, officers and staff to the Committee. Clause 
9 provides for the payment of grants by the Central Government to the Committee. 
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees Five hundred 
crores per annum will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees One hundred crores is also likely 
to be involved. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
7

       LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to establish an Ethics and Accountability Framework for the use of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) technologies in decision-making, surveillance, and  
algorithmic systems to prevent misuse and ensure fairness,  
transparency, and accountability  and for matters  
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Smt. Bharti Pardhi, M.P .) 