     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 59 of 2022
THE  UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE  BILL, 2022
By
SHRI M.K. RAGHA V AN,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide  for equitable access in healthcare through Universal health
Insurance of all citizens and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Universal Health Insurance  Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,—
Short title,
extent
and
commencement.
5
Definitions.

(a) “ambulance expenses” means ambulance cover for transportation to
nearby hospital and restricted to ten per cent. of sum insured per family;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State, the Government
of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “Authority” means National Health Authority constituted vide notification
No. DL-(N) 04/0007/2003-18 dated 9 February, 2019 to replace the Pradhan Mantri Jan
Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY);
(d) “beneficiary” means every citizen who has been identified with the help
of family identity card issued by the Authority;
(e) “domiciliary hospitalization” means a case where a person can be given
medical treatment from the home premises without hospitalization;
(f) “family” means husband, wife, minor sons and daughters, dependent
brother, sister and parents;
(g) “Health Insurance” means an insurance taken to cover the medical
expenses of hospitalization including domiciliary hospitalization;
(h) “health insurance service provider” means a registered general insurance
company or standalone health insurance company authorized to do health insurance
business in India;
(i) “Hospital” means any clinic, dispensary, medical first-aid center, hospital,
nursing home, medical consultancy center, indoor treatment center or a research
center, where patients are treated and includes places where medical consultation is
offered to patients and hospitals under AYUSH  Ministry;
(j) “post-hospitalization” means medical expenses incurred due to an illness
or injury during the period up to sixty days after discharge from the hospital;
(k) “pre-hospitalization” means medical expenses incurred due to an illness
or injury during the period up to thirty days prior to hospitalization;
(l) “scheme” means the Universal Health Insurance Scheme formulate under section 3;
(m) “sum insured” means five lakh rupees per family on floater basis ; and
(n) “treatment” means consultation, prescription, any investigation leading
to diagnosis of disease, any type of treatment provided by any hospital and includes
replacement of human organs and any treatment for physical and mental wellbeing of
the patient.
3. The Central Government shall formulate a Scheme to be known as    Univer-
sal Health Insurance Scheme for providing health insurance to all citizens.
4. (1) The Authority shall implement the Scheme formulated under section 3 for
carrying out the purposes of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to anything contained in sub-section (1), the Authority
shall,
(a) formulate guidelines with regard to the Scheme, model documents
and contracts with health insurance service provider to ensure standardization and
interoperability;
(b) determine the central ceiling of the premium to be paid to  health
insurance service provides under the Scheme;
(c) develop and enforce compliance standards for treatment protocols,
quality protocols, minimum documentation, data sharing protocols and data privacy
of citizens;
2
5
Formulation of
comprehensive
Health Insurance
Scheme.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Authority to
implement the
provisions of
this Act.

(d) issue national Health Identity Card to beneficiaries and ensure that
all the data regarding citizens, health is stored digitally strictly complying with
privacy requirements;
(e) build and maintain state of the art digital health eco-system;
(f) coordinate with State Governments regarding the effective
implementation of the Scheme;
(g) develop capacity building in health care sector and evolve a standard
protocol for treatment of diseases; and
(h) redress various grievances arising in healthcare sector as a result of
medical negligence or shortfall of procedure conducted at hospitals.
5. (1) The Scheme shall include all expenses incurred on,—
(a) pre-hospitalization up to thirty days;
(b) medical examination, treatment and consultation including domiciliary
hospitalization;
(c) medicine and medical consumables;
(d) non-intensive and intensive care services;
(e) diagnostic and laboratory investigations;
(f) medical implantation services;
(g) admission, bed and catering services availed during hospitalization;
(h) complications arising during treatment; and
(i) post-hospitalization follow-up care up to sixty days after discharge.
(2)  No person suffering from any disease  shall be excluded from the coverage of
the Scheme unless notified by the Authority, from time to time, after consultation with
Union Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare.
6. (1) The premium payable per family for the health insurance under the Scheme
shall be computed based on actuarial calculations as follows:—
(a) Government of India shall contribute to fifty per cent. of the premium
payable; and
(b) State Governments shall contribute fifty per cent. of the premium
payable.
(2) The annual premium payable shall be paid by the Authority on behalf of
the appropriate Government based on the calculation arrived at by empanelled
insurance service provider in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. Every health insurance service provider shall,—
(a) settle the claim directly to the hospital on cashless basis immediately;
(b) make arrangements for digital storage of records and ensure that privacy
norms are not violated;
(c) settle claims in respect of hospitals wherever cashless facility is not
available directly to the bank account of the beneficiaries within twenty-four hours of
receipt of necessary documents;
(d) have access to the record of the beneficiaries; and
(e) mandatorily undertake health audits of all the records in such manner as
may be prescribed.
5
10
15
3
Coverage,
Scope and
Exclusions of
the Scheme.
20
30
35
Premium for
Health
Insurance.
Duties of
Health
Insurance
Service
Provider.
25
40

8. (1) The Central Government shall enter into an agreement with all health
insurance service provider for implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The health insurance service provider shall enter into agreement with
privately owned hospitals to provide health services to the beneficiaries covered
under the Scheme at such rates as may be agreed upon by both parties.
9. The Central Government shall, by due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide in each financial year such sums of money to the State
Governments and nationalized Insurance Companies as it thinks necessary for
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
10.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
4
5
10Power to
make rules.
15
20
Agreement with
health insurance
service provider
and private
hospitals.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Various judicial pronouncements have laid stress on Right to health being an
integral part of constitution. Honourable Supreme Court and High Courts has upheld
that  Right to life has a very broad scope which includes right to livelihood, better
standard of life, hygienic conditions in the workplace and right to leisure.  Right to
health is, therefore, an inherent and inescapable part of a dignified life. Article 21
should also be read in tandem with the directive principles of State policy, to truly
understand the nature of the obligations of the State in this respect. However even
though this is the case, in reality, large number of our population still do not have
access to good quality healthcare.
Even though insurance policies were launched by companies, it never helped in
bringing our whole citizens under the ambit of health Insurance. Sadly, Health Insurance
penetration remains minimal. Universal access to health insurance will enable our
citizen to have access to good quality healthcare facilities. This shall significantly
bring down out of pocket expenditure in healthcare sector in India which is by far one
of the largest in the world.
The need is to uphold individual citizen’s right to access to healthcare. State is
also required to ensure that no one is left behind when it comes to access to healthcare
services. This shall uphold the pronouncements made by Honourable Supreme Court
and High Courts regarding healthcare for all. By providing health insurance for all
Indian citizens we shall surely set an example of being a real welfare state.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;       M.K. RAGHA V AN
January 24, 2022.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
          Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of Universal health Insurance
Scheme for all citizens. Clause 4 provides for the national Health Authority to issue
National Health Identity Card to every beneficiary. It also provides for building and
maintaining state of the art digital health eco system. It further provides for
development of capacity building in healthcare sector. Clause 6 provides for the
payment of  fifty      per cent. of the premium payable under the Scheme by the Central
Government and the State Government.  Clause 9 provides for the Central Government
to provide funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that an annual recurring expenditure of rupees one lakh crore shall be incurred upon
the Consolidated Fund of India.
        A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING DELEGA TED   LEGISLA TION
         Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for equitable access in healthcare through Universal health Insurance of
all citizens and for matters connected therewith.
.
————
(Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P .)