1
THE AIRPORTS ECONOMIC REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to amend the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India
(Amendment)  Act, 2018.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause ( i), for the words “one and a half
million”, the words “three and a half million” shall be substituted.
3. In section 13 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the
Authority shall not determine the tariff or tariff structures or the amount of development
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 13.
27 of 2008.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
ON 18.7.2018
Bill No. 59 of 2018
5
10

2
fees in respect of an airport or part thereof, if such tariff or tariff structures or the
amount of development fees has been incorporated in the bidding document, which is
the basis for award of operatorship of that airport:
Provided that the Authority shall be consulted in advance regarding the tariff,
tariff structures or the amount of development fees which is proposed to be incorporated
in the said bidding document and such tariff, tariff structures or the amount of
development fees shall be notified in the Official Gazette.”.
5

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 (the Act) was enacted
to provide for the establishment of an Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (the Authority)
to regulate tariff and other charges for the aeronautical services rendered at airports and to
monitor performance standards of airports and also to establish Appellate Tribunal to
adjudicate disputes and dispose of appeals. The Authority is an independent economic
regulator for protection of interests of airports, airlines and passengers.
2. Over the last few years, India has emerged as the third largest domestic aviation
market in the world and the number of major airports has increased from 12 to 27 during the
period 2007—2017. Exponential growth of the Sector has added tremendous pressure to the
Authority. Further, various private operators are entering the Sector as part of Public-Private
Partnership which requires regulatory certainty keeping in view the long gestation of the
Sector. To overcome this complexity, it is felt that if too many airports come under the
purview of the Authority, it will be difficult on the part of the Authority to efficiently determine
the tariffs and monitor the service standards of major airports with the limited resources
available with the Authority.
3. For engaging private partners in the infrastructure projects, several models are
followed such as predetermined tariff or tariff   based bidding and the airport project is
awarded to the concessionaire who offers the lowest tariff or accepts predetermined tariff
indexed to inflation throughout the concession period. In this model, the market itself
determines the charges and the regulator is not required to fix charges after the award of the
project. The Act, in present form, does not cover airports to be operated under such model.
Since this model is a means to reduce the airport charges, the airports in future may also be
developed under this model.
4. In view of the above, it is proposed to amend the Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority of India Act, 2008 through the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2018 which proposes to —
(a) amend the definition of “major airport” as any airport which has, or is
designated to have, annual passengers throughput in excess of three and a half million
instead of existing one and a half million; and
(b) amend section 13 of the Act so as to capture the tariff models which are part
of bidding process in the Act.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; SURESH  PRABHU.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
The Bill has no financial implications and does not involve any other expenditure of
recurring or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE AIRPORTS ECONOMIC REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF  INDIA ACT, 2008
(27 OF  2008)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(i) “major airport” means any airport which has, or is designated to have, annual
passenger throughput in excess of one and a half million or any other airport as the
Central Government may, by notification, specify as such;
* * * * *
CHAPTER  III
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY
13. (1) The Authority shall perform the following functions in respect of major airports,
namely:—
(a) to determine the tariff for the aeronautical services taking into consideration—
(i) the capital expenditure incurred and timely investment in improvement
of airport facilities;
(ii) the service provided, its quality and other relevant factors;
(iii) the cost for improving efficiency;
(iv) economic and viable operation of major airports;
(v) revenue received from services other than the aeronautical services;
(vi) the concession offered by the Central Government in any agreement
or memorandum of understanding or otherwise;
(vii) any other factor which may be relevant for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that different tariff structures may be determined for different airports
having regard to all or any of the above considerations specified at
sub-clauses (i) to (vii);
(b) to determine the amount of the development fees in respect of major airports;
(c) to determine the amount of the passengers service fee levied under rule 88 of
the Aircraft Rules, 1937 made under the Aircraft Act, 1934;
(d) to monitor the set performance standards relating to quality, continuity and
reliability of service as may be specified by the Central Government or any authority
authorised by it in this behalf;
(e) to call for such information as may be necessary to determine the tariff under
clause (a);
(f) to perform such other functions relating to tariff, as may be entrusted to it by
the Central Government or as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
* * * * *
Definitions.
Functions of
Authority.
22 of 1934.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008.
————
(Shri Suresh Prabhu, Minister of Civil Aviation )
MGIPMRND—756LS(S3)—18-07-2018.