1
THE PERSONAL BANKRUPTCY (DECLARATION AND
REHABILITATION) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for mechanism through which a person who is unable to pay off his debts shall
be declared bankrupt and rehabilitated and for matters connected therewith.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Personal Bankruptcy (Declaration and Rehabilitation)
Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  59 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the appropriate Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for coming
into force of different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "bankruptcy" means the legal status of an individual citizen who is unable to
pay to his creditors;
(c) "creditor" means an individual, a bank, a non-banking financial intermediary
or any such registered or non-registered institution which does the banking function
of accepting deposits and lending money;
(d) "debt" means an amount owed to a creditor from debtor;
(e) "debtor" means an individual who owes money to a creditor;
(f) "defaulter" means any debtor who does not repay the debt despite adequate
liquidity;
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;
(h) "secured creditor" means any creditor who has the legal right to take a
specific property of the debtor and sell it in case of default in payment;
(i) "Tribunal" means the Special Bankruptcy Tribunal established under section
3; and
(j) "trustee" means an officer attached to a Tribunal under section 5.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNAL
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
establish a Special Bankruptcy Tribunal, in every District for exercising the jurisdiction,
power and authority conferred on such tribunals under this Act.
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the appropriate Government, who has been
a Judge of the High Court for a period of not less than five years; and
(b) not less than three judicial members, to be appointed by the appropriate
Government, in such manner, as may be prescribed, from amongst the persons who
have served as judicial officer for at least five years in a Civil Court or District Court
of any State.
4. (1) The Chairperson and the judicial members of the Tribunal shall hold office for
a term of five years and shall be eligible for re-appointment only once.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and the judicial members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. Every Tribunal shall have one trustee who shall take charge of the property of the
debtor who has applied to be declared as bankrupt and who shall reduce every property of
the debtor to cash, except the exempt properties under section 14 and distribute the cash to
creditors within three months of such application.
Definitions.
Establishment
of the
Tribunal.
Terms, salaries
and allowances
of members.
Trustee to
reduce property
to cash and
distribute
among
creditors.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. The appropriate Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Tribunal, as may be prescribed, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. The appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Chairpersons of the
Tribunals, make rules regulating the practices and procedures of the Tribunal.
CHAPTER III
DECLARING  BANKRUPTCY
8. No debtor shall be eligible to file a petition for bankruptcy if he—
(i) transfers his property or any part thereof with the intent not to repay or delay
payment of his debt to his creditors;
(ii) transfers his property, or any part thereof, the transfer being void due to
fraudulent transfer under this Act or any other enactment for the time being in force for
being adjudged an insolvent;
(iii) intends not to repay or delay payment of his debt to his creditors by departing
or remaining out of the territories to which the Act extends or departs from his dwelling
house or usual place of business or otherwise absent himself or secludes himself so as
to deprive his creditors of the means of communicating with him;
(iv) gives notice to any of his creditors that he has suspended, or that he is
about to suspend payment of his debts; or
(v) is sentenced to imprisonment by any court.
9. A debtor shall be entitled to file a bankruptcy petition if—
(i) he is a non-wilful defaulter;
(ii) his debt amount to rupees ten thousand or more; or
(iii) he is under arrest or imprisonment for payment of money; or
(iv) an order of attachment has been made against his property.
10. A debtor, entitled to file a bankruptcy petition, shall do so before the Special
Bankruptcy Tribunal of the district where he resides.
11. (1) Each bankruptcy petition shall be in writing, duly signed and verified in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provisions, each bankruptcy
petition shall contain:
(i) a statement that the debtor is unable to pay his debts;
(ii) the place where he ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally
works, or, if he has been arrested or imprisoned, the place where he is in custody;
(iii) the order of the court under which he has been arrested or imprisoned, or an
order which has been made for the attachment of his property;
(iv) the amount and particulars of all pecuniary claims against him, together with
the names and residences of his creditors;
(v) the amount and particulars of his property, a specification of the value of all
such property not consisting of money, the place or places at which any such property
is located; and
Appointment
of other
officers to the
Tribunal.
Appropriate
Government
to make rules.
Declaration of
bankruptcy by a
debtor.
Entitlement
for filing
bankruptcy.
Petition to be
filed in
appropriate
jurisdiction.
Contents of
the petition.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(vi) a statement whether the debtor has on any previous occasion filed a petition
to be adjudged an insolvent and in that case—
(a) if such petition has been dismissed, the reasons for such dismissal, or
(b) if the debtor has been adjudged an insolvent, concise particulars of the insolvency,
including a statement whether any previous adjudication has been annulled and, if so, the
grounds therefor.
12. (1) A creditor shall file a bankruptcy petition against his debtor, only if he is of the
opinion that the debtor is a wilful defaulter.
(2) Every bankruptcy petition presented by a creditor shall set forth the full particulars
of the debtor and shall also specify,—
(i) the act of insolvency committed by such debtor, together with the date of its
commission;
(ii) the amount and particulars of his pecuniary claim against such debtor:
Provided that no bankruptcy petition shall be filed against corporations, joint ventures,
companies or partnerships under this Act.
(3) The procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 with respect to the
admission of complaints, shall so far as it is applicable, be followed in the case of bankruptcy
petitions.
(4) No petition, whether presented by a debtor or a creditor, shall be withdrawn without
the leave of the Tribunal.
CHAPTER  IV
PROCEDURE  AT  THE  TRIBUNAL
13. (1) Subject to the conditions specified in this Act, once a creditor or debtor files a
petition of bankruptcy after following the procedures laid down in this Act, the Tribunal may
issue an order adjudging bankruptcy of the debtor.
(2)  The Tribunal shall, by order, fix a date for hearing the petition after receiving a
bankruptcy petition and the notice of such an order fixing the date of hearing shall be served
to the debtor as well as the creditors.
(3)  On the day fixed for the hearing of the petition or on any other day to which the
hearing is postponed, the debtor or creditor, as the case may be, shall prove before the
Tribunal that he is entitled to file the petition:
(a)  where the debtor is the petitioner, he shall furnish documents to prove that
he is a non-wilful defaulter; and
(b) where the creditor is the petitioner, he shall furnish documents to prove that
the debtor is a wilful defaulter.
(4) The Tribunal shall, if deem necessary grant time to the debtor or creditor, as the
case may be, to produce further evidence on the case.
(5) The Tribunal shall dismiss the petition, after due examination of the documents and
other evidences, if, in the case of a petition being filed by—
(a)  a debtor, the Tribunal is not satisfied that he is not a non-wilful defaulter; and
(b) a creditor, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the debtor is not a wilful defaulter.
(6) The tribunal shall order an enquiry to be conducted to establish that the current
monthly income of the debtor is not higher than a desired limit as decided by the Tribunal,
given that such income is not above the median income of the State where the debtor
resides;
Creditor to file
bankruptcy
petition.
Procedure for
adjudging
bankruptcy of
debtor.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5 of 1908.

5
(7)  If the petition, after due examination of evidence, is accepted, then the Tribunal
shall issue an order of bankruptcy adjudging the debtor as bankrupt, and the copy of such
an order shall be served both on the debtor and the creditor.
14. Once the order is made, the Tribunal shall entrust the properties, if any, of the
debtor, with the trustee of the Tribunal, except the following exempt properties—
(a) the house of the debtor;
(b) the area where the house is built;
(c) such essential utilities and utensils required for the house, as may be
prescribed; and
(d) the essential instruments required by debtor, who is a farmer, carpenter or
such other professional, to continue his work.
15. The trustee shall be responsible to liquidate the properties to money in such
manner, as may be prescribed, and distribute the money to the creditors in the following
order of preference—
(i) fully secured creditors;
(ii) partly secured creditors to the extent they are secured;
(iii) realization of expenses and remuneration of the trustee;
(iv) preferential creditors; and
(v) unsecured creditors:
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the power of any secured creditor to
realise his security in the manner in which he is otherwise entitled.
16. (1) Whether the Tribunal, after distribution of money, is convinced that the default
in payments by the debtor was not wilful and the conduct of the debtor has been satisfactory
during the tribunal proceedings, it shall issue a discharge certificate to the debtor.
(2)  On obtaining the certificate of discharge, the unpaid debts shall stand cancelled
and the debtor not be liable to the demands of his creditors.
(3) The time taken from the filing of the petition to the issue of the certificate of
discharge shall not be more than three months:
Provided that if the Tribunal has reasons to believe that the procedure of liquidating
the properties of a debtor shall take more time, on the request of the trustee, the Tribunal
shall grant an additional time not exceeding one month for the completion of all procedures.
(4) The certificate of discharge shall not release the debtor from—
(a) any debt due to the Government;
(b) any debt or liability incurred by any means of fraud or fraudulent breach of
trust to which he is party;
(c) any debt or liability in respect of which debtor was granted forbearance by
fraud on his part; or
(d) any liability under an order for maintenance made under section 125 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
CHAPTER V
REHABILITATION
17. After the issue of the order of bankruptcy, the debtor, his immediate relatives and
his properties shall be protected from all coercive methods, physical and emotional, of the
creditors or any intermediary thereof.
Power to
entrust
property with
trustee and
list of exempt
properties.
Responsibility
of trustee to
liquidate
properties.
Certificate of
Discharge.
Protection to
debtor and kin.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2 of 1974.

6
18. The appropriate Government shall consistute a Bankruptcy Rehabilitation Fund
to help and rehabilitate the declared bankrupts within a period of one year from the coming
into force of this Act, and ensure that—
(i) every person who is declared bankrupt by the Tribunal by order of bankruptcy
is provided with minimum social benefits by the appropriate Government; and
(ii) the debtor, if the Tribunal feels necessary, shall be recommended to be given
loan from the Bankruptcy Rehabilitation Fund at such rate of interest, as may be
prescribed by the Tribunal.
19. (1) A debtor, who is declared bankrupt with no properties, except his house to pay
off debts, shall submit a proposal outlining his plan to pay off the debts.
(2) The plan to pay off debts shall be submitted to the Tribunal within three months
from the date of declaration of bankruptcy.
(3) The debtor shall pay off the debts in accordance with the plan within a period of
three months:
Provided that the Tribunal may, if satisfied, extend the time period to pay off the debts:
Provided further that if the debtor is a farmer, an extension of at least two years shall be
given to him to pay off his debts:
Provided also that in case the default in payment of a debtor is caused by natural
calamities, the Tribunal shall impose a moratorium for the payments of the debt for such
period if may deems appropriate.
CHAPTER VI
CIVIL RECORD AND PENALTY
20. After issue of the order of bankruptcy by the Tribunal, the record of bankruptcy
shall remain on the debtors credit record and civil record till the next seven years along with
the certificate of discharge.
21. (1) Whoever make any mis-representation in the statement of bankruptcy in the
credit or civil record shall be punished with imprisonment for one month and also with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(2) All sums realised by way of fines shall be credited in the Bankruptcy Rehablitation
Fund.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
22. (1) The Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909 and the Provincial Insolvency
Act, 1920 are hereby repealed.
(2) The repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any act in which such
enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to and this Act shall not affect the
validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or suffered, or any right,
title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy or proceeding
in respect thereof, or any relase or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability,
claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing.
23. The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
24. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the appropriate
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Bankruptcy
Rehabilitation
Fund.
Plan to pay
off debt in
case of no
properties
except
exempt
properties.
Record of
Bankruptcy in
civil and
credit record.
Misrepresenta-
tion of
Statement of
Bankruptcy of
other records
as a punishable
offence.
Repeal and
Saving.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10
15
20
30
25
35
40
45
3 of 1909.
5 of 1920.

7
Provided that no such order or direction shall be made after the expiration of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
25. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that tule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
According to the World Bank report, India's ranking fell from 109 to 132 among 185
economies in 2012 when it comes to ease or resolving insolvency issues. Personal Bankruptcy
laws help people who are no longer in a position to pay off their debts and are distressed due
to coercive methods used by creditors, thus unable to make a fresh start. The personal
bankruptcy framework in India is weak and barely has provisions in any law to deal with the
matter effectively, apart from a few passed almost over a century ago, during the British
regime, namely, the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 and the Presidency Towns Insolvency
Act, 1909. The present Bill also seeks to repeal the two archaic laws.
In the context of massive growth of different types of loans, credit card usage and the
like, the law should also be progressive and effective. Bankruptcy and insolvency is specified
in the entry 9 of the concurrent list of the Seventh Schedule to the consitution. The Centre as
well as the State Governments have the power to legislate on the same and both share
responsibility to take necessary action in the matter. The Bill is an attempt to make a
comprehensive legislation regarding personal bankruptcy. It vests upon the appropriate
Government to establish Special Tribunals to admit petitions of bankruptcy and issue notices
to hear cases of personal bankruptcy.
The Bill lays down the guidelines for functioning of the Tribunal as well as safeguards
to rehabilitate debtors and make for a transparent, expeditious and just procedure for settling
debt. There are separate provisions for farmers who are debtors, in which case, the legislation
is comparatively liberal with regard to the allocation of time. The record of bankruptcy will be
present in the civil and credit record of the person for a period of seven years from the date
of issue of the order of bankruptcy by the Tribunal along with the certificate of discharge.
The Bill also provides for a Bankruptcy Rehabilitation Fund for the revival of those
declared bankrupt along with imposing penalty in the form of fine or imprisonment, or both
in the event of misrepresentation of the statement of bankruptcy in the civil and credit record
of any person. The remuneration earned thereof would be deposited in the Bankruptcy
Rehabilitation Fund.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
February 8, 2016
8

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
By virtue of clause 3 of this Bill the Central Government shall set up special Tribunals
in Union Territories to hear cases of personal bankruptcy. Clause 4 provides for term, salaries
and allowances of Chairperson and members of the Tribunal. Clause 18 provides for
constitution of Bankruptcy Rehabilitation Fund. Clause 23 provides that the
Central Government shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the consolidated fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of rupees one hundred crore will be involved as a recurring expenditure
per annum from the consolidated fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
9

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules to regulate the
practices and procedures of the Tribunal. Clause 25 empowers to the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
10

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for mechanism through which a person who is unable to pay off his debts shall be
declared bankrupt and rehabilitated and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4264LS(S3)—03-03-2016.