AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 59 of 2023
THE JUDICIAL ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2023
 By
        SHRI SUDHEER GUPTA, M.P.
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Judicial standards.
4. Declaration of assets and liabilities.
5. Making available document or information in relation to a declaration of assets and liabilities of Judges
on website.
6. Maintenance of records.
7. Complaints
8. Manner of making of complaint.
9. Reference  to Scrutiny Panel.
10. Constitution of Scrutiny Panel.
11. Composition of Scrutiny Panel.
12. Functions of Scrutiny Panel.
13. Procedure of Scrutiny Panel.
14. Power relating to Scrutiny of complaints.
15. Provision for officers and other employees for Scrutiny Panel.
16. Provision regarding frivolous and vexatious complaints.
17. Establishment of Oversight Committee.
18. Composition of Oversight Committee.
19. Forwarding of Complaint relating misbehaviour to Scrutiny Panel.
20. Records of complaints forwarded to Scrutiny Panel.
21.  Certain complaints not to be forwarded to Scrutiny Panel.
22. Investigation by investigation committee.
23. Powers of Oversight Committee and investigation committee.

CLAUSES
24. Search and Seizure by investigation Committee.
25. Assistance to investigation committee by Government agencies.
26.Ex parte investigation in certain cases.
27. Investigation into act or conduct of certain other persons in certain cases.
28. Submission of report by investigation committee.
29.  Procedure in inquiries by investigation committee.
30. Investigation committee to have power to regulate its own procedure.
31. Central Government to appoint an advocate to conduct cases against Judge.
32. Staff of Oversight Committee.
33. Stoppage of assigning judicial work in certain cases.
34. Procedure on receipt of report of investigation committee.
35.  Advice to President for removal of Judge.
36. Filing of complaint against complainant in certain cases.
37. Proceedings before Oversight Committee to be judicial proceedings.
38. Power to call for assistance.
39. Confidentiality in complaint procedure.
40. Keeping identity of complainant confidential.
41. No action for contempt to lie in certain cases.
42. Investigation and Inquiry by Oversight Committee not to affect criminal liability.
43. All records, documents, etc., related to complaint, scrutiny, investigation and inquiry to be confidential.
44. Protection of action taken in good faith.
45. Laying of advice of Oversight Committee before Parliament.
46. Motion for consideration of the advice made by Oversight Committee.
47. Investigation into misbehaviour or incapacity of Judge by investigation committee for removal of judges.
48. Consideration of report and procedure for presentation of an address for removal of judge.
49. Motion for removal of a Judge.
50. Power of Joint Committee to make rules.
51. Intentional insult or interruption to Over-sight Committee.
52. Penalty for violation of confidentiality in complaint procedure.
53. Power of Oversight Committee to try certain cases.
54. Punishment for frivolous and vexatious complaints.
55. Offences by Companies.
56. Offences by societies or trusts.
57. Appeal to Supreme Court.
58. Power to Central Government to make rules.
59. Power to remove difficulties.
60. Repeal and saving.
(ii)

Bill No. 59 of 2023
THE JUDICIAL ACCOUNTABILITY BILL, 2023
By
SHRI SUDHEER GUPTA, M.P.
A
BILL
to lay down judicial standards and provide for accountability of Judges of the
Supreme Court or a High Court or a District Court and, establish credible
and expedient mechanism for investigating into individual complaints for
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court and to regulate the procedure for such investigation, and for the
presentation of an address by Parliament to the President  for removal
of a Judge and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Judicial Accountability Act, 2023.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Short title and
commencement.
5

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Assets” includes immovable and movable property;
      Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) “immovable property” includes the land and any building or other structure
attached to the land, and tenancies, lease holds or any other interest in
immovable property;
(ii) “movable property” includes any other property which is not immovable
property as also corporeal and incorporeal property of every description and
household goods and personal effects of the value of each item of more than
fifty thousand rupees;
(b) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Council of States;
(c) “Competent Authority” means in relation to,—
(i) a Metropolitan Magistrate, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate of that Court;
(ii) a Judges of the District Court, the District Judge of that District Court;
(iii) a District Judge of District Court, the Chief Justice of that High Court;
(iv) a Judge of the High Court, the Chief Justice of that High Court;
(v) the Chief Justice of the High Court, the Chief Justice of India;
(vi) a Judge of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice of India;
(vii) the Chief Justice of India,  the President of India;
(d) “Incapacity” means physical or mental incapacity which is, or is likely to be,
or a permanent character;
(e) “investigation committee” means the investigation committee constituted
under section 22;
(f) “inquiry” means an inquiry for proof of misbehaviour or incapacity;
(g) “Judge” means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court or a judge
of the District Court and includes the Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of a
High Court;
(h) “judicial standards” means the values of judicial life specified in section 3,
and the Schedule;
(i) “liabilities” includes financial guarantees given and all loans raised from any
bank, financial institution or any other source;
(j) “misbehaviour” means,—
(i) conduct which brings dishonour or disrepute to the judiciary; or
(ii) wilful or persistent failure to perform the duties of a Judge; or
(iii) wilful abuse of judicial office; or
(iv) corruption or lack of integrity which includes delivering judgments for
collateral or extraneous reasons, making demands for consideration in cash or
2
.
5
10
.
Definitions.
15
20
25
30
35
40

kind for giving judgments or any other action on the part of the Judge which
has the effect of subverting the administration of justice; or
(v) committing an offence involving moral turpitude; or
(vi) failure to furnish the declaration of assets and liabilities in accordance with
the provisions of this Act; or
(vii) wilfully giving false information in the declaration of assets and  liabilities
under this Act; or
(viii) wilful suppression of any material fact, whether such fact relates to
a period before assumption of office, which would have bearing on his
integrity; or
(ix) wilful breach of judicial standards;
(k) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(l) “Oversight Committee” means the National Judicial Oversight Committee
established under section 17;
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(n) “Scrutiny Panel” means a panel constituted under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) of section 11 for the scrutiny of complaints;
(o) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the People.
3. (1) Every Judge shall continue to practice universally accepted values of judicial
life as specified in the Schedule to this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision,
no  Judge shall—
(a)   contest the election to any office of a club, society or other association
or hold such elective office except in a society or association connected with
the law or   any court;
(b)   have close association or close social interaction with individual members
of the Bar, particularly with those who practice in the same court in which he is
a Judge;
(c)   permit any member of his immediate family (including spouse, son, daughter,
son-in-law or daughter-in-law or any other close relative), who is a member of
the Bar, to appear before him or associated in any manner with a cause to be dealt
with by him;
(d) permit any member of his family, who is a member of the Bar, to use the
residence in which the Judge actually resides or use other facilities provided
to the Judge, for professional work of such member;
(e) hear and decide a matter in which a member of his family, or his close
relative or a friend is concerned;
(f) enter into public debate or express his views in public on political matters
or on matters which are pending or are likely to arise for judicial determination by
him:
 Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to,—
(i) the views expressed by a Judge in his individual capacity on issues
of public interest (other than as a Judge) during discussion in private
5
  10
15
20
25
30
  35
40
3
Judicial
standards.

forum or academic forum so as not to affect his functioning as a Judge;
(ii) the views expressed by a Judge relating to administration of court or
its efficient functioning;
(g) make unwarranted comments against conduct of any Constitutional or
statutory authority or statutory bodies or statutory institutions or any
chairperson or member or officer thereof, in general, or at the time of hearing
matters pending or likely to arise for judicial determinations;
(h) give interview, to the media in relation to any of his judgment delivered,
or order made, or direction issued, by him, in any case adjudicated by him;
(i) accept gifts or hospitality except from his relatives;
(j) hear and decide a matter in which a company or society or trust in which
he holds or any member of his family holds shares or interest, unless he has
disclosed his such holding or interest, and no objection to his hearing and deciding
the matter is raised;
(k) speculate in securities or indulge in insider trading in securities;
(l) engage, directly or indirectly, in trade or business, either by himself or in
association with any other person:
     Provided that the publication of a legal treatise or any activity in the
nature of a hobby shall not be construed as trade or business for the purpose
of this clause;
(m) seek any financial benefit in the form of a perquisite or privilege attached
to his office unless it is clearly available or admissible;
(n) hold membership in any organisation that practices invidious discrimination
on the basis of religion or race or caste or sex or place of birth;
(o) have bias in his judicial work or judgments on the basis of religion or race
or caste or sex or place of birth.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “relative” means—
(i) spouse of the Judge;
(ii) brother or sister of the Judge;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the Judge;
(iv) brother or sister of either of the parents of the Judge;
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the Judge;
(vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the Judge;
spouse of the person referred to in clauses (ii) to (vi).
4. (1) Every Judge shall make a declaration of his assets and liabilities in   the manner
as provided by or under this Act.
(2) A Judge shall, within thirty days from the date on which he makes and subscribes
an oath or affirmation to enter upon his office, furnish to the competent authority the
information relating to –
(a) the assets of which he, his spouse, his blood relatives and dependent
children are, jointly or severally, owners or beneficiaries;
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Declaration of
assets and
liabilities.

(b) his liabilities and that of his spouse, his blood relatives and dependent
children.
(3) A Judge holding his office as such, at the time of the commencement of this
Act, shall furnish information relating to such assets and liabilities, as referred to in
sub-section (2) to the competent authority within thirty days of the coming into force
of this Act.
(4) Every Judge shall file with the competent authority, on or before the
31st July of every year, an annual return of his assets and liabilities, as on the 31st March
of that year as referred to in sub-section (2).
(5) The information under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) and annual return
under sub-section (4) shall be furnished in such form and in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,
(a) “dependent children” means sons and daughters who have no separate
means of earning and are wholly dependent on the Judge for their livelihood.
(b) “blood relation” means all relatives  which are related by full blood or
half blood irrespective of the fact whether he or she have separate means of
earning and are wholly independent on the Judge for their livelihood.
5. The competent authority shall exhibit the document or information in relation
to a declaration of assets and liabilities of Judges,—
(a) in the case of Metropolitan Magistrates and Judges of the District Courts,
on the website of the District Court in which such Metropolitan Magistrates and Judges
are serving;
(b) in the case of Judges and Chief Justices of the High Courts, on the website
of the High Court in which such Judges and Chief Justices are serving;
(c) in the case of Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justice of India, on the
website of the Supreme Court.
6. The competent authority shall keep the documents or information forms
containing the details of the assets and liabilities and other particulars in relation
thereto filed by the Judges in its safe custody for such period as may be decided by
the Oversight Committee.
7. Any person making an allegation of misbehaviour or incapacity in respect of a
Judge may file a complaint in this regard to the Oversight Committee.
8. The complaint under section 7 shall—
(a) be in such form and filed in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) set forth particulars of the misbehaviour or incapacity which is the subject
matter of allegation;
(c) be verified at the foot of the complaint by the complainant and shall specify,
by reference to the numbered paragraphs of the complaint, what he verifies of his own
knowledge and what he verifies upon information and shall refer to the source of the
information.
9.  Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the Oversight Committee shall
refer all such complaints to the appropriate Scrutiny Panel constituted under relevant
sections of this act for scrutiny.
Making available
document or
information in
relation to a
declaration of
assets and
liabilities of
Judges on
website.
Complaints.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
Maintenance
of records.
Manner of
making of
complaint.
Reference to
Scrutiny
Panel.

10. There shall be constituted a panel to be called “Complaints Scrutiny Panel” in
the Supreme Court and in every High Court to scrutinise the complaints received against
a Judge under this Act.
11. (1) The Scrutiny Panel in the Supreme Court shall consist of a former
Chief Justice of India and two Judges of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the
Chief Justice of India.
(2) The Scrutiny Panel in every High Court shall consist of a former
Chief Justice of that High Court and two Judges of that High Court to be nominated by
the Chief Justice of that High Court.
12. (1) If the Scrutiny Panel, after scrutiny of the complaint referred to it for
scrutiny under section 9, and after making scrutiny of the complaint, as it deems
appropriate, is satisfied that—
(a) there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the Judge, it   shall,
after recording reasons therefore, submit a report on its findings to the Oversight
Committee for making inquiry against the Judge in accordance with the provisions
of this Act;
(b) the complaint is frivolous or vexatious, or, is not made in good faith, or there
are not sufficient grounds for inquiring into the complaint, or the complaint
relates only to the merits of the judgment or a procedural order, and, then, it shall
after recording reasons therefore submit a report on its findings to the Oversight
Committee for not proceeding with the complaint and treating the matter as closed.
(2) The scrutiny of complaints under this section by the Scrutiny Panel shall be
held in camera.
(3) The Scrutiny Panel shall submit its report under clause (a) or clause (b) of
sub- section (1), to the Oversight Committee in this behalf within a maximum period of
three months from the date of receipt of the complaint from the Oversight Committee.
13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Scrutiny Panel shall have power
to regulate its own procedure in scrutinising the complaints referred to it for scrutiny
under section 9.
14. The Scrutiny Panel shall, while scrutinising the complaints forwarded to it for
scrutiny under section 9, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e)  issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or other
documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
15. (1) The Chief Justice of India shall, determine the nature and categories of the
officers  and other employees required to assist the Scrutiny Panel referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 11 in the discharge of its functions and provide the Scrutiny
Panel with such officers and other employees as he may think fit.
Constitution of
Scrutiny panel.
Provision for
officers and other
employees for
Scrutiny panel.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
6
Composition
of Scrutiny
panel.
Functions of
Scrutiny panel.
Procedure of
Scrutiny panel.
Power relating
to scrutiny of
complaints.

(2) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall, determine the nature and
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Scrutiny Panel
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 11 in the discharge of its functions and provide
the Scrutiny Panel with such officers and other employees as he may think fit.
16. If the Scrutiny Panel is of the opinion that a complaint was filed frivolously or
vexatiously or only with a view to scandalise or intimidate a Judge, it may refer the case to
the Oversight Committee for further action.
17. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be established a National Judicial Oversight Committee.
18. (1) The National Judicial Oversight Committee shall consist of the following,
namely:—
(a) a retired Chief Justice of India appointed by the President after
ascertaining the views of the Chief Justice of India—Chairperson
(b) a Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the Chief Justice of India—
Member;
(c) the Chief Justice of a High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of
India—Member;
(d) the Attorney-General for India — ex officio Member;
(e) an eminent jurist nominated by the President—Member.
Provided that—
(i) where the allegations are against a Judge of the Supreme Court,
who is a member of the Oversight Committee, then, the Chief Justice of
India shall nominate another Judge of the Supreme Court in his place as a
member of that committee; or
(ii) where the allegations are against the Chief Justice of a High Court,
who is a member of the Oversight Committee, then, the Chief Justice of India
shall nominate a Chief Justice of another High Court in his place as a
member of that committee.
(2) After the commencement of the proceedings relating to a complaint
against a   Judge,—
(a) if any change in the composition of the Oversight Committee arises
due to elevation of a member of the Oversight Committee, as the Chief Justice
of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court, as the case may be; or
(b) if any change arises in the composition of the Oversight Committee
due to refusal or retirement or resignation or any other reason, the proceedings
of the Oversight Committee shall continue from the stage from which it was
pending before such change and the Chairperson of the Oversight Committee
shall make such incidental changes, as he deems necessary, to continue the
proceedings.
19. The Oversight Committee shall, within three months of the receipt of a
complaint  relating to misbehaviour of –
(a) an individual Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court,
refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny Panel of the Supreme Court to scrutinise and
report thereon;
Provision
regarding
frivolous and
vexatious
complaints.
Forwarding
of complaint
relating to
misbehaviour
to Scrutiny
Panel.
7
Establishment
of Oversight
Committee.
Composition
of Oversight
Committee.
5
  10
15
20
25
30
  35
40

(b) an individual Judge of a High Court, refer the complaint, to the Scrutiny Panel of
the High Court in which such Judge is acting as such, to scrutinise and report thereon.
20. The Oversight Committee shall maintain a record of the complaints referred to
the Scrutiny Panel.
21. A complaint against the Chief Justice of India shall not be referred to the Scrutiny
Panel for scrutiny but shall be scrutinised by the Oversight Committee.
22. (1) The Oversight Committee, shall for the purpose of inquiry for misbehaviour
by a Judge, constitute an investigation committee (by whatever name called) to
investigate into the complaint in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel has recommended
in its report under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 12 for making inquiry against
the Judge in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) The composition and tenure of the investigation committee shall be such as may
be decided by the Oversight Committee:
Provided that the number of the investigation committees, in no case, at a time,
shall   exceed three:
Provided further that the Oversight Committee may, having regard to the nature
of misbehaviour of a Judge, may constitute different investigation committees for
inquiry into   different complaints.
23. The Oversight Committee, shall, for the purpose of proceedings under this
Act and the investigation committee, while conducting any investigation under this
Chapter, have all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 and in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of
India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or other documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
24. (1) If the investigation committee has reason to believe that any documents
which, in its opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any preliminary investigation or
inquiry, are secreted in any place, it may request the oversight committee to authorise
any officer subordinate to it, or any officer of an agency referred as provided in
section 25, to search for and to seize such documents.
(2) If the investigation committee is satisfied that any document seized under
sub-section (1) would be evidence for the purpose of any investigation and that it
would be necessary to retain the original document in its custody, it may so retain the
said document till the completion of such investigation or retain a copy of such
document, as it may deem fit.
The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to searches shall,
so far as may be, apply to searches under this section subject to the modification that
sub-section (5) of section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if, for the word
“Magistrate”, wherever it occurs, the words “investigation”.
Records of
complaints
forwarded to
Scrutiny Panel.
Certain
complaints   not
to be forwarded
to Scrutiny
Panel.
Investigation by
investigation
committee.
Powers of
Oversight
Committee and
investigation
committee.
Search and
seizure by
investigation
committee.
40   2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
8

25. The investigation committee shall be entitled to make a request to the
Oversight Committee for assistance to it and the Oversight Committee may invoke its
powers in this behalf under section 38 of this Act.
26. If a Judge, to whom notice is issued by the investigation committee, referred
to in section 22, refuses to appear before it or does not co-operate with it in conducting
investigation, then, the investigation committee may proceed ex parte.
27. The investigation committee may cause investigation into any act or conduct
of any person, other than the Judge concerned, in so far as it considers necessary so
to do for the purpose of its investigation into any allegations made against a Judge
and shall give such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and to produce
evidence in his defence.
28. The investigation committee, after completion of the inquiry in respect of a
complaint, shall submit its findings to the Oversight Committee.
29. (1) The investigation committee shall frame definite charges against the Judge
on the basis of which the inquiry is proposed to be held.
(2) Every such inquiry shall be conducted in camera by the investigation
committee.
(3) Charges framed under sub-section (1) together with the statement of
grounds on which each such charge is based shall be communicated to the Judge and
he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a written statement of defence
within such time as may be specified by the investigation committee.
(4) The investigation committee shall hold every such inquiry as expeditiously
as possible and in any case complete the inquiry within a period of six months from the
date of receipt of the complaint:
Provided that the Oversight Committee, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
may extend the period for completion of the inquiry by a further period of six months.
30. Save as otherwise provided, the investigation committee shall have power to
regulate its own procedure in making the inquiry and shall give reasonable opportunity
to the Judge of cross examining witnesses, adducing evidence and of being heard in
his defence.
31. The Central Government may, if requested by the investigation committee,
appoint an advocate to conduct the cases against the Judge.
32. (1) The Oversight Committee shall, for the purpose of performing its functions
under this Act, appoint a Secretary and such other officers and employees possessing
such qualifications, as the President may determine, from time to time, in consultation
with the Oversight Committee.
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary, officers and
employees referred to in sub-section (1) shall be such as the President may determine,
from time to time, in consultation with the Oversight Committee.
(3) In the discharge of their functions under this Act, the Secretary, the officers
and employees referred to in sub-section (1) shall be subject to the administrative
control and direction of the Oversight Committee.
Assistance to
investigation
committee by
Government
agencies.
Ex parte
Investigation
in certain
cases.
Investigation
committee to
have power to
regulate its own
procedure.
Central
Government to
appoint an
advocate to
conduct cases
against Judge.
Staff of
Oversight
Committee.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
9
Investigation
into act or
conduct of
certain other
persons in
certain cases.
Submission of
report by
investigation
committee.
Procedure in
inquiries by
investigation
committee.

(4) The Oversight Committee shall provide such number of its officers and
other employees to assist the investigation committee as the Oversight Committee
considers appropriate having regard to the nature of investigation in a case.
33. During the pendency of the inquiry by the investigation committee, the
Oversight Committee may recommend stoppage of assigning judicial work including
cases assigned to the Judge concerned if it appears to the Oversight Committee that it
is necessary in the interest of fair and impartial scrutiny of complaints or investigation
or inquiry.
34.  (1) If the Oversight Committee on receipt of the report from the investigation
committee is satisfied that—
(a) no charges have been proved, it shall dismiss the complaint and matter
be closed and no further action shall be taken against the Judge and the complainant
shall be informed accordingly;
(b) all or any of the charges have been proved but the Oversight Committee
is of the opinion that the charges proved do not warrant removal of the Judge, it
may, by order, issue advisories or warnings.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), if the
Oversight Committee, on receipt of the report from the investigation committee is
satisfied that there has been a prima facie commission of any offence under any law for
the time being in force by a Judge, it may recommend to the Central Government for
prosecution of the Judge in accordance with the law for the time being in force.
(3) In a case where an inquiry or investigation against the Judge has been
initiated and such Judge has demitted office during such inquiry or investigation,
such inquiry or investigation may be continued if the Oversight Committee is of the
opinion that the misbehaviour is serious in nature and requires to be inquired into or
investigated and the Oversight Committee may after conclusion of inquiry forward its
findings to the Central Government to take further action in the matter under relevant law
for the time being in force.
35. If the Oversight Committee is satisfied that all or any of the charges of misbehaviour
or incapacity of a Judge have been proved and that they are of serious nature warranting
his removal, it shall request the judge to voluntarily resign.
36. If the Scrutiny Panel refers a case to the Oversight Committee under section 16,
the Oversight Committee shall consider the matter further and if it concurs with the
conclusion of the Scrutiny Panel, it may authorise the filing of a criminal complaint
against the original complainant before a competent court.
37. All proceedings under this Act shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, and the Oversight Committee
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, 1973.
38. The Oversight Committee shall be entitled to take assistance of such officers of
the Central Government or State Government or any agency thereof or authority as it
deems fit.
39. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the complainant and every person who participates in the scrutiny or
investigation or inquiry as a witness or as a legal practitioner or in any other capacity,
whether or not he seeks confidentiality about his name, shall undertake to the Oversight
Committee or Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee that he shall not reveal his
own name, the name of the Judge complained against, the contents of the complaint
Filing of
complaint
against
complainant in
certain cases.
Stoppage of
assigning
judicial work in
certain cases.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
10
Procedure on
receipt of
report of
investigation
committee.
45
Advice to
President for
removal of
Judge.
Proceedings
before
Oversight
Committee to
be judicial
proceedings.
Power to call
for assistance.
Confidentiality
in complaint
procedure.
2 of 1974.

or any of the documents or proceedings to anybody else including the media without
the prior written approval of the Oversight Committee:
Provided that the Oversight Committee may, if it considers appropriate, authorise
any person to apprise the media or press in respect of matters relating to complaint,
scrutiny or investigation or inquiry, as the case may be.
40. The Oversight Committee or the Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee may,
at the request of a complainant, direct that the complainant be accorded such protection,
as it deems appropriate, including keeping his identity confidential, from every body and
also the Judge against whom the complaint is made.
41. After the commencement of scrutiny of complaints under this Act, no action
for    contempt of court shall lie or shall be proceeded with in respect of the allegations,
which are the subject matter of the investigation or inquiry.
42. Any scrutiny, investigation or inquiry pending before the Scrutiny Panel or
investigation committee or Oversight Committee shall not affect the criminal liability
in respect of such allegations which are the subject matter of the investigation
or inquiry.
43. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005 or
any other law for the time being in force, all papers, documents and records of
proceedings related to a complaint, preliminary investigation and inquiry shall be
confidential and shall not be disclosed by any person in any proceeding except as
directed by the Oversight Committee:
Provided that the findings of the investigation committee and the orders passed by
the Oversight Committee under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 34 shall be
made public.
44. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairperson
or any member of the Oversight Committee, Scrutiny Panel, investigation committee or
against any officer or employee, agency or person engaged by such committees or
panel for the purpose of conducting scrutiny or investigation or inquiry in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules
made thereunder.
45. The President, on receipt of advice under section 35, shall cause the findings of
the Oversight Committee along with the accompanying materials to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
46. On laying of the advice of the Oversight Committee along with the accompanying
material, the Central Government may move a motion in either House of Parliament for
taking up the said advice for consideration by the House.
47. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 or section 46, if notice
is given of a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal
of a Judge signed,—
(a) in the case of a notice given in the House of the People, by not less
than one hundred members of that House;
(b) in the case of a notice given in the Council of States, by not less than
fifty members of that Council, then, the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Chairman
may, after consulting such persons, if any, as he thinks fit and after considering
such materials, if any, as may be available to him, either admit the motion or refuse
to admit the same.
Keeping
identity of
complainant
confidential.
11
No action for
contempt to lie
in certain
cases.
Investigation and
Inquiry by
Oversight
Committee not
to affect criminal
liability.
All records,
documents,
etc., related to
complaint,
scrutiny,
investigation
and inquiry to
be confidential.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Laying of advice
of Oversight
Committee before
Parliament.
5
  10
15
20
25
30
  35
40
Motion for
removal of a
Judge.
Investigation
into
misbehaviour or
incapacity of
Judge by
investigation
committee for
removal of
Judges.
45
22 of 2005.

(2) If the motion referred to in sub-section (1) is admitted, the Speaker or, as
the case may be, the Chairman shall keep the motion pending and the matter shall be
referred to the Oversight Committee for constitution of an investigation committee
under section 22.
(3) The Oversight Committee, after receipt of reference under sub-section
(2), constitute an investigation committee under section 22 and the investigation
committee shall conduct an inquiry in accordance with the provisions contained
under Chapter VI and submit its report to the Oversight Committee for being submitted to
the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may be, for consideration.
(4) Where it is alleged that a Judge is unable to discharge the duties of his
office efficiently due to any physical or mental incapacity and the allegation is denied,
the investigation committee may arrange for the medical examination of the Judge by
such Medical Board as may be appointed for the purpose by the Speaker or, as the
case may be, the Chairman.
(5) The Medical Board shall undertake such medical examination of the Judge as
may be considered necessary and submit a report to the investigation committee
stating therein whether the incapacity is such as to render the Judge unfit to continue
in office.
(6) If the Judge refuses to undergo medical examination considered necessary by
the Medical Board, the Board shall submit a report to the investigation committee
stating therein the examination which the Judge has refused to undergo, and
the investigation committee may, on receipt of such report, presume that the Judge
suffers from such physical or mental incapacity as is alleged in the motion referred to
in sub-section (1).
48. (1) If the report of the investigation committee contains a finding that the
Judge is not guilty of any misbehaviour or does not suffer from any incapacity, then,
no further steps shall be taken in either House of Parliament in relation to the report
and the motion pending in the House or the Houses of Parliament shall not be
proceeded with.
(2) If the report of the investigation committee contains a finding that the
Judge is  guilty of any misbehaviour or suffers from any incapacity, then, the motion
referred to in section 46 shall together with the report of the investigation committee,
be taken up for consideration by the House or the Houses of Parliament in which it is
pending.
49. If the motion is adopted by each House of Parliament in accordance with the
provisions of clause (4) of article 124 or, as the case may be, in accordance with that
clause read with article 218 of the Constitution, then, the misbehaviour or incapacity
of the Judge shall be deemed to have been proved and an address praying for the
removal of the Judge shall be presented in the prescribed manner to the President by
each House of Parliament in the same session in which the motion has been adopted.
50. (1) There shall be constituted a Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament
in accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained for the purpose of making rules
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2)The Joint Committee shall consist of fifteen members of whom ten shall
be nominated by the Speaker and five shall be nominated by the Chairman.
(3) The Joint Committee shall elect its own Chairman and shall have power to
regulate its own procedure.
Consideration
of report and
procedure for
presentation
of an address
for    removal
of Judge.
Motion of
removal of a
Judge.
Power of Joint
Committee to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
12

(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the
Joint Committee may make rules to provide for the following, among other matters,
namely:—
(a) the manner of presentation of an address to the President for the
removal of a Judge;
(b) the manner of transmission of a motion adopted in one House to the
other House of Parliament;
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to the members of the
Joint Committee and the witnesses who may be required to attend such
Committee;
(d) the facilities which may be accorded to the Judge for defending
himself;
(e) any other matter which has to be, or may be, provided for by rules or
in respect of which provision is, in the opinion of the Joint Committee,
necessary.
Any rules made under this section shall not take effect until they are approved
by each House of Parliament and are published in the Official Gazette, and   such
publication of the rules shall be conclusive proof that they have been duly made.
51. (1) Whoever intentionally insults, or causes any interruption, to the Scrutiny
Panel or investigation committee or Oversight Committee while the Oversight Committee
or Scrutiny Panel or investigation committee or any of their members is doing scrutiny
or conducting any investigation or inquiry under this Act, shall be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 199 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall apply in relation to an offence referred to in sub-section (1) as
they apply in relation to an offence referred to in sub-section (2) of the said section
199, subject to the modification that no complaint in respect of such offence shall be
made by the Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction of the Oversight
Committee.
52. If any complainant or other person, who participates in the scrutiny or investigation
or inquiry as a witness or as a lawyer or in any other capacity, contravenes the
provisions of section 39 or section 40 or section 43, shall be liable for punishment with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
53. When any such offence as is described in sub-section (1) of section 51 is committed,
in the view, or, in the presence, of the Oversight Committee, then the said Oversight
Committee, may cause the offender to be detained in custody and may at any time on
the same day take cognizance of the offence and after giving the offender a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause as to why he should not be punished under this section,
try such offender summarily so far as may be in accordance with the procedure
specified for summary trials under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and sentence
him to simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
54. (1) Any person who makes a complaint which is found, after following the
procedure under this Act to be frivolous or vexatious or made with an intent to scandalise
or intimidate the Judge against whom such complaint is filed, shall be punishable with
simple imprisonment which may extend to one year and also with fine which may extend
to fifty thousand rupees.
5
  10
15
20
25
30
  35
40
45
Intentional
insult or
interruption to
Over-sight
Committee.
Penalty for
violation of
confidentiality
in complaint
procedure.
Power of
Oversight
Committee to
try certain
cases.
Punishment for
frivolous and
vexatious
complaints.
13

(2) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(a) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the
complaint under this section in respect of anything which is done in good faith
or intended to be done under this Act.
55. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that where a company has different establishments or branches or
different units in any establishment or branch, the concerned Head or the person in-
charge of such establishment, branch or unit nominated by the company as responsible
shall be liable for contravention in respect of such establishment, branch or unit:
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on
the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,—
(a)” company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
56. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or trust,
every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the society or trust for the conduct of the business of the society or
the trust, as well as the society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence
under this Act has been committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to,
any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer of the
society or trust, such director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,—
(a) “society” means any body corporate registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 and, “trust” means any body registered under the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882;
Offences by
companies.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Offences by
societies or
trusts.
40
45
14

(b) “director”, in relation to a society or trust, means a member of its
governing board other than an ex officio member representing the interests of the
Central or State Government or the appropriate statutory authority.
57. Any person convicted on a trial held under sub-section (1) of section 54
may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, appeal, within sixty days of order of such conviction, to the Supreme
Court.
58. The Central Government may make rules, in consultation with the Chief Justice of
India, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, rules made under this section may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which, information is to be furnished or, annual
return to be filed, under section 4;
(b) the form and manner in which complaint shall be filed under section 8;
(c) other matters in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel shall, for the
purpose of scrutiny of complaint, have powers of a civil court under
section 14;
(d) other matters in respect of which the Oversight Committee shall, for
the purpose of inquiry or investigation of complaint have powers of a civil
court under clause (f) of section 23;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules
or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
59. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, by an order published
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made,
be laid before each House of Parliament.
60. (1) The Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 (hereinafter
referred to as the repealed Act) the rules made by the Joint Committee under section 7 of
the repealed Act shall continue to be in force until rules are framed under section 49 of
this Act.
Appeal to
Supreme Court.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
saving.
5
  10
15
20
25
30
  35
40
45
15

(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or
purported to have been done or taken including any order or notice made or issued or
any inquiry initiated under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken or initiated under
the corresponding provisions of this Act.
(4) The mention of particular matters in sub-sections (2) and (3) shall not be
held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act,
1897 with regard to the effect of repeal.
5
16

THE  SCHEDULE
[See section 3(1)]
JUDICIAL STANDARDS
1. Norms, including punctuality and commitment to work, guidelines and conventions
essential for the conduct and behaviour of Judges, being pre-requisite for an
independent, strong and respected judiciary, having integrity and detachment
and impartial administration of justice as reflected in the Restatement of Values
already adopted by the Conference of Chief Justices held in 1999 shall be practised
by every Judge.
2. All times be conscious that he is under the public gaze and not do any act or
omission which is unbecoming of the high office he occupies and the public
esteem in which that office is held.
3. A degree of aloofness consistent with the dignity of his office shall be practised
by every Judge.
4. Judgments should speak for themselves.
5. A judge shall refer to all the points raised by counsel in the arguments.
6. The judge shall correctly record on the docket what transpires in a proceeding
on any given day.
7.If anyone attempts to communicate with a judge regarding the merits of any
matter that is pending before him when the court is not in session, the judge
shall report it to the Competent Authority.
17

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The judicial system in any country is an independent and impartial set up in
any nation to remedy injustice. Justice is declared to be blind and therefore, it is on
the judges to decide how to provide justice, keeping in mind that justice should be
rendered to each and every citizen of the nation. Therefore, there comes the need to
hold these judges to be accountable for their verdicts as it is the decision taken by the
judges that decide the fate of the parties involved in a case being heard by the court.
The Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 was enacted with a view to lay down a procedure
for removal, for proved misbehaviour or incapacity, of Judges of the High Courts and
the Supreme Court by way of address of the Houses of Parliament to the President.
There is, however, no legal provision at present for dealing with complaints filed by
the public against Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court. The need for a
statutory mechanism to address complaints of the public in this regard has been felt
to bring greater transparency in the judiciary.
The Full Court meeting of Supreme Court of India on 7 May, 1997 had adopted
“the Restatement of Values of Judicial Life”. The above Restatement lays down certain
judicial standards which are to be followed by the Judges of the Supreme Court and
the High Courts. However, this Restatement of Values of Judicial Life does not have
any legal authority and cannot be enforced. There is also no legal provision at present
that requires Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts to declare their assets and
liabilities.
In the year 2012, a Government Bill, namely, “The Judicial Standards and
Accountability Bill, 2010” as passed by Lok Sabha, sought to lay judicial standards
and provide for accountability of judges, and establish credible and expedient
mechanism for investigating into individual complaints for misbehaviour or incapacity
of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court. However, the Bill could not be
taken up for discussion in the Rajya Sabha and the bill was lapsed.
Accountability is declared to be the sine qua non of any democratic nation as
it secures the rights provided to the citizens and delivers justice that is meant to be
equal for all. It is true that the judiciary is an independent body and it does have the
authority to decide on its own way over a case. But the decisions that are made
subsequently affect the public at large and therefore the judges should be held
accountable for the decisions they make. Therefore, in order to regulate its function
and promote impartiality among the judges while making a decision, the judiciary
must strike a balance. 
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should enact the Judicial
Accountability Bill and the proposed Bill would strengthen the institution of judiciary
in India by making it more accountable thereby increasing the confidence of the
public in the institution.
 Hence this Bill.
 NEW DELHI;                SUDHEER GUPTA
23 December, 2023.
18

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for establishment of National Judicial Oversight
Committee comprising of a retired Chief Justice of India as the Chairperson, a Judge
of the Supreme Court and the Chief Justice of a High Court to be nominated by the
Chief Justice of India and the Attorney-General of India and an eminent person to be
nominated by the President as members.
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, if requested by the
investigation committee, to appoint an advocate to conduct the cases against the
Judge.
Clause 32 of the Bill provides for appointment of a Secretary and such other
officers and employees as the President may determine, from time to time, in
consultation with the Oversight Committee.
The expenditure on account of the aforesaid provisions would be negligible.
At this stage, it is not practicable to make an estimate of expenditure likely to be
involved in the upcoming financial years, both recurring and non-recurring. However,
the expenditure would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India.
19

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 58 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, to carry out the provisions
of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 58 specifies the matters in respect of which such rules
may be made. These matters, inter alia, include:
(i)  the form in which the information relating to assets and liabilities is to be
furnished by Judges and the form for filing annual return by Judges
regarding their assets and liabilities;
(ii)  the form and manner in which a complaint is to be filed;
(iii) other matters in respect of which the Scrutiny Panel and the Oversight
Committee shall have powers of a civil court; and
(iv) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed for the
purposes of the proposed legislation.
The rules made by the Central Government are to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made in accordance with the
aforesaid provisions of the Bill are matters of procedure and detail and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
20

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to lay down judicial standards and provide for accountability of Judges of the
Supreme Court or a High Court or a District Court and, establish credible
and expedient mechanism for investigating into individual complaints for
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court and to regulate the procedure for such investigation, and for the
presentation of an address by Parliament to the President  for removal
of a Judge and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sudheer Gupta, M.P.)