As inrropucen IN Lox y aa
४10६५

Bill No. 59 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004
By
Suri SuRAVARAM SUDHAKAR ReDpy, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— i

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004. Short title.

2. Inarticle 43A of the Constitution, the existing clause shall be numbered as clause (1) Amendment
5. thereof and after clause (1) as so numbered, the following clause shall be added, namely:— article

of
43A.
"(2) The State shall, to secure the objective of clause (1), ensure that atleast one
representative of workers, duly elected or nominated by the workers, is represented on
the board of the undertaking, establishment or organisation."


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Corporate governance is the slogan of the day and transparency is one of the major
tools to achieve the goals of cardinal principles of corporate governance, i.e., involvement
and share to all stake holders,

‘To ensure proper transparency and also to assure proper forum to discuss all issues
pertaining to human resources development, workers participation in management was
provided for in the Constitution. Since no State has, either by way of legislation or by any
other means, have implemented the objective of article 43A of the Constitution, an amendment
is sought to make it mandatory to ensure that atleast one representative of the workers is
nominated on the Board of Management of an organisation to protect the interests of the
workers.

Hence this Bill.

‘New DeLii; SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY
July 21, 2004,


organisation engaged in any industry.

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

ANNEXURE

.

43A. The State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure
the participation of workers in the management of undertakings, establishments or other

.

Participation
of workers in
management
of industries,


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—1611LS—18.08 2004.