TO BE  INTRODUCED  IN LOK  SABHA
Bill No. 59 of 2010
THE NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY AND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
BOARD BILL, 2010
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
NA TIONAL ROAD SAFETY AND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT BOARD
3. Establishment of National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board.
4. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and other Members.
5. Selection Committee for selection of Chairperson and Members.
6. Functions of Board.
7. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and other Members.
8. Removal of Chairperson or any other Member from office.
9. Meetings of Board.
10. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board.
11. Officers and other employees of the Board.
12. Advisory Committee.
13. Functions of Advisory Committee.
14. Power to call for information.
15. Central Government to notify standards.
CHAPTER III
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
16. Grants and loans by Central Government.
17. National Road Safety and Traffic Management Fund.
18. Accounts and audit of Board.
19. Budget.
20. Annual and other reports.
CHAPTER IV
P
ENALTIES
21. Penalties.
22. Cognizance of offences.
23. Composition of offences.

CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
CLAUSES
24. Delegation.
25. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
26. Power of Central Government to supersede Board.
27. Chairperson, Members, etc., to be public servant.
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.
29. Act to have overriding effect.
30. Application of certain laws.
31. Power of Central Government to make rules.
32. Power of Board to make regulations.
33. Laying of rules and regulations.
34. Amendment of certain enactments.
35. Power to remove difficulties.
THE SCHEDULE.
(ii)

THE NATIONAL ROAD SAFETY AND TRAFFIC
MANAGEMENT BOARD BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management
Board for the purpose of orderly development, regulation, promotion and optimisation
of modern and effective road safety and traffic management system and practices in
relation to the national highways and improved safety standards in highway design,
construction, operation and regulate high standards in production and maintenance
of mechanically propelled vehicles and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board
Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 59 of 2010

2
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Board” means the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board
established under sub section (1) of section 3;
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under sub-
section (3) of section 3;
(c) “mechanically propelled vehicle” means any mechanically propelled vehicle
adapted for use upon roads whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto
from an external or internal source and includes trailers, but excludes cycles, cycle
rickshaws and vehicles pulled by animals or humans;
(d) “Member” means a Member of the Board and includes the Chairperson;
(e) “national highways” means the highways specified in the Schedule to the
National Highways Act, 1956 or any other highway declared as national highway
under sub-section (2) of section 2 of the said Act;
(f) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notified” with its cognate and grammatical variations shall be construed
accordingly;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(h) “regulations” means regulations made by the Board under this Act;
(i) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act.
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
National Highways Act, 1956 or the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 or the National Highways
Authority of India Act, 1988  or the Central Road Fund Act, 2000 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
 CHAPTER II
N
A TIONAL ROAD SAFETY AND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT BOARD
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Board to be known as
“the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board” to exercise the powers conferred
on it and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of properties, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson, and five Members, to be appointed by
the Central Government on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted
under section 5.
(4) The head office of the Board shall be at the National Capital Region.
4. ( 1) The Chairperson shall be a person of eminence with ability, integrity and
outstanding calibre who has adequate  knowledge  and, professional experience in
administration and road transport.
(2) The Members shall be persons of ability, integrity and outstanding calibre and
shall be chosen one each from amongst persons having experience  in the fields of—
(a) road design, engineering or construction;
(b) automobile engineering or technology;
48 of 1956.
48 of 1956.
59 of 1988.
68 of 1988.
54 of 2000.
Definitions.
Establishment
of National
Road Safety
and Traffic
Management
Board.
Qualifications for
appointment
of Chairperson
and other
Members.

3
(c) data collection and analysis, accident investigation, research, finance or
administration;
(d) traffic management, road user behaviour strategies or road safety education;
(e) trauma care and rehabilitation.
(3) The Chairperson or the Member shall not hold any other office during the period of
holding his office as such.
(4) The Central Government shall, within a period of two months from the date of
occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or Member, by reason of death,
resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member and six months before the
superannuation or completion of the term of office of the Chairperson or a Member, make a
reference to the Selection Committee constituted under section 5 for filling up of such
vacancy.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of selection of the Chairperson
and Members constitute a Selection Committee.
(2) The composition of Selection Committee and its terms and conditions shall be
such as may be prescribed.
(3) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Board shall be invalid merely
by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
6. (1) The Board shall, in relation to the road safety and traffic management in relation
to the national highways, discharge the functions and exercise the following powers,
namely:—
(a) recommend minimum design, construction, operation and maintenance
standards for the national highways;
(b) recommend minimum standards for establishing and operating trauma facilities
and para-medical facilities for dealing with traffic related injuries on the national
highways;
(c) conduct or cause to be conducted safety audits to monitor compliance with
the standards notified by the Central Government;
(d) make recommendations or issue guidelines relating to standards for design,
construction, operation and maintenance of  the national highways.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 or any other law for the time being in force, the Board shall, in relation to mechanically
propelled vehicles, exercise the power and discharge the following functions, namely:—
(a) recommend minimum safety requirements and standards for the design and
manufacture of mechanically propelled vehicles;
(b) recommend minimum conditions for safe usage of mechanically propelled
vehicles including specifying the maximum load bearing and capacity limits;
(c) conduct or cause to be conducted safety audits to monitor compliance with
the standards notified by the Central Government;
(d) recommend standards for vehicular traffic on the national highways including
the schemes for segregation of various classes of vehicles in separate speed lanes and
their right of way.
Selection
Committee for
selection of
Chairperson
and Members.
Functions of
Board.
59 of 1988.

4
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2), the Board shall, in
relation to the national highways and mechanically propelled vehicles, also exercise the
power and discharge the following functions, namely:—
(a) conduct or cause to be conducted research in different spheres of road
safety and traffic management and publish the findings thereof;
(b) establish the procedure and methodology for data collection, transmission
and analysis at appropriate levels, and define the role of different agencies involved in
the process;
(c) establish procedures and centres for multi-disciplinary crash investigation;
(d) make recommendations or issue guidelines relating to safety features for
vehicles other than mechanically propelled vehicles and for safe operating conditions
for such vehicles;
(e) make recommendations or issue guidelines for building capacity and skills in
the traffic police, hospitals, highway authorities, educational and research organisations
and other organisations dealing with road safety and traffic management;
(f) promote relevant practices in road safety and traffic management, undertake
road safety and traffic education programs, and conduct campaigns to create awareness
amongst all sections of road users, children and students on matters relating to road
safety;
(g) involve non-government organisations working in the area of road safety
and traffic management, and assist them in promotion of efficient traffic management
and road safety;
(h) provide for the special requirements for women, children, senior citizens,
disabled persons and pedestrians relating to road safety and traffic management;
(i) advice the Central Government in matters relating to or arising out of traffic
management on the national highways and the mechanically propelled vehicles for the
purposes of ensuring road safety;
(j) advice the Central Government on administration of the provisions relating to
safety as contained in Chapters II, IV, V, VII, VIII and XIII of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 and the rules made thereunder;
(k) liaise with other agencies such as education boards and institutions, Director-
General of health services and non-government organisations in matters relating to
road safety and traffic management;
(l) any other measures necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the purposes
of this Act.
(4) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall be construed or interpreted
as conferring on the Board, the power and jurisdiction in respect of matters relating to public
order, roads other than national highways and vehicles other than mechanically propelled
vehicles and the matters in respect of which specifically provided under the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 or National Highways Act, 1956.
7. (1) The Chairperson and other Members shall hold office for a term of five  years
from the date on which they enter upon their offices or until they attain the age of sixty-five
years, whichever is earlier.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
59 of 1988.
59 of 1988.
48 of 1956.
Term of office,
conditions of
service, etc., of
Chairperson
and other
Members.

5
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairperson and
the other Members shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson or other Members shall be varied to his disadvantage after
appointment.
(3) The Chairperson or other Member may resign from his office by giving notice
thereof in writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, the
Chairperson or such other Member shall be deemed to have vacated his office.
(4) The Chairperson or any other Member, upon ceasing to hold office as such, shall
not accept any commercial employment for a period of one year from the date he ceases to
hold such office.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “commercial employment” means
employment in any capacity under, or agency of, a person engaged in trading, commercial,
industrial or financial business and includes also a director of a company or partner of a firm
or setting up practice either independently or as partner of a firm or as an advisor or a
consultant in the field of road design, engineering or construction, traffic management,
automobile industry, transport and road safety equipment manufacturing.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of section 7, the Central
Government may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson or any other Member, if he —
(a) has been adjudged as insolvent ; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude ; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a  Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member ; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest; or
(f) has consistently failed to discharge his duties or has been absent from the
meetings of the Board for a continuous period of six months.
(2) No Chairperson or other Member shall be removed from office under clause (d) or
clause (e) or clause (f) of sub-section (1), unless the Central Government, after holding an
inquiry by any person appointed or authority constituted for the purpose and in accordance
with such procedure as may be prescribed, is satisfied that such Chairperson or other Member
ought, on such ground or grounds, be removed.
(3) In the event of inquiry instituted under sub-section ( 2), the Central Government
may suspend such Chairperson or other Member against whom inquiry has been instituted
for a period not exceeding six months if it consider necessary in public interest.
9. (1) The Board shall meet at least once in every month and at such times and places,
and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including the quorum at such meetings) as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson or, if he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the senior-most
Member present, reckoned from the date of appointment to the Board shall preside at such
meeting:
Removal of
Chairperson
or any other
Member from
office.
Meetings of
Board.

6
Provided that in the case of common date of appointment of Members, the Member
senior in age shall be considered as senior to the other Members.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by
a majority of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the
Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding over the meeting shall have a second or
casting vote.
(4) All orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by the Chairperson or
any other officer of the Board so authorised by the Chairperson.
10. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the
Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the
case.
11. (1) The Central Government shall, after consultation with the Chairperson, determine
the nature and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Board in
the discharge of its functions and provide such Board with such officers and other employees
as it may think fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the Board shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence of the Chairperson.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the officers and other
employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Board may appoint consultants required to assist in the discharge of its
functions on such terms and conditions as may be specified by regulations.
12. (1) The Board may, by notification, constitute an Advisory Committee consisting
of not more than thirty-one members to represent the interests of road users, construction
industry, transport industry, automobile manufacturers, and relevant non-government
organisations and academic and research bodies.
(2) The Chairperson and the other Members of the Board shall be   ex officio  Chairperson
and ex officio members respectively of the Advisory Committee.
(3) The Chairperson, if for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the Advisory
Committee, the senior-most Member shall preside at the meeting.
(4) The Advisory Committee shall meet at such times and places, and observe such
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum
at such meeting) as may be specified by regulations.
13. The functions of the Advisory Committee shall be to advise the Board on—
(a) questions of policy;
(b) matters relating to quality, continuity, reliability and extent of road safety and
traffic management; and
(c) protection of road users interest.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of the Board.
Officers
and other
employees
of the Board.
Advisory
Committee.
Functions of
Advisory
Committee.

7
14. Where the Board considers it expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing call
upon any government or non-government agency working in the field of road safety and
traffic management to furnish in writing such information, in such form and manner as may be
specified by regulations, relating to its affairs as the Board may require.
15. The Central Government may, in consultation with the National Highways Authority
of India, notify the standards recommended by the Board under section 6.
CHAPTER III
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
16. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this
behalf, make to the Board, grants and loans of such sums of money as the Central Government
may consider necessary.
17. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National Road Safety and
Traffic Management Fund and there shall be credited thereto—
(i) one per cent. of the revenue from the cess on diesel and gasoline allocated
under section 10 of the Central Road Fund Act, 2000 for national highways and rail and
road overbridges;
(ii) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government under
section 16; and
(iii) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided
upon or approved by the Central Government.
(2) The Fund shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), be applied for making
payments towards—
(a) the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, other
Members, officers and other employees of the Board;
(b) the expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under section 6;
and
(c) the other expenses of the Board in connection with the discharge of its
functions and for the purposes authorised by this Act.
(3) The Central Government shall, on the recommendations of the Board and in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, apply the Fund for meeting
the expenses referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (2) in such manner as may
be prescribed.
18. ( 1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor- General
of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and,
in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books of account, connected
Power to
call for
information.
Central
Government
to notify
standards.
Grants and
loans by
Central
Government.
National Road
Safety and
Traffic
Management
Fund.
Accounts and
audit of Board.
54 of 2000.

8
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Board.
(4) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall
cause the same to be laid, as soon as it is received, before each House of Parliament.
19. The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.
20. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous
finacial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditors report to be
laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER IV
P
ENALTIES
21. (1) Whoever, responsible for maintaining the standards for design or construction
or operation for national highways, fails to comply with the standards of design or
construction or operation for national highways notified by the Central Government under
section 15 of this Act, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees and, in
the case of continuing failure, with an additional penalty which may extend to three lakh
rupees for every month or part thereof during which such failure continues.
(2) Whoever, responsible for the maintaining the standards for design or manufacture
or operation of any mechanically propelled vehicle, fails to comply with the standards for
design or manufacture of any mechanically propelled vehicle notified by the Central
Government under any law for the time being in force  shall be liable to a penalty which may
extend to ten lakh rupees and, in the case of continuing failure, with an additional penalty
which may extend to three lakh rupees for every month or part thereof during which such
failure continues.
(3) Whoever fails to furnish the information required pursuant to section 14, or
wilfully furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return which he knows to be
false or incorrect in material particulars, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one
thousand rupees and, in the case of continuing failure, with an additional penalty which may
extend to five hundred rupees for each day after the first day during which such failure
continues.
22. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act, save
on a complaint made by the Board or any officer authorised by it.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial
Magistrate shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
23. (1) Any offence committed after the commencement of this Act punishable under
section 21, may before institution of the prosecution, be compounded by such officers or
Authority and for such amount as the Central Government may prescribe.
 ( 2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section ( 1), no further
proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.
(3) All sums realised by way of compounding of offences under this section shall be
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
Budget.
Annual and
other reports.
Penalties.
Cognizance of
offences.
Composition
of offences.

9
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
24. The Board may by a special or general order delegate to the Chairperson or any
other Member or any officer of the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any,
as may be specified in that order, such of its administrative or financial powers and functions
under this Act [except the powers and functions under sub-sections ( 1), ( 2) and ( 3) of
section 6 and section 32] as it may consider necessary.
25. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in
exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such
directions on question of policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time
to time:
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express
its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not,
shall be final.
26. (1) If, at any time the Central Government is of the opinion,—
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Board, it is
unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the Board has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction
given by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as
a result of such default the financial position of the Board or the administration of the
Board has suffered; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to
do,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Board for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or persons
as the Central Government may direct to exercise powers and discharge functions under this
Act:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give
a reasonable opportunity to the Board to make representations against the proposed
supersession and shall consider the representations, if any, of the Board.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Board,—
 (a) the Chairperson and other  Members shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
 (b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board shall, until the
Board is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the
person or persons referred to in sub-section ( 1); and
 (c) all properties owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the Board by a fresh
appointment of its Chairperson and other Members and in such case any person who had
vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified
for reappointment.
Delegation.
Power of
Central
Government to
issue directions.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Board.

10
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub-
section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
27. The Chairperson, other  Members, officers and other employees of the Board shall
be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this
Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
28. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or the Board or any officer of the Central Government or any Member, officer or
other employees of the Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
29. Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
30. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 or the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 or any other
law for the time being in force.
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the  composition of the Selection Committee and its terms and conditions
under sub-section (2) of section 5;
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other conditions of service
(including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairperson and the
other Members under sub-section (2) of section 7;
(c) the procedure of inquiry for removal of the Chairperson or Members under
sub-section (2) of section 8;
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service
(including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the officers and staff of
the Board under sub-section (3) of section 11;
(e) the manner in which the Fund  shall be applied for the purposes of clause (b)
or clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 17 by the Board under sub-section (3) of that
section;
(f) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be maintained under sub-
section (1) of section 18;
(g) the form in which, and the time at which in each financial year at which, the
budget of the Board shall be prepared under section 19;
(h) the form, time and manner in which the annual report of the Board shall be
prepared under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(i) the officer or authority and the amount for the purpose of composition of
offences under section 23;
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which
provision is to be made, by rules.
32. (1) The Board may, by notification, make regulations, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
Chairperson,
Members, etc.,
to be public
servant.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Application of
certain laws.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
45 of 1860.
59 of 1988.
68 of 1988.
Power of
Board to make
regulations.

11
(2) The Board shall publish a draft of each regulations proposed to be made under this
section, in the Official Gazette, and in such other manner as it may deem fit, to provide an
opportunity to persons affected or likely to be affected by such regulations to make
suggestions or objections and upon receiving such suggestions and objections within the
period stipulated by the Board, consider the same before notifying the regulations, with or
without modifications.
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the time and places of meetings of the Board and the procedure in regard to
transaction of business at such meetings (including quorum at meetings) under sub-
section (1) of section 9;
(b) the terms and conditions on which the Board may appoint consultants under
sub-section (4) of section 11;
(c) the time and place of meetings of the Advisory Committee and the procedure
in regard to transaction of business of such meetings (including quorum at meetings)
under sub-section (4)  of section 12;
(d) the information which, and the form and manner in which such information,
may be called for by the Board under section 14;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations
or in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
33. Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made by the
Board, under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or
regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,  however,   that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation.
34.   The enactments specified in Parts I, II and III of the Schedule to this Act shall be
amended in the manner specified therein and such amendments shall take effect on the date
of establishment of the Board.
35. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as it may deem necessary for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it is made,
before each house of Parliament.
Laying of
rules and
regulations.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

THE   SCHEDULE
(See section 29)
PART I
AMENDMENTS TO THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988
(59 OF 1988)
1. In section 109, after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(4) Nothing contained in this section, so far as it is contrary to the provisions of
the National Road Safety and Traffic Managment Board Act, 2010, shall, on and after
the commencement of the National Road Safety and Traffic Managment Board Act,
2010, apply to the mechanically propelled vehicles.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the “mechanically propelled
vehicle” means  any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon roads whether
the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or internal source and
includes trailers, but excludes cycles, cycle rickshaws and vehicles pulled by animals
or humans.’.
2. In section 110, after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(4) The Central Government shall, while making rules under this section, take
into the consideration the recommendations made by the National Road Safety and
Traffic Management Board relating to standards for mechanically propelled vehicles
under section 6 of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board Act,
2010.”.
3. In section 111, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(3) The State Government shall, while making rules under this section, take into
the consideration the recommendations made by the National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board relating to standards for mechanically propelled vehicles under
section 6 of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board Act, 2010.”.
PART II
A
MENDMENT TO THE NA TIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1988
(68 OF 1988)
In section 16, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) The Authority  shall, while discharging functions under this section, take
into the consideration the recommendations made by the National Road Safety and
Traffic Management Board relating to standards for national highways under
section 6 of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board Act, 2010.”.
PART III
A
MENTMENTS TO THE CENTRAL ROAD FUND ACT, 2000
(54 OF 2000)
 1. In section 7,  after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(vi) for disbursement to the National Road Safety and Traffic Management
Fund constituted under sub-section (1) of section 17 of the National Road Safety and
Traffic Management Board Act, 2010.”.
Amendment of
section 109.
Amendment of
section 110.
Amendment of
section 111.
Amendment of
section 16.
Amendment of
section 7.
12

13
 2. In section 9, in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( c), for  sub-clauses ( iii) and  ( iv), the
following sub-clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
“(iii) state roads;
(iv) construction of roads either under or over the railways by means of a bridge
and erect suitable safety works at unmanned rail-road level crossings;
(v) road safety and traffic management under the National Road Safety and
Trafic Management Board Act, 2010.”.
3. In section 10,  in sub section (1), in clause (viii),  in sub-clause (b), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“ Provided that one per cent of the amount referred to in items (i) and (ii) shall be
credited to the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Fund constituted under
sub-section (1) of section 17 of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management
Board Act, 2010."
Amendment of
section 9.
Amendment of
section 10.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Road transport is the most convenient and popular mode of transport and at the same
time, it is also the most complex and unsafe mode of transportation resulting in higher
number of road crashes as compared to other sectors of transportation. The world report on
Road Traffic Injury Prevention (2004) of the World Bank and World Health Organisation has
observed that the road traffic injuries are a major but neglected health problem. The report
forecasts that in the absence of increased effort and new initiatives, the total number of road
traffic injuries and deaths would rise by sixty-five per cent. between 2000-2020 across the
world. In India, the number of deaths reported has increased to 1,14,444 in 2007 from 84,674
deaths in 2002. A study conducted in 2002 by the Planning Commission estimated the social
cost of road accidents in India at about three per cent. of GDP annually which at 2000 prices
is estimated at rupees.55,000 crore. In case of developed countries, the cost of road crashes
rise between one to two per cent. of their GDP.
2. The number of vehicles in India has been increasing at an average growth rate of ten
per cent. per annum since last few years. The total number of vehicles as on the 31st March,
2006 is about nine crores as against three lakh vehicles in the year 1951. India has also taken
up an ambitious project of upgrading its National Highways under various phases of National
Highways Development Project. Broadening of National Highways to four to six lanes and
construction of Expressways under this project has already progressed to a large extent.
This has resulted in both volume and speed in traffic flow. At the same time, it also raises
serious concerns about road safety.
3. In most of the developed countries, focused and scientific research is carried out on
road safety and road crash injury prevention. These countries have specialised bodies to
maneuver adequate resources and supervise the activities required to improve road safety.
However, there is no such dedicated agency in India to deal with the road safety issues.
Though Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is the administrative ministry responsible
for road safety efforts in the country, it does not have enforcement machinery of its own and
other technical resources required to ensure better road safety activities. There are other
bodies concerned for road safety issues which are Transport Department of the State
Governments, automobile testing agencies, highway construction and maintenance agencies,
etc. There is also a need to look into the issues as to whether the design, construction and
maintenance standards of highways are being scrupulously followed both by the Government
and concessionaires. It is, therefore, felt that an integrated and dedicated statutory body is
necessary to provide for continuity, expertise and credibility to combat the rising menace of
road accidents and fatalities in the country.
4. In order to look into the issue of creating a dedicated agency for road safety and
traffic management, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri S. Sundar, former Secretary
in the erstwhile Ministry of Surface Transport was constituted in the year 2005. The said
Committee recommended creation of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management
Board through an Act of Parliament which would be responsible to oversee road safety
activities in the country.
5. Based on the recommendations of the aforesaid Committee, the National Road
Safety and Traffic Management Board Bill, 2010 has been prepared. The salient features of
the Bill, inter alia, are as under:—
(a) the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board shall consist of a
Chairperson who shall be a person of  eminence with ability, integrity and outstanding
calibre who has  adequate  knowledge and professional experience in administration
and road transport and five members to be chosen one each from amongst persons
having experience in the  fields of road design, engineering or construction; automobile
14

15
engineering or technology; data collection and analysis, accident investigation,
research, finance or administration; traffic management, road user behaviour strategies
or road safety education; and trauma care and rehabilitation;
(b) the Board shall, inter alia, perform the following functions, namely:—
(i) in relation to the national highways, recommend minimum design,
construction, operation and maintenance standards for the national highways;
recommend minimum standards for establishing and operating trauma facilities
and para-medical facilities for dealing with traffic related injuries on the national
highways; conduct or cause to be conducted safety audits to monitor compliance
with the standards notified by the Central Government; make recommendations
or issue guidelines relating to design, construction, operation and maintenance
standards for the national highways;
(ii) in relation to mechanically propelled vehicles, recommend minimum
safety requirements and standards for the design and manufacture of mechanically
propelled vehicles; recommend minimum conditions for safe usage of
mechanically propelled vehicles including specifying the maximum load bearing
and capacity limits; conduct or cause to be conducted safety audits to monitor
compliance with the standards notified by the Central Government; recommend
standards for vehicular traffic on the national highways including the schemes
for segregation of various classes of vehicles in separate speed lanes and their
right of way;
(iii) without prejudice to aforesaid, in relation to the national highways
and mechanically propelled vehicles, establish procedures and centres for multi-
disciplinary crash investigation; make recommendations or issue guidelines
relating to safety features for vehicles other than mechanically propelled vehicles
and   for safe operating conditions for such vehicles; promote relavant practices
in road safety and traffic management, undertake road safety and traffic education
programs, and conduct campaigns to create awareness amongst all sections of
road users, children and students on matters relating to road safety; involve
non-government organisations working in the area of road safety and traffic
management, and assist them in promotion of efficient traffic management and
road safety; provide for the special requirements for women, children, senior
citizens, disabled persons and pedestrians relating to road safety and traffic
management; advice the Central Government in matters relating to or arising out
of traffic management on the national highways and the mechanically propelled
vehicles for the purposes of ensuring road safety; advice the Central Government
on administration of the provisions relating to safety as contained in Chapters
II, IV, V, VII, VIII and XIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and the rules made
thereunder.
However, the Board cannot exercise the power and jurisdiction in respect of
matters relating to public order, roads (other than national highways) and vehicles
(other than mechanically propelled vehicles) and the matters which have been
specifically provided under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 or the National Highways
Act, 1956;
(c) the Central Government, in consultaion with the National Highways Authority
of India, would notify the standards relating to the national highways and mechanically
propelled vehicles as recommended by the Board;
(d) creation of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Fund for
meeting the expenses of the Board wherein the one per cent. of the revenue from the
cess on diesel and gasoline allocated under section 10 of the Central Road Fund Act,
2000 for national highways and rail and road over bridges shall be credited;

16
(e) the provision for penalty of ten lakh  rupees for failing  to maintain the
standards referred to in sub-paragraph (c) above.
6. The notes on clause  explain  the provisions contained in  the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; KAMAL NATH
The 16th  April, 2010.

Notes on clauses
Clause 2 provides for definitions of various expressions used in the proposed
legislation. Such expressions inter alia include "Board", "mechanically propelled vehicle",
"national highways", "notification", "prescribed", "regulations" and "Schedule", etc.
It further provides that words and expressions used and not defined in the proposed
legislation but defined in the National Highways Act, 1956 or the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
or the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988  or the Central Road Fund Act, 2000
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
Clause 3 provides for the establishment of the National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board. It provides that the Central Government shall, by notification, establish
a Board to be known as "the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board" to
exercise the powers conferred on it and to perform the functions assigned to it under the
proposed lelgislation.
It further provides that the Board shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of
properties, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or
be sued.
It also provides that the Board shall consist of a Chairperson, and five Members, to be
appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Selection Committee
constituted under clause 5.
It also provides that the head office of the Board shall be at the National Capital
Region.
Clause 4 makes provision for the qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson
and other Members of the Board. It provides that the Chairperson shall be a person of
eminence with ability, integrity and outstanding calibre who has  knowledge and, professional
experience in administration and road transport.
It further provides that the Members shall be persons of ability, integrity and
outstanding calibre and shall be chosen one each from amongst persons having experience
in the fields of—(a) road design, engineering or construction; (b) automobile engineering or
technology; (c) data collection and analysis, accident investigation, research, finance or
administration; (d) traffic management, road user behaviour strategies or road safety
education; (e) trauma care and rehabilitation.
It also provides that the Chairperson or the Member shall not hold any other office
during the period of holding his office as such.
It also provides that the Central Government shall, within a period of two months from
the date of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or Member, by reason
of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member and six months before the
superannuation or completion of the term of office of the Chairperson or a Member, make a
reference to the Selection Committee constituted under section 5 for filling up of such
vacancy.
Clause 5 provides for the Selection Committee for selection of Chairperson and
Members. It provides that the Central Government shall, for the purposes of selection of the
Chairperson and Members constitute a Selection Committee. It further provides that the
composition and terms and conditions of Selection committee shall be prescribed by rules.
17

18
It also provides that no appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the Board shall
be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
Clause 6 provides for powers and functions of the Board. It provides that the Board
shall, in relation to the road safety and traffic management in relation to the national highways,
discharge the functions and exercise the powers to  recommend minimum  standard for
design, construction, operation and maintenance of the national   highways; recommend
minimum standards for establishing and operating trauma facilities and para-medical facilities
for dealing with traffic related injuries on the national highways; conduct or cause to be
conducted safety audits to monitor compliance with the standards notified by the Central
Government; and make recommendations or issue guidelines relating to design, construction,
operation and maintenance standards for the national highways.
It further provides that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 or any other law for the time being in force, the Board shall, in
relation to mechanically propelled vehicles, exercise the power and discharge the functions
to recommend minimum safety requirements and standards for the design and manufacture
of mechanically propelled vehicles; recommend minimum conditions for safe usage of
mechanically propelled vehicles including specifying the maximum load bearing and capacity
limits; conduct or cause to be conducted safety audits to monitor compliance with the
standards notified by the Central Government; and recommend standards for vehicular
traffic on the national highways including the schemes for segregation of various classes of
vehicles in separate speed lanes and their right of way.
It also provides that without prejudice to the provisions of sub clauses (1) and (2), the
Board shall, in relation to the national highways and mechanically propelled vehicles, also
exercise the power and discharge the functions, enumerated to in sub-clause (3).
It also provides that nothing contained in sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall be construed
or interpreted as conferring on the Board, the power and jurisdiction in respect of matters
relating to public order, roads other than national highways and vehicles other than
mechanically propelled vehicles and the matters in respect of which specifically provided
under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 or the National Highways Act, 1956.
Clause 7 makes provisions for the term of office, conditions of service, etc., of the
Chairperson and other Members of the Board. It provides that the Chairperson and other
Members shall hold office for a term of five  years from the date on which they enter upon
their offices or until they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
It further provides that the salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the
Chairperson and the other Members shall be such as may be prescribed but neither the
salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson or
other Members shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.
It also provides that the Chairperson or other Member may resign from his office by
giving notice thereof in writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being
accepted, the Chairperson or such other Member shall be deemed to have vacated his office
and the Chairperson or any other Member, upon ceasing to hold office as such, shall not
accept any commercial employment for a period of one year from the date he ceases to hold
such office.
It also provides for the explanation of the term "commercial employment" for the
purposes of this clause so as to mean the employment in any capacity under, or agency of,
a person engaged in trading, commercial, industrial or financial business and includes also a
director of a company or partner of a firm or setting up practice either independently or as
partner of a firm or as an advisor or a consultant in the field of road design, engineering or
construction, traffic management, automobile industry, transport and  road safety equipment
manufacturing.

19
Clause 8 makes provisions for removal and suspension of the Chairperson or any
other member from office. It provides that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
clause (3) of clause 7, the Central Government may, by order, remove from office, the
Chairperson or any Member on any of the grounds enumerated in this clause.
It further provides that no Chairperson or other Member shall be removed from office
under clauses (d) or (e) or (f) of sub-clause (1), unless the Central Government, after holding
an inquiry by any person appointed or authority constituted for the purpose and in accordance
with such procedure as may be prescribed, is satisfied that such Chairperson or Member
ought on such ground or grounds be removed.
It also empowers the Central Government that in the event of inquiry instituted under
sub-clause (2), it may suspend such Chairperson or other Member against whom inquiry has
been instituted for a period not exceeding six months if  it consider necessary in public
interest.
Clause 9 makes provisions for meetings of the Board. It provides that the Board shall
meet at least once in every month and at such times and places, and shall observe such
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at
such meetings) as may be specified by regulations.
It further provides that the Chairperson or, if he is unable to attend a meeting of the
Board, the senior-most Member present, reckoned from the date of appointment to the Board
shall preside at such meeting.
It also provides that all questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall
be decided by a majority of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality
of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding the meeting shall have a
second or casting vote and all orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by
the Chairperson or any other officer of the Board so authorised by the Chairperson.
Clause 10 provides that no act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by
reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or any defect in the
appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Board; or any irregularity in the procedure
of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 11 makes provision for officers and other employees of the Board. It provides
that the Central Government shall, after consultation with the Chairperson, determine the
nature and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Board in the
discharge of its functions and provide such Board with such officers and other employees as
it may think fit and the officers and other employees of the Board shall discharge their
functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson.
It further provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the
officers and other employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
It also empowers the Board to appoint consultants required to assist in the discharge
of its functions on such terms and conditions as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 12 provides for constitution of the Advisory Committee. It provides that the
Board may, by notification, constitute an Advisory Committee consisting of not more than
thirty-one members to represent the interests of road users, construction industry, transport
industry, automobile manufacturers, and relevant non-government organisations and
academic and research bodies and the Chairperson and the other Members of the Board shall
be the ex officio  Chairperson and ex officio members respectively of the Advisory Committee.
It further provides that the Advisory Committee  shall meet at such times and places,
and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including quorum at such meeting) as may be specified by regulations.

20
Clause 13 provides for functions of the Advisory Committee. It provides that the
functions of the Advisory Committee shall be to advise the Board on questions of policy;
matters relating to quality, continuity, reliability and extent of road safety and traffic
management; and protection of road user interest.
Clause 14 empowers the Board to call for informations. It provides that where the
Board considers it expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing call upon any government
or non-government agency working in the field of road safety and traffic management to
furnish in writing such information, in such form and manner as may be specified by
regulations, relating to its affairs as the Board may require.
Clause 15 empowers the Central Government to notify the standards. It provides that
the Central Government may, in consultaion with the National Highways Authority of India,
notify the standards recommended by the Board under clause 6.
Clause 16 provides for grants and loans by the Central Government. It provides that
the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament in this behalf, make
to the  Board, grants and loans of such sums of money as  the Central Government may
consider necessary.
Clause 17 provides for establishment of the National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Fund. It provides that there shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Road
Safety and Traffic Management Fund and there shall be credited thereto one per cent. of the
revenue from the cess on diesel and gasoline allocated under section 10 of the Central Road
Fund Act, 2000 for national highways and rail and road over bridges; any grants and loans
made to the Board by the Central Government under clause 16; and all sums received by the
Board from such other sources as may be decided upon or approved by the Central
Government.
It further provides that the Fund shall, subject to the provisions of sub-clause (3), be
applied for making payments towards the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the
Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Board; the expenses of the
Board in the discharge of its functions under clause 6; and the other expenses of the Board
in connection with the discharge of its functions and  for the purposes authorised by the
proposed legislation.
It also provides that the Central Government shall, on the recommendations of the
Board and in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, apply the Fund
for meeting the expenses referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-clause (2) in such
manner as may be prescribed.
Clause 18 provides for accounts and audit of Board. It provides that the Board shall
maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of
accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
It further provides that the accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor- General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the  Board to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
It also provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall
have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally has in connection with the audit of the
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of
books of account, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any
of the offices of the Board.
It also provides that the accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and

21
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with
the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that
Government shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 19 provides that the Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each
financial year as may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the
estimated receipts and expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central
Government.
Clause 20 provides for annual and other reports of the Board. It provides that the
Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be prescribed,
its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year, and
submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
It further provides that the Central Government shall cause the annual report and
auditors’  report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 21 provides for penalties. It provides that whoever, responsible for maintaining
the standards for design or construction or operation for  national highways, fails to comply
with the standards of design or construction or operation for  national highways notified by
the Central Government under  clause 15 of the proposed legislation, shall be liable to a
penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees and, in the case of continuing failure, with an
additional penalty which may extend to three lakh rupees for every month or part thereof
during which such failure continues.
It further provides that whoever, responsible for the maintaining the standards for
design or manufacture  of any mechanically propelled vehicle, fails to comply with the
standards for design or manufacture or operation of any mechanically propelled vehicle
notified by the Central Government under  any law for the time being in force, shall be liable
to a penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees and, in the case of continuing failure, with
an additional penalty which may extend to three lakh rupees for every month or part thereof
during which such failure continues.
It also provides that whoever fails to furnish the information required pursuant to
clause 14, or willfully furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return which he
knows to be false or incorrect in material particulars, shall be liable to a penalty which may
extend to one thousand rupees and, in the case of continuing failure, with an additional
penalty which may extend to five hundred rupees for each day after the first day during
which such failure continues.
Clause 22 provides for cognizance of offences. It provides that no court shall take
cognizance of any offence punishable under the proposed legislation, save on a complaint
made by the Board or any officer authorised by it and no court inferior to that of a Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall try any offence punishable
under the proposed legislation.
Clause 23 provides for composition of offences. It provides that any offence committed
after the commencement of the proposed lelgislation punishable under clause 21, may before
institution of the prosecution, be compounded by such officers or Authority and for such
amount as the Central Government may prescribe.
 It further provides that where an offence has been compounded under sub-clause (1),
no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.
It also provides that all sums realised by way of compounding of offences under this
clause shall be credited  to the Consolidated Fund of India.
Clause 24 makes provision for delegation of powers. It provides that the Board may by
a special or general order delegate to the Chairperson or any other Member or any officer of

22
the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in that order,
such of its administrative or financial powers and functions under this Act [except the
powers and functions under sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3) of clause 6 and clause 32] as it may
consider necessary.
Clause 25 empowers the Central Government to issue directions. It provides that
without prejudice  to  the  foregoing provisions of the proposed legislation,  the  Board shall,
in exercise of its powers or the performance of its  functions under  the proposed lelgislation,
be bound by such directions on question  of  policy, as  the Central Government may give in
writing to it from time to time.
It further provides that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity
to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
It also provides that the decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one
of policy or not, shall be final.
Clause 26 empowers the Central Government to supersede the Board in certain cases.
It provides that if,  at any time the Central Government is of the opinion that,  on  account  of
circumstances beyond the control  of the Board,  it  is  unable to discharge the functions or
perform  the  duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of the proposed legislation; or
that  the Board has persistently defaulted in complying  with any direction given by the
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge  of the functions or performance of the
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of the proposed legislation and as a result of
such default the  financial position of the Board or the administration of  the Board has
suffered; or that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the  public interest so to do,
it may, by notification,  supersede the Board  for  such period,  not  exceeding  six months,  as
may  be  specified  in  the notification  and  appoint a person or persons as the Central
Government may direct to exercise powers and discharge functions under the proposed
legislation.
It further provides  that  before  issuing  any such  notification,  the  Central Government
shall  give a reasonable opportunity to the  Board  to make  representations  against  the
proposed  supersession  and  shall consider the representations, if any, of the Board.
It also provides that upon  the  publication of a notification  under  sub-clause ( 1)
superseding the Board, the  Chairperson  and other members shall, as from  the  date  of
supersession, vacate their offices as such; all  the powers, functions and duties which may,
by or under  the provisions  of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the
Board  shall,  until  the Board  is  reconstituted  under sub-clause ( 3),  be  exercised and
discharged by the person or persons referred to in sub-clause (1); and all properties owned
or controlled by the Board shall,  until the  Board  is  reconstituted under sub-clause (3), vest
in  the Central Government.
It also provides that on  or  before  the  expiration of  the  period  of  supersession
specified  in  the  notification  issued under  sub-section  (1),  the Central  Government  shall
reconstitute  the  Board , by  a  fresh appointment  of its Chairperson and other members and
in such case any person  who had vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-clause (2) shall
not be deemed to be disqualified for re-appointment.
It also provides that the Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification
issued under sub-clause (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the
earliest.
Clause 27 provides that the Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of
the Board shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.

23
Clause 28 provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
the Central Government or the Board or any officer of the Central Government or any Member,
officer or other employees of the Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended
to be done under the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
Clause 29 provides for overriding effect of the proposed legislation. It provides that
save as otherwise provided, the provisions of the proposed legislation shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than the proposed
legislation.
Clause 30 provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation shall be in addition
to the provisions of the the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 or the National Highwyas Authroity of
India Act, 1988 or any other law for the time being inforce.
Clause 31 empowers the Central Government to make rules. It provides that the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying
out the purposes of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause ( 2) enumerates the matters for
which the Central Government may make rules.
Clause 32 empowers the Board to make regulations. It provides that the Board may, by
notification, make regulations, with the prior approval of the Central Government, consistent
with the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of
the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the Board shall publish a draft of each regulations proposed to
be made under this section, in the Official Gazette, and in such other manner as it may deem
fit, to provide an opportunity to persons affected or likely to be affected by such regulations
to make suggestions or objections and upon receiving such suggestions and objections
within the period stipulated by the Board, consider the same before notifying the regulations,
with or without modifications. Sub-clause (3) enumerated the matters for which the Board
may make regulations.
Clause 33 provides for laying of rules and regulations before Parliament. It provides
that every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made by the Board,
under the proposed legislation shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 34 makes provision for amendment of certain enactments. It provides that the
enactments specified in Parts I, II and III of the Schedule to the proposed legislation shall be
amended in the manner specified therein and such amendments shall take effect on the date
of establishment of the Board.
Clause 35 makes provisions for removal of difficulties. It provides that if any difficulty
arises in giving effect to any of the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation, as it may deem necessary for
removing the difficulty.
It further provides that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two
years from the date of commencement of the proposed legislation and every order made
under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each house of
Parliament.
The Schedule to the Bill provides  for amendments to the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the
National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 and the Central Road Fund Act, 2000. It
provides for amendments of section 109, 110 and 111 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, section
16 of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 and sections 7, 9 and 10 of the
Central Road Fund Act, 2000 in the manner as provided therein.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the National Road Safety and Traffic
Management Board. Sub-clause (2) of clause 7 provides for salary and allowances payable
to the Chairperson and other members of the Board. Clause 11 makes provision for officers
and other employees of the Board and sub-clause (3) thereof makes provision for salaries
and allowances payable to the officers and other employees. Clause 16 provides that the
Central Government may after due appropriation made by Parliament make to the Board
grants and loans of such sums of money as it may consider necessary.
2. The Bill entails an estimated expenditure of  Rupees 12.27 crore per annum to meet
the administrative expenses of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board
which includes expenses on account of salary and other perks admissible to the Chairperson,
Members, officers and employees of the Board and expenditure on account of rented
accommodation and other peripheral administrative expenses. The expenditure of the Board
will be met from the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Fund proposed to be
created under the proposed legislation by way of earmarking one per cent. of the cess on
diesel and petrol allocated for national highways and rail and road overbridges. As per the
budget estimate for the year 2010-2011, an amount of Rupees  87,25,71,000 would be available
towards one per cent. of the cess on diesel and petrol allocated for national highways and
railways. This amount shall be credited to the National Road Safety and Traffic Management
Fund which would be utilised by the Board for carrying out its activities and also to meet its
administrative expenses.
24

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 31 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. The matters in respect of which rules
may be made  inter alia, relate,  to  (a) the composition of the Selection Committee and its
terms and conditions under sub-section ( 2) of section 5;  ( b) the salaries and allowances
payable to, and the other conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other
retirement benefits) of, the Chairperson and the other Members under sub-clause (2) of
clause 7; (c) the procedure of inquiry for removal of the Chairperson or Mmebers under sub-
clause (2) of clause 8; (d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other conditions of
service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the officers and staff of
the Board  under sub-clause (3) of clause 11; ( e) the manner in which the Fund shall be
applied for the purposes of clauses (b) or (c) of sub-clause (2) of clause 17 by the Board
under sub-clause (3) of that clause; (f) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall
be maintained under sub-clause (1) of clause 18; (g) the form in which, and the time at which
in each financial year, the budget of the Board shall be prepared under clause 19; (h) the form,
time and manner in which the annual report of the Board shall be prepared under sub-clause
(1) of clause 20; (i) the officer or authority and the  amount for the purpose of composition of
offences under clause 23; and (j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in
respect of which provision is to be made, by rules.
2. Clause 32 of the Bill confers power upon the Board to make regulations, with the
prior approval of the Central Government, consistent with the proposed legislation and the
rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. The matters in
respect of which rules may be made relate, inter alia, to (a) the time and places of meetings
of the Board and the procedure in regard to transaction of business at such mettings (including
quorum at mettings) under sub-clause (1) of clause 9; (b) the terms and conditions on which
the Board may appoint  consultants under sub-clause (4) of clause 11; (c) the time and place
of meeting of the Advisory Committee and the procedure in regard to transaction of business
at such meeting (including quorum) under sub-clause (4) of clause 12; (d) the information
which, and the form and manner in which such information, may be called for by the Board
under clause 14; and (e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by
regulations or in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
3. The rules made by the Central Government under clause 31 of the Bill and the
regulations made by the  Board under clause 32 of the Bill are required to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which orders may be issued and the rules may be made by
the Central Government are generally matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is
not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
25

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the National Road Safety and Traffic Management Board
for the purpose of orderly development, regulation, promotion and optimisation of
modern and effective road safety and traffic management system and practices in
relation to the national highways and improved safety standards in highway design,
construction, operation and regulate high standards in production and maintenance
of mechanically propelled vehicles and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
————
(Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of Road Transport and Highways )
GMGIPMRND—2045LS(S4)—26.04.2010.