1
THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Co-operative Development Corporation
(Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962,
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for clause ( c), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘(c) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be registered
under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or under the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002 or under any other law with respect to co-operative societies  for
the time being in force in any State, or a producer company referred to in clause (l) of
section 581A of the Companies Act, 1956, which is engaged in any of the activities
specified in sub-section (1) of section 9 and includes a Co-operative Land Development
Bank, by whatever name called;’.
Short title and
commencement.
26 of 1962.
2 of 1912.
39 of 2002.
Amendment
of section 2.1 of 1956.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 59 of 2012
5
10
15

2
3. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (d),  the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(dd) provide loans and grants to the producer companies and co-operative
societies engaged in notified services and trading in notified commodities;”.
4. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2), in clause ( a), after the words ‘‘financing co-operative
societies’’, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘in such manner and to such extent as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify’’;
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘(2A) Every notification issued under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall
be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament.”.
Amendment of
section 9.
Amendment of
section 13.
5
10

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Co-operative  Development Corporation Act, 1962 provides for the
incorporation and regulation of a Corporation for the purpose of planning and promoting
programmes for the production, processing, marketing, storage, export and import of
agricultural produce, foodstuffs, industrial goods, livestock,  certain other commodities
and services on co-operative principles and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
2. Section 9 of the National Co-operative  Development Corporation Act, 1962
provides for the functions of the National Co-operative Development Corporation. It,
inter alia , empowers the Corporation to advance loans or grant subsidies to State
Governments for financing co-operative societies and for employment of staff for
implementing programmes of co-operative development, to provide funds to State
Governments for financing co-operative societies for the purchase of agricultural produce,
foodstuffs, livestock, poultry feed, industrial goods, notified commodities and notified
services on behalf of the Central Government, to provide loans and grants directly to the
national level co-operative societies and other co-operative societies having objects extended
beyond one State and to provide loans to co-operative societies on the guarantee of State
Governments or in the case of co-operative societies in the Union territories, on the guarantee
of Central Government. It is proposed to insert a new clause ( dd) in sub-section ( 2) of
section 9 of the National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962 to empower the
National Co-operative Development Corporation to provide loans and grants to the producer
companies and co-operative societies engaged in notified services and trading in notified
commodities.
3. It is envisaged that the producer companies can play a major role in improving the
livelihood of primary producers and boosting growth of rural economy. It is, therefore,
further proposed to provide assistance to them through National Co-operative Development
Corporation by including them in the definition of co-operative society. The producer
company is defined under clause (l) of section 581A of the Companies Act, 1956. Section
581B of the Companies Act, 1956 provides for the objects of a producer company which are
broadly based on the principles of mutual assistance. A major impediment being faced by
the producer companies in its expansion and growth is the lack of availability of institutional
support and credit to them. The proposed amendment to bring producer companies within
the definition of co-operative societies as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the National
Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962 would provide an additional source of
credit through said National Co-operative Development Corporation to the producer
companies, which mostly comprise of small and marginal farmers. The proposed amendment
would enable the National Co-operative Development Corporation to plan, promote and
finance programmes for the benefit of the producers through co-operative societies including
producer companies.
4. The existing provisions contained in clause ( a) of sub-section (2) of section 13 of
the said National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962 provide that the National
Co-operative Development Corporation shall maintain a Fund. The said Fund shall, inter
alia, be applied for advancing loans and granting subsidies to State Governments on such
terms and conditions as the Corporation may deem fit for the purpose of enabling State
Government to subscribe to the share capital of co-operative societies or for otherwise
financing co-operative societies. It is also proposed to amend said clause ( a) to provide

4
that such advancing of loans and granting of subsidies shall be in such manner and to such
extent as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; SHARAD PAW AR.
The  26th April, 2012.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 13 of the Act
to empower the Central Government to specify by notification in the Official Gazette, the
manner and the extent of financing by the Corporation out of the moneys available in the
Fund of the Corporation under that section.
2. The matters in respect of which the notifications are to be issued, are matters
of detail or procedure. The delegation of the legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NA TIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962
(26 OF 1962)
         *                        *                       *                        *                       *
2.  In  this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
*                        *                       *                        *                       *
(c) " co-operative society" means a society registered or deemed to be registered
under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or under the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 1984 or under any other law with respect to co-operative societies for
the time being in force in any State, which is engaged in any of the activities specified
in sub-section (1) of section 9 and includes a Co-operative Land Development Bank,
by whatever name called;
*                        *                       *                        *                       *
9. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the
Corporation may—
*                        *                       *                        *                       *
13. (1) * * * * *
(2) The moneys in the Fund shall be applied for—
(a) advancing loans and granting subsidies to State Governments on such terms
and conditions as the Corporation may deem fit for the purpose of enabling State
Governments to subscribe to the share capital of co-operative societies or for otherwise
financing co-operative societies;
*                        *                       *                        *                       *
Definitions.
Functions of
Corporation.
Corporation to
maintain fund.
2 of 1912.
51 of 1984.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962.
————
(Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture and Food Processing Industries. )
GMGIPMRND—999LS(S3)—11-05-2012.