24 NOY 206: |

As INTRODUCED IN Lox SaBHa

Bill No. 59 of 2006

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

By
Suri C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.

A
BILL
Surther to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of thé Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2006. Short title.
2. In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 284 and before the Amendment
5 Explanation, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:— pos aes
ule.
"285. The Kerala Professional Colleges or Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation
+Fee, Regulation of Admission, Fixation of Non-Exploitative Fee and Other Measures
to Ensure Equity and Excellence in Professional Education) Act, 2006 (Kerala Act 19 of
2006).”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Kerala Professional Colleges or Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee,
Regulation of Admission, Fixation of Non-Exploitative Fee and Other Measures to Ensure
Equity and Excellence in Professional Education) Act, 2006 is meant for ensuring social
justice, equality of opportunity and academic excellence, especially to weaker sections in the
society, whose children aspire for higher education in privately ownedfrofessional colleges
and institutions in Kerala. This legislation ensures admission based on merit. It provides for
Teservation for socially and economically weaker sections. It seeks to ensure academic
excellence in these institutions.

ya Francs This legislation is a serious attempt to put an end to capitation fee surreptitiously
& charged by the private/institutions. Besides, the present fee structure of these institutions is
exorbitant and prohibitive, and prevents the students belonging to weaker sections from

joining these educational institutions.

The educational standard in many of these institutions is not upto the mark due to lack
of required infrastructure and educational facilities. This legislation seeks to put an end to
this problem. It also stipulates that the students should be admitted to courses based on
their performance in the common entrance examination conducted by the university.

As this piece of legislation aims at ensuring equity and excellence in professional
education and prevents the various malpractices in this field, vested interests are up in arms
against this Act and want to challenge it in court.

As it is an important legislation, it has to be provided protection by including it in the
Ninth Schedule to the Constitution.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
July 19,2006



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

. * के . न . .
NINTH SCHEDULE
(Article 31B)
* * K * नि * *

284. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Tribunal) Act, 1991 (West Bengal Act 12 of
1991). i

Explanation.—Any acquisition made under the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955
(Rajasthan Act III of 1955), in contravention of the second proviso to clause (1) of article
31A shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.]}



ae LOK SABHA

A
BILL
- further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—1518LS(S3)—25.07.2006.