saL No. S of I,S5 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
. for the financial year 1955-56. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. Short title.-This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1955. 
Z. Income-tax and Super-tax.-(l) Subject to the provisions of 
Bub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5), for the year beginning on the 1st S 
day of April, 1955,-
(a) income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in Part 
I of the First Schedule, increased in each case by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union at the rate specified therein in respect of 
each such rate of income-tax, and 10 
(b) rates of super-tax shall, for the purposes of section 5!5 
of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (XI of 1922) (hereinafter 
referred to as the Income-tax Act), be those specified in Part 
II of the First Schedule, increased in the cases to which Para-
graphs A, Band C of that Part apply, by a surcharge for pur- 15 
.poses of the Union at the rate specified therein in respect of each 
such rate of super-tax. 
(2) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1956, there shall be deducted from the total income 
of an assessee,- 20 
(i) in respect of the earned income, if any, chargeable un-
der the head "salaries" which is included in his total income, an 
amount equal to one-fifth of such earned income, plus 
(ii) in respect of the earned income, if any, other than the 
income chargeable under the head "salaries" which is included 25 
in his total income,-
(a). where such earned income does not exceed twenty 
five thousand rupees, an amount equal to one-fifth of such 
earned income; 
(b) where such earned income exceeds twenty five 30 
thousand rupees, the amount, if any, arrived at after deduct-
ing .from four thousand rupees one-fifth of such excess: 
Provided that the aggregate amount to be deducted under this 
sub-sectioJ;l shall not in any case exceed four thousand rupees. 
1,36 L.S. 

s 
to 
I~ 
20 
2S 
so 
2 
(3) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st day 
ot March, 1956,-
(0) when the total income of an assessee, not beinF- a com-
pany, includes any income chargeable under the head • salaries" 
as reduced by the dNuction for earned income appropriate 
thereto, or any income chargeable under the head "Interest on 
securities", or any income from dividends in respect of which 
by virtue of section 49B of the Income-tax Act he is deemed 
bJmself to have paid the income-tax imposed under that Act, the 
income-tax payable by the assessee on that part of his total in-
come which consists of such inclusions shall be an amount bear-
ing to the total amount of income-tax payable according to the 
rates applicable under the operation of the Finance Act, 1954 
(17 of 1954) on his total income the same proportion as the 
amount of such inclusions bears to his total income; 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com-
pany, includes any income chargeable under the head "salaries" 
on which super-tax has been or might have been deducted un-
der the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 18 of the Income-
tax Act, the super-tax payable by the assessee on that portion of 
his total income which consists of such inclusion shan be an 
amount bearing to the total amount of super-tax payable ac-
cording to the rates applicable under the operation of the Finance 
Act, 1954 (17 of 1954), on his total income the same proportion 
as the amount of such inclusion bears to his total income. 
(4) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1956,-
, (0) where the total income of..a company includes any pro-
fits and gains from life insurance business, the super-tax other-
wise payahle by the company on the whole of such total' income 
shall be reduced by an amount which bears to that super-tax 
the same proportion as the amount of such inclusion bears to 
its total income or by an amount computed at the rate of- • 
(i) two annas in the rupee in the case of a mutual In-
surance company as defined in section 95 of the Insurance 
Act, 1938 (IV of 1938), and 
(ii) one-and-a-half annas in the rupee in the case of any 
other company, " 
on the amount of such inclusion, whichever is less; 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com-
pany, includes any profits and gains from life insurance business, 
the income-tax and super-tax payable by the assessee on that 
part of his total income which consists of such inclusion shall 
be an amount bearing to the total amount of such taxes payable on 
his total income according to the rates appUcable under the 
operation of the Indian Finance Act, 1942 (XII of 1942) I in-
creased in respect of each such rate by one-twentieth thereof, the 
same proportion as the amount of such inclusion bears to hi8 
total fnco,me, 80 hqwever that the aggregate of the taxes 110 
computed in respect of such inclusion shan not in any cue exceed 
the amount of tax payable on such inclusion at the-rate of five 
annu in the rupee. 

3 
(5) In cases to which section 17 of the Income-tax Act applies, 
the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that section, 
but with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section (1), and in 
accordance, where applicable, with the provisions of sub-sections (2), 
(3) and (4) of this section. 5 
(6) .• ,For the purposes of making any deduction of income-tax in 
the year beginning on the 1st day of April, 1955, under sub-section 
(2) or'sub-section (2B) of section 18 of the Income-tax Act, from any 
earned income chargeable, under the head "salaries", the estimated 
total income of the assessee under that head shall, in computing the 10 
inc~me-tax to be deducted, be reduced-
(i) where such earned income does not exceed twenty-five 
thousand rupees, by an' amount equal to one-fifth of such earned 
income but not exceeding in any case four thousand rupees; 
(ii) where such earned income exceeds twenty-five thousand 15 
rupees, by the amount, if any, arrived at after deducting from 
four thousand rupees one-fifth of such excess; 
but no abatement shall be allowed by the person responsible for pay: 
ing the salary in respect of any donations made by the assessee to 
which section 15B of the Income-tax Act is or may be applicable. 20 
(7) For the purposes of this section and of the rates of tax im-
posed thereby, the expression "total income" means total income as 
determined for the purposes of income-tax or super-tax, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 
and the expression "earned income" has the meaning assigned to it 25 
in clause (6AA) of section 2 of that Act. 
3. AmeDdment of sectioD Z, Act XI of 19ZZ.-In section 2 of the 
Income-tax Act,- • 
• (1) after clause (5A) , the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:- 30 
"(5B) 'co-operative society' meaRS a co-aperative society 
registered und.er the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 (n of 
1912) or under any other law for the time being in force in 
any State for the registration of eo-operative societies."; 
(2) in clause (6A) ,-
(i) in sub-clause (b), for the words "or debenture-
stock" the words "debenture-stock or deposit certificates in 
any form, whether with or without interest," shall be substi-
tuted; 
3$ 
(it) in sub-clause (c), the proviso and the word "and" 40 
at the end thereof shall be omitted; 
(iii) for the two provisos occurring after sub-clause (d), 
the following shall be substituted, n~ely:-
II (e) any payment by a company, not being a com-
pany in which the public are substantially interested 45 
within the meaning of section 23A, of any Sum (whe-
ther as representing a part of the assets of the company 

10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
4, 
4 
or otherwise) by way of advance or loan . to a share-
holder or any F.yment by any such company on behalf 
or for the individual benefit of a shareholder, to the 
extent to which the company in either case possesses 
accumulated profits; 
but 'dividend' does not include-
(i) a distribution made in accordance with suB-
clause (c) or sub-clause (d) in respect of any share issued 
for full cash consideration where the holder of the share 
is not entitled in the event of liquidation to participate in 
the surplus assets; . 
(ii) any dividend paid by a company which is set 
off by the company against the whole or any part of any 
sum previously paid by it and treated as a dividend 
within the meaning of clause (e), to the extent to which 
it is so set off. 
Explanation.-The expression "accumulated profits", 
wherever it occurs in this clause, shall not include capital 
gains arising before the 1st day of April, 1946, or after 
the 31st day of March, 1948."; 
(3) for clause (6C), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(6C) 'income'includes-
(i) dividend; 
(ii) the value of any perquisite or profit in lieu of 
salary taxable under section 7; 
(iii) the value of any benefit or perquisite, wh~her 
convertible into money or not, obtained from a company 
either by a director or by any other person who has a 
substantial interest in the company (that is to say, who 
is concerned in the 'management of the business of the 
company, being the beneficial owner of shares, 
not being sllares entitled to a fixed rate of 
dividend whether with or without a right to 
participate in profits, carrying not less than twenty per 
cent. of the voting power), and any sum paid by any 
such company in respect of any obUgation which but 
for such payment would have been payable by the 
director or other person aforesaid; 
(iv) any sum deemed to be profits under the second 
proviso to clause (vii) of sub-section (2) of section 10, 
and any sum deemed to be profits and gains under sub-
section (2A) of th8t section or under sub-section (5) of 
section 12; 
(v) uy sum deemed to be profits and gains of 
business, profession or vocation under sub-section (SA) 
of section 10; 
(vi) any capital gain chargeable under section 12B; 

5 
(vii) the profits and gains of any business of in-
surance carried on by a mutual insurance aBBOCiation or 
by a co-operative society computed in accordance with 
rule 9 in the Schedule;"; 
(4) after clause (8), the following clause shall be inserted, 5 
namely:-
II (8A) 'manager' and 'managing agent' have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in the Indian Companies Act, 
1913 (VII of 1913). 
4. Amendment of section 4, Act XI of 1922.-ln section 4 of the 10 
Income-tax Act,-
(a) in the fifth proviso to sub-section (1), for clauses (i), (ii) 
and (iii), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
.. (i) such income, profits and gains are brought into or 
received in the taxable territories after the 2nd day of 15 
September, 1951, and the amount of income-tax, interest or 
penalty or other sum, if any, due from such person under this 
Act on the date of receipt of such income, profits and gains 
in the taxable territories is paid within three months of the 
receipt thereof in the taxable territories; and 20 
(ii) in any case where such income, profits and gains are 
brought into or received in the taxable territories after the 
2nd day of September, 1951, and before the 30th day of 
September, 1954, half of the amount of such income, profits 
and gains is invested within three months of the receipt 25 
thereof in the taxable territories in securities of the Central 
Government or of a State Government purchased through 
the Reserve Bank of India and kept with the said Bank for 
• custody for a minimum period of two years."; 
(b) in sub-section (3),-
(1) for paragraph (a) of the proviso to clause (i), the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
30 
.. (a) if it is applied to religious or charitable pur-
poses without the taxable territories, but in the following 
cases, namely: - 35 
(i) where the property is held under trust or 
other legal obligation created before the commence-
ment of the Indian Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 
1953 (25 of 1953) and the income therefrom is appli-
ed to such purposes without the taxable territories; 40 , 
and 
(ii) where the property is held under trusi or 
other legal obligation created after such commence-
ment, and the income therefrom is applied without 
the taxable territories to charitable purposes which 45 
tend to promote international welfare in which India 
is interested, 

5 . 
10 
r5 
20 
25 
30 
35 
. 45 
6 
the Central Board of Revenue may, by general or 
special order, direct that it shall not be incluaed in the 
total income;"; 
(2) for clause (vi), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(vi) Any special allowance or benefit, not being 
in the nature of an entertainment allowance and not be-
ing a perquisite within the meaning of sub-section (1) 
of section 7, specifically granted. to meet expenses wholly 
and necessarily incurred in the performance of the duties 
of an office or employment of profit, to the extent to 
which such expenses are actually incurred for that pur-
pose,"j 
(3) after clause (xiv), the following clause shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(xiva) Any income chargeable under the head 
"salaries" received by or due to any person, not being a 
citizen of India, during the financial year in which he 
arrived in India and the financial year next following 
as remuneration for services rendered by him as a 
technician in any business carried on in India in any 
case where such person was not resident therein in any 
of the four fbwicial years immediately preceding the 
financial year in which he arrived in India: 
Provided that where during the financial year of 
arrival and the year next following, such person has been 
in India for a period of, or for periods amounting ill all 
to, three hundred and sixty five days or more, ohly so 
much of the income aforesaid as is received by or due to 
him during the financial year in which he arrived in 
India shall not be included in his total income."; 
(4) for clause (xvii). the following clauSes shall • be 
substituted, namely:-
"(xvii) Interest on the 3l per cent. 10 year Treasury 
Savings Deposit Certificates or the monthly payments on 
the 15 Year Annuity Certificates issued by or under the 
authority of the Central Government for an amount not 
exceeding the maximum amount which is pennitted to 
be invested therein; 
(.rviia) Interest on deposits in Post Oftlce Savings 
Bank, Post Otftce Cash Certiftcates, Post Oftlce National 
Savings Certificates and Post omce 10 Year National 
Plan Certificates for amounts not exceeding in each case 
the maximum amount which is permitted to be deposit-
ed or invested therein."; 
(5) after clause (3:3:), the following clauses shall be 
IDserted, namely:-
" (=). Any income of a member of a Scheduled 
Tribe, as defined in clause (25) of article 368 of the 
Constitution, residing in any area apeclfled in Part A or 
Part B of the table appended to paraaraph 20 of the 

7 
Sixth Schedule to the CoJastitution, provided that such 
member is not in the service of Government; 
(xxii) Any payment made, whether in cash or in 
kind, by the Central Government or any State Govern-
ment in pursuance of gallantry awards instituted or S 
approved by the Central Government." 
5. Amendment of section 7, Ad XI of 19ZZ,-In sub-section (1) of 
section 7 of the Income-tax Act,-
• 
(1) for the words "whether paid or not, or are paid by or 
on behalf of", the words "whether paid or allowed or not, or are. 10 
paid or allowed by or on behalf of" shall be substituted: 
(2) to the first proviso, the words "or in respect of any sum 
not exceeding five hundred rupees expended by him on the 
purchase of books and other publications necessary for the pur-
pose of his duties:" shall be added at the end: IS 
(3) for Explanation 1, the following Explanation. shall' be 
substituted, namely:-
"E:rplanation I.-For the purposes of this section, 
'perquiSIte' includes- . 
(i) the right of an assessee to occu~y free of rent 20 
as a place of residence any premises prOVIded by his em-
ployer; 
(ii) the value of any benefit or amenity granted or, 
provided by a company free of cost or at concessional 
rate to an employee whO' is a director thereof or who is 2S 
substantially interested in the company within the mean-
ing of sub-clause (iii) of clause (6C) of section 2: 
(iii) the value of any benefit or amenity granted or 
provided to an assessee [not being an assessee to whom 
the provisions of clause (ii) apply] by his employer free 30 
of cost or at concessional rate in any case where the in-
come of the assessee under the head "salaries" exclusive 
of the value of all benefits or amenities not provided for 
by way of monetary payment exceeds eighteen thousand 
rupees: 3S 
(iv) any sum paid by the employer in respect of any 
obligation which but for such payment would have been 
payable by the assessee; and 
(v) any sum payable by the employer, whether 
directly or through a fund to which the provisions of 40 
Chapters lXA and IXB do not apply, to effect an assur-
ance on the life of the assessee or In respect of a contract 
for an annuity on the life of the assessee."; 
(4) In Explanation 2, for the words beginning with "A pay-
ment due to" and ending with the words "not by way of 4S 
remuneration for past services:", the following' shall be substi-
tuted, namely: - . 
"For the purposes of this section, 'profits in lieu of salary' 
includes,-
(i) the amount of any compensation due to or ,0 
received by an assessee from his employer or former 

5 
8 
employer at or in connection with, the termination of 
his employment, whether solely 88 compensation for loss 
of employment or for any other consideration; 
(ii) any payment due to or received by an aaSesaee 
from an employer or former employer or from a provi-
dent or other fund, to the extent to which it does not 
consist of contributions by the assessee or interest on 
such contributions: ". 
G. Ameuclment of section 8, Act Xl of ItZZ.-In the first proviso 
10 to section 8 of the Income-tax Act, for the words "in respect of any 
lAUD deducted from such interest by way of commission by a banker 
realizing such interest on behalf of the assessee", the words "in res-
pect of any reasonable sum deducted by a banker from such interest 
by way of commission or paid to any other penon by way of 
IS l'2IIluneration for realizing such interest on behalf of the assessee" 
aball be substituted. 
20 
30 
35 
45 
7. Ameadmeat of SediOD I, Act XI of IIZ2.-In section 9 of the 
Income-tax Act,-
(1) for the first proviso to sub-section (2), the following 
proviso shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that, where the property is in the occupation 
of the owner for the purposes of his own residence, the annual 
value thereof shall first be determined in the same manner 
as if the property had been let to a tenant and the amount 10 
determined shall be reduced by one-half of it or eighteen 
hundred rupees, whichever is less, so however that where 
the sum so reduced exceeds ten per cent. of the total income 
of the owner, the annual value of the property shall be deem-
ed to be ten per cent. of such total income;"; 
(2) in clause (a) of the third proviso to sub-section (2) I the 
words "or one-eighth of the annual value of the property, which-
ever is less," shall be omitted; 
(3) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall-be 
substituted, namely:-
" (4) For the purposes of this section-
(a) the holder of an impartible estate shall be deem-
ed to be the individual owner of all the properties com-
prised in the estate; 
(b) a member of a co-operative society to whom a 
building built by the society is allotted or leased under 
a house-building scheme of the society shall be deemed 
to be the owner of that building." 
8. Amendment of section 10, Act XI of ItZZ.-In section 10 of the 
inCome-tax Act,-
in sub-sec~ion (2),-
(i) in clause (vi),-
(a) for the words "or the,machinery or plant being 
.ew has been installed," the words "or the machinery or 

9 
plant being new, not being machinery or plant entitled 
to the development rebate under clause (vib), has been 
installed," shall be substituted; , 
(b) in paragraph (c) of the proviso, for the worda 
"the aggregate of all such allowances made under this 5 
Act or any Act repealed hereby", the words "the aggre-
gate of all allowances in respect of depreciation made 
under this clause and clause (via) or under any Act re-
pealed hereby," shall be substituted; 
(ii) the proviso to clause (via) shall be omitted; 10 
(iii) after clause (via), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(vib) in respect of machinery or plant being new,. 
which has been installed after the 31st day of March, 
1954, and which is wholly used for the purposes of the IS 
business carried on by the assessee, a sum by way of 
development rebate in respect of the ,ear of installation 
equivalent to twenty-five per cent. 0 the actual cost of 
such machinery or plant to the assessee: 
Proviqed that no allowance under this clause shall 20 
be made unless the particulars prescribed for the pur-
pose of clause (vi) have been furnished by the assessee 
in respect of such machinery or plant."; 
(iv) For clause (xiii), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely: - 25 
"(xiii) .Any sum paid to a scientific research associa-
tion having as its objects the undertaking of scientific 
research related to· the class of business carried on, and 
any sum paid to a university, college or other institution 
• to be used for scientific research, research in social 30 
science or statistical research related to the class of 
business· c;:arried on: 
Provided that such association, university, college or 
institution is for the time being approved for the pur-
poses of this clause by the prescribed authority."; 35 
(2) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Where for the purpose of computing profits or 
gains under this section, an allowance or deduction has been 
made in the assessment for any year in respect of any loss, 40 
expenditure or trading liability incurred by the assessee and, 
subsequently during any previous year, the assessee has 
received, whether in cash or in any other manner whatsoever, 
any amount in respect of such loss or expenditure or has 
obtained some benefit in respect of such trading liability by 4S 
way of remission or cessation thereof, the amount received 
by him or the value of the benefit accruing to him shall be 
deemed to be profits and gains of business, profession or 
vocation and to have accrued or arisen during that previous 
year."; SO 

ro 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
45 
10 
(3) In sub-section (S), after the proviso to clause (a), the 
following further. proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that where before the date of acquisi-
tion by the assessee, the assets, which belonged to the 888eI-
see and had been used by him for !:.Jurposes of his busi-
ness, profession or vocation, had c to be lUs property 
by reason of transfer or otherwise, the actual cost to the 
assessee shall be the actual cost to him when he first acquir-
ed the assets less all depreciation actually allowed to him 
under this Act or under any Act repealed hereby or under 
executive orders issued when the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1886 (n of 1886), was in force."; 
(4) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section ahall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(SA) any compensation or other payment due to or 
received by,-
(a) a managing agent of an Indian Company at or 
in connection with the termination or modiftcation of his 
managing agency agreement with the company; 
(b) a manager of an Indian Company at or in con-
nection with the termination of his ofBce or modiftcation 
of the terms and conditions relating thereto; 
(e) any person, by whatever name called, managing 
the whole or substantially the whole affairs of any other 
company in the taxable territories, at or in connection 
with the termination of his oftice' or the modi1lcation of 
the terms and conditions relating thereto; 
(d) any person, by whatever name called, holding 
an a~ency in the taxable territories for any part ot the 
actiVIties relating to the business of any other person, at 
or in connection with the termination of his agency or 
the modification of the terms and conditions relating 
thereto, 
shall be deemed to be profits and gains of a business carried 
on by the managing agent, manager or other_person, as the 
case may be, ana shall be liable to tax accordingly; and the 
tax on such compensation or other payment shall, if the 
assessee so elects, be computed at the average of the rates of 
income-tax and super-tax appUcable to his total income for 
the three years immediately preceding the previous year in 
which the compensation or other payment wu due or 
received." 
•• Amendmellt of sedion 12, Ad XI of IftZ.-In section 12 of the 
Income-tax Act,-
(1) in Bub-section (2), after the words "for the purpose of 
making or earning such income, profits or gains", the w.ords "and 
further in the case of any income by way of dividend, for any 
reasonable sum paid by way of commission or remuneration to a 
banker or any other person realisin« such dividend on behalf 
of the assessee" .hall be inserted; . 

11 
(2) after sub-.section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(5) The provisions of sub-section (2A) of section 10 
shall apply, so far as may be, in computing income, proftts 
and gams of an assessee under this section as they apply in S 
computing proftts or gains of an assessee under that section." 
10. Ameudment of section 14, Ad XI of IIZ2.-In section 14 of the 
Income-tax Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall 
be inserted, namely:- . 
"(3) The tax shall not be payable by a co-operative society, 10 
including a co-operative society carrying on tlie business of 
banking-
(i) in respect of proftts and gains of business carried on 
by it; 
(ii) in respect of interest and dividends derived from its IS 
investments w}th any other co-operative society; 
(iii) in respect of any income derived from the letting 
of godowns or warehouses for storage, processing or facilita-
ting the marketing of commodities; 
(iv) in respect of any interest on securities chargeable 20 
under section 8 or any income from property chargeable 
under section 9, where the total income of such society does 
not exceed twenty thousand rupees and the society is not a 
housing society or an urban consumers' society or a society 
carrying on transport business: 2S 
Provided that nothihg contained in this sub-section shan 
anply to-
(i) the Sanikatta Saltowners' Society in the State of 
Bombay; 
• (ii) a co-operative society carrying on insurance busi- 30 
ness in respect of the proftts and gains of that business com-
puted in accordance with rule 9 in the Schedule. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, an "urban 
consumers' co-operative society" means a society for the beneftt 
of consumers within the limits of a municipal corporation, 35 
municipality, municipal committee, notified area committee, 
town area or cantonment. 
(4) The tax shall not be payable by an assessee, who is a 
member of a co-operative society, in respect of any dividends 
received by him from the society. 40 • (5) The tax shall not be payable by an assessee, which is an 
authority constituted under any law for the time being in force 
for the marketing of commodities, in respect of any income derlv-
ed from the letting of godowns or warehouses for storage, pro-
cessing or facilitating the marketing of commodities." 
11. Amendment of seetlon 15, Ad XI of IUZ.-In sub-section (3) 
of section 15 of the Income-tax Act, for the words "exceed in the 
case of an individual, one-sixth of the total income of the assessee or 
45 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
12 
six thousand rupees, whichever is less, and in the case of a Hindu 
undivided family, one-sixth of the total income of the al8e8lee .. 
twelve thousand rupees, whichever is less", the following shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"exceed in the case of an individual, one-fifth of the total in-
come of the assessee or eight thousand rupees, whichever is less, 
and in the case of a Hindu undivided family, one-fifth of the total 
income of the assessee or sixteen thousand rupees, whichever t. 
less." 
I%. AmeDdmeut of section 15C, Ad XI of ItZ2.-ln sub-section 
(5) of section 15C of the Income-tax Act, the words "and for the 
purposes of that section, the expression 'assessable income' shall be 
deemed to include the profits or gains in respect of which the tax 
is not payable under this section" shall be omitted. 
13. Ameadmeat of section 16, Ad XI of ltZZ.-ln sub-section (1) 
of section 16 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (0), for the worda, 
figures and brackets "sub-section (2) of section 14", the words, 
figures and brackets "sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 
14" shall be substituted .. 
14. Amendment of section 18A, Ad XI of ItZ2.-In sub-section (5) 
of section 18A of the Income-tax Act, for the words "The Central 
Government shall pay on any amount paid under this section simple 
interest at two per cent. per annum from the date of payment", the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"The Central Government shan pay simple interest-
(i) at two per cent. per annum on any amount payable 
in accordance with the provisions of this section before the 
1st day of April, 1955, and paid accordingly; 
(ii) at four per cent. per annum on any amount payable 
in accordance with the/rovisions of this section after thE' 1st 
day of April, 1955, an paid accordingly: 
from the date of payment". 
15. Amendment of section Z3A, Act XI of Itzz.-For sectlon 23A. 
of the Income-tax Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
35 namely:-
40 
45 
"23A. Power to a.BSeSB companie. to IUper-taz on undiltribu&-
ed income in certain ca.e •. - (1) Where the Income-tax Oftlcer is 
satisfied that in respect of any previous year the profits and gainI 
distributed as dividends by any company within the twelve 
menths immediately following the expiry of that previous year 
are less than.sixty per cent. of the total income of the company 
of that previous year as reduced by-
(a) the amount of income-tax and super-tax payable by 
the company in respect of its total income, but excluding the 
amount of any super-tax payable under this section; 
(b) the amount of any other tax levied under any law 
for the time being in force on the company by the GOvem-
ment or by a local authority in excess of the amount, If any, 
which has been allowed in computing the total income; and 

13 
(c) in the case of a banking company, the amount actu-
ally transferred to a reserve fund under section 17 of the 
Banking Companies Act, 1949 (X of 1949); 
the Income-tax Officer shall, unless he is satisfied that, having 
regard to losses incurred by the company in earlier years or to S 
the smallness of the profits made in the previous year, the 
payment of a dividend or a lar~er dividend than that declared 
would be unreasonable, make, WIth the previous approval of the 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, an order in writing that the 
company shall, apart from the sum determined as payable by it 10 
on the basis of the assessment under section 23. be liable to pay 
super-tax at the rate of four annas in the rupee on the undistri-
buted balance of the total income of the previous year, that is 
to say, on the total income reduced by the amounts, if any, 
referred to in clause (a), clause (b), or clause (c) and the 15 
dividends actually distributed, if any: 
Provided that-
(a) in the case of a company whose income is derived 
mainly from investments or from dealings in investments, 
and 20 
(b) in the case of any other company where the 
reserves representing accumulations of past profits which 
have not been the subject of an order under this sub-section, 
exceed either the aggregate of-
(i) the paid up capital of the company exclusive of 25 
the capital, if any, created out of its profits and gain8 
which have not been the subject of an order under this 
sub-section, and 
(ii) any loan capital which is the property of the 
shareholders, 30 
or the actual cost of the fixed assets of the company, which-
ever of these is greater, 
this section shall apply as if for the words, "sixty per cent. of 
the total income", wherever they occur, the words "the whole 
of the total income" had been substituted. 35 
(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made-
(i) in the case of a company referred to in clause (a) of 
the proviso to that sub-section, which has distributed not 
less than ninety per cent. of its total income as reduced by 
the amounts, if any, referred to in clause (a), clause (b) or 40 
clause (c) of that sub-section, or 
(ii) in the case of any other company which has distri-
buted not less than fiftyfive per cent. of its total incomE! as 
reduced by the amounts, if any, aforesaid, or 
(iii) in any case where according to the return made by 45 
a company under section 22, it has distributed not less than 
sixty per cent. of its total income as reduced by the amounts, 
if any, aforesaid, but in the assessment made by the Income-
tax Officer under section 23 a higher total income is arrived 

, 
10 
IS 
2S 
30 
3S 
4' 
14 
at, and the difterence in the total income does not arise out 
of the application of the proviso to section 13 or sub-section 
(4) of section 23 or the omission by the company to diaclOl8 
its total income fully and truly, 
unless the company, on receipt of a notice from the Income-tax -
Officer that he proposes to make such an order, :fails to make 
within three months of the receipt of such notice a further 
distribution of its profits and gains so that the total distribution 
made is not less than sixty per cent. of the total income of the 
company of the relevant prevIous year as reduced by the amounts, 
if any, aforesaid. 
(3) Where in respect of anyone or more of the three 
previous years immediately preceding the previous year, the 
profits and gains distributed as dividends by a company are in 
excess of sixty per cent. of its total income of the relevant pre-
vious year as -reduced by the amounts, if any, referred to in 
clause (a), clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), but in 
respect of the previoUS year the profits and gains distributed as 
dividends by it are less than sixty per cent. of its total income 
similarly reduced, so much of the said excess, if any, as has not 
been adjusted under this sub-section in a preceding year, shall 
be taken into account in determining whether an order under 
sub-section (1) should be made in respect of the previous year. 
(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall apply to the 
profits and gains of a previous year not earlier than the previoUJ 
year relevant to the assessment year ending on the 31st day of 
March. 1957, but in the application of that sub-section to the pr0-
fits and gains of the previous year relevant to the assePl""\eftt 
year ending on the 31st day of March, 1957, that sub-section shaD 
be construed as if for the word "three" the word "one" had been 
substituted, and in its application to the profits ud gains of the 
previous year relevant to the assessment ~ar ending on the ;illt 
day of March, 1958, as if for the word • three" the word "two" 
had been substituted 
(5) The Inspecting Assistant Commissioner shall not give 
his approval to any order proposed to be made by the Income-
tax Officer under this section until he has given the company 
concerned an opportunity of being heard. 
(6) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any 
company in which the public are substantially interested or to a 
subsidiary company of such company if the whole of the share 
capital of such subsidiary company has been held by the parent 
compan~ or by its nominees throughout the prev10lU year. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, a company 
shall be deemed to be a company in which the public are subataD .. 
'tially interested if it i8 not a private company as defined in the 
Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII" of 1913), and 
(i) its sharee (not being shares entitled to a fixed rate 
of dividend, whether with or without a further right to parti-
cipate in profits) carrying not less than fifty per cent. of the 
voting POWN have been allotted unconditionally to, or ac .. 
quired unconditionally by, and were throughout the previous 

15 
year beneficially held by the fUblic (not including a com-
pany to which the provisions a this sub-section apply); 
(ii) the said shares were at any time durin, ~e pre-
vious year the subject of dealings in any recognised stock 
exchange in India or were freely transferable by the holder 
to other members of the public; and 
(iii) the affairs of the company or the shares carrying 
more than fifty per cent. of the total voting power were at 
no time during the previous year controlled or held by less 
than six persons (persons who are related to one another as 10 
husband, wife, lineal ascendant or descendant, brother or 
sister, as the case may be, being treated as a single person 
and persons who are noI¢nees of another person together 
with that other person being likewise treated as a single 
person.)" rs 
16. Amenllment of section 24, Act XI of 1922-ln sub-section (2) 
of section 24 of the Income-tax Act,-
• 
(1) for the words beginning with "Where any assessee sus-
tains a loss or profits" and ending with "three, four and five 
years, respectively", the following shall be substituted, namely:- .20 
"Where any assessee sustains a loss of profits or gains in 
any year, being a previous year not earlier than the previous 
year for the assessment for the year ending on the 31st day 
of March, 1940, in any business,profession or vocation, and 
the loss cannot be wholly set off under sub-section (1), so 25 
much of the loss as is not so set off or the whole loss where 
the assessee had no other head of income shan be carried for-
ward to the following year, and . 
(i) where the lo,!s was sustained by him in a business 
consistin~ of speculative transactions, it shall be set off 30 
only agamst the profits and gains, if any, of any busi-
ness in speculative transactions carried on by him in 
that year; 
(ii)where the loss was sustained by him in any 
other bUSiness, prdfession or vocation, it shall be set off 35 
against the profits and gains, if any, of any business, 
profession or vocation carried on by him in that year: 
provided that the business, profession or vocation in 
which the loss was originally sustained continued to be 
carried on by him in that year; and 40 
(iii) if the loss in either case cannot be wholly so 
set off, the amount of loss not so set off shall be carried. 
forward to the following year and so on:"; 
(2) after clause (e) of the proviso, the following clause shall 
be inserted; namely:- 45 
" (f) A loss arising in the previous years for the assess-
ment for the years ending on the 31st day of March of the 
years 1940, 1941, 1942, 1943 and 1944 shall be carried forward 
for one, two, three, four and five years respectively, and a 
loss arisirig in the previous years for the assessment for the so 
years ending on the 31st day of March of the years 1945, 
1946, 1947, 1948 and 1949 shan be carried forward for six 

16 
years, and such loss shall be set off only against the profit. 
and gains, if any, of the assessee from the same buatnea, 
profession or vocation." 
17. Am_tlmeDt of sectlOD seA, Act XI of ltD.-in aub-HctioD 
S (1) of section 56A of the Income-tax Act, in clause (i) after item 
(10), the following shall be inserted namely:-
10 
IS 
"(11) Automobiles; 
(12) Tractors; 
(13) Cement; 
(14) Electric Motors, 
(15) Locomotives; 
(16) Rolling Stock; 
(17) Machine Tools; 
(18) Agricultural Implements; 
(19) Ferro-man,anese; 
(20) Dye-stufts. 
18. Ameudmeat of seetioa lOA. Ad XI of IIZ2.-In section 60A 
of the Income-tax Act,-
(1) for the words "or to any Part B State", the words "or 
20 to any Part B State or to Chandernagore" shan be substituted; 
(2) in the proviso, for the words "and in the cue of the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir", the words "and in the cue of 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir and Chandernagore" shall be 
substituted. 
25 II. Amendmeat of Schedule, Ad XI of 112Z.-In rule 9 of the 
Schedule to the Income-tax Act, the words "or by a co-operaUve 
society" shall be added at the end. 
ZOo CommeDcement of amendments to Act XI of llZ!.-(1) Save 
as otherwise expressly provided in this section. the amendmen" to 
30 the Income-tax Act made by sections 3 to 19 shall have effect on 
and from the 1st day of April, 1955. 
(2) The amendments made in the Income-tax Act by sub-section 
(5) of section 4 and sub-section (3) of section 8 shall also apply 
in relation to assessments for any year before the 1st day of April, 
3S 1955, whether such assessments have been completed or not. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the ~ 
visions of section 23A of the Income-tax Act, as in force immediately 
before the 1st day of April, 1955 shall continue to apply to a company 
in respect of its profits and gains of a previous year relevant to any 
40 assessment year prior to the assessment year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1956. and also to its share-holders referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 23A as then in force in respect of their appro-
priate previous years, notwithstanding that the relevant assessment 
years in respect of such previous years end on or after the 31st day 
45 of March. 1956. 
ZL AmendlneDt of Act XXXD of IIM.-The Indian Tariff Act 
1934 (hereinafter referred to as the Tarift Act) shall be amend;;i 
in the manner specified in the Second Schedule. 

17 
2%. Additioaat duties of Customs.-When any goods charleable 
with a duty of Customs under the First Schedule to the" Tariff Act, 
or under that Schedule read with any notification of the Central 
Government for the time beinl in force, are assessed to duty, there 
shall, up to the 31st day of March, 1956, be levied and collected as an J 
addition to, and in the same manner as, the total amount so charge-
able-
(a) a sum equal to 155 per cent. of such amount, in the case 
of goods comprised in Item No. 22(4); 
(b) a sum equal to 55 per cent. of such amount, in the case of 10 
goods comprised in Items Nos. 48 and 51 (2), and in the case of 
textile manufactures specified in Item No. 49 when made wholly 
-or mainly of an~ of the fabrics specified in Items Nos. 48, 48(1), 
48(4),48(5),48(7) or 48(10); " 
(c) a sum equal to 45 per cent. of such amount. in the IS 
case of goods comprised in Item No. 47 (2) ; 
(d) a sum equal to 25 per cent. of such amount, in the case 
-of goods comprised in any of the Items of the said Schedule other 
than those specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of this section or 
in the Third or the Fourth Schedule to this Act; and 20 
(e) a sum equal to"5 per cent. of such amount, in the case 
of goods comprised in any of the Items of the said Schedu1e 
speCified in the Fourth Schedule to this Act. 
23. Amendment of Act I of 1941.-ln the Indian Tariff (Amend-
ment) Act, 1949, in sections 4 and 5, for the figures "1955", the figures 2, 
"1956" shall be substituted. 
24. Substitution of new section for section 4 in Act I of 1144.-
In section 4 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter 
referred to as the Central Excises Act), the following section shall 
be. substituted, namely:- 30 
"4. Determination of value for the purposes of duty.-
Where under this Act, any article is chargeable with duty at 
a rate dependent on the value of the article, such value shall 
be d.eemed to be- . 
(a) the wholesale cash price for which an article of the 35 
like kind aqd quality is sold or is capable of being sold at 
the time of the removal of the article chargeable with . duty 
from the factory or any other premises of manufacture or 
production for delivery at the place of manufacture or pro-
. duction, or if a wholesale market does not exist for such 40 
article at such place, at the nearest place where such mar-
ket exists, or 
(b) where such price is not ascertainable, the price at 
which an article of the like kind and quality is sold or is 
capable of being sold by the manufacturer or producer, or 
his agent, at the time of the removal of the article charge- 45 
able with duty from such factory or other premises for 
delivery at the place of manufacture or production, or if 
such articlE: is not sold or. is not capable of being sold at 
such place, at any other place nearest thereto. 
1536 LS 

5 
.]0 
20 
25 
30 
18 
Explcn4tion.-In determining the price of any article under 
this section, no abatement or de<luction shall be allowed except 
in respect of trade discount and the amount of duty payable at 
the time of the removal of the article ~eable with duty 
from the factory or other premises aforesaid.' 
ZS. Amendment of First Schedule, Act I of 1,".-ln the First 
Schedule to the Central Excises Act,-
(i) In Item No. 2,-
(a) for sub-items 1 (ii) and 1 (iii), 
items shall be substituted, namely:-
"(ii) does not exceed five hundred thoUAlld 
gross of boxes per year, but exceeds one 
hundred gross of boxes per dly. 
(iii) does not exceed one hundred IfOSS of boxes 
per day, but exceeds twenty-five gross of 
hoses per day. 
(ill) does not c:sc:eed twenty-five gross of boxes 
per day. 
the following sub-
Two rupees and thir-
teen IMU per IfOSS 
of boxet. . 
Two rupee. and ten 
IIDI1IS per JI'OSI of 
baKei. 
Two rupees and seven 
annes per JI"OSI of 
boxes."; 
(b) for sub-items 2(ii) and 2 (iii) , the following ~ub-ltems 
shall be substituted, namely:-
''(ia) does not exceed five hundred thousand One rupee and fouf'-
JI'088 of boaes pet year, but exceedl one teen anna per..,. 
hundred groes of boxes per day. of boxes. 
(iU) does not exceed one hundred Jf08I of boxes One rupee and tweIft 
per day, but exceeds twenty-five 8fOU of annas per JfOlII of 
. boxes per day. boxes. 
(ill) does not exceed twtnty..five gross of boxes One rupee and .. teD 
per day. aaaas per JrOSI of 
boxes." ; 
(ii) in Item No.8, for the entry in the last column. against 
sub-item (1), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-
"Five rupees and ten !lnnss per cwt."; 
(iii) in Item No.9, for sub-item II (2); the following shall 
be substituted, nameJy:-
Per thousand. "(2) Ciprettes of which the value-
(i) exceeds RI. So. thousand . Twenty-one rupecII 
ud eilht annu. 
Ca') c:sceeda RI. 3S a thoutand, but does not ex-
ceed RI. So a thou.nd. 
(lit') exceedJ RI. 30 a thouand, but doet not ex-
ceed RI. 35 • thousand. 
(;.,) cceeda RI. 2S a'thouaand, but does not ex-
ceed RI. 30 a thOUllDd. 
(.) aceeda RI. 20 • thouIIDd, but dor.I not ex-
ceed lb. 25 • thoUSIDd. 
Nineteen rupees. 
Ten rupees and eiaht 
annu. 
Nine napet"8 and eicht 
1IInII. 
Six f\lpeea and eJsbt anna. 

It 
(III') exceeds Rs. 15 • thousaDd, but docs not 
exceed as. 20 a thousaDd. 
(Wi) exceeds Rs. 10 a thousand, but clocs not 
cacecd Ra. 15 a thoUsaad. 
(u') c:x.ceeds Rs. 718/- a thousan.cl, but docs not 
exceed Rs. 10 a mou.aad. 
(iz) cloeIllOl exceed RI. 718/- a thoUBlDd. 
Five rupees and eiJht 
annas. 
Two rupees and 
twelve aDDU. 
One rupee gd eight 5 
IDDIS. 
ODe rupee." ; 
(iv) for Item No. 12, the following Item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"12. COTI'ON FABRICS-- 10 
"Cotton fabrics" mean all varieties of fabrics manu-
factured either wholly or partly from cotton, and include 
dhoties, sarees, chadars, bed-sheets, bed-spreads, counter-
panes and table-cloths, but do not include any such 
fabric- 15 
(0) if it contains .0 per cent. or more by weight 
of wool;' 
(b) if it contains 60 per cent. or more by weight 
of rayon or artificial silk; or 
(c) if manufactured an a handloom. 20 
(J) Cotton fabrics, superfint-
that is to say, fabrics in whicb tM average Two aunas and six 
count of yarn is 488 or more. pies per square yard. 
(2) Cotton fabrics not otherwise specified. One anna per square 
yard. 2S 
!:xplanation I.-"Count" means count of grey yarn. 
EzpIanation H.-For the purpose of determining the average 
count of yarn, the following rules shall apply, namely:-
(a) Yarn used in the borders or selvedges shall be ignored. 
(b) For multiple-fold yarn, the count of the basic single yam 30 
shall be taken and the number of ends per inch in the reed or 
the number of picks per inch, as the case may be, shall be multi-
plied by the number of plies in the yarn. 
(c) The average count shall be obtained by applying the 
following formula, namely:- . 3j 
"(Count of warp x number of ends per inch in the reed) + (Count 
of weft x number of picks per inch) 
.. -.. - -- ~ _. - . - - .".. . - ~-- -
(Number of ends per inch in the reed)' + (Number of picks per 
inch) , 
the result being rounded off, wherever necessary, by treating any 040 
fraction which is one-half or more as one, and disregarding any 
fraction which is less than one-half." 
&rplanation I1I.-For the purposes of this Item, "staple fibre" 
shall not be deemed to be rayon or artificial silk."; 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
(v) for Item No. 12A, the following Item shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"12A. RAYON OR ARTIFICIAL SILK FABRICS-
''Rayon or Artificial Silk Fabric::a" include aU 
Y8rletic:s of fabric:a manufactured either 
wholly or partly from nIyeD or anificial silk, 
but do not include any such fabric-
(l) if it c:ontainl 040 per cent. or more by weipt of 
wool ; 
(ia) if it contains cotton and leu thII1 60 per c::eot. 
by weight of rayon or artificial siUt ; 
(iii) if it contains DO cotton IIDd less than ofO per 
cent. by weight of wool and less thII1 ofO 
per cent. by wei,tlt of rayon or artificial silk j 
(.) ifmanufacrured on a handloom ; 
(CI) if manufactured by or on behalf of the same 
person in one or more factories in which 
less than twenty-five powerlooms in aU 
are installecl. 
Six pies per equue 
yard. 
20 E.rplanation.-For the purposes of this Item, Ustaple fibre" shall 
25 
30 
35 
45 
not be deemed to be rayon or artificial silk."; 
(vi) after Item No. 12A, the following Item shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"12B. WOOLLEN FABRICS-
"Woollen fabria" mean aU vuietics of fabrics Tea per cent. till 
manufactured wholly of wool or which con- fJolDmn; 
tain 40 per cent. or more by weipt of wool, 
and include blankets, lobia, rugs and shawls, 
but do not include any such. fabric if manu-
factured on a handloom. 
(vii) for Item No. 16, the following Item shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"16. SOAP, that is to lay, all varieties of the 
product known commercially as soap, in or 
in relation to the manufacture of which any 
process is ordinarily carried on with the 
aid of power, iocludins steam for heating. 
(1) Soap, household and laundry, manufactured 
in any factory whose output of such IOap 
exceeds one hundred and twenty-five tons 
per year-
(4) in plain bin of not less than one pound in 
weight. . 
Rupees five and ADDU 
four per c:wt. 
(b) other sorts • Rupees ax and IIUIII 
two per c:wt. 

21 
\2) Soap, toilet, manufaawed in any factory Rupees founee:a per 
whOle output of such soap exceeds fifty tons cwt. 
per year. 
(3) Soap not Qtbenriae apeci6ed • Rupees fourteen per 
cwt.; S 
(viii) after Item No. 17, the following Items shall t>e inserted, 
namely:-
"IS. ELEGrRIC FANS, including air c:ircula- Ten per cent. QJ/ 
tors but excluding tboec whic:b are daiped fHIlor.",. 
for use in an industrial srstem as parts indis- 10 
pensable for its operation and have been 
given for that purpose some special shape or 
quality which would not be essential for 
their use for any other purpose. 
19. ELECTRIC LIGHTING . BULBS AND IS 
FLUORESCBNT LIGHTING TUBES .... Ten per cent. ad 
valor.",. 
20. ELECTRIC BATTERIES-
(i) dry Ten per 
fHIlorem. 
(i.) storage . Ten per 
Nlormi. 
1 t. PAPER, all sorts, including pasteboard, mill-
board, cardboard and straw board, but ex-
cluding newsprint, in or in relation to the 
manufacture of which any process is ordi-
narily carried on with the aid of power. 
22. SEWING MACHINES worked by manual 
• labour or which require for their operation 
less than one-quarter of one brake-horse-
power, and parts of such sewing machines. 
23. PAINTS AND VARNISHES, all sorts, in 
or in relation to the manufacture of which 
any process is ordinarily carried on with the 
aid of power. 
Ten per 
valorem. 
Ten per 
valorem. 
Ten per 
valorem. " 
cent. tid 
cent. ad 
cent. ad 
cent. ad 
cent. ad 
26. Certain duties or excise to apply to excisable goods lying in 
factories on lst March, 1955.-The amendment made by clauses (vi) 
20 
25 
30 
35 
and (viii) of section 25 in the First Schedule to the Central 
Excises Act, shall apply to the excisable goods specified therein 
which are lying on the 1st day of March, 1955, within the precincts 40 
of any factory or other premises where the said goods were manu-
factured or produced or in any premises appurtenant thereto, as 
they apply to such goods manufactured or produced on or after the 
said date. 
27. Additional duties of excise.-When any goods chargeable with 45 
a duty of excise under the First Schedule to the Central ExcigeS Act 
are assessed to duty, there shall, up to the 31st day of March, 1956, be 
levied and collected, as an addition to, and in the same manner as, the 
total amount so chargeable, a surcharge of five per cent. of such 
amount on motor spirit as defined in .Item No.4 of that Schedule. 50 

l2 
ZI. AmeMa_t ef Act 11 .f llU.-In sectioa 2 of the Khacli aDd. 
Other Handloom Industries Development (Additional kc:iee Duty 
on Cloth) Act, 1853, for clause (b), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-
S .. (b) 'cloth' meaDS cotton, woollen and rayon or arWldal 
silk fabrics, as defined. in the First Schedule to the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (I of 18M)". 
II. DiKontbawmee of .. It d1Ity.-(l) For the year begiDlli.Dg on 
the 1st day of April, 1955, no duty under the Central EXci8es Act 
10 or the TarUf Act shall be levied in respect of salt manufactured in 
or imported ~y sea or land into India. 
(2) In section 8 of the Finance Act, 1953 (14 of 1953) and in section 
12 of the Finance Act, 1954 (17 of 1954), for the words "no duty", the 
words and figures "no duty under the Central Excises and Salt Aet, 
15 1944, or the Indian Tariff Act, 1934" shall be substituted and shan be 
deemed always to have been substituted. 
Declaration under the Prot,i.rional Collection of Tazts Act, 1931 
(XVI of 1931) 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
20 that the provisions of clauses 21, 22, 2!, 25, 26, 27 and 28 of this Bill 
shall have immediate effect under the Provisional Collection of Taxes 
Act, 1931. " 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
PART I 
Rates of Income-tax • 
A. (i) In the case of every individual who is married and every 
Hindu undivided family,-
Rate SurcbarJe 
30 I. On the first RI. 2,000 of total income Nil Nil 
2. On the next RI. 3,000 of total income Nine pies in the One-twentieth of 
35 3· On the next Its. 2,500 of total income 
4. On the next Rs. 2,500 of t.ota1 income 
40 S. On the next lb. 5,000 ot total income 
6. ()q, the balance of total income 
45 
rupee. the rate speci-
fied in the pre-
cediq column. 
One anna and 
Dine pies ill the 
rupee. 
Two anaas and 
three pies in 
the rupee. 
Three annu IDd 
three pies in 
the rupee. 
Four IIIl!W in 
tbe rupee. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 

23 
(n) in the case of every individual who is not married and every 
uDretilterecl ftrm or other aasoclatlon of perIODS. not beinI a case 
to .!lich paragraph B or paraeraph C of this Part appl1e8,-
Rate Surcharge 
I. OIl the tim RI. 1,000 of total income Nil Nil S 
2. On the next RI .• .ooo of toW income Nine pies in the One-twcntiem of 
rupee. the rate speci-
fied in the pre 
occliag column. 
3. On the next Rs. 2,500 of toW income One anna and Ditto. 10 
nine pies in the 
rupee. 
". On the next RI. 2.S00 of total income Two aanas and Ditto. 
three pies in 
the rupee. IS 
S. On the next RI. 5,000 of total income Three annas and Ditto. 
three pies in 
the rupee. 
6. On the balance of total income Four annas in Ditto. 
the rupee. 20 
Provided that-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income which 
before deduction of the allowance, if any, for earned income, does 
not exceed the limit specified below; 
(ii) the income-tax payable shall in no case exceed half the 2,5 
amount by which the total income (before deduction of the said 
allowance, if any, for earned income) exceeds the said limit; 
(iii) the income-tax payable on the total income as reduced 
by the allowance for earned income shall not exceed either-
• (a) a sum bearing to half the amount by which the 30 
total income (before deduction of the allowance for earned 
income) exceeds the said limit the same proportion as such 
reduced total income bears to the unreduced total income, 
or 
(b) the income-tax payable on the income so reduced at 35 
the rates herein specified, 
whichever is less. 
The limit referred to in the above proviso shall be-
(i) in the case of every Hindu undivided family which as 
at the end of the previous year had- 40 
(4) at least two members entitled to Rs. 
claim partition 8,400 
(b)· at least four members entitled to • 
claim partition 12,600: 
Provided that in the case referred to in sub-clause (a) DODe of the 45 
members and in the case referred to in sub-elause (b) nODe of the 
minimum number of four members,-
(a) is less than eighteen years of age; or . 

24 
(b) is 1inea1.ly descended from another member or alone 
with another member is lineally descended from any other 
living member of the family not entiUed to claim partition, and 
(U) in every other case Rs. 4,200: 
Provided further that-
(i) no surcharge shall be payable on a total income which 
before deduction of the allowance, if any I for earned income does 
not exceed the limit specified below; 
(ii) the surcharge payable shall in no case exceed half th~ 
10 amount by which the total income (before deduction of the said 
allowance, if any, for earned income) exceeds the said limit. 
The limit referred to in the above proviso shall be-
(i) in the case of every Hindu undivided family which sati&-
fies the conditions laid down in the preceding proviso and had as. 
1 S at the end of the previous year-
20 
(0) "at least two members entitled to 
claim partition 
(b) at least four members entiUed to 
claim partition 
and 
Rs. 
14,400 
21,600 
(ii) in every other case 7,200. 
Explanati011.-For the purposes of this paragraph, in the case of 
every Hindu undivided family governed by the Mitakshara law, a son 
shall be deemed to be entitled to claim partition of the co-parcenary 
25 property against his father or grandfather, notwithstanding any 
custom to the contrary. 
B. In the case of every company-
On the whole of total income 
Rate 
Four annas in 
the rupee. 
• 
Surcharge 
One-twentieth of 
the rate speci-
fied in the pre-
ceding column : 
Provided that in the case of a company which, in respect of Its 
profits liable to tax under the Income-tax Act for the/ear ending on 
35 the 31st day of March, 1956, has made the prescribe arrangements 
for the declaration and payment within the territory of India, of 
the dividends payable out of such profits, and has deducted super-tax 
from the dividends in accordance with the provisions of sub-section 
(3D) 01 section 18 of that Act-
<to (0 where the total income, as reduced by seven annas in 
the rupee and by the amount, if any, exempt from income-tax, 
exceeds the amount of ,any dividends (including dividends pay-
able at a fixed rate) declared in respect of the whole or part of 
the previous year for the assessment for the year ending on the 
45" 31st day of March, 1956, ~nd the company is a company to which 

U 
the provisions of section 23A of the Income-tax Act cannot be 
made applicable, a rebate shall be allowed at the rate of one 
,anna per rupee on the amount of such excess; 
(ii) where the amount of dividends referred to in clause (i) 
above exceeds the total income as reduced by seven annas in the 5 
rupee and by the· amount, if any, exempt from income-tax, there 
shall be charged on the total income an additional income-tax 
equal to the sum, if any, by which the aggregate amount of 
income-tax actually borne by such excess (hereinafter referred 
to as "the excess dividend") falls short of the amount calculated 10-
at the rate of five annas per rupee on the excess dividend. 
For the purposes of the above proviso, the eXJ)ression "dividend tl 
shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (6A) of section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act, but any distribution included in that expression, 
made during the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1956, shall IS 
be deemed to be a dividend declared in respect of the whole or part 
of the previous year, 
For the purposes of clause (ii) of the above proviso, the aggregate 
amount of income-tax actually borne by the excess dividend shall be 
determined as follows:- 2() 
(i) the excess dividend shall be deemed to be out of the 
whole or such portion of the undistributed profits of one or more 
years immediately preceding the previous year as would be just 
sufficient to cover the amount of the excess dividend and as have 
not likewise been taken into account to cover an excess dividend 25 
of a preoeding year; 
(it) such portion of the excess dividend as is deemed to be 
flut of the undistributed profits of each of the said years shall 
be deemed to have borne tax,-
(a) if an order had been made under sub-section (1) 30 
of section 23A of the Income-tax Act, in respect of the 
undistributed profits of that year, at the rate of five annas 
in the rupee, and 
(b) in respect of any other year, at the rate applicable 
to the total income of the company, for that year reduced 35 
by the rate at which rebate, if any, was allowed on the 
undistributed profits, 
C. In the case of every local authority and in, every case i,n which 
under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, mea me-tax IS to be 
charged at the maximum rate- 40 
On the whole of total income 
Rate 
Four annas in 
the rupee. 
Surcharge 
Ooe-tweneth of 
the rate speci-
fied in the pre-
ceding column. 45 

28 
PAM II 
ltcrtes of Supet"-tu 
A. In the case of fJVery individual, Hindu undivided family, 
5 unregistered firm and other association of per'8ODS, not being a case 
to which any other paraeraph of this Part applies-
be Surcharcc 
I. On the first Rs. 20,000 of total in- Nil Nil 
come. 
2. On the next Rs. 5,000 of total in- One IDJla in the 
10 come. rupee. 
3. On the next Rs. 15,000 of total Three annas in 
income. the rupee. 
15 4. On the next Rs. 10,000 of total in-
come. 
Five 8DD8S 
the rupee. 
in 
s. On the next Rs. 10,000 of total in-
come. 
Six annas in 
the rupee. 
6. On the next Rs .. 20,000 of total in- Seven annas in 
20 come. the rupee. 
7. On the next Rs. 20,000 of total in':' Eight annas in 
come. the rupee. 
S. On the next Rs. 50,000 of total in- Nine BI1DIIS in 
come. the rupee. 
25 9. On the balance of total income. Nine and a half 
anD8S in the 
rupee. 
B. In the case of every local authority:-
Rate 
One-twentieth of 
the rate spe-
cified in the pre-
ceding column. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. .. 
Surcharge 
30 On the whole of total income • Two and a half Three pies in the 
annas in the rupee. 
rupee. 
C. In the case of an association of persons being a co-operative 
society as defined in clause (5B) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act 
35 (other than the Sanikatta Saltowners' Society in the State of 
Bombay)-
I. On the fim Rs. 25,000 of total in-
come 
~ 2. On the baIul<:e of total iacome 
Rate 
Nil 
Surcharge 
Nil 
Two and a half Three pies in the 
UIDI6 in the rupee. 
rupee. 

27 
D. 1ft the case of every company:-
Oa the whole of tDtal iDcome. • 
Provided that-
Rate 
. Four aaau ad 
Dille pies in the 
rupee : 
(i) a rebate at the rate of three annas per rupee of the total 
income shall be allowed in the case of any company which-
5 
(a) in respect of its profits liable to tax under the 
Income-tax Act for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 10 
1956, has made the prescribed arrangements for the declara-
tion and payment in India of the dividend payable 
out of such profits and for the deduction of super-
tax from dividends in accordance with the provisions of sub- IS 
section (3D) of section 18 of that Act, and 
(b) is a public company with total income not exceeding 
Rs. 25,000; 
(ii) a rebate at the rate of two annas per rupee of the total 
income shall be allowed in the case of any company which satis-
fies condition (a) but not condition (b), of the precedtng clause; 20 
and 
(iii) a rebate at the rate of one anna and six pies per rupee 
on so much of the total income as consists of dividends from a 
subsidiary Indian company, and a rebate at the rate of, six pies 
per rupee on any other income included in the total income shall 25 
• be allowed in the case of any company which, not being entitled 
to a rebate under either of the preceding clauses, is-
(a) a public company, or 
(b) a company all of whose shares were held at the end 
of the previous year by one or more public companies: 30 
Provided further that the super-tax payable by a company 
the total income of which exceeds Rs. 25,000 shall not exceed 
the aggregate of- . 
(a) the super-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been Rs. 25,000, and 35 
(b) half the amount by which its total income exceeds 
Rs. 25,000. 
Exp14'114tion.-For the purposes of this paragraph of this 
Part, a company shall be deemed to be a public company only if 
it is a company in which the public are substantially interested 40 
within the meaning of the EzpZ4nation to section 23A of the In-
come-tax Act. 

28 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 21) 
PART I 
In the First Schedule to the Tariff Act,-
(a) In Item No. 28 (8), in the eptry in the second column, 
the words "calcium carbide" shall be omitted. 
(b) In Items Nos. 30, 30(2), 30(11), 49(4) and 73(18), to 
each of the existing entries in the fourth and fifth columns, the 
words "plus the excise duty for the time being leviable on such 
10 articles if produced or manufactured in India" shall be added. 
(c) In Items Nos. 30(3), 30(4), 44, 44(4), 48(2), 48(4), 48(5), 
48 (6), 49 (a), 49 (3), 60 (2), 60 (5), 72 (11) and 73 (15), to each of 
the existing entries in the fourth column, the words "plus the 
excise duty for the time being leviable on such articles if produc-
IS ed or manufactured in India" shall be added. 
25 
(d) In Items Nos. 36(2), 37, 37(1), 38, 71(2) and 71(3), for 
the existing entries against each of them in the fourth column, 
the entry "662/3 per cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted. 
(e) In Items Nos. 50 (1) and 50 (4), for the existing entries 
against each of them in the fourth column, the entry "3l! per 
cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted, and in the third column, 
the entry "Revenue" shall be inserted against each Item. 
(f) In Item No. 59 (4), for the existing entry in the fourth 
column, the entry "66 2/3 per cent. ad valorem or 12 annas per 
square foot, whichever is higher" shall be substituted. • 
(g) In Item No. 71 (13), to each of the existing entries in 
the fourth column, t~e words "or ten annas per foot, whichever 
is higher" shall be a'dded. 
(h) In Item No. 72 (33), for the existin~ entry in the fourth 
column, the entry "37! per cent. ad valorem' shall be substituted. 
(i) In Item No. 73 (2), in the entry in the second column~ 
the words "also accumulators, and batteries not otherwise 
specified" shall be omitted. 

5 
PART 
tI 
tn 
the 
First 
Scheduie 
to 
the 
Tariff 
Act, 
for 
Items-Nos. 
4S, 
60 
(8) 
and 
13 
(7), 
the 
following 
items 
shall 
be 
substiwted, 
and 
such 
SllbstitQtions 
shall 
be 
inserted 
in 
their 
appropriate 
places 
:-
Item 
No. 
Name 
of 
article 
Nature 
of 
Standard 
rate 
of 
duty 
Prefereotial 
rate 
of 
duty 
if 
the 
article 
~uc:ror 
duty 
-------------------The 
United 
A 
British 
Duration of 
proteC-
tive 
rates 
of 
duty 
10 
Kiqdom 
Colony 
15 20 2S 30 
., 
Ca) 
Articles 
made 
of 
paper 
and 
papier 
mache. 
pasteboard, 
milIboard, 
Revenue 
66 
t 
per 
cent. 
ad 
cardbolnl 
and 
sttawboard; 
labels, 
advertising 
circuJan, 
.heet 
valormt. 
or 
card 
almanacs 
and 
calendars. 
(b) 
Stationery, 
not 
otherwise 
specified, 
includina 
drawina 
and 
Revenue 
3931. 
per 
cent. 
fill 
copy 
books, 
Christmas, 
Easter 
and 
other 
cards. 
includinc 
cards 
fHIlor-. 
in 
booklet 
form; 
including 
also 
waste 
paper. 
(c) 
Slates, 
all 
iorts 
. 
Keyenue 
39 
3/8 
per 
cent. 
cui 
N/.,."". 
60(8) 
(a) 
Vacuum 
flasks, 
complete 
Revenue 
66 
z/3 
per 
cent. 
IIIl 
fX!lor_ 
or 
Ill. 
• 
per 
ftask, 
whichever 
is 
biIher. 
(b) 
Refill. 
or 
innen 
for 
vacuum 
flasks 
• 
Revenue 
66 
2/3 
per 
cent. 
ad 
fllJ/ar.,. 
or 
RI. 
3 
per 
reJW 
or 
inner, 
whichever 
is 
hiaher. 
73(7) 
Dry 
batteries; 
abo 
accumulators, 
and 
batterica 
not 
otherwise 
aped-
RC1'enue 
3Jl 
per 
cent. 
till 
N-
fied. 
IfIr,,,. 
plus 
the 
ex-
cise 
duty 
for 
the 
time 
beiDa 
leyiable 
on 
IUch 
aniclct 
if 
. produced 
or 
DWlU-
facnued 
In 
1ndJa. 
tal 

5 
'0 
PAl\T IIi 
-------------------------------
Item No. NllIIe Qf Irtid, Nature of 
duty 
StlDHilrd rate of 
duty 
--------- ------- ----------------
III the Pint Schedule to the Tariff' Act,-
(i) after Item No. 28 (32), the fo1lowiac Itan shall be iDsened, aamely :-
Preferential rate of DuratioD e( 
duty if the Irticle is protecti .. 
the produce or mallu- rita of 
f8CtUre of cfuty 
TIle Uaitecl A Britilla 
KUqdoat' CoIoay 
-------- ----------
zlC3!) Calcium carbicle . RevalUe SO per cent. till "'*"'-
(ii) after lua No. 77 (6), the foUowiq It aID shall be illserted, namely :-
'''(7) GQaIet. lUll slana lad tIare liU1Cl . RCftIlue _ SO pel' ceJIC. _ f1IIIp-
,,,,,. 
~ 

5 
10 
PART IV 
(I) In the Second Schedule to the Tariff' Act, £Or It~m No. " the foilowin,ltem shall be substituted. namely :-
(taa No. 
s 
Name of article 
---------------- ----_._----. 
Tea . Wilen tbe price of tea : 
(i) loIoes Dot exceed RI. z-I-o per lb. 
( .. ) exceeds RI. z-I-o per lb. hut loIoes Dot ncee4 lb. 3-4-0 per lb. 
(iif) exceeds RI. 3-4000 per lb. but does Dot eueecJ RI. 4-0-0 per lb. 
("') exceeds RI. 4-0-0 per lb. but does not esceed Ib .• 4-1~ per lb. 
(0) exceeda RI. 4-U-o per lb. 
Per Rate of duty 
lb. Pour allita,. 
lb. Six IUlna •. 
lb. Riabt 1RA1l. 
lb. Ten ADDIS. 
lb. Twelve IIDDU. 
~/i0J.-"Pricc of tea" means the price which the Centrtl GovemmCllt may. baviq reprd to world pria:s ~ tea, 6x fgr dais putpOH 
from time to time by notification in the OCIkial Gazette. 
(oJ) In the Second Schedule to the Tariff Act, for the existiAg eDtry in the seooad colwnn apinst Item No. 6(ii), the 
following entry shall be substituted :-
15 ·«it) CJoUa in whicb the avenace aJUDt of yam, detennined iD the marmcr hettiD dac:ribed. it 178 or finer: 
Ex,..,u...-(tl) "Count" means aJUDt of grey yam. 
(6) For the purpose of determining the averqe count of 1aro, the follo.iag rules slaaU apply, amel,. !-
(i) Yarn used in the borders gr selvedael ,ball be ilDored. 
(it) pgr multiple-fold yam, the aJUnt of the basic si. yaro shaD be taken and the number of endI per inch in tile 
2(' reed or the number of picks per ioch, 15 the case may be, shall be multiplied by the number of plies ia tile yam. 
2$ 
(iii) The averace count shall be obtained by applyinl the foUowinl formula, namely :-
(Count of warp x number of ends pet incb in the reed) + (count of weft x number of picks per inch) 
(Number of ends per incb ill the reed) +(Number of picks per iDeb). 
the result bein, rounded oft". wbe:reftr D~8Il"f. by treatin,anJ fraction which i, o ... ~for JqOre 
at ODie. IQd disrepr4 illf IIlf rr-..:\ioD wJQeb is 'ell t~1! one-half." 
, 
w ... 

32 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 22) 
Goods on which additional duty of Customs is not Leviable. 
Goods comprised in the following Items of the First Schedule to the 
S Tariff Act, namely :-
I (I), 2, 4(1), 4(3), 4(4), 4(5), 7(1), 8(1), 8(3), 8(4), 8(5), 9(3), 9(4), 9($), 
9(6), 12(6), 13(S), 13(9), 15(5), 15(9), 15(10), 15(n). 15(12), 16, 16(1). I6(3), 
18. 19. 19(1). 19(2), 19(3). 20, 20(1), 20(2), 20(3), 20(4), 20(6), 20(7). 20(1), 
20(9). 21, 21(4), 21(s), 21(6), 21(7), 21(8), 21(9), 22(1), 22(2), 22(3). 22(,), 
10 27(1). 27(3), 27(4). 27(9), 28A, 28(14), 28(21), 28(22), 28(23), 28(24), 28(2,), 
2S(26), 28(26A). 28(27), 28(28), 28(29). 28(30). 28(33). 30(1). 30(2), 30(6). 
30(7), 30(II), 30(12), 30(13), 31(4), 31(5), 32(1), 32(2). 36(2), 37, 37(1).37(2), 
38. 40(2). 40(6). 40(7), 42, 44(1), 44(4), 44(7), 45, 4,(3), 45(4), 45(5), 45(6), 
48(1), 48(2), 48(3), 48(4), 48(5), 48(6), 48(7), 48(8). 48(9), 48(10), 4~C), 
15 49(1), 49(2), 49(3), 50(1). 50(3), 50(4), 51, 52, 52(4), 53(2), 54, 55(1), 55(2), 
5S(3). 56, 56(). S9(), 59(3). 59(4), 59(5), 60,60(2), 60(4), 6o(s), 60(7), 6o(S)' 
61, 6I(II), 63(12), 63(15), 63(18), 70(2), 70(3), 70(10), 70(II), 71(2), 71(3), 
71(9), 71(10), 71(13), 72(4), 72(5), 72(14), 72(26), 72(27), 72(28), 72(33), 
'72<35), 73(4), 73(6), 73(7), 73(S), 73(9), 73(10), 73(n), 73(12). 73(16). 
20 73(17), 73(18). 73(19), 74(4), 75(1), 75(5), 75(14), 7S(IS), 76, 77(2), 77(4). 
77(6),77(7),78(1),79,82(4),83, B4 (b), 84(1), 85. 85(2), 86, 86(1); 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE • 
(See section 22) 
Goods on which additional dUly of customs at 5 per cent. is leviable. 
25 Goods comprised in the following Items of the First Schedule to the 
Tariff Act, namely :-
4, 8(2), U(2),- 11(4), II(5), 11(6), 13(4), IS, 21(3), 24, 24(1), 24(2), 24(3), 
25(1), 27(2), 27(5), 27(6), 27(7), 27(8), 28, 28(4), 28(8), 28(12), 28(15), 28(16). 
28(17), 28(18), 28(19), 28(20), 28(31), 29, 29(1), 30, 30(9), 30(10), 34(3), 
30 40(4), 40(5), 43, 44, 46, 46(3), 47, 55, 60(3), 60(6), 61(2), 61(3), 61(8), 61(9), 
62(1), 62(2), 63(14), 63(30), 63(31), 63(32), 63(33), 63(34). 63(35), 64, 64(3), 
64(4), 65, 66, 66(1), 67, 67(1), 67(2), 68, 68(2), 69(2), 70, 70(1), 70(4), 7o(s), 
70(6), 70(9), 71(7), 71(8), 71(n), 72, 72(1), 72(2), 72(3). 72(II), 72(12), 72(13), 
72(15), 72(16), 72(17), 72(IS), 72(19), 72(20), 72(21), 72(22), 72(23), 72(24). 
35 72(25), 72(34), 73(2). 73(14), 73(15), 74(2), 75, 75(2), 75(3), 75(6). 75(7), 
75(8), 75(9), 75(10). 7s(II), 7S(12), 75(13), 77(5), 78, 82(1), 82(3), 84(-). 
8S(I). 

33 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals 
of, the Central Government for the next financial year 1955-58 aDd 
to provide for a few connected matters. The notes on clauses explain 
the various provisions contained therein. 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW Dam; 
The 28th Februat'1J, 1955 . 
• 

34 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 2 prescribes the rates of income-tax and super-tax and 
sur-charges thereon for the financial year 1955-56. The deduction 
m respect of earned income is being restricted to income upto 
Rs. 25,000/- with marginal relief up to income of Rs. 45,000. 
Clause 3 makes amendments to certain definitions in section 2 
of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (1) defines co-operative society. The concession which 
till now has been granted to co-operative societies by a notification 
under section 60 (1) is proposed to be incorporated in the body of the 
Act itself. 
Sub-clause (2) amends the definition of dividend and seeks to 
check evasion of super-tax by shareholders of private limited 
companies by drawing profits as loans instead of as dividends and 
to remove the time limit of six years for taxing as dividends distri-
butions made on the liquidation of companies. It also provides 
that dividends declared by a company in respect of which cash pay-
ment is postponed to a later date, will be treated as cash dividends 
on the date of declaration. 
Sub-clause (3) redrafts the iefinltion of income by including 
some new items. 
Sub-clause (4) defines manager and managing agent in relation 
to a company in order to remove any doubts about the scope of 
clause 8 of the BHl. 
Clause 4 amends section 4 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (a) implements the decision of the Government al~ 
ready announced to relax with effect from the 30th September, 1954 
certain conditions relating to exemption of foreign profits broug1!t 
into India. The concession is now proposed to be continued for an 
indefinite period. 
Sub-clause (b) amends section 4 (3) of the Income-tax Act, and 
(i) empowers the Central Board of Revenue to grant exemption 
to charitable trusts created after the 1st April, 1952, whose funds 
are applied outside India for international welfare; 
(ii) limits the existing exemption in respect of allowances paid 
for expenditure necessarily incurred for the performance of duties, 
that is to say, it will be given only to allowances which are not charge-
able under section 7 as perquisites and will be restricted to the actual 
expenses incurred by the employee. 
Sub-clcluse (S) provides exemption for a limited period to foreign 
technicians employed in private enterprises in India. 
Sub-clause (4) exempts from tax the yield of certain Government 
securities and Post Office Certificates and implements the 
decision of the Government already announced at the time of issue 
of the Certificates. For the sake of convenience, the exemption 
granted to interest on Post Office Saving Bank deposits and Post 

U· 
Office Cash Certificates by Notification under section 60 of the Act 
is incorporated in the body of the Act. 
Sub-clause (5) incorporates the exemption enjoyed hitherto by 
indigenous hill-men residing in certain specified tribal areas in the 
State of Assam and includes some other tribal areas in the same 
State and also exempts from tax the allowances paid by the Central 
or State Governments to recipients of gallantry awards. 
Clause 5 amends section 7 of the Income-tax Act relating to 
assessment of "Salaries". 
Sub-clause (1) makes a clarificatory amendment. 
Sub-clause (2) provides for the deduction of expenses on books, 
ma~azines and other periodicals necessary for the performance of th.e 
dutIes of an assessee subject to a maximum of Rs. 500 a year. 
Sub-clause (3) makes it clear that "perquisites" or benefits in 
kind received by an employee from his employer, such as free 
meals, free domestic services and such other supplies and facilities, 
are also taxable. To remove hardship in smaller cases, it is provided 
that the value of such benefits in kind will not be taken into account 
unless the emoluments received in cash by an employee exceeds 
Rs. 18,000. 
Sub-clause (3) provides for taxation of compensation received 
by an employee at or in connection with the termination of his 
employment. 
Clause 6 provides for the deduction of realisation charges also 
in respect of interest on securities. 
Clause 7 amends section 9 of the Income-tax Act relating to 
assessment of income from house properties . 
• Sub-clause (1) provides for a further reduction in the computa-
tion of income of properties occupied by owners themselves. 
Sub-clause (2) removes the existing limit in terms of annual value 
for deduction of municipal taxes so as to give relief in smaner cases. 
Sub-clause (3) provides for the assessment in his hands of income 
from property acquired by a person through a co-operative housing 
SOCiety. 
Clause 8 amends section 10 of the Income-tax Act relating to 
the assessment of income, profits aIlli gains of business, profession 
or vocation. 
Sub-clause (1) (i) and (iii) amends sub-section (2) of that section 
,relRting to allowances and as a further incentive to the develop-
ment of industrial enterprise in the country provides for a deduc-
tion (called "Development Rebate") in respect of new plant and 
machinery installed in a business after the 31st March, 1954, whe-
ther the business itself is old or new. This "development rebate" 
is similar to the "Investment allowance" given in the United King-
dom, and is in lieu of. the initial depreciation otherwise available 
under section 10(2) (vi) in respect of new plant and machinery. The 
development rebate materially differs from initial depreciation 

81 
allowance in that (i) the allowance is to be made at a higher rate, 
I.e., 25 per cent. instead of at 20 per cent., (if) the allowance will 
not be taken into account in computing the normal and double 
depreciation allowances which will continue to be available for the 
new assets in addition to the development rebate, (iii) the develop-
ment rebate will not also be taken into account for computing the 
maximum amount of allowances admissible or the balancmg charge 
under section 10(2). The rebate is admissible only in cases of busi-
nesses and not in other cases to which initial depreciation allowances 
will continue to be available. 
Sub-clause (1) (ii) deletes the proviso to section 10(2) (via) in 
view of the provision of "development rebate". 
Sub-cla1.l.8e (1) (iv) provides for allowance of expenses incurred 
through a University, College, etc. for research in social science and 
statistical research related to the class of business carried on by the 
assessee. 
Sub-dame (2) inserts a new sub-section (2A) in section 10 and 
brings to charge unclaimed balances and debts foregone in cases 
where a deduction has been obtained by the taxpayer in an earlier 
assessment as a loss, expense or liability. 
Sub-dause (3) amends the definition of "written down value" in 
order to prevent excessive claim for depreciation allowance by an 
assessee selling his old asset to another person and re-acquiring it 
later at a higher price. 
Sub-clause (4) provides for taxation of compensation received 
on the termination or variation of the agreements relating thereto, 
of· managing agencies, commission agencies or other similar agency 
agreements. To remove the hardship by taxing the lump sum 
receipts as the income of one year, it is provided that the compensa-
tion moneys will be charged to tax at the average of the rates of 
tax of the three preceding years of assessment. 
Clawe 9 amends section 12 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (1) provides for the deduction of realization char~ 
also in respect of dividends from companies. 
Sub-cZawe (2) is similar to sub-clause (b) of clause 8. 
Clause 10 inserts new provisions in section 14 of the L'lcome-tax 
Act in relation to co-operative societies. These societies have till 
now been enjoying 'Certain concessions under a NoWication of the 
Government under section 60 (1) of the Act. In order to encoura~e 
the 'll"owth of the co-operative movement in the country, certain 
further concessions have been given. At the same time, the exemp-
tion is being withdrawn in respect of co-operative insurance socie-
ties, which are being put on a par with mutual insurance associa-
tions. 
ClaUH 1.1 enlarges the limits for relief in respect of life insu-
rance prenua payments under section 15 of the Income-tax Act. 

1'1 
CLause 12 amends section 15C and is consequential to the amend-
ment of section 23A 
Clause 13 makes some consequential changes in section 16 of the 
Income-tax Act relating to inclusions and exclusions from total 
income. 
Clause 14 increases the rate of interest payable by Government 
under section 18A of the Income-tax Act on excess payments of 
advance tax from two per cent. to four per cent. 
Clause 15 substitutes a new section for section 23A of the Income-
tax Act dealing with the compulsory distribution of dividends in the 
case of private companies. The amendment is intended to tighten up 
the provisions for preventing avoidance of. super-tax by share-
holders of private companies resulting from insufficient distribution 
or non-distribution of dividends, in proper time. It is further provid-
ed that the companies falling under that section shall pay super-
tax on the undistributed income, subject to certain adjustments, at 
a fiat rate of four annas per rupee. This super-tax is payable, apart 
from the income-tax and super-tax payable by the company on its 
total iAcome in the ordinary course, and the shareholders will not 
get any credit for it in thelr assessments. In order to provide for 
extenuating cases, certain further deductions are permitted in deter-
mining the distributable income, while excess dividends distributed 
in the three preceding years are allowed to be carried forward. 
The new provisions also require the Income-tax Officer to give an 
opportunity to the company to make good the deficiency in distribu-
tion of dividends in cases where there is a difference in the computa-
tion of total income by the assessee and the officer owing to honest 
difference of opinion. 
Clau.se 16 amends section 24 of the Income-tax Act and removes 
the time limit of six years for carrying forward losses sustained 
in business,' profession or vocation. It also provides that business 
Ibsses (other than speculation losses) carried forward, will be allow-
ed to be set off against the profits of the same or any other business, 
profession or vocation carried on by the same assessee in future 
years. 
Clau.ae 17 adds certain new industries to the list specified in section 
56A of the Income-tax Act, the dividends from which are exempt 
from super-tax in the hands of the shareholder company. 
Clawe 18 amends section 60A of the Income-tax Act to enable a 
coDCeSSion order to be made for Chandernagore, if necessary. 
Clau.se 19 amends rule 9 in the Schedule to the Income-tax Act 
IUld provides for the computation of profits of insurance business 
carried on by a co-operative society. 
C14u..e 20 prescribes the date of commencement of the various 
amendments to the Income-tax Act proposed in this Bill. It also 
makes clear that the provisions of section 23Aof the Income-tax 
as it stands now will continue to apply in respect of profits and gains 
of companies assessable to tax in the assessment year 1954-55 and 
earlier years, and the corresponding assessments of the shareholders. 

18 
Clause 21 seeks to increase the duties on some goods specified 
, in the Second Schedule. The duty on certain Items, such as tanned 
or dressed skins [Item No. 36(2)], leather manufactures like sad-
dlery, harness, trunks and bags (Item No. 37), dressed fur skins 
(Item No. 38) is being enhanced. An import duty of 31t per cent. is 
being imposed on second-hand or used gunny-bags or cloth made of 
jute [Item No. 50(1)] and cotton ropes [Item No. 50(4)]. Alternative 
specific duties are being imposed on porcelain or earthenware tiles 
[Item No. 59(4)] and zip fasteners [Item No. 7l(13)], so that low-
priced imports may not excessively affect indigenous manufactures. 
A duty equal to the excise duty is being added to the customs duty 
in respect of some articles on which excise duties are now being 
imposed. In the Export Schedule rates of duty dependent upon 
prevailing prices are being substituted for tea in lieu of the existing 
flat rate on all grades of tea. Cloth is also being re-defined as in the 
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
Clause 22 continues for another year the existing surcharges on 
Customs duties. 
Clause 23 seeks to maintain for another year the status quo in 
regard to the commitments under GATT, pending finalisation of the 
negotiations. 
Clause 24 substitutes a new section for section 4 of the Central 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944, to overcome certain administrative difficul-
ties in determining the value of excisable goods for purposes of duty, 
ct. section 30 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878. 
Clause 25: 
Sub-claUBe (i) proposes certain reductions in the excise duty on 
matches produced in the medium-sized and cottage factories. 
Sub-claUBe (ii) proposes an increase of the excise duty on sug,r 
from Rs. 3/12/- per cwt. to Rs. 5/10/- per cwt. 
Sub-clause (iii) proposes certain changes in the excise duty on 
certain categories of cigarettes. 
Sub-clause (iv) redefines cotton cloth on a more scientific basis, 
and also proposes alterations in the excise duty on such cloth. 
Sub-clause (v) redefines rayon and artificial silk fabrics conse-
quent upon the levy of an excise duty on woollen fabrics. 
Sub-clause (vi) proposes the levy of an excise duty on woollen 
fabrics. 
Suklause (vii) redefines soap in a simpler manner and at 
the same time removes an 2xemption. in the case of large-scale 
factories. 
Sub-clause (viii) proposes the levy of 'an excise duty on certain 
new items. 
Clause 26.- This clause provides for the collection of excise duty 
on existing stocks of the new excisable commodities lying in certain 
premises. 

39 
Clause 27.-This clause proposes a surcharge of 5 per cent. of the 
excise duty on motor spirit. 
Clause 2B.-This clause amends the definition of cloth in Act 12 
of 1953 so as to provide for the levy of a cess of three pies per yard 
on woollen fabrics also. 
Clause 29.-This clause discontinues the levy of a duty on salt 
for another year and at the same time removes a doubt as to whether 
the Finance Acts of 1953 and 1954 affected the Salt Cess Act of 1953 
in any way. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the fin3Jlcial year 1955-56. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
, article 117 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution 
of India, recommended to the Lok Sabha, the introduotion 
and consideration of the Bill. • 
GlPD-LAD-IS36 L. S.-1-3-55-2020 
M. N. KAUL, 
S,eretaf'lI. 
(SAri O. D. DesAmulck 
Minister lor Finance) 