BW .. Vc,. S of 1956 
THE SALES-TAX LAWS VALIDATION 
BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOlC SABHA) 

s 
10 
IS 
20 30 of J9Sc. 
BUI No. S of 195' 
TH'E SALES-TAX LAWS VALIDATION BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to validate laws of States imposing, or authorising the imposition of, 
taxes on the sale or purchaSe of goods in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Sales-Tax Laws Validation Act, Short tide. 
1956. 
z. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, Validation 
no law of a State imposing, or authorising the imposition of, a tax rfws ~~~ 
on the sale or purchase of any goods where such sale or purchase ing, ~~ 
took place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce during the ~h:h:=,­
period between the 1st day of April, 1951, and the 6th day of Septem- tion of. taxes 
ber, 1955, shall be deemed to be invalid or ever to have been in'-"lid ~~rch~ ~r 
merely by reason of the fact that such sale or purchase took place goods in th~ 
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce; and all such taxes ~~~~tate°f 
levied or collected' or purporting to have been levied or collected trade or com-
during the aforesaid period shall be deemed always to have been mercc. 
validly levied or collected in accordance with law. 
Explanation.-In this section, 'law of a State' in relation to a 
State speCified in Part C of the First Schedule to the Constitution, 
means any law made by the Legislative Assembly, if any. of that 
State or extended to that State by a notification issued under sec-
tion 2 of the Part C States (Laws) Act, 1950. 
3. The Sales-Tax Laws Validation Ordinance, 1956, is hereby Repeal of 
repealed. ~~~¢.ce 3 

2 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the case of the Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd., VB. the State of 
Bihar and others (1955) S.C.J. 672, the Supreme Court has so con-
strued article 286 of the Constitution that no law of a State imposing, 
or authorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of 
any goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce can be 
valid unless -Parliament by law removes the restrictions imposed 
by cla\lse (2) of that article on such State law. As there was no 
such law made by Parliament, this decision given on the 6th Septem-
ber, 1955, over-ruling an earlier decision of the Supreme Court on 
the same subject, has the effect of making it illegal for State Govern-
ments to levy and collect such taxes under their laws and doubts 
have been cast on the legality of the levy and collection of such 
taxes already made before that date. In order to remove all diffi-
culties arising in connection with the levy of such taxes, a suit-
able amendment of article 286 of the Constitution in the light of 
the recommendations of the Taxation Enquiry Commission is under 
considerttion of the Central Government. Pending such amend-
ment of the Constitution, it is not considered desit:able to validate 
the existing State laws prospectively but it became necessary to 
take immediate steps to validate the levy and collection of such 
taxes between 1st April, 1951. and 6th September, 1955. To achieve 
this object, the Sales-Tax Laws Validation Ordinance, 1956 (3 of 
1956) was promulgated on the 30th January, 1956. This Bill merely 
seeks to replace the Ordinance by an Act of Parliament. 
C. D. DESHMUKH. 
NEW DELm; 
The 9th Februaray, 1956. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to validate laws of States imposing, or authorising the imposition 
of, taxes on tbe sale or purchase of goods in lie course of 
inter-State trade or commerce. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabba the 
introduction of the Bill 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shn' C. D. Deshmukh, Minister of Fintlnce) 
GIPD-LAD-I931 LS- 16-2-56-1600 