Bm No. S of 196o 
THE TRIPURA MUNICIPAL LAW 
(REPEAL) BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
ON 22ND FEBRUARY 1960) 

Bellgal Act 
XV of 1932. 
30 of 19(0. 
2 of 1349 
T.E. 
BiU No. S of 1960 
THE TRIPURA MUNICIPAL LAW (REPEAL) 
BILL, 1960 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the repeal of the municipal law in force in the Union 
territory of Tripura. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Repblic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Tripura Municipal Law (Repeal) Short title. 
Act, 1960. ! 
5 2. On and from the date on which the Bengal Municipal Act, Repeal of 
1932, is extended by notification under section 2 of the Union r::::3r,~tatt 
Territories (Laws) Act, 1950, to the Union territory of Tripura, Act. 
the Tripura State Municipal Act, 1349 T.E., shall stanci repealed. 
2 of 1349 3. (1) The repeal of the Tripura State Municipal Act, 1349 T.E., S.vIDp. T.E. lOb Y section 2 shall not affect-
(a) the previous operation of that Act or anything duly 
done or suffered thereunder, 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, 
accrued or incurred under that Act, 
1 S (c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect 
of .any offence committed against that Act, or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect 
of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty. 
forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid, 
20 and any such investig1ltion, legal pr()c('edin~ or remedy may bl! 
instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment may be imposed as if that Act had not been repealed. 

(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), 
anything done or any action taken (including any municipality 
constituted, appointment or delegation made, notification, instruction 
or direction issued, form, bye-law or scheme framed, certificate 
obtained, permit or licence granted or registration effected, or order 5 
of supersession issued) under the Act repealed by section 2 shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provision of the Bengal Municipal Act, 1932, extended by notiftca- Benpl Act 
tion as provided in that section to the Union territory of Tripura, xv of 1932., 
and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until 10 
superseded by anything done or any action taken under the Act so 
extended. 
(3) Notwithstanding the repeal by section 2 of the Tripura State 2. of 
Municipal Act, 1349 T.E., the Chief Commissioner may, with the T.E. 
approval of the Central Government, direct, by notification in the IS 
Tripura Gazette, whether prospectively or retrospectively, that any 
of the taxes leviable under the repealed Act shall continue to be 
levied for such time and under such conditions as may be specified in 
the notification, and on the issue of any such notification, the provi-
sions of the repealed Act, in so far as they relate to the assessment, 20 
levy, collection and recovery of such tax and to matters incidental 
thereto, shall apply in relation to the tax so continued as if the said 
provisions had not been repealed. 
1349 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Tripura Municipal Act passed in the year 1939 by the then 
State of Tripura is inadequate for the purpose of meeting the 
requirements of a modern municipal town. For example, that Act 
contains no provision for the levy of taxes in respect of municipal 
services, thereby limiting the resources of the municipality. The 
provisions made in that Act with respect to elections, apart from 
being inadequate·, are far from clear. In the circumstances, it is 
considered desirable to replace that Act by the Bengal Municipal 
Act, 1932 (Bengal Act XV of 1932), which is more exhaustive. 
2. Under section 2 of the Union Territories (Laws) Act, 1950, 
an enactment in force in a State may be extended to the Union 
territory by notification, but the corresponding law in force in the 
Union territory cannot be so repealed. Hence the Bill which pro-
vides that on the day on which the Bengal Municipal Act, 1932, is 
extended to Tripura, the Tripura State Municipal Act, 1349 T.E. 
shall stand repealed. 
D.P.KARMARKAR. 
NEW DII:LHI; 
The 2nd February, 1960. 

LOI( SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the repeal of the municipal law in force in 
the Union territory of Tripura 
(Shri D. P. Karmarkar, Minister of Health.) 