I,oK SA.BHA 
C JRfl.I GEND A 
to 
TIW; CHIi' i'lLI\DS ~)I.Ll., 1979 
L-1o be/As intrqdkced in Lok Sabhn 7 
1. Page 6, lir.it=J 4,-
[Ql:' "ana.orsecnen t II ra ad "end0r semen t" 
2. P~.:~·e 10,::"n tn(} .';1.~g·inC3.1 he:lcL.n(' tJ clause 20,-
o!ll.it"the 1I 
.' 
3. Page ~2,' linR 2,-
!Ql:. "re'ls)n II ~ "reasons" 
4. Page 1~, line 36,- '~.' 
ill "contribut)n s" ntad "contributions" 
5. Pa['3 15"~ llne 
,OJ . 
I ,-
" 
!Q1: !'he !l ~ "the '! 
6. :t)uge 1 ("'; l'iDe ; 1 ,-
f)r "filJJs" ~ r~.filed II 
7. Paee 1C, 112;94-9,-
( 
for ''In sper.t on" r~ "in3p.ec.tion."-'-': 
~ "RegstrarH m.aQ. I1Reg1str~I'n 
9. F'l.g;.; 2'() , in ti'lL illacginal h(":3,ding to clause 57,-
f:) :.' I! ,.vi n " re ad. "winding " 
10. Page 24, lines ~'\4 and 35,-
ru "pr~lcti--disrute" ~ "practitioner" 
12. Page 30 ~ l:~ne '10 ~-
after "winding 11 j,p sert ''up ,. 

2 
13. Page 30, in the marginal heading to clause 89,-
add at the end -
"1 a 0 f 1 89 7 • " 
'14. Page 31, line 6, under the heading "Assets",-
.fQ.r. "Balances with banks:" 
llUld "2. Balances with banks:" 
15. Page 42, line 10,-
after "five" insert "Union" 
16. Page 42, line 19,-
for "50, 000" read 
NEW DELHI; 
February 20, 1979 
Phalguna 1, 1900 ( Saka) 
" Rs. 
50,000 " 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
CLAuSES 
THE CHIT FUNDS BILL, 1979 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMDfABY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
BUJ No. 5 of 197. 
3. Act to override other laws, memorandum, articles, etc. 
CHAPTER II 
RrmSTRATION OF CWTS, COMMENCEMENT AND CONDUCT OF CHIT BUSINESS 
4. Prohibition of chits not sanctioned or registered under the Act. 
5. Prohibition of invitation for subscriptions except under -certain 
conditions. 
6. Form of chit agreement. 
7. Filing of chit agreement. 
8. Minimum capital requirements for the commencement, etc., o~ a 
chit and creation of a reserve fund, by a company. 
9. Commencement of chit. 
10. Copies of chit agreement to be given to subscribers. 
11. Prohibition of the use of the words "chit", "chit fund", '~hitty" 
or "kuri". 
12. Prohibition of transacting business other than chit business by 
a company. 
13. Aggregate amount of chits. 
14. Utilisation of funds. 
15. Alteration of chit agreement. 
16. Date, time and place of conducting chit. 
I? Minutes of proceedings. 
18. Copy of minutes to be filed with Registrar. 
19. Restriction on opening o~ new place of business. 
CHAPTER III 
RIGHTS AND DUTIl'S OF FOREMAN 
20. Security to be given by foreman. 
21. Rights of foreman. 
22. Duties of foreman. 
23. Books, records, etc., to be kept by foreman. 
24. Balance-sheet. 
25. Liability of foreman to subscribers. 
28 Withdrawal of for~m~. 

ii 
CHAPTER IV 
HIGHTS AND DUTIES OF NON-PRIZED SUBSCRIBERS 
CLAtm:s 
27. Non-prized subscriber ·to pay subscriptions and obta~n receipts. 
28. Removal of defaulting subsc ribers. 
29. Substitution of subscribers. 
30. Amounts due to the defaulting subscriber. 
CHAPTER V 
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PRIZED SUB3CRIDERS 
31. Prized subscriber to furnish security. 
32. Prized subscriber to pay subscriptions regularly. 
33. Foreman to demand future subscripti.ons by written notice. 
CHAPTER VI 
TRANSFERS 
»t .. :lRestrictions on transfer of rights of foreman. 
35. Transfer of non-prized subscriber's rights to be in writing. 
36. Recognition of transfer by foreman. 
37. Entry of transferee's name in the books. , 
CHAPTER VII 
MEETINGS OF GENERAL EODY OF SUBSCRIBIRS 
38. Meetings of general body ·!Jf subscribers. 
CHAPTER VIII 
TERMINATION OF CHITS 
39. Provision for continuation of chits ion certain cases. 
40. Termination of chits. 
41. Copy of assent or consent to be filed with Registrar. 
42. Refund of non-prized subscribers' subscriptions. 
43. Subscribers' dues to be first charge on chit assets. 
CHAPTER IX 
INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS 
44. Foreman to allow certain subscribers to inspect chit records. 
45. Preservati.on of chit records by foreman. 
46. Inspection of chit books and records by Registrar. 
47. Power of Reserve Bank to inspect chit books and records. 
CHAPTER X 
WINDING UP OF CHITS 
48. Circumstances under which chits may be wound up. 
4Q. Application for winding up. 
~O. ~r to windin!{ u~ proceedings, 

tuttlll 
al. Commencement and e!ect ot winding \11) at •• 
~2. Injunction order. 
53. powers of Registrar. 
54. Vesting of chit assets in Registrar or other person. 
55. Suits, etc., to be stayed on winding up order. 
56. Notification of winding up order. 
57. Cessation of winding up proceedings on insolvency of foreman, 
etc., or the winding up of the company and transfer of such pro-
ceedings. 
58. Award of compensation to foreman .. 
59. Right to appeal. 
60. Limitation. 
CHAPTER XI 
ApPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS AND LEVY OF FEJ!S 
61. Appointment of Registrar and other officers. 
62. Inspection of documents in Registrar's office. 
63. Levy of fees. 
CHAPTER XII 
DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION 
64. Disputes relating to chit business. 
65. Period of limitation. 
66. Settlement of disputes. 
67. Procedure for settlement of disputes and powers of Registrar or 
nominee. 
68. Attachment before judgment and other interlocutory orders. 
69. Decision of Registrar or nominee. 
70. Appeal against decision of Registrar or nominee. 
71. Money how recovered. 
72. Private transfer of property made after issue of certificate '\laid 
against foreman. 
CHAPTER XIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
73. AdviSOry role of Reserve Bank. 
74. Appeals. 
, 
, ! 
75. Power of Regjstrar to give extension of time for filing documents. 
76. Penalties. 
77. Application of fine. 
78. Offences by companies. 
79. Cognizance of offences. 
80. Power to compound offences. 
81. Power to enter and search any place and to seize any documentl. 
82. Officers to be public servants. .. . 
\1 

;' .. ' . .z .... 
&A .. 
U. POWIf to dellpt.. 
84. Act Dot to apply to certain chit •. 
85. Certain banks not to conduct chit busiile§8. 
86. Power to exempt. 
87. ProteCti·()n of action taken under the Act. 
88. Power to make ruies. 
89. Repeal and saving. 
TIn: SCHEDULE. 

DRl No. 5 of 19'79 
THE CHIT FUNDS BILL, 1979 
A 
BILL 
to provide fOT the 1'egulation of chit funds and tOT matte1'S connected 
therewlilth.. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Chit Funds Act, 1979. Short title, 
extent nnd 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and commence-
Kashmir. • ment. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and difterent dates 
10 may be appointed for different States. 
23 of 1955. 
38 ot 1959. IS 
5 of 1970. 
21 of 1976. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) "approved bank" means the State Bank of India consti-
tuted under section 3 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955, or a 
subsidiary bank constituted under section 3 of the State Bank of 
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, or a corresponding new bank 
constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, or a Regional Rural Bank 
established under sectior.. 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, 

j 
01' a bankins company as defined under claUSe (c) of section 5 of 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, or a banking iDatitution notified 
by the Central Government under section 51 of that Act or such 
other banking W1stitution as the State Government may, in consul-
tation with the Reserve Bank, approve for the purposes of this Act; 5 
(b) "chit" means a transaction whether called chit, chit fund, 
chitty. kuri or by any· other name by or under which a person 
enters into an agreement with a specified number of persons that 
everyone of them shall subscribe a certain sum of money (or a 
certain quantity of grain instead) by way of periodical instalments 10 
over a definite period and that each such subscriber shall, in his 
turn, as determined by lot Qr by auction or by tender or in such 
other manner as may be specified in the chit agreement, be entitled 
to the prize amount. 
Explanation.-A transaction is not a chit within the meaning IS 
of this I!lause, if in such transaction,-
(i) some alone, but not all, of the subscribers get the 
prize amount without any liability to pay future subscriptions; 
or 
(ii) all the subscribers get the chit amount by turns with 20 
a liability to pay future subscriptions; 
(c) "chit agreement" means the document containing the arti-
cles of agreement between the foreman and the subscribers relating 
to the chit; 
(d) "chit amount" means the sum-total of the subscr;'ptions 25 
payable by all the subscribers for any instalment of a chit without 
any deduction of discount or otherwIse; 
(e) "chit business" means the business of conducting a chit; 
<I> "defaulting subscriber" means a subscriber who has de-
faulted in the payment of subscriptions due in accordance w1th the 3 ' 
terms of the chit agreement: 
(g) "discount" means the sum of money or the quantity of 
grain which a prized subscriber is, under the terms of the chit 
agreement, required to forego and which is set apart under the said 
agreement to meet the expenses of running the chit or for distr1bu- 35 
tion among the subsccibers. or for both: 
(h) "dividend" means the share of the subscriber in the amount 
of discount available under the chit .agreement for rateable dilrtri-
bution among the subscribers at each instalment of the chit; 
(i) "draw" means the manner specified in the chit agreement 40 
for the purpOae of ascertaining the prized subscriber at any in-
stalm.ent of the cbU; 
(j) ''foreman'' mean I'! the person who under the chit agree-
ment is responsi~le for the conduct of the chit and includes any 
person discharging the functions of the foreman under section 39; 45 
(k) "non-prized subscriber" does not mclude a defaulting sl.lb-
IC:riberi 
1001 t .... 

3 
ll) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under tbJa 
Act; 
(m) "prize amount" means the d!fference between the chit 
amount and the discount, and in the case of a fraction of a ticket 
S means the difference between the chit amount and the discount pro-
portionate to the fracti:m of the ticket, and when the prize amount 
is payable otherwise than in cash, the value of the prize amount shall 
be the value at the time when it becomes payable; 
(n) "prized subscriber" means a subscriber who has either re-
10 ceived or is entitled to receive the prize amount; 
hUSH. IS 
(0) "Registrar" means the Registrar of Chi.ts appointed TInder 
section 61, and includes an Additional, a Joint, Deputy or an Assis-
tant Registrar appointed under that section; 
(p) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India consti-
tuted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
(q) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, means 
the admini.strator of that Union territory appointed by the Preside~lt 
under article 239 of the Constitution; 
(r) "subscriber" includes a person who holds a fraction of a 
20 ticket and also a transferee of a ticket or fraction thereof by assign-
ment in writing or by operation of law; 
(8) "ticket" means the share of a subscriber in a chit. 
3. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,-
(a) the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any other law for tPe time 
being in force or in the memorandum or articles of association or 
bye-laws or in any agreement or resolution whether the samp hp. 
registered, execu ted or passed, as the case may be, before or after 
the commencement of this Act; and 
30 (b) any provision contained in the memorandum, articles, bye-
laws, agreement or resolution aforesaid, shall, t:> the extent to which 
it is repugnant to the provisions of this Act, become or be void, as 
the case may be. 
CHAPTER II 
35 REGISTRATION OF CHITS, COMMENCEMENT AND CONDUCT OF CHIT BUSINESS 
4. (1) No chit shall be commenced or conducted without obtaining the 
previous sanction of the State Government within whose jurisdiction the 
chit is to be commenced or conducted or of such officer as may be em-
powered by that Government in this behalf, and unless the chit is regis-
40 tered in that State in accordance with the provisions of this Act: 
Provided that a sanction obtained under this sub-section shall lapse ~f 
the chit is not registered within six months from the date of such sanc-
tion. 
(2) An application for the purpose of obtaining a sanction under sub-
4S section (1) shall be made by the foreman in such form and ion s~c~ 
~~~r as may be ~rescrib~q.. \ \ 
Act to 
over ride 
other 
laws, memo-
randum, 
articles, 
etc. 
Prohibi-
tion of 
,~bits not 
sanction-
ed or regi.-
tered under 
the Act. 

Prohibition 
of invita-
tion for 
subscrip-
tioRS 
except 
under 
certain 
conditions. 
Form of 
chit 
agreement. 
(3) The previous sanction referred to in sub-section (1) may be re-
fused, if the foreman,-
(a) had been convicted of any offence under this Act or under 
any other Act regulating chit business; or ' 
(b) had defaulted in the payment of fees or the filing of any S 
statement or record required to be paid or filed under thi.s Act or had 
violated any of the provisi::ms of this Act or the rules made there-
under; or 
(e) had been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude 
and sentenced to imprisonment for any such offence unless a period 10 
of five years has elapsed since his release: 
Provided that before refusing any such sanction, the foreman shall be 
given a reasonable opportunity of betng heard. 
(4) The order of the State Government, and, subject to the provisions 
of sub-section (5), the order of the officer empowered under sub-section 15 
(1). issuing or refusing previous sanction under this section shall be final. 
(5) Any person aggrieved by the refusal to issue previous aanction 
by an officer empowered under sub-section (1) may appeal to the State 
Government within thirty days of the date of communication to him of 
such refusal and the decision of that Government on such appeal shall be 20 
final. 
5. No person shall issue or cause to be issued any notice, circular, pros-
pectus, proposal or other document inviting the public to subscribe for 
tickets in any chit unless such notice, circular, prospectus, proposal or 
document contains a statement that the previous ,"anction required under 25 
section 4 has been obtained and the particulars of such sanction. 
6. (1) Every chit agreement shall be in duplicate and shall be signed 
by the subscribers or by any person authorised by them in wr~ting and the 
foreman and attested by at least two witnesses and it shall contain the 30 
following plrticulars, namely:-
(a) full name and residential Dddress of every subscriber; 
(b) the number of tickets including the fraction of n ticket held 
by each subscriber; 
(e) the number of instalments and the amount payable for each 35 
ticket at every instalment; 
(d) the date of commencement and the duration of the chit; 
(e) the manner of ascertaining the prized subscriber at each 
instalment; 
(f) the nmount of discount which the prized subscriber has to 
forego at any instalment; 40 
(g) the mode and proportion in which the discount is distribu-
table by way of dividend, foreman's commission or remUl)eratfon qr 
,~n8e8 for running the cllit, _. tile case may b,,; 

s 
I 
(h) the date, time and place at which the chit is to be drawn; 
(i) the instalment at which the foreman is to get the chit amount; 
(j) the name of the approved bank in which chit moneys shall be 
deposited by the foreman under the provisions of this Act; 
(k) where the foreman is an individual, the manner in which a 
chit shall be continued when such individual dies or becomes of un-
sound mind or is otherwise incapacitated; 
10 
(1) the consequences to which a non-prized or prized subscriber 
or the foreman shall be liable in case of violation of any of the 
provisions of the chit agreement; 
(m) the conditions under which a subscriber shall be treated as 
a defaulting subscriber; 
(n) the nature and partif!ulars of the security to be offered by 
the· foreman; 
15 (0) the days On which and time during which the foreman shall, 
subject to the prOvisions contained in section 44, anow inspection of 
chit records to non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers; 
20 
(p) the names of the nominees of each subscriber, that is to say, 
the names of the persons to whom the benefits accruing to ·the subs-
criber under the chit may be paid in the case of the death of the 
subscriber or when he is otherwise incapable of making an agree-
ment· . , 
(q) any other particulars that may, from time to time, be pres-
cribed. 
25 Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, it shall be suffi-
cient if the signature of each subscriber is obtained in separate copies of 
the agreement. 
(2) The duration of a chit shall not extend beyond a period of five 
years from the date of its commencement: 
30 Provided that the State Governm~nt may perm~t the duration of a chit 
35 
up to a period of ten years if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, 
having regard to,-
, (a)· the financial condition of the foreman; 
(b) his methods of operation; 
(c) the interests of prospective subscribers; 
(d) the requirements as to security; and 
(e) such other factors as the circumstances of the case may re-
quire. 
(3) The amount of discount in a chit referred to in clause <f) of sub-
40 section (1) shall not exceed thirty per cent. of the chit amount. 
(4)' Where the prized subscriber at any instalment of the chit is re-
quired to be' determined by auction and more than one person offer the 
maximum discount, the prized subscriber shall be determined by lot. 

!'ilin, 
of chit 
.,reement. 
Minimum 
capital 
require-
ment. 
for the 
com-
mence-
ment, etc., 
of. a chit, 
and erea-
tionofa 
reserve 
fund, 
by a com-
pany. 
7. (1) Every chit agreement shall be filed in duplicate by the for. 
man with the Registrar . 
(2) The Registrar shall retain one copy of the chit agreement and 
return the duplicate to the foreman with an andorsement that the chit 
agreement has been registered: S 
Provided that the Registrar may refuse to register the chit agreement 
on anyone or more of the following grounds, namely:-
(a) that the security offered by the foreman under section 20 is 
insufticient; 
(b) that the foreman had been convicted of any offence uad .. 10 
this Act or under any other Act regulating chit businesl; 
(c) that the foreman had defaulted in the payment of fees or the 
filing of any statement or record required to be paid or flIed under 
this Act or had violated any of the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder: IS 
Provided further that before refusing to register a chit under the first 
proviso, the foreman shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. 
(3) Every endorsement made under sub-section (2) shall be conclu-
sive evidence that the chit is duly registered under this Act. 21. 
8, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 
1956, but subject to the provisions of this Act, a company shall not com-
mence or carry on chit business Wlless it has a paid-up capital of not less 
than rupees one lakh. 
(2) Every company having a paid-up capital of less than rupees one 2S 
lakh and carrying on chit business on the commencement of this Act, 
shall, before the expiry of a period of three years from such commence- ... 
ment, increase its paid-up capital to not less than rupees one lakh: 
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necetl881')" 
in the public interest or for avoiding any hal'dship, extend the said period 30 
of three years in respect of any company by such further period or 
periods not exceeding two years in the aggregate: 
Provided further that no such company shall commence any new chit 
the duration of which would extend beyond the said period of three years 
or such extended period or periods under the first proviso unlesa it in- 3S 
creases iots paid-up capital to not less than rupees one lakh. 
(3) Every company carrying on chit business shall create and main-
tain a reserve fund and shall, out of the balance of profit of each year as 
disclosed in its profit and loss account and before any dividend fa dec-
lared, transfer to such reserve fund, a sum equal to not len than twenty 40 
per cent. of such proftt. 
(4) No company shall appropriate any sum or sums from the reserve 
fund except with the prior approval of the Registrar and, for the purpose 
of obtaining such approval, it shall make an application ion the prescribed 
form to the Registrar explaining the circumstances relatini to such ap- 45 
propriatlon. 
1 et 1 .... 

r1 
t. (1) Every foreman shall, after all the tickets specified in the chit 
agreement are fully subscribed, file a declaration to that effect with the 
Registrar. 
(2) As soon as may be ailter a declaration is filed under sub-section 
5 (l), the Registrar shall, after satisfying himself that all the require-
ments relating to sanction, registration of chit and other matters have 
been duly complied with, grant a certificate of commencement to the 
foreman. 
(3) No foreman shall commence any auction or the draw of any chit 
10 or appropriate any chit amount unless a certificate ot commencement 
referred to in sub-section (2) is obtained by him. 
10. (1) A foreman shall, as soon as may be after he has obtained the 
certificate of commencement under sub-section (2)' of section 9, but not 
later than the date of the first draw of the chit, furnish to every sub-
15 scriber, a copy of. the chit agreement certified to be a true copy. 
(2) A foreman shall, within fifteen days after the close of the month 
in which the draw for the first instalment of the chit is held, fUe with the 
Registrar, a certiJicate to the effect that the provisions of sub-section (1) 
halve been complied with. 
20 11. No person shall carry on chit business unless he uses as part of 
his name any of the words "chit", "chit fund", "ch~tty" or "kuri" and 
no person other than a person carryine on chit bU:iiness shall use as part 
of his name any such word. 
12. (1) Except with the general or special permIssion of the State 
2,5 Government, no company carrying on chit business shall conduct any 
other business. 
(2) Where at the commencement of this Act, any company is carrying 
on any business in addition to chit business, it shall wind up such other 
business before the expiry of a period of three years from such commence-
30 ment: 
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necell8ry 
in the public interest or for avoiding any hardship, extend the said period 
of .three years by such further period or periods not exceeding two years 
in the aggregate. 
Com-
mence-
ment ot 
chit. 
Copies of 
chit 
agree-
ment to 
be given 
to subs-
cribers. 
Prohibi-
tion 
of the 
use ot the 
words 
"chit" 
"chit 
fund", 
"chitty" 
or "kuri". 
Prohibi-
tion ot 
transact.in& 
business 
other 
than chit 
busineu 
by a com-
pany. 
35 13. (1) No foreman, other than a firm or other association of indivi- Agrre-
duals or a company, shall start or conduct chits, the aggregate chit ,ate 
amount of which at any time exceeds ten thousand rupees. amount ot chJt •. 
(2) Where the foreman is a firm or other association of individuals, 
the aggregate chit amount of the chits conducted by the firm or other 
.fO all8OCiation ,hall not at. any time exceed,-
(a) where the number of partners of the firm or the indivi-
duals constituting the association is not less than four, a sum of 
forty thousand rupees; 
(b) in any other case, a sum calculated on the basis of ten 
thousand rupees with respect to eacl! such partner or individual. 

Utilisation 
of funds. 
Alteration 
of chit 
a,reemenL 
(3) Where the foreman is a company, the aggregate chit amount of 
the chits conducted by it shall not at any time exceed ten times the net 
~5ets of the company. 
ExpLanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "net assets" shall 
mean the total assets of a company less the total outside liabilities, bad 5 
ana doubtful debts as certified by the auditors for which no provision has 
been made and other intangible assets such as deferred revenueexpend~ 
ture as disclosed by the la3t audited balance sheet of the company. 
14. (1) No person carrying on chit business shall utilise the moneys 
collected in respect o,f such business except for-
(a) carrying on chit business; or 
(b) giving loans and advances to non-prized subscribers on the 
security of subscriptions paid by the~; or 
(c) investing in trustee securities within the meaning of sec-
tion 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882; or 
(d) making deposits with approved banks mentioned in the chit 
agreement. 
(2) Where any person carrying on chit business has utilised Ute 
moneys collected in respect of such business before the commencement 
10 
IS 2.f 1881. 
of this Act, otherwise than for the purposes specified in sub-section (1), 20 
he shall secure that sO much o~ such moneys as have not been realised 
before such commencement are realised before the expiry of a period 
of three years from such commencement: 
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necessary, 
in the public interest QI' for avoiding any hardship, extend the said period 25 
of three years by such further period or periods not exceeding two years 
in the aggregate. 
15. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the chit agreement, 
the subscribers to a chit may, by a special resolution,-
(a) alter or add to the chit agreement such provisions as may be 30 
necessary in .respeot ~ all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(i) the date on which, or the time at which, or the place 
where, the chit is to be conducted; 
(ii) the reduction of the chit amount; 
(iii) the continuance of the chit in ae<:orqa.p.ce with the pro- 35 
visions of section 39; 
(iv) the suspension or the prolongation of the chit; 
(v) the termina.tion of the chit;' 
(b) omit the name of any approved bank mentioned in the chit 
agreement or add the name of any approved bank; or 40 
(c) alter any of the articles of the chit agreement that may be 
found to be inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Act or 'the 
rules made thereunder. 
(2) Any alteration, addition or omission made under sub-section (1) 
shall be valid as if it is originally contained in the chit agreement and 45 
shall be subject, in like manner, to alteration, addition or omission by a 
special resolution. 

5 
10 
9 
(3) A true copy of every special resolution passed under sub-secHoll 
(1) or sub-section (2) shall be filed by the foreman with the Registrar 
wlthin twenty-one days from the date o'f such resolution. 
(4) The foreman shall-
(a) supply to every subscriber, by registered post or qtheIWise, a 
copy of every special resolution passed Wl4ier sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) within seven days from the date of such resolution; and 
(b) file with 'the Registrar along with a copy of such resolution 
the aclmowledgements given by the subscribers of the receipt by 
them of the copies of such resolution. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of th,is section and section 38, "special 
~ILljtion" means a resolutioll which is passed at a meeting of the general 
body of subscribefs specially convened for the purpose, by a majority of 
not less than two-thirds of the subscribers to the chit present at the meet-
IS ing in person or by proxy and representing not less than three-fourths of 
the amount or, as the case may be, the value of the grain, subscribed by 
all the non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers, jf any. 
16. (1) Every draw in a chit shall be conducted on the date, at the time 
and place mentioned in the chit agreement and in accordance with the 
20 provisions contained therein. 
(2) The Registrar may, if he considers it necessary, direct that the 
draw shall be conducted in his presence or in the presence of any person 
deputed by him. 
17. (1) The minutes of the proceedings of every draw shall be :prepar-
25 ed and entered in a book to be kept for that purpose immediately after the 
closure of the draw and shall be signed by the foreman, the prized sub-
scribers, if present, or their authorised agents, and at least two other 
subscribers who are present, and where a direction has been made 
under sub-section (2) of section 16, also by the Registrar or the person 
30 deputed by him under that sub-section. 
(2) The minutes J;'eferred to in sub-section (1) shaLl state clearly-
(a) the darte and hour when proceedings began and ended and the 
pI...,ct where t~ draw was held; 
(b) the number of the instalm~t of the chit to which the pro-
35 ceedings relate; 
(c) the names of the sutseribers present; 
(d) the person or persons who become entitled to the prize 
amount in the instalment; 
(e) the amount of discount; 
(/> full particulars regarding the disposal of the unpaid prize 
40 Blnount, If ~y, in respect of any prewus instalment; and 
(g) any other particulars that may be prescribed. 
18. A true copy of the minutes of the proceedings of every draw certified 
as su~h by ,the foreman shall be filed by the foreman with the Re~~rar 
4S withjn fourteen days from the date of the draw to which i1: relates or be.-
fort the date of the next succ;:eeding draw, whichever is earlier. 
Ollie, tim. 
anc:l : pltce 
of conduct-
in, chit. 
Minute. 
Of proceeci-
Inis, 
Copy of 
minutes 
10 be flIed 
with 
Re,lIUII'. 

Restriction 
In opening 
of new 
place of 
buaineu. 
Security 
to be liven 
by the 
foreman. 
~ • .A ~O 
19. (1) No pe~ carrying on chit business shaLl open 11 new place of 
business without obtaining the prior approval of the Registrar within 
whose territorial jurisdiction its registered office or, as the case may be. 
the place or the principal place of business is situated. 
(2) Before granting approval under sub-aection (1), the Registrar S 
shall consult the Registrar of the State within whose ,territqrial jurisdic-
tion the new place of business is proposed to be opened and shall also 
keep in view the financial condition and methods of operation of the fore-
man, the exterrt to which public interest will be served by the opening of 
the new place of business and such other matters as may be preecribed. 10 
(3) For the purposes of this section, "place of business" shall include 
any branch office, sub-otfice. or any place of business where the chit busi-
ness may be conducted by such person. 
CHAPTER III 
R1GHTS AND DUTIES OF FOREMAN 
20. (1) For the proper conduct of the chit, every foreman shall, before 
filing a declaration under section 9,-
(a) deposit in an approved bank mentioned in the chft agreement, 
an amount equal to the chit amount in the name of the ReeJ.strar; or 
IS 
(b) transfer Government securities of the face value or market 20 
value (whichever is less) of not less than ~ and a half times the 
chit amount in favour of the Registrar; or 
(c) transfer in favour of the Registrar such other securities, being 
securities in which a trustee may invest money under section 20 of 
the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, of such value, as may be prescribed 2S 2 at ISM. 
by the StatE Government from time to time: 
Provided that the value of the securities referred to in al.ause (c) 
shall not, in any case, be less than one and a half times the value of 
the chit amount. 
(2) Where a foreman conducts more than one chit. he shall furnish 30 
~curity in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) in respect of 
each chit. 
(3) The RegJ8trar may, at any time during the currency of the chdt, 
permit the subllUtution of the security: 
Provided tha1 the face value or market value (whichever is less) of the 35 
substituted sewrity shall nQt be less than the value of the security given 
by the foreman under sub-sec!tion (1). 
(4) The security given by the foreman under sub-section '(1), or any 
security substituted under sub-section (3), shall not be liable to be 
attached in execution cit a decree or otherwise until the chit is terminated 4 
I . 0 
and the c alms of all the subscribers are fully satisfied. 
(5) Where the chit is terminated and the Registrar has satisfied him-
self that the claims of all the subscribers have been fully satisfied, the 
Registrar shall order the release of the security furnished by the foremq 
, 

II 
under &ub·section (1), or the security substituted under 8ub.section (3), 
8S the case may be, and in doing so, he shall follow such procedure as may 
be prescribed. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other 
S law for the time being in force, the security furnished under this section 
Bhall not be dealt with by the foreman during the currency of the chit to 
which it relates and any dealing by the foreman with respect thereto by 
way cd transfer or other encumbrances 9hall be null and void. 
10 
20 
21. (1) The foreman shall be entitled-
(a) in the a·bsence o't. any provision in the chit sgrecment to the 
contrary, to obtain the chit amount at thc first ins1:tlment without 
deduction of the discount specified in the chit agreement, subject to 
the condition that he shall subscribe to a ticket to the chit: 
Provided that in a case where the foreman has subscribed to more 
than one ticket, he shall not be eligible to obtain more than one ('hit 
amount in a chU; 
(b) to such amount not f'xc£'eding five per cent as may b(' fixed 
in the chit agreement. by way of commission, remunerat;on or for 
meeting the expense!'! of running the chit; 
(c) to receive and realise all subscriptions froUl the subscriber.J 
and to distribute the prize amounts to the prized subscribers; 
(d) to demand suftlcient security from any prized subscriber for 
the due payment of future subscription!'! payable by bim. 
ExplatUltion.-A security shall be deemed to be sufficient for the 
purposes of this clause if its value exceeds by one-third, or if it con-
sists of immovable properties, the value of which exceeds by one-half, 
of the amount due 'from the prized subscriber; 
(e) to substitute subscribers in place of defaulting subficribers; 
and 
(f) to do all dther acts tha1 may be necessary for the due nnd pro-
per conduct of the chit. . 
(2) Where any dispute arises with regard to the value of the propertv 
offered as security under'clause (d) of sub-section (1), it shall be referred 
to the Regfgtrar tor arbitration under section 64. 
ru8hts of 
foreman. 
35 22. (1) The foreman shall, on the prized sub!lC:riber furnishing sum·· DuliN ot 
dent security for the due payment of future subscriptions, be bound to foreman. 
pay him the prize amount: 
Provided that the prized subscriber shall be entitled to the pay-
ment of the prize amount without any security whatsoever if he agrees to 
40 the deduction therefrom of the amount of all future subscriptions and in 
such a case. the foreman shall pay the prize amount to the prized subs-
criber within seven days after the date of the draw or before the date of 
the next succeeding instalment, whichever is earlier: 
Provided further that where the prize amount has been paid to thp. 
45 prized subscriber under the first proviso, the amount deducted shall be 

·ooka, 
records, 
etc., tob. 
kept by 
~em.n. 
... -_ .... ,....- .. - -"" ,.' 12 ., .• ~.~_. 'w*'~ 
deposited by the foreman in an approved bank mentioned in the chit 
agreement and he shall not withdraw the amount so deposited except for 
the payment of future sub9Criptions. 
-(2) If, owing to the default of the prized subscriber; the prize amount 
due in respect of any draw remains unpaid until the next succeeding 5 
draw, the foreman shall deposit the prize amount forthwith in an approv-
ed bank mentioned in the chit agreement and intimate in writing the fact 
of such deposit and the reason therefor to the prized subscriber and the 
l'tegistrar. I f.t~!·,1 
(3) Every payment of the prize amount or the amount of future sub- 10 
I!JCriptions under sub-section (1), and the deposit of the priv:e amount 
under sub-section (2). shall be intimated to the subscribers at the next 
succeeding draw and the particulars of such payment or deposit shall be 
entered in the minutes of the proceedings of that draw. 
(4) 'nle foreman shall not appropriate to himself any amount in excess IS 
of what he is entitled to under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 21: 
Provided that where the foreman is himself a prized subscriber, he 
shall be entitled to appropriate to himself the prize amount subject to his 
complying with the provisions of section 31: 
Provided further that the foreman may appropriate to himself the in- 20 
terest accruing on the amount depOsited 'Under the second proviso to sub-
section (1). 
(5) The foreman shall not admit any person as a subscrihitt to a chit. 
if, by such admission, the total number of tickets mentioned in the chit 
agreement is increased. ~S 
(6) The foreman shall distribute among the subscribers, in accOTdance 
with the chit agreement, the dividend either in cash or by way of adju9t-
ment towards the subscriptions payable for the next instalment, if any. 
23. The foreman shall maintain-
(a) a register containing- .. 30 
(i) The names and full particulars of the subscribers in each 
chit together with the number of tickets held by each sub9Criber; 
(ii) the dates on which the 9Ubscribers signed the chit agree-
ment; and . - " , 
(iii) in the case of an assignment of a ticket by a subscribel', 3S 
the name and full address of the assignee wtth the dllte of assign-
ment and the date on which the assignment had been recognited 
by the foreman; 
(b) a book containing the minutes 'of the proceedings of each 
chit; 
(e) a ledger contaihing-
(i) the amounts paid by subscribers in each chit and the 
dates of such payments; 
(ii) the amounts paid to the prized subscribers and the dates 45 
of such payments; and 

13 
(iii) in the case ot any deposit in an approved bank mention-
ed in the chit agreement, the date and the amount of auah 
depoait; 
(d) a register in the prescribed form showing the amounts deposit-
S ed in approved banks as required under the provisions of this Act in 
re8peCt of all chits conducted by the foreman at his office; and 
(e) such other registers and books in such form as may be pres-
cribed by the State Government within whose jurisdiction the chit is 
conducted. 
10 z&. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 211 of the Compan- Balance-
1 of 1958. ies Act, 1956, every 1Ioreman shall prepare and file with the Registrar .heet. 
within such time as may be prescribed, a balance-sheet as on the last date 
t of 1958. 
01 each calendar year, or, as the case may be, the financial year ot the 
foreman, and a profit and 108& account relating to the year of accowit, in 
IS the Forms set out in Parts I and II of the Schedule. or as near thereto as 
circumstancea admit, in respect of the chit business and audited by audi-
tors qualified to act as auditors under the Companies Act, 1956, or by a 
chit auditor appointed under section 61: 
Provided that where a balance-sheet is audited by an auditor qualified 
20 to act as auditor under the Companies Act, 1956, a chit auditor appointed 
under section 61 shall have the right to audit the balance-sheet at any tim(" 
if so autborilled by the Registrar in this behalf. 
25. (1) Every foreman shaLl be lia:ble t. account to the subscribers 'tru-
the amounts due to them. 
25 .. (2) Where there are more than one foreman in a chit, each one of them 
JomUy and severally and. if the foreman is a firm or other association of 
individuals, eacll one of the partners or individuals thereof jointly and 
severally and, if the foreman is a company. the company as such, shall be 
liable to the subscribers in respect of the obligations arisine out of the chit. 
28. (1) No fomnan, or where there are more than one foreman in a 
30 chit, none of them. shall withdraw frQm ,the chit until its termination un-
less such withdrawal is assented to in writing by all the non-prized and 
unpaid prized subscribers and a copy of such anent has been filed with 
the Registrar under section 41. 
(2) The withdrawal from a chit of anyone of the foremen shall not 
35 aJ!edt the security given 1II1der section 20. 
CHAPTER IV 
RIGHTS AND DUTIES Ol" NON-PRIZED SUJJSCRIBBRS 
Z1. Every non-prized subscriber shall pay his subscription on the 
410 dates and times and at the places mentioned in the chit agreement and 
shall, on such payment, be entitled to obtain a receipt from the- forl-
I II '~~ maR. ,. 
Liability 
of foreman 
to subscri-
bera. 
With· 
drawal 
of fore-
man. 
Non-
prized 
.ublcriber 
to pay 
n,.crip-
tions 
and 
obtain 
recei.,tl. 

Removal 
of 
defaultiill 
subs-
cribers. 
-5:>nsIaB 
.t9srla 
Substitu-
tion 
of IUb&-
cribers. 
"(tilidsi.I 
r:sm!nol ~o 
-j,:>2dU2 oj 
.n9d 
-rHiW 
fSWS1h 
-5101 10 
.nam 
Amounts 
due to 
the de-
faulting 
subscriber. 
-noTl1 
bJmq 
19dinadu2 
'{.q~ 
-qh:>l!due 
2lIoU 
bn.e 
niatdo 
.dqi9~"t 
.8Ml10 r 

~ 15 () 1 
211oLtqrl:>e<iul! 9V19:>9'I ot llBm~MJ\FfI1M~i1 srlt 10 U12IlSli v.nA ($) 
sdt '{S19b 10 ti8lakT8t A_1Gfr'lJilSi <Ii ~ __ 1IcIlDas bssi"Iq 9dt m011 
.d3isE'J~i~¥i:aRi ·sa~~, iftiil~if1ftil\Yai'htW_~nt8 ~cm,~ 
amount of all future subscriptions from the ~:>~!U!Je> t?~ 
! 'fdM.w,aaAd'{1 ~ stiat1J~ S8ffiti'nba8oa2'i~If<m" ~).mt 
df'3_~i.tMl.'ripiiClhru.cQiiiI4b1! fDtemaft ~wquimd CSltbIatilHfr, ,Sf 
sliittf:gllfe t"'~cf~ ·diarrp;yBDm.t.sdf aHstlsel .... etbl'*"ipti., ttB 
the satisfaction of the Hllgbb • .-;rt 9d.t flO 2L '(9dil~adua d,)U2 10 et2919tni 9d1 
Pri:t;ed 
subscri. 
berto 
furnish 
security. 
9ctaZrtiE"~ i'PaRd 1 eu blldfAtd rOU61l:S:PlrllbG; lIU~riptiOBI~ reguiirl;t on PrlZlF aB1T 
Jert~c\I~ ~_. QIIlft tat9t}8 rtiidt9i1aM&i~e6 pithlwcWt9Ci#e*uttrb 8UbaefM~'O 
and, on his failure to do so, he shall be liable tosmaW arltcdn.ltlW.leci:f to ~lq 
payment of all the future subscriptions forthwith. :~ns 2'19;t 
relUlatffai 1 
33. (1) A foreman shall not be ent~tled to <;laim a ~onso1idated pay- Fore~A~l~ 
I S 1"'1~o8b~ijitrCd»Wz~'~~~~92U"U~-dI\MIr.e ~eman1P~H 
~1bP.~~ iticUNHtelMctBMlqWF.tt1jlft·lo tqi9~9'( 10 91sb 9dt m01} 2~sb future'loUia 
·(S~WlHWe"Ut.MIpU_ ~tra1sed:luMtwrt11lat~1bjJ anfdr"~a:>GCJllKf subsc~tJ:l- 10 
;_ .,MIAM ""YtMatl!6f2fO~·~iMlt-itciG.,lfb>Df ... Ufaulftir« plllit1Jsft~l\arw tions'lllF B1! 
sePiMaUIt ifdtbt2~l:1tt tpfiJW~ UtW torSJliait>9in9di befl)J'eltbli~at wri~~l~~ 
to which th4P~~ ilsp~ttrlbDj~ngtItbrrrxaDreGrSUWc6tJbkfiplio"ll notl . 
20 till that date together with the interest thereon at the rate provided 
fdfdi.sflltp~l1t' ~tWtIftOafttlli! ~ ~§Jli8f9'~~'t~I9Ap.c, 
tttPJRe~ttfI'~,1JfttsSn8ml~~mgi.e9dfs~tP_ll?rijoW.r.""'ngf.t 
:;~fi99cfjffl}amrlf~~"%t_ir1,rlfndlijy;affsnrdWl dtdfct4dgbiJIi tdbbdBe~1ta9 
pay b tife foreman the future s,,*ti~_'" _~ .. MM .... 2Qab 
2S which they fall due, and that'Itt ~ct'A~ def-ault of such payments 
by the subscriber~J~: foreman shall be 8;t liberty. to realise, in execution 
of that order, all rt.rttiJ~:>Mi/lcr1~tr6WH a\MWr~k't'tiOiIMjWwith the costs, 
jfIab,qlielS ~1IIJlf).uQdrp1foany ,~a<brtPJrid ,~.nthAsBI","i \wI.TiIl ~J)ICt 
cliHHeqfnq '{ns ~nh9bi2nc~ 101 ,!1sdinadua io ~bod Ia19ns~ sri:t 10 811iJ99n1 
30 Provided that if any such dispute is on a ~I"aza ..etc! 
s4ft111t~i~!Hf}cim; YH!!NlR-1iF'it~m 9HW~ mHf~ ni"s~fM' ~~ 
elaW~l¥toff'tW~9tfNtbJ~ftt ~~'1~f9~9~ellSM~miB!8F.Y,Jl§H\.tl-fw 
.1J!jn~h~ta~f~fHJwnlPM!P!bHl ~~c:fi%~due b9Si1q bisqIlU bllS 
0E: li (B)IsAII,Up&up&l wfIb lboJqts..., lintalDt sift ~ ~dIumiftIMd m%ri 
35 sEll:lplityrgellhpahn~iIdMHr tle!rlonii1llM .. clJJlltetot1Ma~;mi!l(!t 
s~ee~.t(il)N:t llsd,t 2291 :tOll ,Ilo'ti2iup91 rl:>U2 10 tqi9:>91 '0 9:tsb 9tH 10 
'{"'" ~!pi~atQHfi<Mm(Jp~s beP MtWte-HlMo\Qp .. d"u.ttta"~cflcbyt lIP~ 
foreman shall be deposited by himBiH2iWSl.~~cfWJ1IC'Un"n~ !tM.i~ 
c~hwrltlti Jril!eaneatt aef.~fthm~"'thfi cWotE;ediItg 1.e*p~rfIJ\ct~e 
40 arfKi~ lID 1 ....... oshllllt tmtriberc:M!Ulbd-nae'Q (~lMJlh.fP.f uaPMfrMlll§, (ffm 
fuf.tln Bliltq;rrq.tiolDl bllS 219di1:>aduC! sri:t 10 '{bod IS191198 9tH Io ~1lI.t99m 
rl~ rWlIereI~:>propearhyn;s~bidlntd ~Su~t'diIlI_tP~~~"- s 
solidated payment of future subscriptions, it shall remain as M6U~b 
ojf§ h~ jlf~trRfrif~tf1~rw~s"'{nG 10 1S1.t2il:\9H ~dT (") 
4S ,(S) noihs2-dU2 10 (1) noi:t:GH~_llli1lsn9vno:> Blli:t99m Isb9q2 -;:1'J'l9 
!Sb9Q2 £ 22Sq ot Isaoqolq '{IlS~""O:> '101 bSIlsvno:> 2i ~nU99m 9d.t ti 
10 '{ltn:!I 
-2I1Blt 
1'~~191 
ai ~mBrr 
.!xood 9nt 
&!ttU99M 
10 
ialSlI98 
10 '{bod 
-2du< 
34. (1) No transfer of the rijH~lB'oWWt~1f~~*' ~estric­
f*'l ta t*'itmi8JWr11ari8 qau besftlBd~ JIIi"'oWaJ;ltbfIJlYW~cMn.~n ~:a':sf:: 
~jn9W1u_bfotltlffR_tRtq2 Iloi.t:>S2 airlt 1sbllU ~IlU99m s 10 21,dh:>2du2 of rights 
ods Hstfe 1l0i.tuI0291 Isb9q2 9rl.t 10 ~qo:> & bns ~llit99m 10 9:>sIq blIB '1lJon of 
.~llit9'3m ~tft 10 S:>itOll 9dt dtiw 81101S tn~2 !..(1 foreman. 

Transfer 
of non-
prized 
Jubetrl-
ber's 
rights 
to be in 
writin,. 
Recet-
nition 
ot 
transfer 
by 
foreman. 
Entry of 
trans-
feree'll 
name in 
the books. 
Meetings 
of 
geaeral 
body of 
subs-
cribers. 
16 
(2) Any transfer of the rights of a foreman to receive subscriptions 
from the prized subscribers shall, it it is likely to defeat or delay the 
iDteJ'tlsta of a non-prized or unpaid prized subscriber, be voidable a't the 
inltance of such subscriber. 
(3) When under sub-section (2), a transfer is disputed by a subtcr1- S 
ber, the burden of proving that the foreman was in solvent circumstances 
at the time of the transfer and that the transfer does not defeat or delay 
the interests of such subscriber is on the transferee. 
35. Every transfer by a non-prized subscriber of his rights in the 
chit shall be in writing duly attested by at least two witnesses and shall 10 
be files with the foreman. 
•. Bwry transfer under section 35 shall, within a period of fourteen 
days from the date of receipt of the proposal for transfer by the foreman, 
be recognised by him unless the transferee is not solvent or the transfer 
was effected with a view to defeating the provisions of any law includ- I) 
ing this Act and the decision of th£ foreman to 'recognise the transfer or . 
not shall forthwith be communicated to the parties concerned. 
37. Every transfer under section 34 or section 35 shall be entered by 
the foreman in the books of the chit forthwith and a true copy of such 
entry shall be filed by the foreman with the Registrar within fourteen 20 
days from the date of making Ruch entry. z 
CHAPTER VII 
MEETINGS OF GENERAL BODY OF SUBSCRIBERS 
38. (1) The foreman may, on his own motion, convene a special 
meeting of the general body of subscribers for considering any proposal 2S 
to pass a special resolution. 
(Z) The foreman shall convene such a meeting on the requisitioR in 
writing of not less than twenty-five per cent. of the number of non-prized 
and unpaid prized subscribers, and the meeting so convened shall be 
held within thirty days of the date of receipt of the I'equisition and if 30 
the foreman refuses or fails to call such a meeting within fourteen days 
of the &te of receipt of such requisit;on, not less than twenty-five per 
cent. of the number of non-prized and unpaid prized subacribers may 
~ive notice of the fact to the Registrar. 
(3) The Registrar shall, within twenty-one days of the receipt of the 3S 
not;ce under sub-section (2), convene or direct the convening of a special 
meeting of the general body of the subscribers and on receipt of such 
a direction, it shall be the duty of the foreman to comply with such 
direction. 
(4) The Registrar or any officer deputed by him shall be present at 40 
every SfeCial meeting convened under sub-section (1) or sub-section (Z), 
if the meeting is convened for considering any proposal to pass 9 special 
resoJutiOll for amending the chit agreement. 
(5) Notice of not less than fourteen days shall be given to all the 
subscribers of a meeting under this section specifying the object, date, 4S 
hour and place of meeting and a copy of the special resolution shall also 
be sent along with the notice of the meeting. 

17 
CHAPTER VIII 
TERMINATION OF CHITS 
39. (1) Where a foreman dies or becomes of unsound mind or is 
otherwise incapacitated" the chit may continue in accordance with the 
5 provisions of the chit agreement. 
(2) Where a foreman is adjudicated an insolvent, or withdraws from 
the chit under section 26, or fails to conduct the chit at any instalment 
or on any other date before the next succeeding instalment as may have 
bl'en agreed upon by a special resolution passed at a meeting of the non-
10 prized and unpaid prized subscribers held in that behalf in accordance 
with the provisions of section 38, anyone or more of such subscribers 
authorised by such resolution may, in the absence of any provision in 
the chit agreement for the future conduct of the chit, take the place of 
the foreman and continue the ch:t or make other arrangements for the 
IS further conduct of the chit. 
20 
40. A chit shall be deemed to have terminated,-
(a) when the period specified therefor in the chit agreement has 
expired provided the payment of dues to all the subscribers has been 
completed; or 
(b) when all the non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers consent 
in writing to the termination of the chit and a copy of such consent 
i~ filed with the Registrar as required under section 41; or 
(c) where a foreman dies or becomes of unsound mind or is 
otherwise incapacitated and the chit is not continued in accordance 
with the provisions of the chit agreement: 
Provided that, in a case where the foreman is a firm, if a partner 
thereof dies or becomes of unsound mind or is otherwise incapacitated, 
the chit shall not be deemed to have terminated and the surviving 
partner or partners shall conduct the chit in the absence of any provi-
30 sion to the contrary in the chit agreement. 
41. A true copy of every assent referred to in section 26 and of every 
consent referred to in clause (b) of section 40 with their dates shall be 
filed by the foreman or by the surviving partner or partners, as the case 
may be, with the Registrar within fourteen days f('om the date of such 
35 assent or consent. 
42. Except in the cases referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of 
section 40,-
(a) every non-prized subscriber shall, unless otherwise provided 
for in the chit agreement, be entitled to get back his subscriptions 
40 at the termination of the chit without any deduction for dividend, if 
any, received by him: 
Provided thllt, any person to whom the rights of a non-prized 
subscriber are transferred in accordance with the proVIsions of 
section 35, shall, in addition to his own subscriptions, be entitled to 
4S get back the subscriptions paid by such non-prized subscriber, subject 
to the conditions specified in this clause; 
Provision 
tor 
continua-
tion of 
chits in 
certain 
.cues. 
Termina-
tion of 
chits. 
CoPy of 
assent or 
consent 
to be 
tiled with 
Registrar. 
Retund 
of non-
prized 
subscri-
bers' 
subscrip-
tions. 

fT>JiaivolQ 
Subscri"roi 
beaJdlHfIb 
to ~fIn&h 
chlPft~ 
chitdlWit,'i., 
.2928:> 
Foreman 
to allow 
certain 
subscribers 
to 
inspect 
chit 
records. 
-snimlsT 
Pr"~ii 
t iOtl ol!1ith 
chit 
records by 
foremalL 
Inspection 
of chit 
books 
and 
records 
by 
Registrar. 
\0 ~o:) 
')0 tllS228 
,tllsanO!) 
sd oj 
tUiw })sIft 
.Ul,faias H 
PowINw1sH 
of -non to 
Reser+es i1q 
BanWwdJJa 
inspect '21Sd 
cbitQh~2dm 
books .lInoit 
and 
records. 

5 of 1908. 
ot uS 
ljllibntw 
-O"lq qu 
. I! 3 llibss!) 
Circum-
stances 
under 
which 
chits may 
be 
wound up. 
-mo:> 
-9:)lI~m 
hnatml.a 
10 t:>S'ft9 
anibaiw 
:19b'IO qu 
noihllutaI 
."lsb'lo 
10 B1swo'i 
."lB'ItaiI9$! 
Illi.tesV 
titf:> to 
ni aU9188 
'I8'ItaiI9H 
'IStUo 10 
.noll1sq 
,I!tiu2 
oj ,.~j9 
b9'{aJa 9d 
-bniw no 
qu llnl 
.1sb'IO 
Applica-
tlon 8 !iWOK 
wln~..I'oJt 
up.iiifWniw 
.'lSb10 qu 
owtSU'l:;) 
linibniwo 
-O'Iq I"J 
no 2inibs9' 
,!:>£Tsvlop. fl f 
-s"lolln 
,.:>1s .ncm 
grit 10 
niw 
!lriJ 10 all 
,(fTsqmo') 
ImG 
10 'I9h:nau 
-0'10 If ... "" 

___ to 
winding 
up pro-
ceedings. 
Com-
mence-
mentand 
effect of 
wineting 
lIP order. 
lnj.nction 
order. 
Powers of 
Reptrar. 
Vesting 
of chit 
... ta in 
Registrar 
or other 
person. 
Suits, 
etc., to 
be stayed 
on wind-
Ini up 
order. 
Notifica-
tion of 
winding 
up order. 
CHSaUon 
o·r winding 
~ pro-
ceedinlson 
insolvency 
c.t fore-
man, etc., 
or the 
win' 
up of the 
company 
and 
transfer of 
auch 1)ro-
ceoedin,l. 
• 
subscriber of a fraction of a ticket shall be deemed to be a subscriber 
only to the extent of such fraction. 
50 NotWithstanding anything contained in sections 48 and 49, no 
petition for the winding up of a chit shall be entertained by the Regis-
trar,- 5 
(a) if proceedines relating to insolvency are pending against 
the fJoreman; or 
(b) where the foreman is a firm, if proceedings relating to in-
solvency are pending against all the partners or all the partners 
except one thereof, or proceedings for the dissolution of the firm 10 
are pending; or 
(c) where the foreman is a company, if proceedings for the 
winding up of· such company are pending. 
51. An order for the winding up of a chit shall operate in f.avour of 
all the subscribers to whom amounts are due from the foreman and it 
shall be deemed to have commenced from the date of the presentation IS 
of the application for the winding up. 
52. The Registrar may, on the application of the foreman or of any 
subscriber to whom amounts are due in respect of a chit, at any time 
after the presentation of the application for the winding up of the chit 20 
under this Act and before the making of an order-for the appointment 
of an interim receiver or for the winding up of the chit, remain any 
other proceedings instituted against the foreman for the realisation of 
amounts due from him on such terms as the Regstrar thinks fit. 
53. The Registrar may, on hearing an application, dismiss it witD or 
without costs, or adjourn the hearing conditionally or unconditionally 25 
or make an interim or any other order that he deems fit. 
54.. On the making of an order for the winding up of a chit, all the 
chit assets shall vest in the Registrar or in any person appointed by him 
for distribution amongst the subscribers to whom amounts are due in 
respect or; the chit. 30 
55. When a winding up order has been made or a receiver has been 
appointed, no suit or other legal proceedings shall be continued or com-
menced against the foreman by a subscriber far the realisation of amounts 
due to him in respect of the chit except with the leave of the Registrar 35 
winding up the chit and on such terms as he may impose. 
58. On the making of a winding up order, the Registrar shall make an 
entry in rus book relating to the chit and shall notify in the Oftlcial 
Gazette that the order has been made. 
57. Where during the pendency of the proceedings {,or the winding 40 
up of a chit, the foreman is adjudicated an insolvent, or where the 
foreman is a firm, all the partners or all the partners except one thereof 
are adjudicated insolvents, or where the foreman is a company. the 
company has been ordered to be wound up by the Court, the winding up 
proceedings under this Chapter shall ceue and the distribution of the 4S 
chit assets shall, subject to the provisions of aections 43 and 52, be made 
by the insolvency court '01' the court winding up the company, as the 
case may be. 

21 
A .. {1) Where an application for the winding up ot a emt is msnussea 
and the Registrar is satisfied that the petition is frivolous or vexatious, 
be may, on the application o~ the foreman award against the petitioner 
such amount, not exceeding one thousand rupees, as he deems reason-
S able as compensation to the foreman for the expenses or injury caused 
to him by the presentation of the application and the proceedings there-
on, and such amount may be realised as if the award were a decree. 
(2) On the making of an award under sub-section (1), no suit for 
compensation in respect of an application for any winding up o~ the chit 
10 shall be entertained. 
59. The foreman or any subscriber or any other person aggrieved by 
a decision or order of the Registrar in any proceedings for the winding 
up ot a chit may, wfthin sixty days from the date of such decision or 
order, appeal to the State Government. 
IS 60 .. (1) Where an order musing to wind up a chit has been made 
under this Act, the chit shall be deemed to have been under suspens.on 
from the date of presentation of the application to the date of such order 
in respect of non-prized subscribers; and, notwithstanding anything con-
taLned in the chit agreement, no non-ptized subscriber who was not 8 
20 defaulter on the date of the presentation of the petition ror winding up, 
shall be deemed to be a defaulter on the date of its dismissal. 
(2) Where an order refusing to wind up a chit has been made under 
this Act, in computing the period of limitation prescribed for any suit 
or other legal proceedings (other than a suit or application in respect 
2,5 o! which the leave of the court has been obtained) which might have 
been brought or instituted, but for the presentation of the application 
for the wincUng up of the chit, the period from the date of the presenta-
tion of the application to the date of the order re~using to wind up a chit 
shall be excluded. 
30 (3) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall affect the rights of a sub-
scriber to proceed against the foreman personally for the balance, if any, 
of the amount due to him after the declaration of. the final dividend in 
the proceeddngs for the winding up of the chit and in computing the 
period of limitation prescribed for any such proceedings, the period from 
3S the date of the presentation of, the application for the winding up of the 
chit to the date of the declaration of the final div1dend shall be excluded. 
CHAPTER XI 
.. -.. , APPOIN'l'MDT OF OFFICERs AND LEVY OF FEES 
II. (1) The State Govemment may, by notification In the official 
40 Gazette, appoint a Registrar of Chits and a8 many Additional, Joint, 
Dep~ty an.- Assistant Registrars as may be necessary for the purpose of 
discharging the duties imposed upon the Registrar by or under this Ad. 
(2) fte Registrar may appoint as many inspectors of chits and chit 
8~ditors as may be necessary for the purpose of discharging the duties 
45 Imposed on the inspectors of chits or chit auditors by or under this Act. 
(3) All inspectors of chits and chit auditors shall discharge the duties 
imposed upon them by or under this Act under the geneT'al supedntend-
ence and control of the Registrar. 
Award of 
compensa· 
tion to 
foreman. 
Rilht to 
appeal. 
Limita-
tion. 
Appomt. 
mentof 
Registrar 
and other 
ofticera. 

Inspection 
of docu-
menta in 
Regis-
trar'_ 
office. 
LeVy of 
fce&. 
Dispute. 
relating 
to chit 
bUlinell8'. 
22 
~ .. 
(4) If the Registrar is ot the opinion that the accounts ot any chit arS! 
not properly maintained and that sut:h accounts should be audited, it~ 
shall be lawful for him to have such accounts audited by a chit auditor. 
(5) It shall be the duty of the foreman of the chit whose accounts 
are to be audited by a chit auditor under sub-section (4) to produce. S. 
before the chit auditor, all accounts, books and other records relating: 
to the chit, to furnish him with such inf-ormation as may be required and 
afford him all such assistance and facilities as may be necessary and 
reasonable in regard to the audit of the accounts of the chit. 
(6) The foreman shall pay to the ch:t auditor such fees as may be 10 
prescribed for the audit of the accounts o£ the chit under sub-section (4): 
Provided that different scales of fees may be prescribed for different 
chits depending on the quantum of the chit amount. 
62. The foreman of a chit or any subscriber in a chit or the heirs or 
legal representat.ves of any foreman or subscriber may, on payment of I~ 
such fees as may be prescribed,-
(a) inspect the documents of the concerned chit kept by the 
Registrar; or 
(b) obtain a certified copy or an extract of any such document 
or record. • '~2.0 
63. (1) There shall he paid to the Registrar such fees as the State 
Government may, from time to time, prescribe for,-
(a) the issue of previous sanction under seetion 4; \ 
(b) the filing of the chit agreement with the Registrar and the 
registration of the chit under section 7; 25 
(e) the filing of a declaration with the Registrar and the grant 
of, a certificate of commencement under section 9; 
(d) the filing of copies of documents under any of the provisions 
of this Act; 
(e) the audit of the accounts of the foreman under section 61; 30 
(f) the inspection of docume'lts under section 62; 
(g) the obtaining of certified copies or extracts of documents 
and records under section 62; and 
(h) such other matters as may appear necessary to the State 
Government. 35 
(2) A table of fees prescribed under sub-section (1) shall be exhibi-
ted on a notice board in the office o~ the Registrar. 
CHAPTER XII 
DIsPuTES AND ARBITRATION 
. M. (1) Notwithstanding anything 'Conta:ned in any other law for the 40 
time being in £orce, any dispute touching the management of a chit 
business shall be referred by any of the parties to the dispute, to the 
Registrar for arbitration if each party thereto is one or the other of the 
following, namely:-
. (a~ Q foreman, a prized subscriber or a non-prized subscriber, 45 
mcludIng a defaulting subscriber, past subscriber or a person claim-
ing through a subscriber, or a deceased subscriber to a chit; 

86 of 1963. 
s 
10 
IS 
23 
(b) a surety at a suhs(!riber, past subscriber, or a deceased sub-
icriber. 
EJ.'Planaltion.-For the purposes of this sub-section, a dispute touch-
ing the management of a chit business shall include-
(i) a claim by or against a foreman for any debt or demand 
due to him kom a subscriber, or due from him to a subscriber, past 
subscriber or the nominee, heir or legal representative of a deceased 
lubscriber whether such debt or demand is admitted or not; 
(ii) a claim by a surety for any sum or demand due to him 
from the principal borrower in respect of a loan by a foreman and 
recovered from the surety owing to the default of the principal 
borrower, whether such sum or demand is admitted or not; and 
(iii) a refusal or failure by a subscriber, past subscriber or 
the nominee, heir or legal representative of a deceased subScriber 
to deliver possession to a foreman of land or any other asset re-
lumed by him for breach of conditions of €he asSignment. 
(2) Where any question arises as to whether any matter referred to 
for the award of the Registrar is a dispute or not for the purposes of sub-
section (1), the same shall be decided by the Registrar whose decision 
20 thereon shaE be final. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3) of section 66, no 
Civll Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or other proceed-
ings in respect of any dispute referred to in sub-section (1). 
65. (1) Notwithstand:ng anything contained in the Limitation Act, 
2S 1963, but subject to the specific provisions contained in this Act, the 
period of. limitation in the case of a dispute referred to the Registrar 
under section 64, shall-
(a) if the dispute relates to the recovery of any sum, including 
interest thereon, due to a foreman from a deceased subscriber, be 
30 computed from the date on which such subscriber dies or ceases to 
be a subscriber; or 
(b) if the dispute is between a foreman and a subscriber or a 
past subscr1ber, or the nominee, heir or legal representative of a 
deceased subscriber, and the dispute relates to any act or omission 
3S on the part of either party to the dispute, be three years 'from the 
date on which the act or omission with reference to which the dis-
pute arose, took place. 
(2) The period of limitaLon in the case of any dispute other than 
those referred to in sub-section (1) which are required to be referred to 
40 the Registrar under section 64 shaLl be regulated by the provisions at 
36 of 1963. the Limitation Act, 1963, as if the dispute were a suit, and the Registrar, 
a Civil Court. 
(~) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
the Registrar may admit a dispute after the exp;ryof the period of 
45 liJilitation, if the applicant satisfies the Registrar that he had sufficient 
cause for not referring the dispute within such period. 
PeriOd of 
limita-
tion. 

Settle-
ment of 
disputes. 
Procedure 
for settle-
ment of 
disputes 
and 
powers 
of Re-
gistrar or 
nomi-
nee. 
24· 
86. (1) If the Registrar is satisfied that any matter referred to him 
or brought to his notice is a dispute within the meaning of sectioD 64, 
he shall, subject to such rules as may be prescribed, settle the dispute 
himself, or refer it for disposal to a person appointed by bim (hereafter 
in this Chapter referred to as the nominee). S 
(2) Where any dispute is referred under sub-section (1) for settle-
ment to the Dominee, the Registrar may, at any time for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, withdraw such dispute from the nominee and may 
settle the dispute himself, or refer it again for settlement to any other 
nominee appointed by him. 10 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 64, the Registrar 
may, if he thinks fit, ::llspend the proceedings in regard to any dispute, 
if the question at issue between a foreman and a subscriber or between 
different subscribers, is one involving complicated questions of law and 
Ifact, until the question has been decided in a regular suit instituted by IS 
anyone of the parties to the dispute and if any such suit is not instituted 
within two months from the order of the Registrar suspending the pro-
ceedings, the Registrar shall take action under sub-section (1). 
6T. (1) The Registrar or the nominee hearing a dispute under section 
66, shall in addition to the powers conferred on him under that section, 20 
have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court while trylnga suit 
Wlder the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect ofi the following 
matters, namely:-
." 
(4) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and 
examining them on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies th~reof from any 
court or office; 
25 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 30 
documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed 
(2) Except with the pennission of the Registrar or the nominee, no 
party shall be represented at the hearing of a dispute by'8 legal pract1-
dispute. 35 
(3) (4) If the Registrar or the nominee is satisfied that any person, 
whether he is a subscriber or not, has acquired any interest in the 
property of a person who is a party to a dispute, he may order that the 
person who has acquired the interest in the property may be joined 
as a party to the dispute, and any decision that may be given by the 40 
Registrar or the nominee on the dispute shall be binding on the party 
so joined, in the same manner as if he were an original party to the 
dispute, 
(b) Where a dispute has been referred in the name of a wrong person, 
or where all the necessary parties have not been included, the Reglmar 45 
or the nominee may, if he is satisfied that it was due to a genuine mis-
take, order any other person to be substituted or added as a platn'tfff 
or a defendant at any stage of hearing of the dispute on such terms aa 
he thinks just. 
5 ot 1908. 

·25 
t~) The Registrar or the nominee may, at any stage of the proceedingt, 
either upon or without the application of either party and on such tenns 
as may appear to the Registrar or the nominee to be just, order that the 
name of any party improperly joined be struck off. 
S (d) Any person who is a party to the dispute and entitled to more 
than one relief in respect of the same cause of action may claim all or 
any such reliefs, but if he omits to claim any such relief, he shall not 
be entitled to claim that relief, except with the leave of the Registrar 
or the nominee. 
10 68. (1) Where a dispute has been referred under section 64 and the 
Registrar or the nominee hearing the dispute is satisfied on enquiry or 
otherwise that a party to such dispute, with intent to defeat or (Jbstruct 
the execution of any award or the carrying out of any order that may 
be made,-
15 (4) is about to dispoie of the whole or any part of his property; 
or 
(b) Is about to remove the whole or any part of the property 
from the jurisdiction of the Registrar, 
he may, unless adequate security is furnished, direct conditional attach-
20 ment of the said property, and such attachment shall have the same effect 
as if it is made by a competent Civil Court. 
(2) Where the Registrar or the nominee directs the attachment of 
any property under sub-section (1), he shall issue a notice calling upon 
the person whose property is so attached to furnish such security as he 
25 thinks adequate within a specified period, and if the person fails to 
provide such security, the Registrar or the nominee may confirm the 
order, and may, after the decision in the dispute, direct the disposal of 
the property so attached towards the claim, if awarded. 
(3) Any attachment made under this section shall not aftect the 
30 rights, subsisting prior to the attachment of the property, of persons who 
are not parties to the dispute, or bar any person holding a decree against 
the person whose property is so attached from applying for the sale ofi 
the property under the attachment of such decree. ,. 
(4) The Registrar or the nominee may, in order to prevent the ends 
35 of justice being defeated, make such interlocutory orders pending the 
award in a dispute referred to in sub-section (1) as may appear to be 
just and convenient. 
69. When a dispute is referred to arbitration under this Chapter, the 
Registrar or the nominee, may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to 
40 the parties to the dispute to be heard, make an award on the dispute, on 
the expenses incurred by the parties to the dispute in connection with 
the proceedings and the fees and expenses payable to the Registrar or 
the nominee and such an award shall not be invalid merely on the ground . , 
that it was made after the expiry of the period, if any, fixed for deciding 
45 the dispute by the Registrar, and shall, subject to appeal under section 70, 
be hal and binding on the parties to the dispute, 
Attach-
ment 
before 
judg. 
ment and 
other in-
terlocu-
tory 
orders. 
Decision 
of Re-
gistrar or 
nomi-
nee. 

Appeal 
qa1nat 
decJ8ion 
ofRe-
patrar or 
nomi-
Dee. 
1\(one7 
hoW' re-
covered. 
Private 
tr&n.rer 
of pr0-
perty 
made 
after 
is8ue ot 
cerWicate 
void 
apJnJt 
fore-
man. 
AdvisGry 
role of 
Reserve 
Bank. 
Appe'lJ" 
.. 
.. 26 
'18. Any party aggrieved by any order passed by the Registrar or the 
nominee or the award of the Registrar or the nominee under section 69, 
may, within two months from the date of the or4ier or award, appeal to 
the State Government. 
71. Every order passed by the Registrar or the nominee under sec- 5 
tion 68 or section 69 and every order passed by the State Government 
in appeal under section 70 for payment of any money shall, if not carried 
out,- ... .. ..,; .. " .•. , ~r~ ,LI 
(4) on a certificate signed by the Registrar, be deemed to be a 
decree of a Civil Court, and shall be executed in the same manner as 10 
a decree of such Court, or 
(b) be executed in accordance with the provisions of any law 
for the time being in force for the recovery of amounts as arrears of 
land revenue: 
Provided that no application under clause (b) shall be made IS 
after the expiry of three years from the date fixed in the order, and 
if no such date is fixed, from the date of the order. 
72. Any private transfer or delivery of., or encumbrance or charge 
on, property made or created after the issue of the certificate by the 
Registrar under section 71 shall be null and void against the foreman on 20 
whose application the said certificate was issued. 
.. 1. I·' ,. CHAPTER XIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
73. The .tleserve Bank may tender to any State Government such 
advice on questions of policy with respect to this Act as it thinks fit ~S 
either on its own motion or on a request made by the State Government. 
74. (1) Any foreman aggrieved by the decision of the RegJstrar,-
(4) refusing to issue a certificate of registration of the chit 
agreement under section 7; 
~ (b) refusing to grant a certificate of commencement under sub- 30 
section (2) of section 9; 
(e) refusing to accept any security under sub-section (1) nf 
section 20 or under section 31; or 
(d) refusing to release the security charged under section 31, 
may, within thirty days of the communication to him of such decision, 35 
appeal to the State Government or to such officer or authority as may 
be empowered by not.fication in the Official Gazette by the State Gov-
ernment in that behalf. 
(2) Any foreman or other person aggrieved by the order of, the Re-
gistrar under sub-section (1) of section 34 may, within thirty days of 40 
the communication to him of such decision, appeal to the State Govem-

-
ment or to such officer or authority as may be empowerea Dy notificatlOl.. 
in the Official Gazette by the State Government in that behalf. 
(3) The State Government or such officer or authority aforesaid 
may, after giving the appellant an opportunity of making his represen-
station, pass such order on the appeal as it or he thinks tit and such 
order shall be final. 
75. The Registrar may, in his discretbn and upon an application 
in writing by a foreman made within the period specified for the filing 
Of documents, under sub-section (3) of section 28, sub-section (2) of 
10 section 29, section 37 or section 41, allow the foreman further time not 
exceeding fifteen days to file copies of such oocuments. 
76. (1) Whoever contravenes or abets the contravention of any of 
the provisions of sections 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20, 22, 24, sub-
section (3) of section 29, sections 30, 31, sub-section (4) of section 33, sub-
IS section (2) of section 46 or sub-sectbn (5) of section 61 shall, on convic-
tion, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may exteno 
to two years or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or 
with both. 
20 
(2) Any foreman,-
(4) who fails to file any document required to be filed under 
this Act within the period specified therefor or within. such further 
time as may be allowed; or 
(b) who fails to comply with the requirements of the chit 
agreement regardi.ng the date, time and place at which the chit is 
to be drawn or who fails to comply with the requirements of any 
direction given under sub-section (3) of section 38; or 
(c) who contravenes or fails to comply with any other require-
ment under this Act, 
30 shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to three 
thousand rupees. 
(3) Whoever wilfully makes a statement in any document required 
to be filed under this Act which is false in any material particular 
shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
35 may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to five thou-
sand rupees or with both. 
77. A eourt imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the 
whole or any part taereo! shall be appJied in, or towards payment of, 
the cost of the proceedings. 
40 78. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committe<i by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of, the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
4S and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided. in this Act, if he proves 
that the offence was committed without hi's knowledge or that he ex-
ercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
Power of 
Registrar 
to live 
extenaiOll 
of time 
for fllina 
docu-
ments. 
Penalties. 
Applica-
tion • 
of fine. 
O1!encea 
by com-
panies. 

Cognizance 
of 
offences. 
Power to 
compc;und 
offences. 
Powe~ to 
enter and 
search 
any place 
and to 
seize i'ny 
documents. 
Offi.cer3, 
to be 
public 
servants. 
Power to 
delegate. 
.. 
(2) Notwithstanding anythlng contained in sub-section (1), w?e~ 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and It 18 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
nivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer ef the company, such dlrec- S 
tor, manager, secretary er ether efficer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty ef that offence and shall be liable toO be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly. 
EzplaMtion.-Fer the purpeses of, this sectiDn,-
(a) "cempany" means any body corporate and includes a firm 10 
Dr other association Df individuals; and 
(b) "directer" in relaren to a firm means a partner in the firm. 
79. (1) All offences under section 11 shall be cognizable. 
(2) NoO CoOurt inferioOr toO that of a Metropolitan MagIstrate or a Judi-
cial Magistrate of the first class shall try an oOffence punishable under IS 
this Act. 
80. (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any oftlcer 
empowered by the State Government in this behalf may, either befere 
or after the institution of criminal proceedings under this Act, accept 
Irom the person who has committed or is reasonably suspected toO have 300 
committed an offence under this Act, by way of cemposition 00£ such 
offence, a sum of, money not exceeding such amount as may be prescribed. 
(2) Where an offence has been eompounded under sub-sectien (1), 
the effender, if in custody, shall be discharged and no further proceed-
ings shall be taken against him in respect ef such effence. 25 
81. (1) If the Registrar or any other officer authorised by him in this 
behalf, has reason to suspect that any person conducts, or is responsible 
for the conduct of, a chit in any place in centravention of the .provisions 
of this Act, he may, for reasens toO be recorded in writing and at any 
reasonable time, enter into and search such place, and may seize such 30 
books, registers, acceunts er documents as may be necessary. 
(2) The Registrar er officer autherised by him in this behalf, may 
avply for assistance toO an officer incharge of a police station and take 
police officers to accompany and assist him in discharging his duties under 
SUb-section (1). 
(3) All searches under sub-section (1) shall be made in accordance 
with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
82. The Registrar and all oftlcers appointed by the State Government 
to perform any functions under this Act shall. be deemed to be public 
3S 
2 of 1874. 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 40 f5 of 
83. The State Government may, by notificatien in the Oftlcial Gazette, 
direct that any power (other than the power to hear appeals or to make 
rules) exercisable by it under thiB Act or the rules made thereunder 
may be exercised also by any efficer of the State Government subject to 
such terms and conditions, if. any, as may be specified therein. 4S 
1860. 

2 of 1934. 
" 
5 
84. Nothing in this Act shall apply in respect of,-
(a) any chit started before the commencement of this Act; or 
(b) any chit the amount of which, or where two or more chits 
were started or conducted simultaneously by the same foreman, the 
aggregate amount of which does not exceed one hundred rupees. 
85. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no bank shall 
commence or carry on chit business after the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Where a chit had been started by any bank before such com-
mencement, such chit may be continued after such commencement until 
10 it is .completed, and subject to the other provisions of this Act and of 
the chit agreement and such laws, if any, as were applicable to it 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall apply to such 
chit. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of, this section "bank" means an ap-
15 proved bank or a co-operative bank as defined in clause (bii) of section 
2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
86. The State Government may, in consultatio~ with the Reserve 
Bank, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such condI-
tions as may be specified in the notification exempt any person or class 
20 of persons or any chit or class of chits from all or any of the provisions 
of this Act. 
87. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
State Government, the Registrar or other offi.cers of the State Govern-
ment or of the Reserve Bank or any of its officers exercising any powers 
25 or discharging any functions under this Act in respect of anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder. 
88. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
30 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
3:S 
foregoing. power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ine matters, namely:-
(a) the form and manner in which an application for obtaining 
the previous sanction may be made under sub-section (2) of section 4; 
(b) the additional particulars that a chit agreement may contain 
under clause(q) of sub-section (1) of section 6; 
(c) the particulars that may be included in the minutes of the 
proceedings of a draw under section 17; 
(d) the method of valuation by the Registrar in a grain chit 
for the purpose of furnishing security under section 20: 
(e) the procedure that may be followed by the Registrar in 
releasing the security furnished by the foreman under section 20; 
Act not to 
apply to 
certain 
chit,. 
Certain 
banka 
not to 
conduct 
chit 
business. 
Power to 
exempt. 
Protection 
of action 
taken 
under the 
Act. 
Powe!' to 
make 
ruIdfl. 

Repeal 
and 
savinf. 
80 
(1) the registers and books and the form in which such registers 
and bo()ks may be maintained by the foreman under section 23; 
(g) the time within which the balance-sheet and the profit and 
loss account in respect of a chit business shall be filed under section 
~; S 
(h) the rate at lvhich interest shall be payable on the defaulted 
instalments by a defa·ulted su.bscriber under section 28; 
(i) the particulars that may be included in an application for 
the wi.n,ding up of chits under section 49; 
(j) the procedure to be followed for the winding of chits under 10 
Chapter X; 
(k) the rees payable under section 63; 
(l) the auditing of balance-sheets and the profit and loss ac-
:ounts of chit business and the issue of audit certificates; 
(m) the form and manner in which a dispute shall be referred IS 
to the Registrar under section 64; 
(no) the procedure ... be followed by the Registrar or his no-
minee for settling the disputes referred to him under section 64; 
(0) the matters referred to in clause (I) of sub-section (1) ot 
section 67; 20 
(p) the conditions subject to which and the amount on the 
payment of which composition of offences may be made under sec-
tion 80; 
(q) the form and manner in which an appeal may be preferTed 
under this Act and the fees payable f()r such appeal; lS 
(r) the issue and service of notic.es or other process under this 
Act; 
(8) the procedure for, and the manner of receiving, any sum 
payable under this Act; 
(t) any other matter which is required to be or may be pres- 30 
cribed. 
89. (1) The Andhra Pradesh Chit Funds Act, 1971, the KeraIa Andhra 
Chitties Act, 1975, the Maharashtra Chit Funds Act, 1974, the Tamil ~~ 
Nadu Chit Funds Act, 1961, as in force in the State of Tamil Nadu and 1971. 
in the Union territories of Chandigarh and Delhi, the Uttar Pradesh 3S Keraia 
Chit Funds Act, 1975, the Goa, Daman and Diu Chit Funds Act, 1973 Act 28 
and tbe Pondicherry Chit Funds Act, 1966, are he!"eby repealed and the ot 19711. 
prClvisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Art, 1897, shall apply to Mat hAar~sLhv-. . n L such repeal as If each such Act so repealed were a Central Act. of 1974-
ramll . I 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, but subject to the other provisions 40 ~~~4 of 
of this Act, the Acts mentioned in sub-secion (1) shall continue to apply 1961. 
to chits in operation on the commencement. of this Act, in the same Uttar 
manner as they applied to such chits before such commencement. Pradel'" Act ~3 of 
197G. 
Goa, 
Daman 
and Diu 
Act 16 of 
1978. 
PoDdi-
cherr)' 
Act 18 OJ. 
1888. 

Liabilit irs 
I. Capital. 
Autbori8ed 
hilled 
Paid-up 
•• Reserve Fund 
5. DepoIits 
.. BorrowiDgI 
5. Foremau'sliabilir, in tickets pmcd 
6. Prize amount payaWe 
7. DeFaulted subllcribers" amounO payable 
8. .YYaIlce !uhlcriptioa recei'fIed 
9. Uability to DOD-prWQ IQbIaiben 
(Arrears from ooa-pri2Ied .. bocnOen 
to be indicated) 
10. Amount payable in terminated chill 
II. AuctioD prollt pa~bIt- to DI:JD1Iriaed 
Sublcriben 
'll. Other LiabOitiu 
"!S. Profit and los aCOOIIIII 
TarAL 
Total ebb amauna of the chits III bee 
i .•. nmniq chits. 
Rs. 
lU. 
lU. 
THE SCHEDULE 
. (See IIeCtion 24) 
. --~- .. 
--
.It ,. 
PART I.-FORM OF BALANCE-SHEET 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
lU. 
lU. 
RJ. 
RI. 
R,. 
RJ. 
RI. 
Rs. .. 
AIIeb 
I. Cub 
Balances with ba1b : 
<a) Current acoount RI. 
(b) Deposit account RI. 
,. Investments: 
(a) In chits RI. 
(b) In Government eecuritics Rs. 
(e) Others Rs. 
.. Share amount due &om JrtRdsubscribers: 
(a) Secured t RJ. 
(b) Umecured Rs. 
5· Arrears due from prized subscribers I 
<a) Secured Rs. 
(b) Umecured RI. 
6. Amouat due in terminated chits 1" 
(a) Secure4 RI. 
~ Unsecured Rs. 
'7. it prize amount paid earlier 
8. Loau aDd adYaD(eS to sub5aiben 
9· Litigation expeDJeI 
10. PremUes 
II. Furniture and fixture 
I~. Stamps in stock 
13. Other_ts 
14. Profit .Dd 10lIl account 
TarA!. : 
RJ. 
lU. 
Rs • 
1tJ. 
Ra. 
Its. 
Rs. 
RI. 
Rs. 
RI. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
RI. 
lU. 
RI. 
,----
ParticuJars to be specified in respect of amounts Ihown against 4, 5 and 6. 
(i) Amounts d.e from directon or oflittrs of the company or aDy of them dther 
jointly or IeVerally with any other perwm. 
(Ii" AmoURts due by companies or firms in whicb the directon of the company 
are interested as direct8rs, partners or in the cue of private companies, .. 
members. 
------------------------------------------------'----------------
\loa ... 

• 
.... 
Jhpeod.iture 
----_._------------
I. To In:~rest paid on deposi .... bOhowblp, etc. 
I. To ulari~, ailowa.Gces. boous and provident fund 
3. To directon' Sittln~ fes 
+. r.J r; )(. ta'(!;, ins,Jr .l'lce,1igbting 
5. . To law c:harps 
6. r" P)IU!~~ l~e!tl"&(lU ~Dd stamps 
7. To auditors' r~ 
-L8. To filing &:es-
1. r J lb;lreci.ltio3 1n j repain 
,1'\. To Stationery, printing and advertiaemeat 
I'. To othet espeodibue 
1'1. To baiallcC ofpr<lfit 
TOTAL 
PART II.-FORM 01' PaoI'IT AND Loss ACCOl11ft' 
Income 
RI. a. By fOreman', commiaPoo B.a. 
RI. II. By boaus ... 
RI. 3. By Ibtcirest Ill. 
Ra. 4. By iadiYUibie income in auclioD profit B.a. 
B.a. ,5. Byimt Ra. 
Ra. 6. By !let profit on we of investmeDlI Ra. 
RI. 7. By other receipts RI. 
RI. 8. By'" RI. 
Ra. 
lU. 
RI. .... 
N 
fU. 
RI. TorAL Ra. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASQNS 
A 'conventional chit' is an old indigenoua financial institution involv-
ing regular periodical subscriptions by a group of persons. It is, in law, 
a contract between the subscribers and the foreman which provides that 
the subscribers shall subscribe a certain sum by periodical instalments 
for a definite period. Each subscriber shall, in his turn, as determined 
by lot or by auction or in such other agreed manner, be entitled to the 
prize amount. There wili be as many periodi-cal instalments as there are 
members. As there is a mutuality of interest among the small number 
of, subscribers to each chit fund, it constitutes a convenient instrument 
combining savings and borrowings. 
2. In the wider context of examining in depth the activities of the 
non-banking financial intermediaries (which term also includes institu-
tions conducting chit funds or kl.l'rks), the Banking Commission (1972) 
had recommended mter alia, that it is essential to have a uniform chit 
fund legislation applicable to the whole country and as such either an all .. 
India Chi t Funds Act may be enacted or a Model law may· be prepared 
for adoption by all the States. The Commission also observed that it 
would be desirable to provide in the legislation that only public limited 
companies can run chit funds. 
3. The recommendations of the Banking Commissi'on were examined 
by Government. The Reserve Bank, at the instance of the Government, 
drafted a model Bill to regulate the-conduct of chit funds for adoption 
by all the State Governments. The Reserve Bank also sent the draft 
Bill to the Study Group on Non-Banking Companies constituted by it in 
June, 11974, under the Chairmanship of Shri James S. Raj, the then 
Chairman of the Unit Trust of India. The Study Group was unanimous-
ly of the view that the Bill should be enacted as a Central legislation, 
as such a step, besides ensuring uniformity in the provisions 
applicable to chit fund institutions throughout the country, would 
also prevent such institutions from taking advantage either of the absence 
of any law governing chit funds in any State or exploit the benefit of 
any lacuna or relaxation in any State law by extending their activities 
to such States. The Group further recommended that the admintstration 
of the law should be lett to the State Government concerned which in tUrn 
could seek the advice and assistance of the Reserve Bank on policy mat-
ter~. Further, there should be, according to the Group, no objection to 
chi~s being conducted by private limited companies also and on a limited 
sca1,e even by unincorporated bodies such as, individuals, sale' proprietor-
shi;:>s and partnership firms. 
4. The Bill has been finalised after taking into account the views of 
all the State Governments to whom a draft Bill was sent for com-
ments. The scheme of the Bill and the provisions made therein largely 
folJow the pattern of chit fund legislations in force in some of the States 
and includes certain new provisions, such as, minimum capital require-
33 

84 
ments for compani~ conducting chit business, prohibiting chit fund com-
panies from doing any other business, placing a ceiling on the aggregate 
chit amounts of chits that are being conducted by chit fund i'nstitutions, 
providing fur a self-contained machinery for the settlement of disputes 
between a foreman and the subscribers by means of arbitration, etc. The 
repeal of the exjsting State legislations on the subject has also been 
provided for in the Bill. 
5. The "Notes on clauses" appended to the Bill explain in detail the 
provisions of the Bill. 
Ny;w DELHI; CHARAN SINGH. 
The 6th February, 1979. 

NOI:es on clauses 
CZau.se 2.-This clause defines the various expressions commonly used 
in th~ Bill. 
Sub-clause (a) defines "approved banks" as referring to commercial 
banks and such other banking institutions as the State Government may, 
in consultation with the Reserve Bank, approve for the purposes of the 
Bill. 
Sub-clause (0) defines the term "chit". This definition is on the same 
lines as the definition of the expression "conventional.chit" in the Prized 
Chits and Money Circulation Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978 (43 of 1978). 
Su~.clause (g) defines "discount" as the sum of money which a prized 
subscriber is required to forego under the terms of the cl:lit agreement. 
Sub-clause (h) defines "dividend" to mean the share of the subscriber 
in the amount of discount available under the chit agreement for rateable 
distribution amona the subscribers at each instalment of the chit. 
Clause 3.-This clause provides that the provisions of the Bill shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 
provisions of any other law in force or in the memorandum and articles of 
association, or bye-laws, etC., and if any such provision is repugnant to 
the provisions of the Bill, it shall, to the extent of the repugnancy become 
or be void. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides that no chit shall be commenced or 
conducted without obtaining the previous sanction of the State Govern-
ment within whose jurisdiction the chit is to be conducted and unless the 
chit is registered under the provisions of the Bill. It has also been provided 
that such sanction shall lapse if the chit is not registered before the expiry 
of six months from the date of such sanction. 
Sub-clause (3) of this clause specifies the cases in which previous 
sanction may be referred. 
Clause 5.-This claUSe prohibits the invitation for subscriptions to a 
chit by issuing a circular, prospectus or otherwise unless such notice, 
circular or prospectus contains a statement that the previous sanction 
referred to in clause 4 has been obtained and also the particulars of such 
sanction. 
Clause 6.-While the various particulars which are required to be 
specified in every chit agreement and the other formalities to be complied 
with have been specified in sub-clause (1) of this clause, it has been pro-
vided in sub-clause (2) that the duration of a chit shall not extend beyond 
a period of five years from the date of its commencement. However, the 
State Government concerned has been empowered to permit the duration 
of a chit up to a period of ten years on the existence of certain conditions 
s~cifled in that sul>-clause. 
35 

Sub-clause (3) provides that the amount of discount in any chit shall 
not exceed th~rty per cent. of the chit amount (that is, the sum-total of 
subscriptions payable by all the subscribers {or any instalment of a chit 
without any deduction for discount or otherwise). 
CLause 7.-Su})';clause (1) of this clause provides for the chit agreement 
being filed in duplicate by the foreman with the Registrar. 
Sub-clause (2) empowers the Registrar to retain one copy of the chit 
agreement and return the duplicate to the foreman with an endorsement 
thattb~ chit agreement bas been registered by him; and such an endorse-
ment shall be conclusive evidence that the chit is duly registered under 
the provisions of . the Bill. 
Clause a.-Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a company shall 
not conduct any chit or carryon any chit business unless its paid-up capital 
is not less than rupees one lakh. 
Sub-clause (2) requires the existing companies having a share capital 
of less than rupees one lakh to increase i.ts paid up capital to not less than 
rupees one lakh within a period of three years from the commencement 
of the proposed legislation. The State Government has. however, been 
empowered to extend the period of three years in respect 01 any cOmpany 
for such further period not exceeding two years in the aggregate. 
Sub-clause (3) provides that every company carrying on chit bUSiness 
shall create a reserve fund and transfer to such reserve fund a sum. not 
less than twenty per cent. of the balance of profit for each year as disclosed 
in its profit and loss account before declaring any dividend on its shares. 
CZ.use 9.-This clause provides that every foreman shall, after all the 
tickets specified in the chit agreement are fully subscribed, file a declara-
tion to that effect with the Registrar . . 
Sub-clause (2) empowers the Registrar to issue a certificate of com~ 
mencement after the filing of such declaration and no foreman can com· 
mence any auction or draw unless such certificate is granted. 
Clause lO.-This clause requires every foreman to furnish a copy of 
the chit agreement to every subscriber after the foreman has obtained 
the certificate of commencement under clause 9 and before the first draw. 
Clause n.-This clause prohibits the use of the word "chit", "chit 
fund". "chitty" or "kuri" by any person other than a .person carrying on 
.chit business and makes it obligatory on a per,son carrying on chit busi-
nesa to use as -part of· his name anyone of su<!hwords. 
Clause 12.-Sub-clause (1) provides that no company carrying on chit 
business shall conduct any other business except with the general or 
special permission of the State Government.· . 
Sub-clause (2) proviQes for the winding up of such oUler busin(tBS 
before· the expiry of" a peri9d of three years from the commencement of 
.the proposed legislation or such ex.tended period not exceeding two years. 
Clause la.-Under this clause, no foreman other .than a firm or other 
a~sociation ~f indLviduals or a company can ,start orcol)ductchit, . t1;le 
aggregate amount of which at any time exceeds ten thousand rupees. 
Where the foreman is a firm or other association of individuals, 

lie ~ggregate chit aDlOWlt shall not eJl:ceed rupees ten thou-
And for every partner or individual, as the case may· .00, subject to a 
maximum of rupees forty thousand. Where the foreman is a company, 
the aggregate chit amount of the chits conducted by it, shall not, at any 
time, exceed ten times the net assets of the company (that is the total 
assets of the company less its total liabilities, bad and doubtful debts as 
also other intangible assets as disclosed by its last audited balance-sheet). 
Clause 14.-This clause prohibits a person carryiong on chit business 
from utilising the moneys collected in respect of such business except for 
the pw-poses mentioned. therein, namely, for carrying on. chit bwriness, 
givil\g loans and advances to non-iprized subscribers, etc., on the security 
of the subscriptions paid by them, investment in trustee .securities, etc. 
Cl4UBe 16.-This clause lays down the prooedure to be foll()Wed for 
making any alteration in the chit agrt>ement. 
Clau.,es 16 to 18.-These clauses provide for the conduct of the draw, 
maintenance of minutes of the proceedings of every draw .and the filing 
of minutes of such proceedings with the Registrar. 
ClcwBe 19.-This clause prohibits the opening of new places of business 
without obtaining the approval of the Registrar. 
Clauses 20 to!2.-i'hese clauses specify the rights aad ,duties of the 
foreman of a chit. 
Clause 20 specifies the various securities to be given by a foreman 
for the proper conduct of the chit. They are as follows:-
(a) deposit in an approved bank of an amount equal to the chit 
amount in the name of the Registrar; 
{b) transrer Government securities or other securities referred to 
in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, ill·favour ·of the Registrar. 
The value of the Government securities :;hould be not less than one-and-
a-half times the value of the chit amount and the value of other securities 
would be specified by the State Government by rules whioch shall not be 
less than .one-and-a-half times the value of the chit .amount. Thesecurity 
given may be substituted by another security of the same value and the 
security so furnished or slIlbstituted would not be released to the foreman 
until the chit is terminated and the daims of all the subseribersare fully 
satisfied. 
A foreman's rights include the rj,ght .to take the chit amount .at the first 
i-aetalment without deduction of discount, to .receiv.e and realise all subs-
criptions fr.om the subscribers and to, distrihut: the prize amounts to ~be 
prized subscribers. The duties include t~e ~b~sement. of the pnze 
amounts to the prized suhscriberso n theIr fumishing suffict.ent security 
-For the due ,paYment of futuresnbflcriptions, deposit the undisbursed prize 
nmount in app~ov.ed battks befare the next sl1cceeding draw, etc. 
Clau~e 23.-This clause enumerates the various books and records to 
be maintained by a foreman. 

Clause 24.-This clause enjoins every forenlan to prepare and file with 
the Registrar within such time as may be prescribed by rules a balance-
sheet and proflt and loss account in the 'fonns set out in the Schedule tQ 
the Bill. 
Clause. 25 and 26.-While clause 25 lays down that 'the foreman 
.hall be liable to account to the subscribers for the amounts due to 
them, clause 26 prohibits a foreman from withdrawing from the chit 
until its termination unless such withdrawal is assented to in writing 
by all the non-prized and unpaid prized subscribers. 
Clause 27.-This clause provides for payment of subscriptions by 
every non-prized subscriber on the date, time and place mentioned in 
the chit agreement. 
Clause 28.-This clause provides for the removal of a non-prized 
subscriber if he defaults in the payment of the subscriptions. 
Clau.ses 29 and 30.-These clauses provide for the substitution of a 
new subscriber in place of a defaulting subscriber and the amounts 
payable to the defaulting subscriber. 
Clames 31 to 33.-These clauses provide for the rights and duties 
of prized subSCribers. The prized subscriber has to furnish security for 
payment of the prize amount and he has to pay the future subscriptions 
regularly. If he defaults in the payment of subscriptions, the foreman 
is entitled to a consolidated payment of all future subscriptions by fol-
lowing the procedure spedfied in clause 33. 
Clause 34.-This clause prohibits the transfer of the rights of the fore-
man 10 receive subscrip,tions from the prized subscribers without the pre-
vious sanction. in writing of the Registrar. 
Clauses 35 to 37.-These clauses provide for the procedure to be follow-
ed for the transfer of rights of non-prized subscribers. Such transfer shall 
be in writing and shall be filed with the foreman who shall recognise it 
if the transferee is solvent. 
Clause 38.-This clause lays down the procedure for convening a special 
meeting of the general body of the subscribers for passing a special resolu-
tion. 
Clause 39.-This clause provides for the manner in which a chit has 
to be conducted if the foreman dies or becomes of unsound mind or is 
declared an insolvent, etc. It provides for the conduct of the chit by any 
one or more subscribers authorised by a speCial resolution in accordance 
with the provisions of the chit agreement. 
Clauses 40 and 41.-These clauses lay down the circumstances in which 
a chit shall be deemed to have terminated. The expiration of the period 
specified. in the chit agreement, death or unsound mind of the foreman and 
the consent of all the subscrihers to terminate the chit are some of the 
circumstances under which a chit shall be terminated. The consent of 
the subscribers is required to be filed with the Registrar under clause 41. 
Clame 42.- This clauRe Rpecifies the circumc;tanr.~s in which a non-
prized subscriber is entitled to the refund of the ';llhscriptions paid by him. 
Clause 43.-tTnder this clause the amount nne to the subscriber from 
a foreman in relation to the chit business shall be a first charge on the 
chit assets. 

39 
tzause 44.-This clause entitles a non-prized or unpaid prized tubs-
criber to inspect the books and records of the foreman on payment of the 
prescribed fee not exceeding five rupees. 
Clause 45.-This clause requires every foreman to preserve all records 
pertaining to a chit for a period of eight years from the date of termina-
tion of the chit. 
Clause 46.-This clause, inter aZia, empowers the Registrar or an officer 
authorised by the State Government to inspect the chit books or records 
maintained by a foreman and also authorises the Registrar to direct the 
foreman to remedy any defects noticed within the speciofied time. 
Clause 47.-This clause saves the power of the Reserve Bank under sec-
tion 45N of the Reserve Bank of India Act to inspect the books and re-
cords of any foreman. It also, inter alia, empowers; the Reserve Bank 
to give appropriate directions to the. foreman on the basis of the inspec-
tion report. 
CWU8es 48 to 59.-These clauses provide for the winding up of chits 
and other connected matters. 
Clause 48 specifies the circumstances in which a chit may be wound 
up and clause 49 lays down the manner in which an applicaUon for the 
purpose may be presented by any non-prized or unpaid prized subscriber. 
Clause 50 prohibits the entertainment of the winding up petition of a chit 
by the Registrar if insolvency proceedings, or, as the case may be, proceed-
ing, for dissolution or witnding up, are pending against the foreman. 
Clause 53 empowers the Registrar to pass appropriate orders in the 
proceedings for the winding up of a chit and clause 54 provides for the 
vesting of all chit assets in the Registrar or a person appOinted by him. 
Clause 56 requires the Registrar to make an entry in his book on the 
passing of an order of winding up of a chit and to notify in the Official 
Gazette that the winding up order has been made. 
Clause 58 empowers the Registrar to award compensation to the fore-
man where he is satisfied that the peti.tion for winding up is frivolous 
or vexatious. 
Clause 59 empowers any party aggrieved by the decision or order (If the 
Registrar to prefer an appeal to the State Government within sixty days 
from the date of receipt of the order. 
Clause 60.-This clause provides for computation of the limitation 
periods where an ord~r refusing to wind up a chit is made. 
ClaU8e 61.-This clause empowers the State Government to appoint a 
Registrar of Chits and other officers for discharging the functions con-
ferred on the Registrar by or under the provisions of the Bill 
Clause 62.-This clause provides for the inspection of the documents 
kept by the Registrar and obtain certified copies thereof. 
Clause 63.-This clause empowers the State Government to specify by 
rules the fees payable under the provisions of the Bill. 

40 
Cla.1I.8es 64 to 72.-These clauses provide for a self-contained machindry 
for the settlement of disputes arising between the foreman and the subs-
cribers, etc., to a chit. The mtention is to provide for a· machinery for 
the settlement of disputes which is cheap and expeditious. The 
provisions made in these clauses are on the lines of the machinery 
provided in the State co-operative laws for the settlement of disputes 
between a society and its members by arbitration. 
Clause 64 provides for the reference of any dispute touching the 
management of a chit business to the award of the Registrar. 
Clause 65 provides for special periods of limitation in respect of disputes 
and empowers the Registrar to condone delay in referring the dispulte 
within the prescribed period. 
Clause 66 enables the Registrar to settle the dispute himself or to refer 
it for disposal to his nominee. This clause also empowers the RegiStrar 
to suspend the proceedings in regard to any dispute if the question at 
issue between the parties is one involving complicated questions of law 
and fact to be decided in a regular suit instituted by any one·of the parties 
to the dispute. But if no suit is instituted within a period of two months 
~ the order suspending the proceedings, the Regiattar shall settle the 
dispute himself. 
Clause 67 seeks to confer on the Registrar certain powers of a civil 
court. 
Clause 68 empowers the Registrar or his nominee to order oonditional 
attachment of the property of a party to the dispute and any attachment 
so made shall have the same effect as an attachment made by a competent 
civil court. 
Clause 69 enables the Registrar to make an award after giving a 
reasonable opportunity to the parties of the dispute of being heard. He is 
also empowered to give his award on the expenses incurred by the parties 
or fees and expenses payable to the Registrar or his nmninee. It has also 
been provided that the award of the Registrar or his nominee shall be 
final and binding on the parties to the dispute subject to an appeal being 
made to the State Government under clause 70. 
Clause 70 provides for the appeal to the State Government against an 
award of the Registrar or his nominee. 
Clause 7L-This clause provides that where any order passed by the 
Registrar or his nominee is for payment of money, such order, on the issue 
Qf a certificate by the Registrar, be deemed to be a decree of a civil court 
and executable as such or where no such certificate is given, the moneys 
specitfied therein win be recoverable as arrears of land revenue. 
Clause 73.- This clause confers an advisory role on the Reserve Bank 
of tendering advice to the Statte Governments on its own motion or on a 
request madre by a Staifle Government on questiqns of policy regulating the 
business of chits. 
CZawe 76.-This clause provides for the penalties for cODtravention of 
certain provisionl of the Bill. 

~I 
Clause 79.-Tbis clauSe provides that offences under clause 11 ahal11M§ 
bognizab1e and no court inferior ~ that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or 
a JUdicial Magistrate of the First class shall try an offence punishable 
under this Act. 
Clause SO.-This clause authorises any officer empowered by the State 
Government to compound an offence punishable under this Act on 
payment of such sums of money as may be specified by the State Gc!vem-
ment in the rules. 
(;taUBe 81.-This clause empowers the Registrar or any officer authorised 
by him to enter and seMCh any place and to seize any documents where 
he has reasons to suspect that any person conducts a chit in contraven-
tion of the provisions of the Bill. 
C14u.se 83.-This clause empowers the State GovernmeIrt to delegate 
any powers exercisable by it (except the power to make rules) to any 
officer of the Stalte Government subject to such terms and conditions as 
may be specified therein. 
Clause 84.-This clause makes the provisions of the Bill inapplicable 
to any chit started befC\Te the commencement of the proposed legislation 
or to any chit the aggregate amount of which does not exceed. one hundred 
rupees. 
Clause 85.-This clause prohibits commercial and co-operative banks 
from commencing Or conducting chit business after the commencement 
of the proposed legislation and a1.$) provides that any chit started by any 
bank /before such commencement may be continued till its completion 
subject to the provisions of the chit agreement and the State laws applic-
able to it. 
CtaU8e 86.-This clause empowers the State Government, in consulta-
tion with the Reserve Bank, to exempt any person or class at persons or 
any chit or class of chits from all or any o~ the provisiOns of the proposed 
legislation. 
CtaUBe SS.-This clause empowers the State Government to make Mel 
to give effect to the provisions of the Bill. 
Ctause 89.-This clause repeals certain State enactments regulating chit 
business and provides for the continued application of those enactments to 
the chits in force on the commencement of the proposed. legislation. 

FINANCIAL MEMoRANDUM 
Clause 61 (1) of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Registrar 
of Chits and as many AdditiO'1l8I, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Registrars as 
may be necessary by the State Gqvernment. Sub-clause (2) of this clause 
provides for the appointment of inspectors of chits and chit auditors. In 
:respect of the Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Delhi and Lakshadweep, any addi-
tional expenditure on this account will be met from Qut of the Consolidat-
ed Fund of India. 
2. Out of these five territories, budget for the Union territory of Delhi 
alone provides at present separate expenditure for the enforcement of the 
Tamil N adu Chit Funds Act, as extended tQ Delhi. This is of the order 
of Rs. 1.75 lakhs annually. After the proposed Legislation comes into 
Joree in that Union territory, it is estimated that there may not be any 
significant addition to the recurring expenditure for the purpose of dis-
charging the duties imposed by this Act in relatiQll to the Union territory 
of Delhi. For the remaining four Union territories, the additional recur-
ring expenditure is estimated as follows:-
1. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
2. Cbandigarh 
3. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
4. Lakshadweep 
TOTAL : 
50,000 
75,000 
50,000 
25,000 
2,00,000 
Thus, the 6dditional recurring expenditure that is likely to be involved 
is estimated to be of the Qt'der of Rupees two lakhs per annum. No addi-
tional non-recurring expenditure is expected. 
The provisions of this Bill do not involve any other expenditure of a 
!recurring or non-recurring nature. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 88 of the Bill confers on the State Govern-
ments the power to make rules to give effect to the provisions of the 
Bill. Sub-clause (2) of that clause specifies the matters in respect of 
which rules may be made under this clause. These i'Ilclude, among other 
things, the form and manner in which an application may be made for 
obtaining the previous sanction of the State Government for the com-
mencement of a chit, the particulars that a chit agreement shall contain, 
the procedure to be followed by the Registrar for the release of the 
security furnished by the foreman for the proper cOnduct of the chits, 
the fees payable under the provisions of the Bill and the procedure to 
be fIollowed for the winding up of chits and for the settlement of disputes. 
2. The matters with respect to which rules may be made are matters 
of procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power is thus nor-
mal in character. 
43 

LOK SABHA 
" . WI' 
I 
BILL 
to provide for the regulation of chit ~unds and for matters connected 
therewith. 
(ShTi Cha1'an Singh, Deputy Prime Ministe1' and Mi.niste1' of Finance.) 