• 
, 
.. 
" ,. 
BUI No. $ 01 Ie 
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES 
BIlL, 1963 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
PARTY 
PDLDcNARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions and interpretation. 
PARTn 
3. Legillative Assemblies for Union territories and their cem. 
position. 
4. Qualification for membership of Legislative Assembly. 
5~ Duration of LegiSlative Assemblies. 
8. Sessions of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dtssoIu· 
tion. 
7. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly. 
8. Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolu-
tion for his removal from oftlce ia under consideration. 
9. Right of Administrator to address and send messages W. 
LeJislative ~ly.. . .. 
10. Rights of the Administrator and Ministers as reipeets LeglJ-
Iative Assembly. 
1.1. Oath or affirmation by members. 
(i) \ .; ... '. ~ . 
• 
., 

,~,: 
13., . Voting in" Auembly, power of Al8embly to act notwith-
8tandiDI vaeancles and quorum. 
13. V..uon of .at&. 
14. DisquaWlcationa for membership. 
1&. Penalty for Bitting and votinJ. before making oath or afBr-
mation or when not qualifted or when disquaWled. 
18. Powers, privileges, etc., of members. 
IT. Salaries and allowances of members. 
18. Extent of legislative power. 
19. Exemption of property of the Union from taxation. 
20. Restrictions on laws pasaed by Legislative Assembly with 
respect to certain matters. 
21. Inconsistency between laWI made by Parliament and lawl 
made by Legislative Assembly. 
22. Sanction of the Adminiatrator requJrecl for oertaiIl Jegiala-
tive proposals. 
21. Special provisions as to ftnandal Bllla. 
2t. Procedure u to lapatD' eIf.BillJ. 
25. Allent to Billa. 
28. Requirements u to sanction and recommendations to be 
regarded" u matters of procedure only. 
27. Annual ftnancial statement 
28. Procedure in Legislative Allembly w:1tII respect to MUmates. 
~~ AppJ:opriation Billa. 
30. Supplementary, additional or excelS grants. 
31. VotaOll account 
32. Authorlsatlon of expenditure pending its sanction by Legil-
latlve Assembly. 
33. Rules of procedure. 
at. Oftletal langua,e or languages of Union tenltory and 
language or languases to be uaecl in LepJIIttft ~bly 
l1wreef 
35. Language to be used for Acts, BUla, etc. 
• H. Restriction on discuuioD in the LelillaUve AuemWy. 
3T. Courts not to inquire Into proceeclinp of Legislative Auem. 
bl)'. 
(' . 

, • 
, 
PARTm 
Da.IMlTATION or CoNSiiTODCII8. 
38. DeftnitiODI. 
39. Asaembly eonstitueJ'lcies. 
• 
40. Repreaentation of Pondicherry. in the HOUle of the People. 
41. Dutlet of Delimitation Commission. 
42. Auoeiate members. 
43. Procedure u to del1m1tation. 
PART IV 
COtnfCIL OF MDnsTI:Rs 
44. Council of Minister •. 
45. Other provisions as to Ministers. 
48. Conduct of business. 
PART V 
MIsc:a.I.Alaous AND TRAlfsmONAL PaOVISIORS 
47. Consolidated Fund of the Union territory. 
48. Contingency Fund of the Union territory. 
G. Audit reports. 
SO. Relation of Administrator and his Ministers to President. 
51. Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery. 
52. Special proviaion for Hill Area of Manipur. 
53. Provisions for election to Parliament from Goa, Daman and 
Diu, and Pondicherry. 
M. Provisions as to provisional Leg1slative Assemblies of eN-
tain Union territories. 
55. Contracts and suits. 
58. Power of President to remove cWIlcultiel. 
57. Amendment of certain enactment& 
58. Repeal and savings. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

LOK . SABRA 
CORBIGENDA 
to 
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TER~ITORIES 
BILL, 1963 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
• 
1. Page 5, in the marginal heading to clause 12,-
.!2!: "powe If read "power" 
2. Page 21, in the marginal heading to clause 50,-
for "Minister " read "Ministers" 
3. Page 27, line 25,-
for "license" read "licence" 
4. Page 27, line 26,-
for "inconsistnt" read "inconsistent" 
5. Page 29, line 15,-
for "MIDE" read "MADE" 
P.T.O. 

6. Page 30, line 2,-
for "FROM" read "FORM" 
7. Page 31, line 37,-
after "the total" insert 
8. Page 4~, line 16,-
for "39.524" read 1f395.24" -
" It , 
9. Correct line numbers on pages 1, 3, __ 4.., - 5~-6-f 30 
31 and 32. 
NEW DELHI, 
February 20, ,1963 
Phalguna 1, 1884 (Saka~ 

BID NO.5 of 1"3 
TIm GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES 
BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
to promde for Legtrlative AlJembliea and CouftCils of Minilter. for 
certain Union t'erritorie. and for certain other matter,. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
PART I 
PREI,IMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territo- Shott title 
ria Act, 1963. and com-meDtCmcnt. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that ,different dates may be appoillted for different provi-
10 slons of this Act and for different Union territories and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be 
. donstrued as a reference to the coming into force of that provision, 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- DeftnitioDi 
and iDter-
(a) ClAdministrator" means the administrator of a Union pfttatioa. 
f 1, territory; 
(b) Clarticle" means an article of the Constitution; 
(c) "assembly constituency" means a constituency provid-
ed under this Act for the purpose of elections to the Legislatwe 
Asiembly of a UnJ.on territory; 

(d) "Election Commission" means the Electton,Commilsion 
appointed by the President under article 324; 
(e) "Judicial Commissioner" includes an Additional Judi-
cial Commissioner; 
(f) "scheduled castes" in relation to a Union territory mean • 
such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such 
castes, races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be sche-
duled castes in relation to that Union territory; 
(g) "scheduled tribes" in relation to a Union territory mean 
such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within 10 
such tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under article 
342 to be scheduled tribes in relation to that Union tenitory; 
(h) "Union territcry" means any of the Union territories 
of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Trlpura, Goa, Damaa and Diu, 
and Pondicherry. 15 
(2) Any reference in this Act to laws made by Parliament iha1l 
be construed as including a reference to Ordinances promulgated 
by the President under article 123 and a referece to Rellllationa 
made by the President under article 240. 
PART II 
LEGISLATIVE AssEMBLIES 
Lcsi~lative 3. (1) There shall be • Legislative Assembly for f!.~h Unloa terri-
Assemblies t for Union ory. 
territories Le As 
20 
and their (2) The tctal number of seats in the gislative sembly of a 
COf;Dpotition. Union territory to be filled by persons chosen ,by atz:ect election:a5 
shall be forty in the case of the Union tenitory of Himachal 
Pradesh and thirty in the case of any other Union territory. 
(3) The Central Government may ~omi.nate not more than two 
persons, not being persons in the service of Government, to be mem-
bers of the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory. 30 
(4) Seats shall be reserved for the scheduled cades iathe Legis-
lative Assembly of each of the Union territories Of Himachal Pra-
desh and Pondicherry. 
(5) The number of seats to be reserved for the scheduled castes 
in the Legislative Assembly of any Union territory under sub-lec- 3' 
tion (4) shall bear, as nelU'ly as may be, the same proportion to the 
total number of seats in the Assembly to be filled by persons chosen 
by direct election as the population of the scheduled castes in the 
Union territory bears to the total population of that Union territory: 

, 
Provided that the determiDation of the number of .eats reserved 
for the scheduled castes as aforesaid shall not aftect the compwlitlon 
of the then existhlg Assembly untn the dilBOlution ·of that Assembly. 
" A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the fiOuaWlcatioD or mem-
, Legislative Assembly of a Union territory unless he- bersbil? 
of Lel!sla-
(4) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before tive Assem-
lOme person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commis- bJy. 
sion an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the 
purpose in the First Schedule; 
10 (b) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and 
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed 
in that behalf by or under any law. 
S. The Legislative Assembly of a Union territory, unless sooner Duration of 
IS dissolved, shan continue for five years from the date appointed for ~~~~~lj~:. 
its first meeting and no longer, and the expiration of the said period 
of five years shaH operate as a dissoluticn of the Assembly: 
Provided that the said period may, while a Prockimation of Emerg-
ency issu.ed under clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, be extend-
ed by the President by order for a period not exceeding one year at 
ao a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months 
after the Proclamation has ceased to operate . 
:as 
•. (1) The AdmiDIstrator shall, from time to time, summon the Sess!o" •. of 
Legislative Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, ~~;!b\;~ 
bat liz mon.ths shall not intervene between its last sitting in one ProdrodPti~? 
d the firs ·· an ISIO",-
seaton an date appointed for its t sitting In the next session. tion. 
(2) The Administrator may, from time to time,-
(4) prorogue the Assembly; 
(b) dissolve the Assembly . 
.,. (1) Every Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose Speaker and 
30 two members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and De- Deputy 
puty Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy ~:~~:: 
Speaker becomes vaeant, the .Anembly shall choose another member A&sembly. 
to be Speabr or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be. 
(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of an 
Aslembly- -
35 (4) shall vacate hW oftlce if he ceases to be a member of the 
~bl3r. . 

. 
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addrelsed., 
if such member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if 
web member 1& the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign b1J 
oftlce; 
(c) may be removed from his oftlce by a resolution of the s 
Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members of the 
Assembly: 
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall 
be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the 
intention to move the resolution: 
Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the 
Speaker shan not vacate his office until immediately before the first 
meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution. 
10 
(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the oftlce 
shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy IS 
Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Assembly as may be 
determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly. 
(4) During the ebsence of the Speaker from any sitting of the 
Assembly, the Deputy Speaker, or, if he is also absent, such person 
as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly, or, 20 
if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined 
by the Assembly, shall act as Speaker. 
(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Dl'pnty Speaker 
of the Legislative Assembly such salaries and aDowanees as may be 
respectively fixed by the I.egislative Assembly of the 1.Tnlnn territory 25 
by law and, nntll provisi.on in that behalf Is 10 made. sueh salaries 
and allowances as the Administrator may, with the approval of the 
President, by order determlae. 
Speaker or 8. (1) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any reso-
~;!k?r not lution for the removal of the Speaker from his office is under con- .30 
to elre.ide sideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution for the removal of _hi C. reso-lution for the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy 
his removal Speaker, shan not, though he is present, preside and the provisions 
from ofticc h is under of sub-section (4) of section 7 shall apply in relation to every sue . 
':Onsidcra- litting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker 3S 
lion. b or, as the cue may be, the Deputy Speaker Is a sent. 
• (2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak In, and otherwise to 
take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly whlle 
any resolution for his remowl from ofAce 1.s under eonsideration in 

a 
the AssEJbly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 12, be 
entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on any 
other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an equa-
lity of votes. . 
S 9. (1) The Administrator may address the Legislative Assembly Rightor 
and may for that pm-pose require the attendtance of members. AdIniniltra-tor to 
(2) The Administrator may also send messages to the Assembly adddre8sesand sen m •• -whether with respect to a Bill then pending in the Assembly or ~ , t •. 
otherwise, and when a message is so sent, the Assembly shall with ~:I;.e 
10 all convenient dispatch consider any matter required by the message 
to be baken into consideration. 
10. The Administrator and every Minister shall have the right to Rights o~ . 
.speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the ::to~d=" 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory, and to speak in, and Ministen II 
IS otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the L::=ve 
Legislative Assembly of which he may be named a member, but Assembly. 
shall not by virtue of this section be entitled to vote. 
11. Every member of the Legislative Assembly of a Union terri- Oath or, 
tory shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the Ad- ~~::~l:~. 
20 ministrator, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath 
or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the 
First Schedule. 
12. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions Voting in 
at any sitting of the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory shall ~:n:rIY, 
25 be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and Assembly: to 
. h act not wlth-voting other than the Speaker or person acting as sue . staoding 
VIQIIIC.es 
(2) The Speaker or ,person acting as such shall not vote in the first and quoru;n. 
instance but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of 
an equality of votes. 
(3) The Legislative Assembly of a Union territory shall have 
30 power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership there-
of, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly of a Union 
territory shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered sub-
sequently that some person who was not entitled 1i0 to do, sat or 
3S voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings. 
(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Legislative 
Assembly of a Union territory shall be ten members or one-third. 
of the total number of members of the Assembly, whichever is 
greater. , .. 
2631 (B) LS-2 . 
• 

V_ion of 
seats. 
8 
(S) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislati~e Assembiy 
of a Union territory there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the 
Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the Assembly or 
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum. 
13. (1) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of S 
the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory and if a person is 
chosen a member both of Parliament and of such Assembly, then, at 
the expiration of such period as may be specified in the rules made by 
the President, that person's seat in Parliament shall become vacant, 
unless he has previously resigned his seat in the Legislative Assembly 10 
of the Union territory. 
(2) If a member of the Legislative Assembly of a Union terrl-
tory~ 
(a) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in 
section 14 for membership of the Assembly, or IS 
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to 
the Speaker, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
(3) If for a period. of sixty days a member of the Legislative 
Assembly of a Union territory is without permission of the Assem- 20 
bly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly may declare his 
seat vacant: 
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days, no 
account shall be taken of any period during which the Assembly is 
prorogued or is adjourned for more than four consecutive days. 2S 
Disquali- 14. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for 
fications for being, a member of the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory-
member-
Ibip. 
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government 
of India or the GDvernment of any State or the Government of 
any Union territory, other than an office declared by law made 30 
'by Parliament or by the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory not to disqualify its holder; or 
(b) if he is for the time being disqualified for being chosen 
as. and for being, a member of either House of Parliament under 
• the provisions of sub-clause (b), sub-clause (c) or sub-clause 35 
(d), of clause (1) of article 102 or of any law made in pursuance 
of that article. 

7 , 
(2) For the purposes of this s~ction, a person .hall not be deem-
ed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the 
Government of any State or the Government of any Union territory 
by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such 
S State or Union territory~ 
(3) If any question arises as to whether a member of the Legis-
lative Assembly of a Union territory has become disqualified for 
being such a member under the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his 
10. decision shall be final. 
(4) Before giving any decision on. any such question, the Presi-
dent shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall 
act according to such opinion. 
15. If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assem- ~ty,':[ 
IS bly of a Union territory before he has complied with the require- ~~=.D 
ments of section 11 or when he knows that he is not qualified or =~c oath 
that he is disqualified for memlbership thereof, he shall be liable in or ~­
respect of each day on which hE! so sits or votes to a penalty of five ~~ ~~ali:: 
hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union. or w'tcn 
disqualified. 
20 16. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules and po.wr8• 
standing orders regulating the procedure of the Legislative Assem- ::~:l :rs, 
bly, there shail be freedom of speech in the Legislative Assembly of mcmben. 
every Union territory: 
(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory 
2S shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of anything 
said or any vote given by him in the Assembly or any committee 
thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication 
by or under the authority of such Assembly of any report,paper, 
votes or proceedings. 
30 (3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of 
the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory and of the members 
and the committees thereof shall be such as are for the time being 
enjoyed by the House of the People and its members and committees. 
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply 
35 in relation to persons who by virtue of this Act have the right to 
speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legis- • 
lative Assembly of a Union territory or any committee thereof as 
they apply in relation to memhE:rs of that Asiembly. 

8 
~:~:f 17. Members of the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory 
members. shall be entitled to receive ~ut:h salaries and allowanePos ~5 may from 
time to time be determined hy the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory by law and, until pr.ovision in that ltehalf is so made, such 
salaries and allowances as the Administrator may, with the approva~ S 
of the President, by order determine. 
Eztentof 
lqislative 
power. 
18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Legislative 
Assemhly of a Union territory may make laws for the whole or any 
part of the Union. territory with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as 10 
any such matter is applicable in relation to Union territories. 
(2) !Nothing in sub-section (1) shall derogate from the powers 
conferred on Parliament by the Constitution to make laws with res· 
pect to any matter for a Union territory or any part thereof. 
~ption 19. The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament IS 
off=~D may by law otherwise providC', be exempted from all taxes imposed 
[{om taa- by or under any law made by the Legislative Assembly of a Union 
OD. territory or by or under any other law in force in a Union territory : 
Restrictions 
on laws 
passed by 
Le&islative 
Assembly 
with respect 
to certain 
matters. 
Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by 
law otherwise provides, prevent any authority within a Union terri- 20 
tory from levying any tax on any property of the Union to which 
such property was immediately before the commencement of the 
Constitution liable or treated as liable, so long as that tax continues 
to be levied in that Union territory. 
ZOo The provisions of article 286, article 287 and article 288 shall zS 
apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislative Assembly of 
a Union territory with respect to any of the matters referred to in 
those articles as they apply in relation to any law passed by the 
Legislature of a State with respect to those matters. 
Inconsisten- 21. If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly 30 
f!w~:'d: of a Union territory is repugnant to any provision of a law made by 
by Parlia- Parliament, then, the law made by Parliament, whether passed 
=t~e 'before or after the law made by the Legislative Assembly of the 
'!y UBisla- Union territory, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislative 
~l;' Asacm- Assembly of the Union territory shall, to the extent of the repug- 3S 
nancy, be void. 
• Expla.nation.-For the purposes of this section, the expression 
"law made by Parliament" shall not include any law which provides 
for the extension to the Union territory of any law In force in any 

\ 9 
other part of the territory of India or any law made before the com-
mencement of this Act, in relation to any matter with respect to 
which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory has power to 
make laws. . 
S 22. NoBill or amendment shall be introduced into, or moved in, Sanction of 
the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory without the previous the Adminls-• trator re-
sanction of the Administrator, if such Bill or amendment makes qui red for 
provision with respect to any of the following matters, namely: _ cclatr.tain lesia-, Ive pro-
(a) constitution and organisation of the court of the Judicial 
10 Commissioner; , 
(b) jurisdiction and powers of the court of the Judicial 
Commissioner with respect to any of the matters in the State 
List or in the Concurrent List. 
posals. 
23. (1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, or special pro-
IS moved in, the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory except on ~~iOns~sto 
the recommendation of the Administrator, if such Bill or amend- B~~ 
ment makes provision for any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the imposition, ~bolition, remission, alteration or re-
gulation of any tax; . 
20 (b) the amendment of the law with respect to any financial 
obligations underlaken or to be undertaken by the Government 
of the Union territory; 
(e) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated 
Fund of the Union territory;' 
25 (d) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure 
charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory or the 
increasing of the amount of any such expenditure: 
(e) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated 
Fund of the Union territory or the custody or issue of such 
30 money: 
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this 
sub-section for the moving of an amendment making provision for 
the reduction or abolition of any tax. 
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not ·be deemed to make provision 
3S for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for 
• 
• • 

Procedure .. 
-to~sina 
of BIDs. 
Assent to 
BiOI. 
10 
the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the de-
mand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered 
or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission: 
alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for 
local pUrp()Ses. s 
(3) A Bill whieh, if enacted and brought into operation, would 
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a Union territory 
shall not 'be passed by th~ Legislative Assembly of the Union terri-
tory unless the Administrator has recommended to that Assembly 
the consideration of the Bill:, 10 
14. (1) A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly of a Union 
territory shall not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Assembly. 
(2) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly of a 
Union territory shall lapse on a dissolution of the A..~sembly. 
Z5. (1) When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly IS 
of a Union territory, it shall be presented to the Administrator and 
the Administrator shall reserve the Bill' for the consideration of the 
President. 
(2) When a Bill is reserved by an Administrator for the considera-
tion of the President, the President shall declare either that he 20 
assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom: 
Provided that the President may direct the Administrator to 
return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with a message 
requesting that the Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any speci-
fied provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirabi- 25 
lity of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in 
his message and, when a Bill is so returned, the Assemblvshl'lll rp-
consider it accordingly within a period of six months from the date of 
receipt of such messa~e and, if it is a~ain passed bv the Assemblv 
with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the Presl- 30 
dent for his consideration. 
Requ're- Z6. No Act of the Le,nslative Assemblv of a Union territory, and 
:::;O~8 ~ no provision in any such Act, shall be invalid by reason only that 
recollUllCDda-some previous sanction or recommendation required by this Act was 
tions to be .. h A . b th Pr 'd t reprded .. not gIven, If assent to t at ct wa,s gIven y e est en . 3S 
marten of 
procedure' 
ODly. 
Annual 
financial 
ltatement. 
27. (1) The Administrator of each Union territory shall in respect 
of every financial year c.ause to be laid before the Legislative Asc;em-
"bly of the Union territory, with the previous approval of the Presi-
dent, a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 

, 
• 11 
Union terrAory for that year, in this Part referred to as the I'annual 
financial statement", 
, 
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual finan-
cial statement shall show separately-
5 (a) the sums required to meet expenditure described. by this 
Act as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the 
Union territory, and 
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed 
to be made from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory; 
10 and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other 
expenditure: i 
(3) The following. expenditure shall be expenditure charged on 
the Consolidated Fund of each Union territory:-
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Administrator 
IS and other expenditure relating to his oflice as determined by the 
President by general or special order; 
(b) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the 
Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India including 
interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other 
20 expenditure connected therewith; 
25 
30 . 
(c) the salaries and.. allowances of the Speaker and the 
Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly; 
(d) expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of 
a Judicial Commissioner;' 
(e) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or 
award of any court or arbitral tribunal; 
(f) expenditure incurred :by the Administrator in the dis-
charge of his special responsibility; 
(g) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or 
by law made by Parliament or by the Legislative Assembly of 
the Union territory to be so charged. 
.. 
28. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charg- Proc:ed~re in 
ed upon the Consolidated Fund of a Union territory shall not be sub- ~~i;e 
mitted to the vote of the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory, with ~pect 
35 but nothing in this BUlb-section shall be construed as preventing the 10 estimata. 
discussion in the Legislative Assembly of any of those estimates. 

Approp'ria-
tioD BIUs. 
SupplemeD-
tary. [ddi-
tio08lor 
.cehiraD'~ 
12 
. ( 
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to otbt=r expenditure 
shall be submitted in the form of demands for grants to the Legisla-
tive Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to 
assent, or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any 
demand subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein. 
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recom-
mendation of the Administrator. 
5 
29. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have 
been made by the Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to pro-
vide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union 10 
territory of all moneys required to meet-
(a) the grants so made by the Assembly, and 
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of 
the Union territory but not exceeding in any case the amount 
shown in the statement previously laid before the Assembly. 15 
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the 
Legislative Assembly which will have the effect of varying the 
amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of vary-
ing the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of the Union territory and the decision of the person presiding 20 
as to whether an amendment is inadmis.;iblc under this sub-section 
shall be final. 
(3) Subject to the other provision~ of this Act, no money shall be 
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory ex-
cept under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the 25 
provisions of this section. 
30. (1) The Administrator shall-
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance 
with the provisions of section 29 to be expended for a particular 
service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient 30 
for the purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during 
the current financial year for supplementary or additional ex-
penditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual . 
financial statement for that year, or 
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during. a 35 
financial year in excess of the amount granted for that seI'Vlce 
and for that year, 
• cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the Union terri-
tory, with the previous approval of the President, another statement 

\ 13 
showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or ~ause to be 
presented to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory with 
such previous approval a demand for such excess, as the case may 
be. 
$ (2) The provisions of sections 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in 
relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and· also 
to any law to be made auth:Jrising the appropriation of moneys out 
of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such expen-
diture or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in 
10 relation to the annual financial statement and the expenditure men-
tioned therein or to a demand for a grant and the law to be made 
for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or grant. 
31. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of Votes OD 
IS this Part, the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory shall have accoWlt. 
power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated ex-
penditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of 
the procedure prescribed in section 28 for the voting of such grant 
and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of BeC-
20 tion 29 in relation to that expenditure and the Legislative Assembly 
shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys 
from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory for the purposes 
for which the said grant is made. 
(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in rela-
2S tion to the making of any grant under sub-section (1) or to any law 
to be made under that sub-section as they have effect in relation to 
the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in 
the annual financial statement. and the law to be made for the au-
thorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund 
30 of the Union territory to meet such expenditure. 
32. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of thi!J ~tho:isl­
Part, the Administrator may authorise such expenditure from the ~:d~tu:· 
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory as he deems necessary for pend~Dllb'ts 
h · thbe" ihhd thslDctlOny a period of not more t an SIX mon s gInnIng w t t e ate of e Leaislativc 
3S constitution of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, pending Assembly. 
the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory. 
. . 2831 (B) ~. ~.\: .. ,~ •.. ;.: 
• • 

Ilules of 
procedure. 
14 
.. 
33. (1) The Legislative Assembly of a Union territory 'may JMke 
ntles for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Act, its pl'0C8-
4ure aha the conduct of its business: 
Provided that the Administrator shall. after consultation with the 
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and with the approval of the , 
PrestC1ent, make rUles-
(4) for securing the timely completion of financial 'buaineilll; 
(b) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of. 
business in, the Legislative Assembly in relation to any 'finalld1il 
'matter or to any Bill for the appropriation ofmoneyllout of •. 10 
COnsoUdated PUnd of the Union territory. 
c(t) 'Until 'rules are made under sub-secti.on (1), the rules ·of, ,pro-
cedure and standing orders with respect to the Legislative Assembly 
ot the State of Uttar Pradesh in force immediately before the com-
mencement of this Act ,in any Union territory. shall have effect in IS 
NIa:tion to the Legislative Assembly of that Union territory . subject 
to':sUchmodifications and adaptations 'as may be made therein by the 
Administrator. 
OfIlcfll 14. Notwithstanding anything in Part xvn of the Constituuon 
~es but 'subject to the provisions of article 348- ao 
~t~~,n (a) the Legislative Assembly of a 'Union terrttory may 'by 
:cs Ja~: law adopt any. on.e or more o~ the languages in use in 'the Union 
to be u:?rn territory or HmdI as the officIal language or languages to be'UM!C! 
~~:;. for all or any of the official purposes of the Union territory: 
tbChOf. 
Provided that so long as the Legislative Assembly of the 2S 
Union territory of Pondicherry does not decide othetwtse, 'the 
French languago.! shall continue to be used as an o'ftlebU'lan-
guage of that Union territory for the same omcial p~s for 
which it was being used in that territory immediately'befctre the 
commencement of this Act: 
Provided further that the President may by order direct-
(i) that the official language of the Union shall be 
adopted .for such of the official purposes of theUnioh terri-
tory as may be specified in the order; 
. (it) that any other language shallo8llo ,be ildopted 35 
throughout the Union territory· or such·part ·thereof for -such 
of 'the ofBclal purposes of the Union territory as may be 
specified in the order, if the President is satiatied ·that • 

5 
10 
, 
• 15 
iubst\mtial proportion of the population of the Union terzi.. 
tory desires the use of that other language for all or any of 
such pl1.rpOMlJ; 
• (b). the, busin~ in the Legislative Assembly of a UDi.Qn 
terr~tory shall be transacted in the official language or lapguages 
of the Union tel'J;1tory or in Hindi or in English: . 
~ovi~ed that the Speaker of the Legislative Ass~IIlbly or 
~rson. acting as sucl:l, as the case may be, may permit any ~­
ber who cannot adequately express himself in any of tl;le lan-
guages aforesaid to address the Assembly in his mother-tongue. 
~ :t\~~\'!f)t~tandiIlg anything contained in section 34, until Par- LaquaF ~ 
liament by law ~therWise ~l'ovides, the authoritative texts;- t~:ifilt: 
(a) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to etc. 
~ moved: in. the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory, 
(~). of all A,cts passed by the Legislative Assembly of a 
Union territory, and 
(c) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under 
any, law IOade by the Leiislative Assembly of a Union territot;y, 
a1aall be in th,e English language: 
20 fl'ovided that where the Legislative Assembly of a Union terri-
to.tY ~ pr,escr~bed any language other than the English language 
for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory or in any order, rule, regulation or 
b,e-Ia\,V iJ&ued under any law made by the Legialative Assembl,y of 
2S t~ .. Unioa telrritOI'J!' , a tJ;aQ~tion of tht;! same in the En&lish l~­
guage published under the ~1I-~hority of the ~strat9r W. ~ 
Official Gazette shall be deemed to be the authoritative text thereof 
in tlut~ili~~ ~~~. 
31. No, _usiirion sl1~l t~e place in the Legislative ~mbly of •• tric:doa 
30 a Union territory with respect to the conduct of any Judicial Com- i:tt~= 
~9'Wf Qr o~ ~y j~e o~ t.~e. &¥reme Court or of a High Court ~~blJ. 
i~. \he 9.~p'l!o{g~ of hi.s d~ties. 
3~. (1). The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative AsIIem-Co~s !W' 
biy of a Union territory shall not be called in question on the ground !:t~D:::" 
35 of any alleged irregularity of procedure. dLei~slof 81S atm 
(2) No Qftlcer or member of the' Legislative Assembly of a Union Asscmbl,. 
ten1~orY in Wp~m pow~ are vested by or under this Act for regula-
tinit t>rOc~ure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order 
in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of' any 
-40 court in respect of the exercise by him of those powel'l. 

DcftDitioDl. 
Assembly 
CODuitu-
eDCies. 
16 
PARTIn 
DELIMITATION OF CONS'rITUENCIES 
38. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "associate member" means a member associated with 
the Delimitation Commission under section 42; S 
(b) "Delimitation Commission" means the Delimitation 
Commission constituted under section 3 of the Delimitation Com-
mission Act, 1962; 61 of I96a. 
(c) "latest census figures" mean the census figures in a 
Union territory ascertained at the latest census. of which the 10 
finally published figures are available; 
(d) "parliamentary constituency" means a constituency 
provided by law for the purpose of elections to the House of the 
People from a Union territory including the Union territory of 
Delhi. 
39. For the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly of a 
Union territory, the Union territory shall be divided into single-
member assembly constituencies in accordance with the provisions 
IS 
Of this Part in such manner that the population of each of the cons-
tituencies shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the 20 
Union territory. 
Re reSCD- 40. There shall be allotted one seat to the Union territory of 
tatroD of PODdicherry in the Bouse of the People and that Union territory 
Pondicherry _L_11 f Ham tary t'tuenc iD the House..... orm ODe pn en CODS I y. 
oftbe 
People. 
Duties of 
Delimitation 
Commi •• lODo 
41, (1) It shall be the duty of the Delimitation Commillion-
(a) to delimit the nssembly constituencies In each Union 
territory, and 
(b) to determine, on the basis of the latest census figures, the 
number of seats to be reserved for tlle scheduled CAstes in the 
Legislative Assembly of Himachal Pradesh, and in the Letrislative 30 
Assembly of Pondicherry, and the constituencies in which thetle 
seats shall be so reser,'cd, 
(2) It shall also be the duty o.f the Delimitation Commluion-
<a) to readjust, on the basis of the latest censu'i figures, the 
division of each of the rnion territories of Delh;, Hb!lachal Pra- 3S 
desh, Manipur and Tripura mto parliamentary constituencies, 
the total n1llDber thel'f'Of remaininc the same; 

61 of 1963. 
10 
, 
(b)\ to determine the constituency in which the seat shall be 
reserved for the scheduled castes or for the scb.er.luled tribes, as 
the case may be; and 
(c) to divide the Union territory of Goa, Daruan and Diu 
into two single-member parliamentary constituencies. 
42. (1) For the purpose of aSSisting tbe Delimitation Commjssion Associate 
in its duties,' the Delimitation Commis.n shall associate with it- members. 
self,- . 
(a) in respect of the Union territory of Delhi, all the mem-
bers of the House of the Peopie representing that Union 
territory; 
(b) in respect of each of the Union territories of Himachal 
Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura, all the members of the House pf 
the People representing that Union territory and three mem-
bers of the Legislative Assembly of that Union territory to be 
nominated by the Speaker of the Assembly from among the 
members thereof; 
(c) in respect of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, 
the two members of the House of the People representing that 
UniOG territory; 
(d) in respect of the Union territory of Pondicherry, three 
members of the Legislative Assembly of that Union territory to 
be nominated by the Speaker of the Assembly &om among the 
members thereof. 
25 (2) The nomination of members of the several Legislative Assem-
blies under sub-section (1) shall be made by the respective Speakers 
thereof as soon as practicable and shall be communicated to the De-
limitation Commission. 
(3) If owing to death or resignation the office of an associate 
30 member falls vacant, it shall be filled as soon as practicable under 
and in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(4) None of the associate members shall have the right to vote 
or to' sign. any decision of the Delimitation Commission. 
43. The provisions of sections 7, 9, 10 and 11 of the Delimitation procedurea' 
3S Commission Act, 1962, shall apply, as far as may be, in relation to t~ delimita-
the delimitation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies under tIOD. 
this Part as they apply in relation to the delimitation of parlia! 
mentary and assembly constituencies under that Act. 

Couoc:ilo£ 
MIDHten. 
1t , 
PART IV I 
COUNcn. OF MmISTDUJ 
44. (1) T~e shaU be a COUD.cl1 01 Nini""'4 ia ... Union 
territory with the Cbief Minister at tb.e h-.d. tAJt,i.tl .... ,111., the 
Administrator in the exercise of his functions in relation to matte1'l 
witk rQil'- t.o wJU,:h Ute Legi.slat.i,ve __ ~ fid .. .,.... ~ twi- s 
to~ hM. powe~ ~ IP8ke lawa Beep' ~ SQ 1M .......... ~.bl-
or under th:s Act to act in his discretion ~r by or UDder any ...... 
exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial fuDc:tioaa: 
~ovided that, in case of difference of opinion between the Ad-
ministrator and his Ministers on any matter, the Adminisvator shall 10 
reiet ~t to the PresUien.t for decision and. ~t 8.«:corQWa tq.t.IM\ decision 
g;i.ven thereon by the Presiclent, aDd peodiRi ~ 4tRi_.,~,flhall 
be competent for the Administrator illaD3 c .. w;hAr~ t.M-.~ is 
10 his opinion so urgent that it is necelNlary ~o~ ~ ~ t~ WJi:n.e- i 
d.i.ate action, to. take such action or to &V~ sJ.U:.tl <»r~ We, the S 
matter as he deems necessary. 
(Z) The Mministrator sh.all, when he is preseat,. pllellide at meet-
~ ot the COWlCil. of Ministers, and, when tlIe Admi,*,tJa»r .. not 
present, the Chief Minister or, if he is also not pre8ItIl$, ... Qther 
Minister as may be detennined by the rules IIl.iil~ ~d~}; S1i.trsection :ao 
(1) of section 46, shall preside at meetin~s of tbe Co1,JR.C,ij.. 
(3) In the exercise of his functions the Administrator ~ each of 
t~e Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, Mantpur and Tripura 
shall have special responsibility for the security of the border and ~ 
fOF' that purpose he may issue such direc lions and take such mea.-
SUFes- as he may think necessary. 
(4) If and in so far as any special responsi"~, Gf.lla.e .4ei.P. 
trator is involved under this Act, he shall. in the exercise of ala 
fUReUons, aet in his discretion. 
(5) 11 any ques.tion arises as to. whether any IIUlU. is or· is .0Ila. 
matter as respects which the Administrator is by; or under tl.lis ~ct 
required to' act in his discretion, the decision of the Adminisvator 
thereon shall De final: 
Provided that in case of any difference of opinion between th~ U. 
Administrator and the Minister on such question it shall ~ r~~rre4' 
for the decision of the President and his de<$ion th~reon shllll b\' 
tinal. 

.. , .. ,. ," 
• 
~) af a!1, questiollarises ·as to whether any matter is oris not 
.. aat1er ... napects whieh the Administrator is required by 'any :law 
,. . ......m. imy juGioial 'or quasi-judicial functions, the decision of 
!the .MlnlDrlstntor thereon shall be final. 
! (7) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tender-
ed by Ministers to the Administrator shall not be inquired into in 
anyeourt. 
G. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President and Other provi-
the other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice M8i~D~ ~ to 
rO-af tIle.chief Mm •• er. IDIS en. 
(;) ".PRe .Ministers shall -hold office during the pleasure of the 
.Prestdat . 
. (3) Tae Council of Ministers shall be collectively. responsible to 
·the Legisl~ive Assembly of the Union territory. 
IS .0(4) Before.a Minister enters upon his office. the Administrator 
shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy accordin~ 
to the forms set out for the purpose in the First Schedule. 
t(3) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is 
not a member of the Lpgislative Assembly of the Unionterrito1'7l' 
20 shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister . 
.• 'ftae wILles 'lIIId atlowRft~es'of Ministers shall bp such as the 
....... ttv.1A ...... ,. 'of the Union territory may from time·to tiIM 
.,.~ .. ' ....... dIle, am8 1IIitil the Legislative ASMmlbly so detennb'M. 
shall be detennined by the Administrator with tile -approval of the 
25 President. -
.. (1) ~e ,Pr-eaicient shall make rules-
(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers; and 
C(~ ,.. the more eomrenient transaC!tion ·of business with the 
Mmtst~1'S ;hre1u6tng the 'procedure to be adopted in the C8!fe 'df 
30 a diftenmce lof optmon ·between the Administratdr and the 
Council of Ministers or a Minister . 
'Omduct·ot 
'business. 
. (f) '!lave lIS dther'W"be prO'\l'ided in this Act, all exeeutive aetion • 
tit 'the Mministrator,whether taken on the advice of his Ministers 
"Or dehetWise, 'sruin 'be expressed to be taken in the name of tbe Ad-
35 ministrator. I 

20 • • 
(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name 
of the Administrator shall be authenticated in such manner as may 
be specified in rules to be made by the Administrator, and the validity 
of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be 
called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument 5 
made or executed by the Administrator. 
PART V 
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSmONAL PROVISIONS 
CoDlOlidated 47. (1) As from such date as the Central Government may, by 
fi:do:f the notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues 10 
territory. received in a Union territory by the Government of India or th~ 
Administrator of the Union tflrritory in relation to any matter with 
reaped to which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory has 
power to make laWs. and all grants made and all loans advanced to 
the Union territnry from the Consolidated Fund of India and . all IS 
moneys received by the Union territory in repayment of loans shall 
form .one Consolidated Fund to be entitled "the Consolidated Fund 
of the Union territory". . 
(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of a Union territory 
shall be appropriated except in accordance with, and for the purposes 20 
and in the manner provided in, this Act. 
(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a Union territory, 
the payment of moneys into 9Uch Fund, the withdrawal of moneys 
therefrom and all other matters connected with or ancillary to those 
matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Administrator With 25 
the approval of the President. 
CoDtinlency 48. (1) There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the 
Fw:-d of tile nature of an imprest to be entitled "the Contingency Fund of the 
~::~:ry. Union territory" into which shall be paid from and out of the Con-
solidated Fund of the Union territory such sums as may, from time to 30 
time; be determined by law made by the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory; and the said Fund shall be held by the Administra-
tor to enabie advances to be made by him out of such Fund. 
(2) No advances shall be made out of the Contingency Fund of the 
• Union territory except for the purposes of meeting unforeseen ex- 35 
penditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Legisla-
tive Assembly of the Union territory under appropriations made by 
law. 

, 21 
• 
(3) The Administrator may make rules regulating all matters 
connected with or ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys 
into, and the withdrawal of moneys from, the Contingeney Fund of 
the Union territory. . 
S 4 •. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor.Gener81 of India ~~~~I. 
relating to the accounts of a Union territory for any period subse-
quent to the date referred to in sub-section (1) of section 47 shall 
be submitted to the Administrator who shall cause them to be laid 
before the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory. 
10 so. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Administrator and Rel~io.D of 
his Council of Ministers shall be under the general control of, and ~~r:is~­
comply with such particular directions, if any, as may from time to MiD!stcr, LO 
t · be' b th P id t Prc>1dcnt. Ime given y, e res en. 
51. If the President, on receipt of a report from the Administrator Provi~ion in 
IS of a Union territory or otherwise, is satisfied- r:ii~! of 
con~titution­
(a) that a situation has arisen in which the administration of a1 machin-
the Union territory cannot be carried on in accordance with the cry. 
provisions of this Act, or 
(b) that for the proper administration of the Union territory 
20 it is necessary or expedient so to do, 
the President may, by order, suspend the operation of all or any of 
the provisions of this Act for such period' as he thinks fit and make 
such incidental and consequential provisions as may appear to him 
to be necessary or expedient for administering the Union territory 
25 in accordance with the provisions of article 239. 
52. (1)' There shall be a Standing Committee of the Legislative Sp~ial pro-
Assembly; of the Union territory of Manipur consisting of all the HufiJeO:. of 
members of the Legislative Assembly who for the time being rep- Manipur. 
resent the constituencies situated in the Hill Areas of that territory: 
30 Provided. that the Chief Minister and the Speaker shall not be 
members of the Standing Committee. 
(2) The President may by notification determine the area which 
shall be regarded as the Hill Areas of Manipur and specify the 
constituencies situated in the Hill Areas. 
35 (3) Every Minister shall have the right to speak in, and other .. 
wise take part in the proceedings of, the Standing Commfttee, but • 
sh.all not, by virtue of such right, be entitled to vote at any meeting 
of the Committee if he is Dot a member thereof. 
2831 (B) LS-f. 
• • 

22 , , 
(4) The following matters in so far as they relate to the Hill Areas 
of ManipUr shall be within the purview of the Standing Committee 
to the extent and in the manner provided by this section, namely:-
(a) the allotment, occupation, or use, or the setting apart of 
land (other than any; land which is a reserved forest) for the 5 
purposes of agriculture or grazing or for residential or other nOD-
agricultural purposea or for any other purpose likely to promote 
the interests of the inhabitants of any village or town situated 
within the Hill Areas: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to 10 
require the reference to the Standing Committee of any proposal 
for compulsory acquisition of any land for a public purpose; 
(b) the management of any forest not being a reserved 
forest; 
(c) the use of any canal or water course for purposes of IS 
agriculture; 
(d) the regulation of the practice of ;hum or other fonDS of 
shuting cultivation; 
(e) the estab1ishment of vill'age or town committees or 
councils and their powers; and any other matter relating to 20 
village or town administration, including village or town police 
and public hf'llllth and sanitation; 
(/) the appointment or succession of chiefs or headmen; 
(g) the inheritance of property; 
(h) marriage; and 
(i) social customs. 
(S) Every Bill which is not a financial Bill and contains mainly 
provisions dealing with matters specified in sub-section (4) shall, 
upon introduction in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory 
2S 
of Manipur, be referred to the S1anding ComInittee for considera- 30 
tion and report to the Legislative Assembly. 
(6) U any question arises whether a Bill attracts the provisions 
of sub-section (S) or not, the question shall be referred to the 
Administrator and his dech:ion thereon shall be final. 
(1) Any Bill referred to the S1Janding Committee under sub- 35· 
section (S) may, if 80 recommended by the Standing Committee, be 
passed by the Legislative Assembly with such variations .a may be 
necessary in its application to areas other than the Hill Areas. 
l' 

• , 
• (8) When a Bill as reported by the Standing Committee is not 
. passed by the Legislative Assembly in the form in which it has been 
reported but is passed in a form which, in the opinion of the Speaker, 
is substantially different from that as reported by the Standing Com-
S mittee, or is rejected by the Legislative Assembly, the Speaker shall 
submit to the Adminiatrator-
(a) in any case where the Bill has been passed by the Legis-
lative Assembly in a substantially different form, the Bill as 
passed. by the Assembly together with the Bill as reported by 
10 the Standing Committee; 
(b) in any case where the Bill is rejected by the Assembly, 
the Bill as reported by the Standing Committee. 
(9) The Mmjnistrator shall, as soon as possible after the sub-
miaslon to him of the Bill, return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly 
IS with a message recommending either that the Bill be withdrawn or 
that it be passed in the form in which it has been reported by the 
Standing Committee or in the form in which it has been passed. by: 
the Legislative Assembly and the message received from the Admin-
istrator shall be reported by the Speaker to the Assembly and 
20 accordingly, the Bill shall be deemed to have been withdrawn, or as 
the case may be, be deemed to have been passed by the Assembly 
in the form recommended by the Administrator. 
(10) The Standing Committee shall have power to consider and 
pass resolutions recommending to the Administrator llny legislative 
25 or executive action with respect to matters specified in sub-section 
(4), so however that the executive action relates to general questions 
of policy and the legislative or executive action does not involve any 
fln.ancial commitments other than expenditure of a routine and 
1n.cidental character. 
30 (11) The Council of Ministers shall normally give effect to the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee under sub-section (10) 
but if the Council is of the opinion that it would not be expedient 
to do 10 or that the Standing Committee was not competent to make 
any such recommendations, the matter shall be referred to the 
3S Administrator whose decision thereon shall be final and binding on 
the Council and action shall be taken accordingly. 
(12) The Administrator shall have special responsibility for· 
aecuring the proper functioning of the Standing Committee j. 
accordance with this section . 
• 
/ 

Provisiom 
for election 
to Parl;a-
ment from 
Goa, Daman 
and Diu, 
and pond i-
cllerry. 
Provi,ions 
as to pro-
vIsional 
Legislative 
Assemblies 
of certain 
Union 
tcrritorici. 
, 
53. (1) As soon as practicable after the commencement of this 
Ad,- elections shall be held in accordance with law-
(a) to fill the seats in the Bouse of the People allotted to 
the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu; and 
(b) to fill the seat in the House of the People and the seat S 
in the Council of States allotted to the Union territory of Pondi-
cherry. 
(2) Notwithstwlding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, the members nominated to represent the Union 
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu in the House of the People shall 10 
continue to be such until the election of the members to fill the two 
seats in that House allotted to that Union telTitory: . 
Provided that where the dates of election of the members are 
different, the members so nominated shall cease to be members of 
that House on the earlier of those two dates. IS 
Explanation.-In this sub-section, the expression "date of election" 
has the same meaning as in section 67A of the Representation of .the 
People Act, 1951. 
54. (1) In this section "constituency" means-
(a) in each of the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, 20 
Manipur and Tripura, a territorial council constituency provided 
in accordance with the provisions of the Territorial Councils Act, 
1956, for the purpose of elections to G Territorial Council consti-
tuted under that Act; 
(b) in the Union telTitory of Pondicheny, a territorial con- 25 
stituency provided in accordance with the provisions of the 
State of Pondicherry (Representation of the People) Order, 1955, 
for the purpose of elections to the Representative Assembly ()f 
the State of Pondicherry. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, until the Legislative 30 
Assembly of each of the Union territories of Himachal Pra-
desh, Manipur, Tripura and. Pondicherry has been duly con-
stituted .an4 summoned to meet for the first . session under and in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, the following prOvisions 
shall apply in rel~tion to the Legislative Assembly of each of those 35 
Union teITitories, namely:-
(a) every constituency in existence immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall on and from such commence-
ment be deemed to be an assembly constituency·· of the same 
43 of 1951. 
103 of 1956. 

, 25 
name for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly of 
the Union territory under this section; 
(b) the seat reserved in any constituency for the scheduled 
castes in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh shall be 
S reserved in the assembly constituency of the same name for those 
castes; 
(c) every person who immediately before the commence-
ment of this Act is a member elected from a constituency to fill 
a seat in the Territorial Council of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur 
10 or Tripura or in the Representative Assembly of Pondicherry 
shall, on and from such commencement, represent the assembly 
constituency of the same name in the Legislative Assembly and 
shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly 
from that constituency, and every person who immediately 
IS before such commencement is a member nom.intated to the Terri-
torial Council by the Central Government shall be deemed to be 
nominated to the Legislative Assembly; 
and accordingly on the commencement of this Act, the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory shall, without any further action or 
20 step being taken in this behalf, be deemed to be the duly constituted 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory: 
Provided. that a person who, immediately before the commence-
ment of this Act, is a member of the Representative Assembly of 
Pondicherry shall not become a member of the Legislative Assembly 
25 thereof unless he is a citizen of India. 
35 
(3) The period of five years referred to in section 5 shall in the 
case of a Legislative Assembly functioning under this section be 
deemed. to have commenced-
(i) in the case of the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Himachal Pradesh, on the 3rd August, 1962; 
(ii) in the case of the Legislaltive Assembly of the Union 
territory of MIlnipur, on the 3rd August, 1962; 
(iii) in the case of the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Tripura, on the 1st August, 1962; and 
(i..,) in the case of the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Pondicherry, on the 25th August, 1959. 
(4) In other respects, the provisions of Part II shall apply in rela-
tion to a Legislative Assembly functioning under this section as they , 
apply in relation to a Legislative Assembly constituted lUlder and in 
40 accordance with the provisions of that Part. 

Contracts 
and suits. 
Power of 
President to 
ftmOve 
dill.cul tiel. 
, 
28 
• 55. For the removal of doubts it is hereby declar~ that-
«(I) all contracts in connection with the administration of a 
Union territory are contracts made in the exercise of the 
executive power of the Union; 
(b) all suits and proceedings in connection . with the admin- 5 
tstration of a Union territory shall be instituted by or against 
the Government of India. 
56. If any difticulty ames in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act and, in particular, in relation to the constitution of the Legisla-
tive Assembly for any Union territory, the President may by order 10 
do anythina not inconsistent with such provisions which appear to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the 
difticulty. 
:::::nt 57. (1) The enactments specified in the Second Schedule are 
caactmeDtl. hereby mnended to the extent and in the manner mentioned in the 15 
fourth column thereof. 
(2) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commence-
ment of this Act in connection with the preparation or revision of 
electoral rolls for the purpose of elections to the HOUle of the People 
from the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry, 20 
and to the Legislative Assemblies of those Union territories shall, in 
10 far as they are in eonformity with the provisions of the Represen-
tation of the People Act, 1950, as amended by this Act, be deemed to 43 of 1950. 
have been done in accordance with law. 
58. (1) The following laws are hereby repmled:-
«(I) the Territorial Councils Act. 1956; 
(b) the Decree No. 46-2381, dated the 25th October, 1946, 
as subsequently amend.ed. TelatinJt to the Representative 
Assembly of the State of Pondicherry; 
(c) the Decree No. 4'1-1490, dated. the 12-tb August, 1947, as 30 
subsequently amended, relatinii to the setting up of a Council of 
Government t.n the State of Pondicherry; 
(d) the State of Pondicherry (Representation of the People) 
Order, 1955, In 10 far al it relateS to the Repreaentative Assembly 
of Pondlcberry. 35 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Territorial Councils Act, 
103 of 1956. 
• 1058,- . 10 3 of 1956. 
(II) every oftlcer aDd other emplOJ'ee of the Territorial 
Council of a Unloa ..... ltOl')' &erma. ancl_ the eou..c:u iIDme-
• 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
40 
, 
distely before IUch repeal shall beeeme an ofticer or other 
employee of Govemment and shall be employed in connection 
with the administration of the Union territory with such designa-
tion as the Administrator may determine and shall hold office 
by the same tenure and at the same remuneration and on the 
same terms and conditions of service as he would have but for 
such repeal beld the same and shall continue to do so unless and 
until such tenure. remuneration and terms and conditions are 
duly altered by the Administrator: 
Provided that-
(i) the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions 
of service of any such officer or other employee shall not be 
altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of 
the Central Government; 
(ii) any service rendered by any such officer or other 
employee before such repeal sh811 be deemed to be service ren-
dered in connection with the administration of the Union 
territory; 
(iii) the Administrator may employ any such officer or 
other employee in the discharge of such functions as the 
Administrator may think proper and every such officer or 
other employee shall discharge those functions accordingly; 
(b) anything done or any action taken (including .any noti-
:fication, order, scheme, rule, form, notice or bye-law made or 
issued, any license or permission granted) under the repealed 
Act shall in so far as it is not inconsistnt with the provisions of 
this Act, continue in force unless and until it is superseded by 
anything done or any action taken in accordance with law; 
(c) all debts, obligations and Dabilities incurred, all con-
tracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be 
done by, with or for the Territorial Council before such repeal 
aha1I be deemed to have been incurred, eDtered. into or engaged 
to be done in exercise of the executive power of the Union fol'l 
the purposes of the administration of the Union territory," 
(d) ell assessments, valuations, measurements or divisions 
made by the Territorial Council shall, in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force • 
unless and until they are superseded by any assessment, valua-
tion, measurement or division made by the AdminJatrator in 
accordance with law; • 

28 
(e) all properties, mowble and immovable, and all interests 
of whatsoever nature and kind, vested in the Territorial Council 
immediately befo1'le such repeal shall, with all rights of what-
soever description, used, enjoyed or possessed by that Council, 
vest in the Union for the purposes of the administration of the S 
Union territory; 
(t) all rates, taxes, cesses, fees, rents, fares and other 
charges which immediately before such repeal were being law-
fully levied by the Territorial Council shall continue to be levied 
at the same rate at which they were being levied by the Council J 0 
immediately before such repeal until provision to the contrary 
is made by law; 
(g) all rates, taxes, cesses, fees, rents, fares and other charges 
due to the Territorial Council immedoilltely before such ~al 
shall be deemed to be due to the Union in connection with IS 
the administration of the Union territory; 
(h) all suits, proseeutioDS and other legal proceedinp insti-
tuted or which might have beett instituted by 01' against the Ter-
ritorial CouncR may be contiD_ or lutltuted by or apiD&t the 
Government of IDdia. 20 

• 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 4 (a), 11 and 45 (4) ] 
FORMS OF OATHS OR AFFIRMATIONS 
I 
5 FORM OF OATH OR -AFFIRMATION TO BE MADE BY A CANDIDATE FOR 
ELECTION TO THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
• 
"1, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the 
- . . do swear in the name of God LegIslative Assembly of--- ----- ------- --
10 solemnly affirm 
that I will b~ar true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India 
as by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and 
integrity of India." 
II 
15 FORM OF OATH OR AFFIRMATION TO BE MID! BY A MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF A UNION TERRITORY 
"I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the 
do swear in tht! name of God 
20 Legislative Assembly of . ------sOiemIiIy affirm - -----
25 
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India 
as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity 
of India and that I will faithfully discharge th~ duty upon which I 
am about to enter." 
III 
FORM OF OATH OF OFFICE FOR A MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 
OF A UNION TERRITORY 
do swear in the name of God "I A B - --~--- - -------- - that I will bear true faith 30 "', solemnly affirm 
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, 
that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will 
faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for 
the Union territory of , and that I will do right to all 
35 manner of people in accordance with the Constitutipn and the law 
without fear or favour, affection or ill-will." 
29 
2631 (B) LS-r5. t 
• • 

30 
IV 
( 
FROM OF OATH OF SECRECY FOR A MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL or MINISTERS 
OF A UNION 'l'IIIUU'I'OItY 
do swear in the name of God. "I, A.B., 01 I aftlr . - - that I will not directly or • emny m ~ 
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any mat-
ter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become 
known to me as a Minister for the Union territory of:-----
except as may be required for the due discharje of my duties as such 
Minister." 

I 
, 
• 
'nt.E SECOND SCHEDutE 
(See section S7) 
ENACTMENTS AMENDBD 
-----------------Year Number Short title 
3 
Amendments 
4 
• 
S rMD 43 The ~n of the In section 4, in sub-section (I), the 
People AI;:t, 1950. words "to Goa, Dimln and Diu" 
shall be omitted. 
10 
IS 
35 
4S 
In section 138, in sub-section (1), 
for the words "a Union rerritory", 
the words "the Union territory of 
Delhi" shall be substituted. 
In section 130, in sub-sections (1) and 
(.2), for the words "a Union territory", 
the words "the Union territory 
of Delhi" shall be substituted. 
. In section 27A, -
, (I) sub-section (.2) shall be omitted; 
(ia) for sub-section (4), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(4) The electoral c:olleae for each 
of the Union territories of Himachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Tripara and Pon-
dicherry shall couaist of the elected 
members of the Legislative Assembly 
constituted for that rerritory under 
the G'Overnment of Union Territories 
Act, 1963." 
In the: First Schedule,-
(i) after the entry "24. Goa, 
Daman and Diu .. 2", the entrr, 
"2S. Pondicherry. . . I' 
shall be inserted and the existina entry 
rdadlll to North East Frontier Tract 
shall be renumbered as entry 26; 
(ii) for the total the following total 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"TOTAl. soS". 
In the Second Schedule, after entry IS 
relatilll to Nqaland, the following 
entries shall be inaerted, namely:-
"16. Hirna~hal Pradesh . 40 
17. Manipur 30 
18. Tripura 30 
19. Goa, Daman and Diu 30 
20. Pondicherry • 30" 
The Fifth Schedule, shall be omitted . 
• ----.-. __ ------_.-------- ___ ... -_0_. ____ --_. 
31 

Year 
I 
• 
Number 
43 
37 
, 
_____ . _________ ---L __ _ 
Short title Amendments 
3 4 
The Representation ofthe In section 4, the words "to Goa 
People Act, 19SI. Daman and Diu" shall be omitted •• 
The States Reorganisa-
tion A(.'t, 19S6. 
In section IS., in sub-section (~),-
(i) for the words "the Governor", 
the words "the Governor or Adminis- 5 
trator, as the case may be" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in the proviso, the words and 
figures "or under the provisions of 10 
section S of the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963, as the case may 
be" shall be added at the end. 
In section 3Z, the words and figures 
"or under the provisions of the J 5 
Government of Union Territories 
Act. 1963, as the case may be." shall 
be added at the end. 
In section 36, in clause (a) of' sub-
section (.2),- 20 
(i) the word "and" occurring after 
the figures "191" .~all be omitted; 
(ii) for the words and figure "Part 
II of this Act", the words and figures 
"Part II (If this Act, and sections 4 and 2~ 
14 of the Government of Union -
Territories Act, 1963" shall be 
substituted. 
In section 55, the words and filure~ 
"or under the Government of Union 30 
Territories Act, 1963, as the case may 
be." shall be added at the end. 
In section 100, in clause (a) of sub-
section (I), after the words "this 
Act", the words and figures "or the 35 
Government of Union Territories 
Act, 1963." shall be inserted. 
In section 15 of the' States Reorganisa-
tion Act. 1956,-
(i) in clause (d). after the word 40 
"Maharashtra", the words "and the 
Union territories of Dadra and Naill' 
Haveli lind Goa, Daman and Diu" 
shall bl' inserted; 
(ii) in dause (e). after the word 45' 
"Kerala", the words "and the Union 
territory of Pondicherry" shall be 
inserted. 
-------_ ... _---_ ............ _. __ .. _-_ .•. _._ .. _ .. -..•..... _ .. __ ._ ...... --_.-

• 
STAttMENT OF OBJECTs ANb R~AS6:NS 
Article 239A of the Constitution introduced by the Constitution 
(Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, enables Parliament to create 
by law Legislatures or Councils of Ministers or both in the Union 
territories of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura, Goa, Daman and 
Diu, and' Ponddcherry. In pursuance thereof the present Bill seeks 
to establish Legislatures and also Councils of Ministers in those ter-
ritories broadly on the pattern of the scheme in force in some of the 
Part C States under the Government of Part C States Act, 1951, 
which was repealed by the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
Provision has been made in the Bill to allot one seat to the Union 
territory of Pondicherry in the House of the People and for filling 
by direct election that seat as well as the two seats allotted to the 
Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu now filled by nominated 
members. Provision has also been made for the delimitation of 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies in the several Union ter-
ritories (including the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies 
in the Union territory of Delhi) by the Delimitation Commission 
recently set up under the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962. 
The Bill also seeks to amend the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, 
so as to provide representation to the Uriion territories of Goa, Da-
man and Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Pondicherry in the Zonal 
Councils. 
The provisions of the Bill are further explained in the nores on 
clauses, wherever necessary. 
NEW DELHI; LAL BAHADUR. 
The 7th Februar1/, 1963. 
33 

Notes on Clauses 
Clause 3.-The clause provides for the establishment of Legislative 
Assemblies in the Union territories of Himachal Prade~h, Muipur, 
Tl'ipura, Goa, Daman and Diu. and Pondicherry. It is proposed that 
the number of elected seats in the legislature of Himachal Pradesh 
shall be 40 and 30 in the legislatures of other territories. Two seats 
in each Legislative Assembly are proposed to be filled by nomination 
by the Central Government. Himachal Pradesh and Pondicherry have 
sizable scheduled castes population. Hence, provision has ,been made 
in this clause for reservation of seats for members of scheduled 
castes in these two territories on population basis. 
Clause 4.-The qualifications for membership of the legislatures of 
the Union territories prescribed in this clause are the same as those 
prescribed for membership of Legislative Assemblies of States. Pro-
vision has also been made in this clause that candidates for election 
to the legislatures shall subscribe an oath or affirmatioa to bear true 
faith and allegiance to the Constitution and uphoM t.he sovereignty 
and integrity or India. 
Clause 5.-The term of legislatures of the Union territories pres-
cribed in this clause is the same as that prescribed in respect of Legis-
lative Assemblies of States. 
Clauses 6 to 17.-The provisions of these clauses generally tollow 
the corresponding provisions applicable to the Legislative Assemblies 
of States and members of those Assemblies. 
Clauses 18 to 31.-These clauses define the scope of the legislative 
powers of the legislatures of the Union territories and relate to pro-
cedural matters including the procedure regarding assent to Bills. 
Clause 18 provides that the power of Parliament to make laws with 
respect to any matter for a Union territory shall remain unfettered. 
Subject to this, the legislatures shall have power to legislate in 
respect of such of the matters enumerated in the State and Concur-
rent Lists as are applicable in relation to Union territories. Clause 
21 provides that no law enacted by a legislature of a Union territory 
shall over-ride any law passed by Parliament on or after the com-
mencement of thE; Act. Clauses 19 and 20, provide that powers of 
the legislatures of the Union territories shall be subject to the same 
restrictions as are applicable in relation to State legislatures under 
articles 285 to 288 of the Constitution. 
34 
• 

• 
Clause 25 provides that Ems passed by the legh;lature::; of Union 
territories shall become law only after they have been assented to by 
the President and prescribes the procedure in this behalf. 
Clause 32.-This clal)se empowers the AdministrDtor to 3uthorise 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory as ?n 
inteTim measure because it will not he possible for the legislatures to 
authorise expenditure immediately on the constitution of such Fund. 
Clause 33.-This empowers the le~islatures of Union territories to 
make their rules of procedure and also empowers the Administrator 
to make rules in relation to financial business after consultation with 
the Speaker and with the approval of the President. Sub-clause (2) 
of this clause provides that until the rules are made, the legislatures 
shall follow the rules of procedure and standin!! orders of the Legis-
lative Assembly of Uttar Pradesh with such modifications and ~dap­
tations as may be made by the Administrator. 
Clausf 34.-This empowers the legislatures of the Union territori~s 
to adopt by law.. either Hindi or any language or 1lmguages in use in 
the territory as the officiallan~age. In view of the provisions of the 
Treaty of Cession between the Govf>rnments of India and France, in 
the case of Pondicherry, provision has been made that so long as the 
Le~81ative Assembly of Pondicherry doeR not decirie otherwise, the 
French language shall continue to be used as an official language of 
that Union territory for the same official purposes for which it was 
being used in that territory immediately before the commencement of 
the Act. 'ryle President is also empowered to direct thoe use of the 
official language of the Union for specific official purposes of the Union 
territory and to direct the use of any other language for any such 
purposes if he is satisfied that a ~ubstantial proportion of the popula-
tion of the territory desires the use of that languB,:!e. Sub-clause (b) 
of this clause relate.s to the lan{{uage to be used in the legislatures and 
follows the 'provisions of article 210 (1) of the Constitution. 
Clause 35.-This clause relates to the langua~e to be used for Acts. 
Bills, etc. and follows the corresponding provisions of article 348 of 
the Constitution. 
Clauses 38 to 43.-These clauses relate to delimitation of parliamen-
tary constituencies in the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Tripura and Delhi and also assemblr constituencies in the 
territories in which legislativp assemblies are proposed to be estab-
lished. Clause 53 provides that the two seats in the House of the. 
People allotted to thc Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu sh"an 
be filled by electiQll as soon as practicable. Accordingly. provision 
has been included in the.se clauses for the delimitation of two parlia- • 
• 

36 
• mentary constituencies in this territory also. Clause 40 provides for 
one seat in the House of the Peopl~ being allotted to Pondicherry and 
the entire Union territory being treated as one parliamentary consti-
tuency for the purpose. Clause 41 empowers the Delimitation Com-
mission to delimit the constituencies. Clause 42 provides for the asso-
ciation of l\{embers of the House of the People representing the Union 
territory concerned and three members of the respective Assemblies 
nominated by the Speakers thereof, with the Delimitation Commis-
sion. In Pondicherry, however. only three members of the Legislative 
Assembly of the territory will be associated because the question of 
delimiting parliamentary constituencies does not arise in that terri-
tory. In Goa, Daman and Diu, the delimitation will have to be done 
before the election of members of the Legislative Assembly. Hence, 
only the two members representing the territory in the House of the 
People are pro~ed to ,be associated with the Commission. Clause 
43 makes the relevant provisions of the Delimitation Commission Act, 
1962, applicable to the delimitation under this Act. 
Clauses 44 to 46.-Clause 44 provides for the constitution of a 
Council of Ministers in each Union territory having a legislature to 
aid and advise the Administrator in the exercise of his functions 
except when he is required to act in his discretion or in a judicial or 
quasi-judicial capacity. In the case of the Union territories of Hima-
chal Pradesh. Manipur and Tripura which are border territories, the 
security of the border is proposed to be made the special responsibi-
lity of the Administrators in these territories. Clause 45 contains 
other provisions regarding the Councils of Ministers and clause 46 
relates to the procedure in regard to conduct of busineSs. 
Clauses 47 to 49.-These clauses provide for the constitution of a 
separate Consolidated Fund and a Contingency Fund in each Union 
territory having a legislature and for the audit reports in respect of 
the accounts of the territory being IlBid before the legislature of that 
territory. • ~. • ........... .. 
Clauses 50 and 51.-These clauses provide that-
(a) the Administrator and his Council of Ministers shall be 
under the general control of, and comply with the directions 
given by, the President; 
(b) the President may suspend the operation of all or any 
of the provisions of the Act when it is necessary or expedient to 
do so and make other arnmgements for the administration of the 
territory concerned. 
• 

, 37 
£lauae 51.--This clause provides for the constitution of a' Standing 
Committee consisting of members from the Hill Areas of MaDiPlR" 
which are inhabited mostly by tribal people. It also provides that it 
shall be the special responsibility of the Administrator to secure the 
proper functioning of this Committee in accordance with this clause. 
The subjects which will come within the purview of this Committee 
undet'su'b-c:1ause (4) correspond to those specified in paragraph'S (1) 
of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. The procedural provisions 
relating to this Committee generally follow the corresponding provi-
sions' applicable in respect of the regional committees constituted 
under article 3'11(1-) of the Constitution. 
Clause 53.-This clause provides for elections being held as 'soon 
as practicable to fill the SEets in the House of the People allotted to 
the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry and 
the seat in the Council of States allotted to the Union territory of 
Pondicherry and makes consequential provisions in respect of the 
existing members nominated to represent the Union territory of Goa, 
Daman end Diu in the House of the People. 
Clause 54.-The existing elected members of the Territorial Coun-
cils of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura were chosen by direct 
election in 1962 and the members of the Representative Assembly of 
Pondicherry were similarly chosen ip 19~9 on the basis of adult fran-
chise. Their five year term of office as members of those bodies com-
menced on the dates mentioned in sub-cleuse (3). This clause pro-
vides that the members of those bodies shall become members of the 
Legislative Assembly of the respective territory and the Legislative 
Assemblies shall be deemed' to have been constituted accordingly for 
the unexpired portion of their term. 
Clause 55.-The present Bill does not alter the relationship of the 
Union territories with the Union. To place the matter beyond doubt, 
this clause seeks to make it clear that contracts, suits end proceedings 
in connection with administration of the territories are contracts 
made in exercise of the executive power of the Union and suits and 
proceedings instituted by or against the Government of India. 
Clause 56.-This clause provides for the removal of difficulties 
which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Act. 
Clause 57.-The Second Schedule referred to in this clause makes 
consequential amendments in the Representation of the People Act, 
1950, and the Representation of the People Act, 1951. The Schedule· 
also seeks to amend section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, 
so as to include the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 
2631 (B) 1j!-6. 

38 I 
. Goa, Daman and Diu in the Western Zone and the Union territory of 
Pondioherry in the Southern Zone. 
Clause 58.-lt -is proposed that the functions entrusted to the. Terri-
torial Councils of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura should 
re-vest in the Government. Hence, this clause provides for the repeal 
of the Territorial C9uncils Act, 1956, and makes consequential provi-
sions regarding the employees of the Councils and other matters. It 
also repeals the decrees under which the Representative Assembly 
and the Council of Government of Pondicherry were constituted, and 
the State of Pondicherry (Representation of the People) Order, 1955, 
on the basis of which elections were held to the Representative 
Assembly in 80 far as that Order relates to that Assembly. 

'. FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3(1) of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Legislative 
Assembly for each of the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Tripura, Goa, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry". Clause 
44(1) provides for the setting up of a Council of Ministers in each of 
these territories. Clauses 7(5), 17 and 45(6) relate to payment of 
salaries and allowances to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, 
members of the legislatures and the Ministers. The expendtture on 
such salaries and allowances and other expenditure of an incidental 
nature such as on the additional staff for the Legislatures and Coun-
cils of Ministers will be met from the Consolidated Fund of the Union 
territory concerned. However, if there is any time lag between the 
setting up of these bodies and the constitution of the Consolidated 
Fund of the territories, the expenditure for that interval will be met 
from the Consolidated Fund of the Union. The interval, if any, is 
expected to be very short. It is not possible to precisely estimate the 
expenditure on such salaries and allowances at this stage. On a rough 
estimate, it is expected to be about Rs. 20 lakhs per annum in all the 
five territories but, to some extent, there would be a corresponding 
saving on account of the abolition of the Territorial Councils of 
Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura and the Representative 
Assembly and Council of Government of Pondicherry. 
Clause 4& provides fer ene seat in the !leuse of the People beiBl 
allotted t& Pondicherry. Clauses 41 aad 42(1) provide for tile deUmf-
tation of constituencies being done by the Delimitation Commission 
and association of members of the House of the People and some 
members of the loeal legislatures with the Commission for this pur-
pose. elause 53(1) provides for electiens being held to fill the seats 
in the House of the People allotted to Goa, Daman, and Diu, and 
Pondicherry. These provisions will involve an additional expendi-
ture of about Rs. llakh from the Consolidated Fund of India of which 
about Rs. 10,000 will be of a recurring nature on account of the salary 
and allowances of the Member of the House of the People represent-
tng Pondlcherry. In the case of Goa, Daman and Diu, as the existing 
nominated members will be replaced by elected members no extra 
expenditure is involved. 
The expenditure on the administration of these territories which II 
at present being met d.irectly from the Consolida1¢ f1:1P.d of India. 
8~ 

40 
by far exceeds the revenue from these territories, HeI'ce, as envis-
aged in clause 47(1), it will be necessary to give substantial financial 
assistance to these territories by way of grants and loans from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. The magnitude of this assistance may 
vary'irorn time to time depending on the size of the dev~lopment 
programmes and the revenue of these territories, The foHowing 
figUres which are based on the estimates of revenue and expel1diture 
. for 'the year 1962-63 give some idea of the magnHude of such assist-
ance: ...... 
----------------
RI. h laths 
-------------_ .. _---
Himacltal Pnadosh 
Mladipar· 
Tripaft 
9oa, Daman and Diu 
P.oDilic:herry 
Revenue 
---432 -81 
79'31 
55-82 
5°1'19 
240'62 
Expenditure Likely defic:.t 
--- ---2156'66 112 3 '8S 
904'14 ~'P3 
1149'38 1093'46 
S77"71 16'~ 
~9"S24 IS4'62 
Clause 58(2) provides that on the repeal of the Territorial Coun-
cils Act, 1956,-
(a) all the officers and employees of the Territorial Councils 
of Himachal Pradesh, Manipar and Tripura shall be employed in 
connection with the administration of the territory concerned and 
that .service rendered by such officers and employees under the 
-T~ Couwills shall be deemed .to be Go"er1l1tWl~ serv..ice; 
{p} aU-debts, obligations and 'liabilities iJmrnred., aU e.ttnllts 
'eDtere~ . into by' the Territorial Councils, ete.; 'Shatl-be cleeamd-to 
haye -'been incurred or entered into in exarci8e 1d tile 't!!!DCDtive 
power of the Union for the purpOMJll-ofd.e .., .. tni .. t;'.-;z>f 
the UlUlm -territories: ... . ' 
(G} 8Th auita,. prosecuthms and other legal proceedings lnsti-
tuW or which might have been instituted by or aga,inst the 
T-erritorial Councils may be contiJlued or instituted by or against 
the Govenunept of India. 
These liabilities will be met from the Consolidated :Fund 'of. India 
until the Consolidated Funds are constituted for the telTitOrieI' aDd 
thereafter, from the Consolidated Fund of the territory :CODce1'Iled. 
How.ever, in effect, this will not involve extra expenditure because of 
_ the savings due to the abolition of the Territorial CoUDCils, 

• , 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 33 of the Bill empowers the Legislative Assembly of a 
Union territory to make rules for regulating its procedure 'ami con-
duct of business and provides that such rules relating to financial 
businesa may be made by the Administrator in ~oDSultation with the 
Speaker and with the approval of the President. . 
Clause 46 provides for the rules regarding the transaotion'ef.busi-
ness with the Ministers being made by the President and empowers. 
the Administrator. to -make rules· presoribiBg til. mamer.·:of autiIIIiU-
cating ·th~ orders -issued' in his name. . 
Clause 47(3) provides for rules regarding the custody, etc., of the 
Consolidated Functbeing made by the Administra&o1' with the appro-
val of the President and clause 48 (3) empowers the Administrator to 
make -similar -rules -regarding the ContiDgeucy Fund. 
The,.matteJ:s mentioned. above are of a procedural natureand-Uru 
dUllcult to .provide .for these matters in detail in the Bill itseH. The 
~opOll8ls. ®f' 4elegal1 oD .of legislative power are. thus of .a nOrJ!l&l . 
. ell,.,... . 
,. .. 
4.1 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEoPLE ACT 1950 J 
(43 OF 1950) 
• • • • • • 
PiUiaI of 4. (1) The seats allotted unde!" section 3 to the State of Jammu 
H:.eiJl,:~ and Kashmir, to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, to the Laccadive, 
Peoplc. Minicoy and Amindivi Islands, to Dadra and N,agar Haveli, to Goa, 
Daman and Diu and to the Part B tribal areas shall be seats to be 
ft1Ied by persons nominated by the President 
.' 
e e· e • 
Blectoral 13B. (1) The electoral roll for each parliamentary constituency in 
~D • a Union territory, each assembly constituency and each Council 
constituency shall be prepared and revised by an electoral registration 
oftlcer who shall be such officer of Government or of a local authority 
as the Election Commission may, in consultation with the Govern-
ment of the Sta~ in which the constituency is situated, designate 
or nominate in this behalf. 
• e • • • • 
PART lIB 
ELECTORAL RoLLS FOR PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES 
Electoral 13D. (1) The electoral roll for every parliamentary constituency 
~ for paP other than a parliamentary constituency in a Union territory shall 
=. consist of the electoral rolls of so much of the assembly constituencies 
cieI. as are comprised within that pa!I'liamentary constituency; and it shall 
• 
not be necessary to prepare or revise separately the electoral roll 
for any such parliamentary constituency. 
(2) The provisions of Part III shall apply in relation to every pu-
Iiamentary constituency in a Union territory as they apply in rela-
tion to an assembly constituency. ' 
• • • • • • 

t , 43 
PART IVA 
MANNER OF FILLING SEATS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES TO BE Fu.I.D 
BY REPRESENTATIVES OF UNION TERRITORIES 
Z1A • • • • • • 
(2) The electoral college for each Union temtory specified in the eoDltitutioD 
first column of the Fifth Schedule shall consist of the nwnber of :!aiD': 
members specified in the second column thereof opposite to lhat tbe 8 .u~ of 
Union territory to be chosen by direct election. ~:S::I of 
Stake ....... 
• • • • • • to Uole. 
territodol, 
(4) The electoral colle.ge for each of the Union territories of 
Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura shall consist of the mem-
bers of the Temtarial Council constituted for that territory under 
the Territorial Councils Act, 1956, but shall not include any of the IOJ of ,,,6. 
members nominated by the Central Government under sub-.ection 
(3) of section 3 of that Act. 
• • • 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
• 
Allocation of seats in the House of the People 
Name of State, Union territory or area 
• • • 
16. Napland • 
17. Delhi 
18. Himachal Pradesh 
19. Manipur • 
20. Tripura • 
2 I. AndlDlao aod Nicobar Island, 
Z3. Lac cadtve, Miniooy and Amindivi Islands ... ,. 
23. Dadra lind Nagar Haveli 
240 Goa, Daman and Diu. 
2,. North But Frontier Tract 
• • 
. 
" 
: 
TOTAL· • 
TOCII 
Dumber 
ofleetl 
• 
I 
S 
.. 
3 
a 
I 
I 
I 
3 
I 
., !OS 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for Legislative Assemblies and Councils of M~nisters 
for cenain Union territories and for certain other matters 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recolllrilended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N.KAUL, 
Seaetary. 
~hri Lal Bahadur Shastri, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 