11: \. . :. .. !. 
THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) BILL. 1964 
" BILL 
to regulate the procedure 10,- the i7l.t1eltigctt~ sftd proof 'of' :.,.. 
miabehaviour or incapacity of 4 Judge of the Supreme Coon tir 
of a High Coon aM fo,- the pre.sen.t4tioft 01 4" add, ... : . bsl. 
ParZiament to the Preside7l.t. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year 01 the 
Republic of India as follows:-
L (1) Thia Act may be called the Judgel (Inquiry) Act, 11K Short dtll 
-.d com. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date 81 the Central Govera- mcace ...... 
5 ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwile requira,-
(a) "Judge" means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of • 
High Court and includes the Chief Justice of India and the 
Chief Justice of a High Court; 
10 (b) "Special Tribunal" means a Special Tribunal coDlt1tuted 
under section 3j 
(c) ccprescribed" means prescribed by rule. mad. and ... 
this Act. 
a. (1) If the PresideDt, on receipt of a report or otherwise. Is trI TllveseI..-
~ wo~· J5 opinion that there are ,ood grounds .lor maldDr an brvestiptlOD behaviour t!It 
into the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge, he may constitute tr,::rr". 
a Special Tribunal for the purpose of making such aD investigatiOll ~pee:i.1 
lind forward the grounds of such iDvesU,atlOll to the Ipedal 1"rib.-L 
Trlhuaal. ., ,!: I· !.~ 

(2) The Special Tribunal shall consist of such number of mem-
bers, being not less than three in numiber, as the President may 
think fit to appoint from among persons who are or have been 
Judges of the Supreme Court and one of them shall be appointed 
by ,the President as the Chairman thereof. 
(3) The Special Tribunal shall frame detmite charges against 
the Judge on the basis of which the investigation is proposed to be 
held. .._ I 
(4) Such charges together with a statement of the grounds on " 
which .each charge is based shall be communicated to the Judge and 10 
he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a written 
statement of defence within such time as may be specified in this 
behalf by the Special Tribunal. 
(5) Where it is alleged that the Judge is unable to discharge the 
duties of his office efficiently due to any physical or mental incapa- I, 
city and the allegation is denied, the Special Tribunal may arrange 
,for the medical examination of the Judge by such Medical Board as 
may be appointed by the President for the purpose and the Judge 
'shall submit himself to such medical examination within the time 
specified in this Ibehalf by the Special Tribunal. 20 
(6) The Medical Board shall undertake such medical examina-
tion of the Judge as may be considered necessary and submit a 
report to the Special Tribunal stating therein whether the incapacity 
.is ,auch as to render the Judge unfit to continue in office. 
(7) The Special Tribunal may, after considering the written 25 
statement· of the Judge and the medical report, if any, amend the 
charges framed under sub-section (3) and in such a case, the Judge 
,shall be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a fresh writ-
ten statement of defence. 
(8) The President may, if he so thinks fit, appoint a person to 30 
conduct the case against the Judge. 
4, (1)' Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the 
Special Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure 
In making the investigation and shan give Q reasonable opportunity 
to the Judge of cross-examining witnesses, adducing evidence OD 
behalf of the defenoe and of being heard. 35 
(2) After the close of the investigation, the Special Tribunal 
aba11 submit Its report to the President stating therein its fbldinp 

3 
on each of the charges separately with such observatlons on the 
whole case as it may think fit. 
(3) The President shall cause the report submitted under IUb-
section (2) to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
S S. For the purpose of making any investigation .under this Aet, ~ of 
the Special Tribunal shall have the powers of a CIvil court while ~buall. 
trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of 
the following matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
10 and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of document.;· 
(e) receiving evidence on oath; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witneuel 
or documents; 
I, (e) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
6. Each House of Parliament may take into consideration the r;~r:'e!:t.. 
report of the Special Tribunal in relation to the misbehaviour or tloa of 
incapacity of a Judge and if the Judge is to be removed from his ~.~i=. 
office on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity, it shall 
10 present an address to the President for such removal through the 
Speaker of the House of the People, or the Chainnan of the Coun-
ell of States, as the case may be. 
'I. (1) The Central Government may, by notiftca~on in the Oftl-:r:r.. 
cial Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
as (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it 
is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com-
prised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session imIne-
,0 diately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that" any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
J5 anything previously done under that rule, 

STATE!4ENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Constitution, a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a 
High Co\Ut may be removed from office on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Judge after an address has been 
presented to the President for such removal by each House of 
Parliament. This Bill seeks to regulate the procedure for the 
investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge 
and tw: the presentation of an address to the President. 
R. M. HAJARNAVIS. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill provides for the constitution Of a Special TribunalfoJ; 
the purpose of making an investigation into the misbehaviour or 
incapacity of a Judge. The appointment of a Special Tribunal, if 
and when constituted, will involve lome expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India and the amount of expenditure will 
depend upon the nature of the investigation to be made by the 
Special Tribunal. It is not, however, possible at this stage to say 
whether it would be necessary to constitute any Special Tribunal 
or to give an estimate of the amount of expenditure, if an,., lik.q 
to b. incurrecl. 

IIlDIORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause T of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules to oarry out the purposes of the Bill when enacted. The 
matters in respect of which rules may be made relate to the proce-
dure to be followed by the Special Tribunal and the powers of the 
Special Tribunal. TheM are matters of detail and the deleaatioD 
et l.,wati .... power 11 of • nonQal charac1er. 

LOI. SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to rCJUlate the procedure for the investigation and pro)f of the 
misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge of the Supreme 
Court or of a High Court and for the presentation of an 
address by Parliament to the President. 
(Shri R. M. Hajarnavis, Minister of State 
in the Ministry 0/ Home Affairs.) 