8ID No. 5. of 1,61 
THE BANKING COMPANIES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1961 
...... 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA 
ON 21ST FEBRUARY, 1961) 
". 
('."! ..... 

10 of 1949. 
BUI NO.5 of 1"1 
THE BANKING COMPANIES (AMENDMENT)' 
BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SAlIBA) 
A 
BILL 
fur1Jher to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Amendment) Short tide. 
Act, 1961. 
5 Z. In section 35A of the Banking Companies Act, 1949 (herein- ~t 
after referred to as the principal Act), in clause (a) of sub-section :~A. eec:tiOD 
(l), for the words "national interest", the words "public interest" 
shall be substituted. 
3. In section 44A of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), the words Ameadm~Dt 
10 "in national interest" shall be omittec:t. ~. acctlOD 
• 
IS 
20 
• 
4. In section 45 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1)-
(i) for the wards "any agreement", the words "any 
agreement or other instrument" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "the banking company", the words "a 
banking company" shall be substituted; 
(b) for sub-sections (4) to (9), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:-
, (4) During the period of moratorium, if the Reserve 
Bank is satisfted that-
(a) m the public interest; or 
(b) in the interests of the depositors; or 
Amendment 
of section 
45. 
1885 (B) L.8.-I. 
• 

2. 
(c) in order to secure the proper ma,nagement of 
. the banking company; or 
(d) in the interests of the banking system of the 
country as a whole,-
it is necessary so to do, the Reserve Bank may prepare a 5 
scheme-
(i) for the reconstruction of the banking company, or 
(ii) for the amalgamation of the banking company 
with any other banking institution (in this section refer-
red to as "the transferee bank"). 10 
(5) The scheme aforesaid may contain provisions for all 
or any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the constitution, name and registered oftice, the 
capital, assets, powers, rights, interests, authorities and 
privileges, the liabilities, duties and obligations, of the 15 
banking company on its reconstruction or, as the case may 
be, of the transferee bank; 
(b) in the case of amalgamation of the banking com-
pany, the transfer to the transferee bank of the 
business, properties, assets and liabilities of the banking 20 
company on such terms and conditions as may be speci-
fied in the scheme; 
(c) any change in the Board of directors, or the 
appointment of a new Board of directors, of the banking 
company on its reconstruction or, as the case may oe,2S 
of the transferee bank and the authority by whom, the 
manner in which, and the other terms and conditions on 
wbich, such change or appointment shall be made and 
in the case of appointment of a new Board of directors 
9r of any director, the period for which such appointment ~o 
uall be made; 
(d) the alteration of the memorandum and articles 
of association of the banking company on its reconstruc-
tion W, as the case may be, of the transferee bank 
for the purpose of altering the capital thereof or for such 3S 
other purposes as may be necessary to give effect to the' 
reconstruction or amalgamatioD; 

5 
10 
15 
zo 
• 
30 
35 
• 
3 
(e) subject to the provisions of the scheme, the 
continuation by or against the banking company on its 
reconstruction or. as the case may be, the transferee bank, 
of any actions or proceedings pending against the bank-
ing company immediately before the date of the order of 
moratorium; 
(f) the reduction of the interest or rights which the 
members, depositors and other creditors have in or 
against the banking company before its reconstruction 
or amalgamation to such extent as the Reserve Bank 
considers necessary in the public interest or in the 
interests of the members, depositors and other creditors 
or for the maintenance of the business of the banking 
company; 
(g) the payment in cash or otherwise to depositors 
end other creditors in full satisfaction of their claim-
(i) in respect of their interest or rights in or 
against the banking company before its recons-
truction or amalgamation; or 
(ii) where their interest or rights aforesaid in or 
against the banking company has or have been re-
duced under clause (f), in respect of such interest 
or rights as so reduced; 
(h) the allotment to the members of the banking 
company for shares held by them therein before its 
reconstruction or amalgamation [whether their interest 
in such shares has been reduced under clause (f) or not], 
of shares in the banking company on its reconstruction 
or, as the case may be, in the transferee bank and where 
any members claim payment in cash and not allotment 
of shares, or where it is not possible to allot shares to 
any members, the payment in cash to those members in 
full satisfaction of their c1aim-
(i) in respect of their interest in shares in the 
banking company before its reconstruction c:r 
amalgamation; or 
(ii) where such interest has been reduced under 
clause <f), in respect of their interest in shares as so 
reduced; 
(i) the continuance of the services of all the 
employees of the banking company (excepting such of 

4 
them as not being workmen within the meaning of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 are specifically men- 14 of 1947. 
tioned in the scheme) in the banking company itself on 
its reconstruction or, as the case may be, in the 
transferee bank at the same remuneration and on S 
the same terms and conditions of service, which they 
were getting or, as the case may be, by which they were 
being governed, immediately before the date of the order 
of moratorium: 
Provided that the scheme shall contain a provision 10 
that-
(i) the banking company shall payor grant Dot 
later than the expiry of the period of three years 
from the date on which the scheme is sanctioned 
by the Central Government, to the said employees 15 
the same remuneration and the same terms and 
conditions of service as are applicable to employees 
of corresponding rank or status of a comparable 
banking company to be determined for this purpose 
by the Reserve Bank (whose determination in this 20 
respect shall as final); 
(ii) the transferee bank shall payor grant Dot 
later than the expiry of the aforesaid period of three 
years, to the said employees the same remuneration 
and the same terms and conditions of service as are 2S 
applicable to the other employees of corresponding 
rank or status of the transferee bank subject to the 
qualifications and experience of the said employees 
being the same as ox equivalent to those of such 
other employees of the transferee bank: 30 
Provided further that if in any case under clause (ii) 
of the first proviso any doubt or difference arises as to 
whether the qualification and experience of any of the 
said employees are the same as or equivalent to the 
qualifications and experience of the other employees of 35 
corresponding rank or status of the transferee bank, the 
doubt or difference shall be referred to the Reserve 
Bank whose decisions thereon shall be final; 
(;) notwithstanding anything contained in clause 
(i) where any of the employees of the banking company 40 
not being workmen within the meaning of the Industrilfl 
DIsputes Act, 1947 are specifically mentioned in the 14 of 1947. 

5 
10 
I. of 1941. 
15 
20 
30 
35 
• 
• 
S 
scheme under clause (i), or where any employees of 
the banking company have by notice in writing given 
to the banking company or, as the case may be, the 
transferee bank at any time before the expiry of one 
month next' following the date on which the scheme is 
sanctioned by the Central Government, intimated their 
intention of not becoming employees of the banking 
company on its :reconstruction or, as the case may be, 
of the ttansferee bank, the payment to such employees 
of compensation, if any, to which they are entitled under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and such pension, 
gratuity, provident fund and other retirement benefits 
ordinarily admissible to them under the rules or 
authorisations of the banking company immediately 
before the date of the order of moratorium; 
(k) any other terms and conditions for the :recon-
struction or amalgamation of the banking company; 
(I) such incidental, consequential and supplemental 
matters as are necessary to secure that the reconstruction 
or amalgamation shall be fully Bnd effectively carried 
out. 
(6) (a) A copy of the scheme prepared by the Reserve 
Bank shall be sent in draft to the banking company and also 
10 the transferee bank and any other banking company 
concerned in the amalgamation, for suggestions and objec-
tions, if any, within such period as the Reserve Bank may 
specify fo:r this purpose; 
(b) the Reserve Bank may make such modifications, if 
any, in the draft scheme as it may consider necessary in the 
light of the suggestions and objections received from the 
banking company and also from the transferee bank, and 
any other banking company concerned in the amalgamation 
and from any members, depositors or other creditors of each 
of those companies and the transferee bank. 
(7) The scheme shall thereafter be placed before the 
Central Government for its sanction and the Central 
Government may sanction the scheme without any modifica-
tions or with such modifications as it may consider neces-
sary; and the scheme as sanctioned by the Central Gov-
ernment shall come into force on such date as' the Central 
Government may specify in this behalf: 

6 
Provided that different dates may be specified for 
different provisions of the scheme. 
(8) On and from the date of the coming into operation 
of the scheme or any provision ther.eof, the scheme or. such 
provision shall be binding on the banking company or, as 5 
the case may be, on the transferee bank and any other 
banking company concerned in the amalgamation and also 
on all the members, depositors and .other creditors and 
employees of each of those companies and of the transferee 
bank, and on any other person having any right or liability 10 
in relation to any of those companies or the transferee bank. 
(9) On and from such date as may be specified by the 
Central Government in this behalf, the properties and assets 
of the banking company shall, by virtue of and to the extent 
provided in the scheme, stand transferred to, and vest in, 15 
and the liabilities of the banking company shall, by virtue 
of and to the extent provided in the scheme, stend trans-
ferred to, and become the liabilities of, the transferee bank. 
(10) If any diftlculty arises in giving effect to the provi-
sions of the scheme, the Central Government may by order 20 
do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which 
appears to it necessary or expedient for the purpose of re-
moving the diftlculty. 
(11) Copies of the scheme or of any order made under 
sub-section (10) shall be laid before both Houses of Parlia- 25 
ment, as soon as may be, after the scheme has been sanc-
tioned by the Central Government, or, as the case may be, 
the order has been made. 
(12) Where the scheme is a scheme for amalgamation of 
the banking company, any business acquired by the trans- 30 
feree bank under the scheme or under any provision 
thereof shall, after the coming into operation of the scheme 
or such provision, be carried on by the transferee bank 
in accordance with the law governing the transferee bank, 
subject to such modifications in that law or such exemptions 3S 
of the transferee bank from the operation of any provisions 
thereof as the Central Government on the recommendation 
of the Reserve Bank may, by notitication in the Official 
Gazette, make for the purpose of giving full effect to the • lCb~e: 40 

a of 1961. 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
7 
Provided that no such modification or exemption shall 
be made so as to have eftect for a period of more than seven 
years from the date of the acquisition of such business. 
(13) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent 
the amalgamation with a banking institution by a single 
scheme of several banking companies in respect of each of 
which an order of moratorium has been made under this 
section. 
(14) The provisions of this section and of any scheme 
made under it shall have effect notwithstanding anythin, to 
the contrary contained in any other provisions of this Act or 
in any other law or any agreement, award or other instru-
ment for the time-being in force. 
(15) In this section, "banking institution" means any 
banking company and includes the State Bank of India or 
any other banking institution notified by the Central Gov-
ernment under section 51.'. . 
s. In section 45L of the principal Act,- AmeDdmalt 
of eection 
«(I) in 8U~ion (3), for the words "a scheme of recon- 4,L. 
struction of a banking company or its amalgamation with an-
other banking company", the words "a scheme of reconstruction 
or amalgamation of a banking company" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words "a scheme of recon-
struction of a banking company or its amalgamation with another 
banking company", the words "a scheme of reconstruction or 
amalgamation of a banking company" shall be substituted. 
6. (1) The Banking Companies (Amendment) Ordinance, 1961, f."" aDd 
is hereby repealed. VUllo 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
30 taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act, as if this Act had commenced on the 
4th day of February, 1961. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Banking Companies Act, 1949, was amended in 1960 in order 
to facilitate the grant of expeditious relief in the case of banking 
companies which may be taken into liquidation and the reconstruc-
tion or amalgamation of other banking companies, wherever this 
may be considered necessary or desirable. 
The question of transferring the assets and liabilities of certain 
banking companies to other institutions, which may be in a better 
position to serve the interests of the depositors, has since been under 
consideration, but certain practical difficulties have been encounter-
ed in bringing into force or implementing the schemes which have 
been formulated for this purpose. In order to eliminate these 
difficulties and to clarify the legal position beyond any doubt, the 
Banking Companies' (Amendment) Ordinance was issued early in 
February, 1961, substantially amplifying the provisions of section 45 
of the Banking Companies Act. 
The present Bill is intended to replace the Ordinance. 
j 
Nmw DBLRI; 
The 11th Febnu&ry, 1961. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
• 

lof 1956' 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS I'ROM THE BANKING COMPANlBS ACT, 1949 
10 or 1949 
• • • • • 
35A. (1) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that-
(4) in the national interest; or 
• 
44A. • • • • • • • • • 
Power oftbe 
Reserve 
BlOt to Jive 
direction •• 
(7) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall Procedure 
aftect the power of the Central Government to provide for the for~­
amalgamation of two or more banking companies in national :'~~ina 
interest under section 396 of the Companies Act, 1956: companiee. 
Provided that no such power shall be exercised by the Central 
Government except after consultation with the Reserve Bank. 
• • • • • 
45. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing Apply to 
power of Reserve Bank to provisions of this Part or in any other law =t't:-
or any agreement, for the time being in force, where it appears to 1U1p~0D 
the Reserve Bank that there is good reason so to do, the Reserve &;. i::: 
Bank may apply to the Central Government for an order of company ADd 
moratorium in respect of the banking company. :h~ 
• • • • • 
reconstitu-
tion or amal-
(4) During the period of moratorium, if the Reserve Bank is ,amadon. 
IBtisfted that-
(4) in the national interest; or 
(b) in the interests of the depositors; or 
(c) in order to secure the proper management of the bank-
ing company; or 
(d) in the tDterests of the banking system of the country 
as a whole, 
it is necessary so to do, then, notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act or in any other law or any agreement or instrument for 
the time being in force, the Reserve Bank may prepare a scheme-
• 
(i) for the reconstruction of the banking company, or 
9 
1885(B) L.S.4. 

10 
(ii) for its amalgamation with another banking company, 
with such constitution, with such capital, assets, powers, rights, 
interests, authorities and privileges, with such liabilities, duties and 
obligations and on such terms and conditions as may be specified in 
the scheme. 
(5) The scheme may provide for the appointment of a new Board 
of directors-
(a) of the banking company on its reconstruction, or 
(b) of the other banking company with which it is amal-
gamated in accordance with the scheme, and the authority by 
whom, the manner in which, the period for which, and the 
other terms and conditions on which, such appointment shall be 
made, shall be as provided in the scheme. 
(6) The scheme aforesaid may contain such conJequential, 
incidental and supplemental proviSiOns as may, in the opinion of 
the Reserve Bank, be necessary to give effect to the reconstruction, 
or, as the case may be, the ama1gamation, and may also provide for 
the reduction of the interest or rights which the members or 
creditors have in or against the banking company before its 
reconstruction or its amalgamation with the other banking com-
pany, to such extent as the Reserve Bank considers necessary in 
the public interest or in the interests of the members and creditors 
or for the maintenance of the business of the banking company. 
(7) (a) A copy of the scheme prepared by the Reserve Bank 
shall be sent in draft to the banking company and in the case of 
amalgamation, also to the other banking company with which it is 
proposed to be amalgamated for suggestions and objections, if any, 
within such period as the Reserve Bank may specify for this 
purpose; and " 
(b) the Reserve Bank may make such modifteations, if any, in 
the draft scheme as it may consider necessary in the light of the 
suggestions and objections received from the banking company or 
in the case of amalgamation, from both the banking companies or 
from any members or creditors thereof. 
(8) The scheme shall thereafter be placed before the Central 
Government for its sanction and the Central Government may 
sanction the scheme without any modifteations or with such modi-
fications as it may think necessary; and the scheme as sanctioned 
by the Central Government shan come into force on such date ,as 
the Central Government may specify in this behalf and shall, as 
from that date, be binding on the banking company or companies 
concerned and also on all the members and creditors thereof. 

II 
(9) Copies of every scheme made under this section shall be 
laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after the 
scheme has come into force. 
45L. • • • • • 
• • • • • 
Publiceu-
minatioD of 
directors and 
auditors.etc:1 
(3) Where a scheme of reconstruction of a banking company in rc: Of 
or its amalgamation with another banking company has been ~!.~)' 
sanctioned by the Central Government under section 45 and the:e. f 
Central Government is of opinion that any person who has taken ~t. 
part in the promotion or formation of the banking company or has 
been a director or auditor of the banking company should be 
publicly examined, that Government may apply to the High Court 
for the examination of such person and if on such examination the 
High Court finds (whether a fraud has been committed or not) that 
that person is not fit to be a directOl\ of a company or to act as an 
auditor of a company or to be a partner of a firm acting as such 
auditors, the Central Government shall make an order that that 
person shall not, without the leave of the Central Government, be 
a director of, or in any way, whether directly or indirectly, be 
concerned or take part in the management of any company or, as 
the case may be, act as an auditor of, or be a partner of a firm 
acting as auditors of, any company for such period not exceeding 
five years as may be specified in the order. 
(4) Where a scheme of reconstruction of a banking company or 
its amalgamation with another banking company has been sanc-
tioned by the Central Government under section 45, the proviSiOns 
1 of 19S6. of liection 543 of the Companies Act, 1956, and of section 45H of 
this Act shall, as far as may be, supply to the banking company as 
they apply to a banking company which is being wound up as if 
the order sanctioning the scheme of reconstruction or amalgamation, 
as the case may be, were an order for the winding-up of the banking 
campanYi and any reference in the said section 543 to the applica-
tion of the official liquidator shall be construed as a reference to 
the applicatiCHl of the Central Government . 
• • • • • 
• 

LOK SABHA 
• BILL 
fUrther to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 