Bill No. 5 of 1991
नमक

THE INFANT MILK FOODS, FEEDING BOTTLES AND INFANT
FOODS (REGULATION OF PRODUCTION, SUPPLY AND
id DISTRIBUTION) BILL, 1991

4 ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES

CLauses

1. Short title, extent and commencement.

2. Definitions.

3. Certain prohibitions in relation to infant milk foods, feeding
bottles and infant foods.

4. Prohibition of incentive for the use or sale of infant milk foods
or feeding bottles.

5. Donations of infant milk foods or feeding bottles or equipment
or materials relating thereto.

6. Information on containers and labels of infant milk foods or
infant foods.
7. Educational and other materials relating to feeding of infants to
Health care system.

Inducement to health worker for promoting use of infant milk
etc.

relating to empleyces of person who produces,
or sells infant milk foods, ete.

to the owner of the seized infant milk.
or infant food or container thereof.



Bill No. 5 of 1991
ey
THE INFANT MILK FOODS, FEEDING BOTTLES AND INFANT
FOODS (REGULATION OF PRODUCTION, SUPPLY AND
DISTRIBUTION) BILL, 1991 ry
A
BILL

to provide for the regulation of production, supply and distribution of
infant milk foods, feeding bottles and infant foods with a view to
the protection and promotion of breast-feeding and ensuring the
Propér use of infant foods and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto,

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Infant Milk Foods, Feeding Bottles

Short

g ani Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) ‘ive
5 Act, 1991. extent

2 and com-

It extends to the whole of India. mence.

It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government वि

tion in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Act, unless the context otherwise Tequires,— Defini-
“ tions.

nent” includes any notice, circular, label, ‘wrapper
and also includes any visible representation or
means of any light, sound, smoke or gas;

@ box, bottle, casket, tin, can, barrel,
wrapper or other thing in which any


prohibi-
tions in
relation
to infant
milk foods,

Prohibi-
tion of

tives for
the use or
sale of
infant

foods or
feeding
bottles.

2

infant mille food, feeding bottle or infant food is placed or packed
for sale or distribution;

(c) “feeding bottle” means any bottle or receptacle used for
the purpose of feeding infant milk foods, and includes a teat and

a valve attached or capable of being attached to such bottle or 5
receptacle;

(d) “health care system” means an institution or organisation
engaged, either directly or indirectly, in health care for mothers,
infants or pregnant women, and includes a health worker in private
practice, but does not. include a pharmacy or drug store; 10

(e) “health worker” means a person engaged in health care for
mothers, infants or pregnant women;

(J) “infant food” means any food (by whatever name called)
being marketed or otherwise vepresented as 9 complement to mother’s
milk to meet the growing nutritional needs of the infant after the 15
age of four months:

(9) “infant milk food” means any food being marketed or other-
wise represented as a partial or total replacement for mother’s milk,
whether or not it is sttitable for such replacement;

(i) “label” means a display of written, marked, stamped, 20
printed or gtaphic matter affixed to, or appearing upon, any container;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) Any reference in this Act to any other enactment or any provi-
sion thereof, shall, in relation to an area in which such enactment or
such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corres- 25

ponding law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any,
in force in that area.

3. No person shall— 4

(a) advertise, or take part in the publication of any advertise-
ment, for the distribution, sale or supply of infant milk foods or feed- 39
ing bottles; or

(b) give an impression or create a belief in any manner that
feeding of infant milk foods is equivalent to, or better than, mother’s
milk; or

(©) take part in the promotion of use or sale of infant milk foods 35
or feeding bottles or infant foods otherwise than in accordance with
the provisions of this Act.

4, No person shall—

(a) supply or distribute samples of infant milk foods or feeding
bottles or gifts of utensils or other articles; or 0

(0) contact any pregnant woman or the mother of an infant; or

(० offer inducement of any other kind,

for the purpose of promoting the use or sale of infant milk foods or feed-
ing bottles.


3

5. Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 8, no person
$4. shall donate or distribute—

(@) infant milk foods or feeding bottles to any other person
except to an orphanage;

3 (0) any informational or educational equipment or material
relating to infant milk foods or feeding bottles:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the donation
or distribution, subject to such conditions and restrictions 2s may
be prescribed, of such equipment or material through the health care

10 system.

6. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, 1954 and the rules made thereunder, no person shall
produce, supply or distribute any infant milk food or infant food unless
every container thereof or any label affixed thereto indicates in a clear,

15 conspicuous and in an easily readable and understandable manner: the
words “important notice” in capital letters in such language as may be
Prescribed, and indicating thereunder the following particulars in the same
language, namely: —

(०) a statement “mother's milk is best for your baby” in capital
20 letters;

(0) a statement that infant milk food or infant food should be
used only on the advice of a health worker as to the need for its use
and the proper method of its use;

(०) a warning that infant milk food or infant food is not the sole
25 source of nourishment of an infant;

(@) the instructions for its appropriate preparation and a warn-
ing against the health hazards of its inappropriate preparation;

(०) the ingredients used;

(f) the composition or analysis;

30 (9) the storage conditions required;

(0) the batch number, date of its manufacture and the date
before which it is to be consumed, taking into account the climatic
and storage conditions of the country;

(@ such other particulars as may be prescribed.

_ @) No container or label referred to in sub-section (1) relating to

35 infant milk food shall—

(a) have pictures of an infant or a woman or both; or
(७) have pictures or other graphic material or phrases designed
crease the saleability of infant milk food; or

he word “humanised” or “maternalised” or any
particulars as may be prescribed,

Donations
of infant
mille
foods or
feeding
bottles or
equip-
ment or
materials
relating
thereto,


Educa-
tional and
other
materials
relating
to feeding
of infants
to contain
certain
parti-
culars.

Health
care
system.

4

7 (1) Every educational or other material, whether audio or visual,
dealing with pre-natal or post-natal care or with the feeding of an infant
‘and intended to reach pregnant women or mothers of infants shall in-
clude clear information on—

(@) the benefits and superiority of breast-feeding;
(b) the preparation for, and the continuance of, breast-feeding;

(c) the harmful effects ‘on breast-feeding due to the partial
adoption of bottle feeding;

(d) the difficulties in reverting to breast-feeding of infants after
a period of feeding by infant milk food;

(e) the financial and social implications in making use of infant

milk foods and feeding bottles;

(f) the health hazards of improper use of infant milk foods and
feeding bottles;

(g) such other matters as may be prescribed.

(2) No material referred to in sub-section (1) shall be utilised to
promote the use or sale of infant milk foods or feeding bottles.

8. (1) No person shall use any health care system for the display of
placards or posters relating 10, or for the distribution of, materials for
the purpose of promoting the use or sale of infant milk foods or feeding
bottles or infant foods:

Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to—

(@ the donation or distribution of informational or educational
equipment or material made in accordance with the proviso to clause
(b) of section 5; and

(b) the dissemination of information to a health worker about
the scientific and factual matters relating to the use of infant milk
foods or feeding bottles or infant foods along with the information
specified in sub-secton (1) of section 7.

(2) No person who produces, supplies, distributes or sells infant
milk foods or feeding bottles or infant foods shall make any payment to
any person who works in the health care system for the purpose of pro-
moting the use or sale of such foods or bottles.

(3) No person, other than a health worker, shall demonstrate feeding
with infant milk foods or infant foods to a mother of an infant or to any
member of her family and such health worker shall also clearly explain
to such mother or such other member the hazards of improper use of
infant milk foods or feeding bottles or infant foods.

(4) No person, other than an institution or organisation, engaged
in health care for motiiers, infants or pregnant women, shall distribute
infant milk foods or feeding bottles to a mother who cannot resort to

breast-feeding and who cannot afford to purchase infant milk foods or
feeding bottles. ५

(5) An orphanage may purchase infant milk foods or feeding bottles
at a price lower than their sale price for the purpose of utilising them
in the said orphanage.

10

25

43


5 ५

1. Explanation—For the Purposes of this sub-section such purchases
Shall not amount to an inducement for Promoting the use or sale of
infant milk foods or feeding bottles,

"5 जा 16 2, NO Dotson who produces, supplies, distributes or sells infant
हैं milk: foods or feeding bottles or infant foods shall offer ox give, directly
indirectly, any financial inducements or gifts to a health worker or to health

fog gnember of his family for the purpose of promoting the use of such foe
foods or bottles.

(2) Where such person makes any contribution to, or incurs any use of

10 expenditure on, a health worker हां hoc directly or indirectly, such

Person and such health worker shal] disclose the same to the institution foods,
or organisation to which such health worker is attached,

10. (0 No person who produces, supplies, distributes or sells infant ee
milk foods or feeding bottles or infant foods shall fixe the remuneration गिर:
15 of any of his employees or give any commission to such employees on 4 emplo-

the basis of the volume of sale of such foods or bottles made by such
employees.

_ (2) The employees of such person shall not perform any function  quces,

which relates to educating a pregnant woman or mother of a, iatae on supplies,
20 Pre-natal or post-natal care of the infant. oy

11. (1) No person shall sell or otherwise distribute any infant mille
food or infant food unless it conforms to the standards, specified for such ards of
ot 1954, food under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, and the rules infant
५ made thereunder and the contained thereot has the relevant Standard Pte

25 Mark specified by the Bureau of Indian Standards established under Seche.
igs, Section 3 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to indicate that the jetties sr
infant milk food or infant food conforms to such standards: i

1 provided that where no standards have been specified for any infant 14%

‘ood or infant food under the Prevention of Food Adulteration
30 Act, 1954, no person shall sell or otherwise distribute such food unless

Indian Standard referred to in sub-section (1) for feeding bottles and
such mark is affixed on its container,

12. (1) Any food inspector appointed under section 9 of the Preven- Powers
{ton of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred tow the food of entry
inspector) or any offic ies

er not below the rank of a Class 1 officer autho- ped
‘ised in this behalf by the State Government (hereinafter referred to as
the authorised officer) may, if he has any reason to believe that any
of section 6 or section 11 has been or is being contravened,
and search at any reasonable time any factory, building, business
or any other place where any trade or commerce in infant milk
bottles or infant foods is carried on or such foods or
supplied or distributed.



Power
to seize
infant
foods etc.,

or con-
tainers
thereof.

Confisca-
tion.

Power
to give
option to
pay cost
in lieu of
confis-
cation.

Confis-
cation
not to
interfere
with
other
punish
ments,

Adjudi-
cation.

6 4

(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, :
to searches and seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every
or seizure made under this Act. 4

13. (1) If any food inspector or authorised officer has reason to be-
lieve that in respect of any infant milk food or feeding bottle or infant
food or container thereof, the provisions of this Act have been or are
being contravened, he may seize such food or bottle or container.

(2) No such food or bottle or container shall be retained by any food
inspector or authorised officer for a period exceeding ninety days from
the date of its seizure unless the approval of the District Judge within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction such seizure has been made, has been
obtained for such relation,

14. Any infant mille food or feeding bottle or infant food or container
thereof, in respect of which any provision of this Act has been or is
being contravented, shall be liable to confiscation: 15

Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court
adjudging the confiscation that the person in whose possession, power
or control any such food or bottle or container is found is not respon-
sible for the contravention of the provisions of this Act, the court may,
instead of making an order for the confiscation of such food or bottle 20
or container, make such other order authorised by this Act against the
person guilty of the breach of the provisions of this Act as it may think
fit.

15. (1) Whenever any confiscation is authorised by this Act, the
court adjudging it may, subject to such conditions as may be specified 25
in the order adjudging the confiscation, give to the owner thereof an
option to pay in lieu of confiscation such cost not exceeding the value
of the infant milk food on feeding bottle or infant food or container
thereof in respect of which the confiscation is authorised as the court
thinks fit. “$30

(2) On payment of the cost ordered by the court the seized infant
wuilic food or feeding bottle or infant food or container shall be returned
to the person from whom it was seized on the condition that such person
shall, before making any distribution, sale or supply of such food, bottle
or container, give effect to the provisions of this Act. 35

16. No confiscation made or cost ordered to be paid under this Act
shall prevent the infliction of any punishment to which the person
affected thereby is liable under the provisions of this Act or under any
other law. | i

17. Any confiscation may be adjudged or costs may be ordered to be 40
paid, —
(a) without any limit, by the principal civil court of original
jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such confis-
> cation has been made or costs have been ordered to be paid, as the
case may be; 45

शरण


1 . =

subject to such limits as may be specified by the Central
Government in this behalf, by such other court, not below a civil
court having pecuniary jurisdiction exceeding five thousand rupees,
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
5 Gazette, authorise in this behalf.

18. (1) No order adjudicating confiscation or directing payment of
costs shall be made unless the owner of the infant milk food or feeding
bottle or infant food or container thereof has been given a notice in
writing informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to con-
10 fiscate such food or bottle or container and giving him a reasonable
opportunity of making a representation in writing within such reason-
able time as may be specified in the notice against the consfication and

if he so desires, of being heard in the matter:

Provided that where no such notice is given within a period of

15 ninety days from the date of the seizure of the infant milk food or

feeding bottle or infant food or container thereof, such food or bottle

or container shall be returned after the expiry of that period to the
Person from whose possession it was seized.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), the provisions
fof 1968. 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall, so far as may be, apply to
every proceeding referred to in sub-section (0).

19. (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the court adjudica-
ting a confiscation or ordering the payment of costs may prefer an ap-

peal to the court to which an appeal lies from the decision of such

25court, / . नि

(2) The appellate court may, after giving the appellant an opportu-

nity. of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit confirming, modifying

or Tevising the decision or order appealed against or may send back the

case with such directions as it may think fit for a fresh decision or ad-

30 judication, as the case may be, after taking additional evidence if neces«
sary: | |

Provided that an order enhancing any fine in lieu of confiscation or
for confiscating goods of greater value shall not be made under this
section unless the appellant’ has had an opportunity of making a re-

35 Presentation and if he so desires of being heard in his defence,

(3) No further appeal shall lie against the order of the court made
under sub-section (2). 1 |
20. (1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 or sub-section (2) of section 11 shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine
है which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.

(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sections 6 or sub-
ion (1) of section 11 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to
sand with fine which shall not be less than two thousand
ti 3 54

“apnea

i

Penalty.


Offences
by com-
panies.

है दि

Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to
be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend
to two years and with fine which shall not be less than one thousand
rupees. 1

21. (1) Save as otherwise provided in section 173 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, no court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by—

(०) a person authorised in this behalf under sub-section (1) of
section 20 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954;

(0) an officer not below the rank of a Class I officer authorised
in this behalf, by general or pecial order, by the Government; or

(०) a representative of such voluntary organisation engaged in
the field of child welfare and development and child nutrition as
the Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, au-
thorise in this behalf.

(2) Where a complaint has been made by a representative of the
voluntary organisation authorised under clause (c) of sub-section (7)
and the court has issued a summons or, as the case may be, a warrant
under sub-section (1) of section 204 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the Assistant Public Prosecutor for that court shall take charge of
the case and conduct the prosecution.

22. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:

5:

2 of 1974,

10 37 of 198

15

20 2of 197

25

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence,

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
nivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any difector,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director,
manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly, :

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—

4 (a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or
other association of individuals; and

(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the
firm. , 7 he

30

35

40

rca


9 mips

Procedure, 1973, an offence punishable under this Act shall be bailable.
(2) An offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.

24, No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against

5 the, Central Government. or any State Government or any officer of the

Central Government or of any State Government for anything which
is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act,

25, The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be
in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Prevention of Food Adultera-
10 tion Act, 1954, or the rules made thereunder.

26. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oficial
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
15 Matters, namely:— 1 |

(@) the conditions and restrictions subject to which educational
equipment and other material may be donated or distributed under
the proviso to clause (b) of section 5;

(७), the language in which the notice and other particulars
20 referred to in sub-section (1) of section 6 shall be indicated;

(०, the particulars which are to be indicated under clause (i) of
sub-section (1) of section 6; |

& (8) the particulars which a container or label shall not bear
under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 6;

(@) the matters to be included in the information which readhes
pregnant women or mothers of infants under clause (9) of sub-
section (1) of section 7; | .

@) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. |

(3), Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
after it ismade, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
‘both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or

agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
h effect only in such modified form or of no effect
y be; so, however, that any such modification or annul-
Prejudice to the validity of anything previously
ar

to be
cogniza.
ble and
bailable,

Protec-
tion of
action
taken,
in, good
faith,
Applica.
tion of
Act 37
of 1954

not
barred,
Power

to make
rules.

23, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal —_ Offences


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Every child has a right to be adequately nourished as a means of
attaining and maintaining health. Infant malnutrition is a major contri-
butory cause of high incidence of infant mortality and physical and
mental handicaps. The health of infants and young children cannot be
isolated from the health and untrition of women. The mother and her
infant form a biological unit. Breast-feeding is an integral part of the
reproductive process. It is the natural and ideal wav of feeding the infant
and provides a unique biological and emotional basis for healthy child
development. The anti-infective properties of mother’s milk protect infants
against diseases. The effect of breast-feedine on child spacing. on the
health and well-being of the mother on family health. on family and
national economy and on food production is well-recognised. Breast-
feeding is, therefore. a kev asnect of celf-reliance and primary health care-
It is. therefore, essential to protect and promote breast-feeding and to
protect pregnant women an nursing mothers from any influence that
could disrupt it, .

2, Inappropriate feeding nractices lead ty infant malnutrition, mor-
bidity and mortality in our children. Promotion of infant milk foods and
related products like feeding bottles and teats do constitute a health
hazard. Promotion of infant milk fonds and related products has been
more extensive and pervasive than the promotion of information con-
cerning the advantages of mother’s milk and hreast-feeding, and contri-
butes to decline in breast-feeding. In the shsence of strone interventions
designed to vrotect. promote and support breast-feeding. this decline can
assume dangerous proportions subiectine millions of infants to greater
risks of infections, malnutrition end death.

3. In the light of the foregoing considerations, and in view of the
vulnerability of infants in the early months of life to the aforesaid risks
and the risks involved in inappropriate feeding practices including the
unnecessary and imorover use of infant milk foods feeding accessories
and infant foods. it has become necessary to regulate the marketing of
such products. For the prover nutrition sind health of the world’s children,
the World Health Assembly adonted in Mav. 1981. an International Code
of Marketing of Breast Milk Substitutes. The Government of India re-
cognised this code and adonted the “Indian National Code for Protection
and Promotion of Breast-Feeding” (hereinafter referred to as the Ci
in December, 1983. i a)

4. The Code envisages that there shall he no advertising or other
form of sales promotion of infant milk fonds feeding hottles and teats.
The Code, in accordance with this seneral nrincinle. enioins the health
authorities to encourage and vrotect breast-feeding, and alsn prescribes
several measures to control the marketing and promotion of infant milk
foods, feeding bottles, teats and infant foods.

10 fn 4


१1 Oe

5. The Bill proposes to give effect to the principles and aims of the
Code, Accordingly, it prohibits advertisements of infant milk foods and
feeding bottles and also prescribes measures to ensure that in the market-
ing of infant milk foods, no impression is given that feeding of these pro-
ducts is equivalent to, or better than, breast-feeding. The provisions rela-
ting to labelling and quality control of infant milk foods, feeding bottles
and infant foods are proposed to be implemented through the concerned
Departments in the State Governments and Union Territory Administra,
tions under the overall control of the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. Contravention of the provisiong of the Bill will be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both, However,
the contravention of certain provisions of the Bill relating to labelling of
quality control of such foods will be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to
three years and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand $
rupees.

6: The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Dent; RAMJILAL SUMAN.
The-Ath January, 1991.



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM :

Clause 12 of the Bill provides that any food inspector appointed,
under section 9 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, or any
officer not below the rank of a Class I officer authorised by the State Go-
vernment may, if he has any reason to believe that any provision of clause
6 or clause 11 has been or is being contravened, enter and search at any
reasonable time any factory, building, business premises, etc, where
such contravention has been or is being done.

2, Clause 13 of the Bill empowers any food inspector or the officer so.
authorised to seize any infant milk food or feeding bottle or infant food
or container thereof in respect of which the provisions of the Bill have
been or are being contravened and retain it for a period not exceeding
ninety days from the date of the seizure uNder that clause,

3: The implementation of the above provisions of the Bill. will not
require any additional staff by the Central Government, since the said
provisions will be implemented through the machinery available in the
concerned States and Union territories and dealing with the administra~
tion of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954.

4, The provisions of the Bill, therefore, do not involve any additional
expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring nature, '


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
Tules, by notification in the Official Gazette, to carry out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. The rules may be made, inter alia, to pres-
ctibe the conditions and restrictions subject to which educational
equipment and other material relating to infant milk food or infant food
may be donated or distributed, the language in which the notice and
other particulars shall be indicated on a container of infant milk food or
any label affixed thereto, the particulars which should be indicated on
such container or the label affixed thereto, the particulars which such
container or label shall not bear and the matters to be included in the
information which reaches pregnant women or mothers of infants,

2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under clause

26 are essentially matters of detail or procedure, The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character,

13


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the regulation of production, supply and distribution
‘of infant milk foods, feeding bottles and infant foods with a view
to the protection and promotion of breast-feeding and ensuring the
proper use of infant foods and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

(SHRI RAMJI LAL SUMAN,
Minister of State in the
Ministries of Labour and

Welfare.)