ra

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

94 FES 23

Bill No. 5 of 2003

THE CULTURAL HERITAGE PROTECTION BILL, 2003
By
SHRI G. M. BANATWALLA, M.P.
| A

BILL

to provide for application of the convention concerning the protection of world
cultural and natural heritage adopted by the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation and to give its provisions the force of law, for greater vigilance
in the protection of cultural heritage, for the constitution of a Board for protection of
cultural heritage, making provisions for deterrent punishment of those guilty of offence
against cultural heritage and for matters connected therewith ot incidental thereto.

Whereas the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisations adopted a convention concerning the protection of the world
cultural and natural heritage at its seventeenth session on 16 November, 1972;

And whereas, it is necessary to have legislative provisions for the application of
this convention;

And whereas, it is expedient to provide for the constitution of a Board for Protection —

of cultural heritage to exercise greater vigilance and supervision over protection,
conservation and preservation of cultural heritage;

And whereas it is considered necessary to provide for deterrent punishment for
offences against the cultural heritage.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Cultural Heritage Protection Act, 2003.
(2) It extends tq the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

Short title,
extent and
commencement.


2

Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Board” means the Board for Protection of Cultural Heritage constituted
under section 4;

| (b) “convention” means the convention concerning the protection of the world
cultural and natural heritage adopted by the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation at its seventeenth session
on 16 November, 1972;

(c) “cultural heritage” includes—

(i) ‘cultural heritage and natural heritage’ covered by articles | and 2
respectively of the convention;

(1) ‘ancient monument’ and archaeological sites and remains covered

by clauses (a) and (d) respectively of section 2 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958;

(1) ‘place of worship’ covered by clause (c) of section 2 of the Places of
Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(e) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
convention or the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,
1958 (24 of 1958) of Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991 or the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them therein.

Convention 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
ie or force the provisions and obligations contained in the convention shall have the force of law.
01 law.

Constitution 4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,

of Board for constitute a Board to be called the Board for Protection of Cultural Heritage.
Protection of T ४

Cultural (2) The functions and powers of the Board shall be to—

Heritage and |
its functions
and powers.

(a) exercise supervision and superintendence over due implementation of the
convention by Ministries and Governmental Departments and authorities concerned
and to give them such directions as it may deem fit and necessary for effective
a application and implementation of the convention including discharge of obligations
and drawing of benefits and assistance under the convention;

\

(b) advise the Central and State Governments on legal, scientific, technical
and administrative measures for identification, protection, conservation, preservation
and rehabilitation of cultural heritage;

(c) be vigilant and issue directions to Ministries and Governmental departments
and authorities for measures to counteract dangerous and threats to cultural heritage;

(d) enquire or cause an inquiry or investigation or due legal action on offences
against cultural heritage, including offences against them under the Indian Penal
Code or the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958,
or the Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991 or any other law for the time
being in force;

(e) take appropriate measure to secure implementation of the provisions of
this Act;

(f) discharge such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the
Government.

(3) The Board shall consist of not less than eleven members, one of whom shall be
the Chairperson |

(4) The members and the Chairperson of the Board shall be appointed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Leaders of the Opposition in the two
Houses of the Parliament



10

15

५
914,

40

20

(5) A member of the Board shall hold office for a term of three years from the
date of appointment.

(6) Provisions as regards resignation, disqualification and removal of Chairperson

or members of the Board and as regards filling up of casual vacancies shall be such as may
be prescribed.

(7) The Board shall, subject to the approval of the Central Government, make rules

governing the convening of its meetings and the procedure and conduct of the business at
its meetings.

(8) The directions issued by the Board under this Act shall have a binding
force. ' |

(9) The Board shall prepare’ and submit to the Central Government an annual report
on the implementation of the provisions of the Act and the Central Government shall
cause such annual reports to be laid before each House of Parliament.

(10) The Board may, whenever it may deem fit or necessary, submit interim report or
reports to the Central Government who shall cause the said report or reports to be laid
before each House of Parliament without any delay

(11) The Board may, in consultation with the Central Government, determine the
number of the staff of the Board and their conditions of service.

5. Whosoever—

(a) directly or indirectly attempts to indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly
is a part or is actually involved in any process or activity connected with or. indulge
in propaganda for causing. any damage to including any conversion of any cultural
heritage; |

(b) commits an offence under section 30 of the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958;

(c) commits an offence under section 6 of the Places of Worship (Special —

Provisions) Act, 1991; or

(d) commits an offence against cultural heritage under the provisions of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being 1n force

shall be guilty of offence against cultural heritage under this Act

6. Whosoever commits an offence against cultural heritage under section 5 shall be

- liable to be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than

seven years and fine and such imprisonment and fine shall be in addition or further to any
sentence under any other law for the time being in force.

7. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 468 and 469 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure 1973 (2 of 1974) or in any other law in force, no action pursuant to
section 6 shall be vitiated by any consideration of the action being a delayed or belated
action or action being barred by lapse or expiry of the period of limitation.

8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law in force, every offence
punishable under this Act shall be cognizable

9, All Ministries, Governmental departments, the police, intelligence and

| investigating agencies, and all civil authorities shall act in aid of the Board in the discharge

of its functions and duties

10. (J) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent thereof contained in any other law in force

(2) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition and not in lieu of or derogatory to
the provisions as regards cultural heritage contained in any other law for the time being in
force. |

Offence
against
cultural
heritage.

ta

Punishment
for offence
against
cultural
heritage.

_ Limitation

period not to
apply.

Offences to.
be cognizable.

Civil
authorities,
etc. to act In

aid of Board.

Act to have

overriding

effect and be
in addition to
provisions in
any other law ©
in force.


4

Power to 11. (/) The Central Government may, make rules for carrying out the provisions of
make rules. this Act.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be |
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation adopted a convention concerning the protection of the World
Cultural and Natural Heritage at its seventeenth session on 16 November 1972. It is
necessary to make the convention applicable and give it a force of law in our country.

There is also need for greater vigilance and supervision over protection of
cultural heritage. It will be expedient to have a Board for the purpose

In view of increasing number of offences against cultural heritage, deterrent
punishment needs to be provided for such offences.

The expression ‘cultural heritage’ has been given wider meaning to include
cultural and natural heritage covered by the convention, ancient monuments and
archaeological sites and remains covered by the Ancient Monuments and Archaeo-

logical Sites and Remains Act, 1958 and Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act
199]

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DELHI: | | G.M. BANATWALLA _
December 20, 2002. *


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Board and its staff etc. for
protection of cultural heritage. This will involve both recurring and non-recurring
expenditure.

The Bill, if enacted, will involve a recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore
per annum and a non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore from the
Consolidated Fund of India.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for the pur-
poses of the Bill, particularly, under sub-clauses (6) and (7) of clause 4. Since the rules will
relate to the matters of details only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal
character. : क्र |


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for application of the convention concerning the protection of world cultural and
natural heritage adopted by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation and to give its provisions the force of law, for greater vigilance in the
protection of cultural heritage, for the constitution of a Board for protection of cultural
heritage, making provisions for deterrent punishment of those guilty of offence against
cultural heritage and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri 6. M. Banatwalla, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—7237LS—10-02-2003.