As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

३1 FEB

Bill No. 5 of 2006

THE COIR FACTORY WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2006
By न
Dr. K.S. Manos, M.P.

A

BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for coir factory workers and for matters
connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:— :
1. (7) This Act may be called the Coir Factory Workers (Welfare) Act, 2006. Short oo
extent an
(2) It extends to the whole of India. commencement.

5 (3) It shall come into force at once.



z
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(@ “coir factory” means a centre where defibring, yarning, making or any other
activity relating to coir is carried out and includes an establishment engaged in selling
or export of coir mats, mattings and other products;

(5) “Fund” means the Coir Factory Workers' Welfare Fund constituted under
section 3 of this Act;

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

(४) “worker” means any person who is engaged in any activity undertaken ina
coir, factory.

Setting up of 3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a fund to be known as the Coir Factory

acess Workers’ Welfare Fund for the welfare of coir factory workers in the country.
forkers'

Welfare Fund. (2) The Central Government and every State Government/Union territory
Administration shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.

(3) The owners of coir factory and exporters of coir products shall also contribute
to the Fund in such proportion as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

Administration 4. The Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of:—

f Coir Factor
oe es (0) a Chairman who shall be appointed by the Central Government;
Welfare Fund.

(ii) a member to represent the owners of the coir factories;
(iii) a member representing the workers;

(iv) one representative each from all States/Union territories who shall be
nominated by the respective State Government/Union territory Administration;
and

ela (0) one member to represent the exporters of coir products.
Utilisation of
Fund. 5. The Fund shall be used for the following purposes, namely,—

(0) to pay unemployment/subsistence allowance to workers during off-season
period;

(ii) to provide free health facilities for the workers and their families;

(iii) to provide free educational facilities to the children of the coir factory
workers;

(iv) to pay compensation to workers who are injured during the course of their
work;

(v) to pay compensation to the next of the kin of workers who die in harness;

(vi) to pay disability allowance to the workers who are injured in accidents or
contract ailments during the course of their duty and are not able to work;

(vii) to pay old age pension to those workers who have attained the age of sixty
years; anc
(viii) to pay family pension.
Power to make 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
rules. carrying out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Lakhs of workers are engaged in the work related to defibring, yarning, making of coir
mats, matting and other coir products throughout the country but they are not covered under
any labour laws. They are not paid even minimum wages which they deserve by virtue of
their work. The condition of these workers is worse than the contract labourers. In the
circumstances, provision of certain facilities to these workers during their service as well as
in their old age is desirable.

Hence this Bill.

New Deu; ड़ K.S. MANOJ
December 7, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM -

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Coir Factory Workers, Welfare
Fund for the welfare of coir factory workers in the country. It further provides that Central
Government shall also contribute to the fund. Clause 4 provides for the setting up of a
Committee for administration of the Fund. The Bill, therefore, if will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure
of about rupees one hundred crore per annum. A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees
one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

| 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
16 purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
islative powers is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for certain welfare measures for coir factory workers and for matters
connected therewith.

(Dr. K.S. Manoj, MP.)

MGIPMRND—5147LS(S-3)—08.02.2006.