1
THE ACQUISITION OF CERTAIN AREA  IN MUMBAI FOR
DR. BHIMRAO AMBEDKAR MEMORIAL BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to provide for the acquisition of certain area in Mumbai belonging to the National Textile
Corporation Limited for facilitation of the construction of a memorial
for Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS there has been a long-standing demand for the making available the land
belonging to the India United Mills No. 6, in Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra presently
vested in the National Textile Corporation Limited by virtue of the provisions of the Sick
Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974, for the purposes of construction of a
memorial to commemorate the life and achievements of Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar;
A
ND WHEREAS the textile undertaking on the said land is currently closed and if this
land is made available to construct a memorial to inspire and motivate the citizens and, in
particular, the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, whose
advancement has always been championed by Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar, thereby facilitating
the common good of the community by inspiring the aspirational consciousness of the
weaker sections of society and their access to a place of commemoration of the life struggle
of Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar and in furtherance of the mandate of clause (b) of article 39 and
article 46 of the Constitution;
57 of 1974.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.  5  of  2014

2
AND WHEREAS the State of Maharashtra has also undertaken to construct such a
memorial if the land is made available to it;
AND WHEREAS with a view to achieving the aforesaid objectives, it is necessary to
acquire the said land from the National Textile Corporation Limited and to facilitate the use of
the same for the purposes of construction of such a memorial, free of any legal hindrance or
obstacle.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Acquisition of Certain Area in Mumbai for Dr. Bhimrao
Ambedkar Memorial  Act, 2014.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of January, 1992.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "area" means the area located at India United Mills No. 6 Vir Savakar Marg,
Mumbai, as specified in the schedule, including all the buildings, structures or other
properties comprised therein;
(b) "Management" means the general management, maintenance, supervision,
upkeep, repair, improvement of the property and other matters relating thereto;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
 CHAPTER II
A
CQUISITION OF THE AREA OF INDIA UNITED MILLS NO. 6 IN MUMBAI
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 or the Sick Textile
Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 or the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)
Act, 1985 or in any other law for the time being in force or in any rules, regulations, schemes,
notification, bye-laws made thereunder or in any order passed by any court, tribunal  or
authority, on and from the commencement of this Act, the right, title and interest in relation
to the area shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government.
4. (1) The area shall be deemed to include—
(i) all assets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authority and privileges and all
properties, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, structures, shops of
whatever nature or other properties and all other rights and interests in, or arising out
of, such properties; and
(ii) all registers, maps, plans, drawings and other documents of whatever nature
relating to the properties referred to in clause ( i), as immediately before the
commencement of this Act, were in the ownership, possession, power or control of the
National Textile Corporation Limited.
(2) Notwithstanding any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any court or tribunal
or other authority and in particular any scheme that may have been approved by any authority,
court or tribunal in terms of the provisions of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)
Act, 1985 restricting the use of the properties referred to in sub-section (1), the right, title and
interest in relation thereto, which have been transferred to and vested in Central Government
under section 3, such properties by virtue of such transfer and vesting, be freed and
discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all other encumbrances
affecting them.
(3) If, on the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other proceeding in respect
of the right, title and interest relating to the property which has vested in the Central
Government under section 3, is pending before any court, tribunal or other authority, the
same shall abate.
Short title and
commencement.
Definitions.
1 of 1956.
57 of 1974.
1 of 1986.
Acquisition of
rights in
respect of
certain area.
General effect
of vesting.
1 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
5. (1) The Central Government may take all necessary steps to secure possession of
the area which is vested in that Government under section 3.
(2) On the vesting of the area in the Central Government under section 3, the person in
charge of the management of the area immediately before such vesting shall be bound to
deliver to the Central Government or the person authorised by that Government, all assets,
registers and other documents in their custody relating to such vesting or where it is not
practicable to deliver such registers or documents, the copies of such registers or documents
authenticated in the prescribed manner.
CHAPTER III
M
ANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF PROPERTY
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any contract or instrument or order of
any court, tribunal or other authority to the contrary, on and from the commencement of this
Act, the property vested in the Central Government under section 3, may be transferred by
the Central Government to the State of Maharashtra or to any trust or society that may be
constituted by the State of Maharashtra for the purposes of construction and management
of a memorial for Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar.
Explanation.—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is clarified that the transfer
under this sub-section shall be exclusively for the purpose of  construction and management
of said memorial while the ownership of the property after such transfer shall remain vested
in the Central Government.
(2) The instrument of transfer, contemplated in sub-section (1), shall be for a period
not exceeding ninety-nine years which may be extended subject to such terms and conditions
as may be mutually agreed to between the Central Government and such transferee at the
time of such extension.
(3) The instrument of transfer contemplated in sub-section (1) shall contain a stipulation
that the land shall exclusively be used for the purpose of construction and management of
the memorial for Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar and for no other purpose.
(4) Other terms and conditions shall be as may be mutually agreed to between the
Central Government and such transferee.
(5) In the absence of any agreement in writing to the contrary, on the expiry of the
period stipulated in the instrument under sub-section (2), the property shall automatically
revert to the Central Government and no court or tribunal or authority shall entertain any suit
or legal proceeding to interdict or stay or prevent such reversion or resumption by the
Central Government.
CHAPTER IV
M
ISCELLANEOUS
7. (1) The National Textile Corporation Limited shall be paid by the Central
Government, for the transfer to and vesting of the right, title and interest in relation to the
area in that Government under section 3, in cash an amount of rupees forty-five crore,
sixty-nine lakh and twelve thousand only.
(2) The compensation amount paid by the Central Government under sub-section (1)
shall be utilised by the National Textile Corporation Limited for the purposes mentioned in
section 11A of the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 and for the payment
of the dues of the workmen and the creditors of the National Textile Corporation Limited.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or any decree or order of any court, tribunal or
other authority.
9. Any person who is in charge of the management of the area and fails to deliver to the
Central Government or the person authorised by that Government, any asset, register or
Duty of
person in
charge of the
management
of the area to
deliver all
assets, etc.
Construction
and
management
of
Dr. Bhimrao
Ambedkar
Memorial.
Payment of
amount.
57 of 1974.
Act to
override all
other
enactments.
Penalties.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
other document in his custody relating to such area or, as the case may be, authenticated
copies of such register or document shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with
both.
10. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or State Government or National Textile Corporation Limited or any person
authorised by the Central Government under this Act or any officers of those Governments
or National Textile Corporation Limited for anything which is done in good faith or intended
to be done in good faith under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
11. It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to the policy of the State
towards securing the principles specified in clause (b) of article 39 of the Constitution.
Explanation.—In this section, "State" has the same meaning as in article 12 of the
Constitution.
12. It shall be the duty of every authority to act in aid of the carrying out the provisions
of this Act and to render all co-operation and assistance in realising the objective of this Act,
including effecting any amendment or modification to any notification, rule, regulation or
bye-law retrospectively to facilitate and expedite the construction and maintenance of the
memorial for Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Declaration as
to the policy
of the State.
Duty to carry
out objective
of  Act.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

5
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2 (a)]
DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA
All that pieces or parcels of land belonging to the National Textile Corporation Limited,
Unit: India United Mills No. 6 (Dye Works) situated at Veer Savarkar Marg, Dadar, Mumbai -
400 028 within the Municipal limits of Mumbai, bearing City Survey No. FP 1163, TPS IV ,
Mahim Division, Mumbai, admeasuring 48414.83 square metres of land popularly known as
India United Mills No. 6 (Dye Works), Mumbai. Properties are bounded as follows :—
City Admeasuring North South East West
Survey No.
FP1163 48414.83 sq. Suryavanshi FP No .1166, S.V. Savarkar Beach /
TPS IV  mtrs.  of land Kshatria 1165, 1164 Road Sea
Sabhagrah
Marg
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There has been a long-standing demand for making available the land belonging to the
India United Mills No. 6, in Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra, presently vested in the
National Textile Corporation Limited by virtue of the provisions of the Sick Textile
Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 for the purposes of construction of a memorial to
commemorate the life and achievements of Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar. In view of proximate
location of that land to Chaityabhoomi, Dadar, near the site of Dr. Ambedkar's last rites, the
Government of India is desirous of constructing such a memorial to honour the Father of the
Indian Constitution.
2. The Construction of the memorial will serve a significant public purpose and inspire
and motivate the citizens and, in particular, the members of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, whose advancement has always been championed by Dr. Bhimrao
Ambedkar, thereby facilitating the common good of the community by nurturing the
aspirational consciousness of the weaker sections of society and providing access to a
place of commemoration of the life struggle of Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar and will be in furtherance
of the mandate of clause (b) of article 39 and article 46 of the Constitution.
3. The State of Maharashtra has undertaken to construct the memorial if the said land
is made available to it.
4. The Acquisition of Certain Area in Mumbai for Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Memorial Bill,
2014 is enacted for acquisition of the land of India United Mills No. 6 for the purpose of
construction and management of a memorial for Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar notwithstanding
anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 or the Sick Textile Undertakings
(Nationalisation) Act, 1974 or the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 or
any other law for the time being in force.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
KA VURU SAMBASIVA RAO
N
EW DELHI;
The 4th February, 2014.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall pay in cash an amount
of rupees forty-five crore, sixty-nine lakh and twelve thousand only to the National Textile
Corporation Limited, for the transfer to and vesting of the right, title and interest in relation
to the area in that Government under section 3. This is one time, non-recurring expenditure.
2. The aforesaid expenditure would be met from the Consolidated Fund of India.
3. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or non-recurring
expenditure.
7

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules,
by notification in the official Gazette to carry out the provisions of the Bill.
2. The rules made by the Central Government are required to be laid, as soon as they
are made, before each House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters of procedure
and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the proposed Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.
8

GMGIPMRND—4153LS(S3)—06.02.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the acquisition of certain area in Mumbai belonging to the National Textile
Corporation Limited for facilitation of the construction of a memorial for
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao, Minister of Textile)