1
THE PROHIBITION ON RELIGIOUS CONVERSION
(BY INDUCEMENT OR FORCE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI SADASHIV LOKHANDE, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on religious conversions by inducement or by force and for
matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act  may be called the Prohibition on Religious Conversion (by Inducement
or Force) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. No person or institution shall encourage or cause to encourage any person or
group of persons to convert religion by inducement or by force.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “inducement” includes giving or
offering or promising to give cash, imparting free education or giving employment, shelter,
food or clothes free of cost.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No.  5 of 2015
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Prohibition on
religious
conversion.
5
10

3. This Act shall not apply to a person who voluntarily converts to another religion or
reconverts to his original religion.
4. (1) Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years and a fine which shall not be
less than rupees one lakh.
(2) If any institution or organisation  violates the provisions of this Act, the person in
charge of the affairs of the organisation or institution, as the case may be, by whatever
name called, shall be subject to punishment as provided under sub-section ( 1) and the
registration of that organisation or institution under any law for the time being in force shall
be cancelled forthwith.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person or organisation violating the provisions of this Act shall be allowed to accept any
donation or contribution of any kind from within the country or abroad.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act not to
apply in case
of voluntary
conversion.
Punishment.
Prohibition on
accepting
donation or
contribution.
Power to
make rules.
2
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Religious conversion is the order of the day. Inducement of all types is offered and
sometimes promise to offer certain things is given. Certain organisations indulge themselves
in encouraging conversion through all ways and means and funds received from abroad
and within the country are put to use for these purposes.
In many parts of the country, it has been witnessed that conversion has been taking
place through force. Forced or induced conversion should be stopped. It is, therefore,
proposed in the Bill to prohibit conversion through force or inducement. However, a
provision has been made for enabling voluntary conversion.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SADASHIV LOKHANDE
December  23, 2014.

4
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of this Bill. As the rules are relating  to matters of detail only,  the delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—4338LS(S3)—04-02-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition on religious conversions by inducement or by force and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Sadashiv Lokhande,  M.P.)