1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR, M.P.
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2012.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) in List II—State List,—
(a) entry 14 shall be omitted; and
(b) in entry 17, the words “irrigation and canals,” shall be omitted;
Short title.
Bill No. 5 of  2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of the Seventh
Schedule.
5

2
(ii) in List III—Concurrent List, after entry 17B, the following entry shall be
inserted, namely:—
“17C. Agriculture, including agricultu ral education and research,
protection against pests and prevention of plant diseases; irrigation and canals
including water for irrigation to farmers.”. 5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Even after more than six decades of independence, more than sixty per cent. population
of the country is still dependent on agriculture. But the situation of the agricultural sector is
far from satisfactory. On account of its bad state, farmers feel distressed enough to commit
suicide. Non-availability of adequate water for irrigation is one of the major reasons for the
bad condition of farmers. Even Dr. M.S. Swaminathan, the noted expert of agricultural sector,
has strongly advocated provision of adequate irrigation facilities for farmers. To make
agricultural operations profitable, the Government will have to strive to arrange means of
irrigation for farmers such as dams, wells, borewells and tanks. The fact that the farmers
living in areas which are well irrigated are relatively more prosperous than those living in
other areas clearly demonstrates the urgency of providing adequate irrigation facilities to all
such farmers.
At present, agriculture is included in List-II (State List) of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution. Therefore, the Central Government has no legislative or executive jurisdiction
in this area. To create better infrastructure in agriculture, combined efforts of the Central
Government and the State Governments are required, more so for creation of irrigation potential.
For this purpose, it is proposed in the Bill that the entry relating to agriculture be transferred
from the State List to the Concurrent List and the subjects relating to irrigation and providing
water for irrigation to farmers be specifically mentioned in the Concurrent List so that the
Central Government plays a more active role resulting in increased agricultural productivity
and food security for the nation.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; HANSRAJ GANGARAM AHIR
November 18, 2011.
3

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
List II—State List
* * * * * *
14. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests
and prevention of plant diseases.
* * * * * *
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments,
water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List I.
* * * * * *
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
 further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3990LS(S3)—25-02-2012.