AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

1 1 MAR 2005

Bill No. 5 of 2005
(SPRY PRA WATER ROT कछर

THE POPULATION CONTROL BILL, 2005
By
SHRI BACHI SINGH Rawat, M.P.
है
| BILL
to provide for measures to control population in the country and for matters
connected therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

ही 0७४: Short title,

1. (/) This Act may be called the Population Control Act, 2005. extent and
et | : . commence-
(2). It extends to the whole of India. । ment.

4 (3) It shall‘ come into force on such date as the Central Government: may, by

Notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Definitions

_ 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “child” includes an illegitimate child but does not include an adopted
child; _ nat

(b) “custom” means any usage which has been continuously and uniformly
being observed for a long time by the people and which has now acquired the
force of law amongst any Community in any area, tribe, group or family;

हैँ


Small family
norm. .

Insertion of
new section
8B in Act
No. 43 of
1951.
Disqualification
on ground of
not following
small family
norm.

Penalty.

Incentives
for
adopting
small
family
norm.

‘corporation, firm or society in which the Central Government holds not less than

. which the Central Government holds not less than fifty-one percent. of shares;

3. Any person—

section shal! be inserted, namely:

shall not procreate another child, shall be—

another child, the benefits given to him shall be withdrawn immediately.

Z

(c) “financial institution” means any banking or lending company,

fifty-one percent. of shares,

_ (d) “Government company” means any company, corporation or society in

and

(e) “Government service” means any public service in connection with the
affairs of the Central Government and includes service in any civil, defence or all
India service of the Union or service in any Government company 0 local bodies
in Union territories. — |

(8) who has two or more than two living children shall not procreate any

and

. (b) who-has less than two living children on the date of commencement of
this Act, shall not procreate more than two living children. |

4. After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following

“8(B). (1) A person shall be disqualified if he procreates more than two living
children:

Provided that the person shall not be disqualified if he, within a period of
one year from the date of commencement of the Population Control Act, 2005,
procreates another living child and thereby the number of living children of that
person increases to more than two.

(2) The disqualification referred to in sub-section (/) shall not apply in case |

of persons having more than two living children on the date of commencement of
the Population Control Act, 2005.” i

5, Any person who violates the provisions of section 3,—

(a) shall not be given, if such person is in Central Government service, any
further increment or promotion during his service;

(b) shall not be allowed to avail of any loan or facility of any kind from any
Government agency or financial institution under the control of the Central
Government; and

(c) shall not be entitled to the facility of drawing ration from public
distribution system and cooking gas from a Government company.

6. (1) Any person who procreates only one child and gives an undertaking that he

(a) given preference in Government service;

_ (b) provided with a house by the Central Government at subsidized cost;
and

(c) given ration items from fair price shops ata reduced price.

(2) Any person, who has been given benefit under sub-section (/), procreates

more child after a period of one year from the date of commencement of this Act;

10



7. (1) Every population census taken after the commencement of the Population

- Control Act, 2005, shall identify the districts and: group of persons who have contributed
_ to the increase in the population during the decade

, (2) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to initiate effective measures to
5 check the increase in population in the district.’ or villages and amongst the group of
persons identified in the population census

| 8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.

| 9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
10 for carrying out the provisions of this Act

Identification

of districts,
villages and
group of

persons who

have

contributed
‘to

population

growth.

Act to have

over-riding
effect.

Power to

‘make rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Exploding population of the country is one of the major hurdles in the progress of the.
country. If we can check the increase in population then we can expect to give reasonable
standard of living to the people of the country. ।

Some strong measures are required to check this menace. Some benefits should also
be given to the people to encourage them to adopt small family norm. —

The Bill provides for some harsh measures for those who do not come forward to help
in achieving the goal of population control. Alongside, some benefits are provided to those
who adopt the small family norm

Hence this Bill.

New Dew; a a BACHI SINGH RAWAT
November 18, 2004. |



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 6 of the Bill provides that any person who procreates only one child and gives

king that he shall not procreate another child shall be provided with accommodation
dised cost and ration items from fair price shops at reduced price by the Central
iment. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION ।
- Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out

the provisions of the Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. |



LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for measures to control population in the country and for matters
connected therewith.

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—3626LS—13.01.2005.

a ee ae —