AS INTRODUCED IN Lo}

५9४९

Bill No. 5 of 2000
—_——

THE COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING BILL, 2000
~ By
‘Suet Vitas Murtemwar, M.P.

A
BILL.

to make military fraining compulsory for all able-bodied persons and for matters
connected therewith,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fitly-tirst Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Compulsory Military Training Act, 2000,
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

5 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
Notification in the Official Gazette. appoint,

Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.


if

Employment
to those who
have
undergone

training.

Power to make
rules.

2,

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,

(a) “appropriate Government" means in the case of State, the State Government
and in the case of a Union territory, the Union Government; and

(b) "person" means a person between the age of fourteen and fifty years.

३. () The Central Government shall provide military training to all able-bodied
Persons for a period of not less than one year.

(2) The Central Government shall establish such number of institutions and
take such other necessary steps, as it may deem fit to give effect to the provisions of
sub-section (J).

(3) Every person who successfully completes training under sub-section (1) shall be
awarded a certificate to that effect by the Central Government.

4. The appropriate Government shall give preference to persons who have successfully
completed their military training in services under defence, para-military police and such
other establishments and organisations, as it may-deem fit, for proper utilisation of talent:

Provided that all such persons, who, after successful completion of their military
training remain unemployed, shall be given unemployment allowances at such rate,
as may be determined from time to time, by appropriate Government fill they are
gainfully employed.

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

5

10

15

20



peo

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Almost all developing countries, even smaller in size, population and recources
than India, have provided for compulsory military training for their youth and old. Providing
compulsory militury training to able-bodied citizens does not in any way run counter to
the ideal of international peace and harmony, which has been the hall-mark of India's
foreign policy since independence. Military training does not necessarily encourage the
pugnacity of individual or the belligerence of the nation-States. On the contrary it inculcates
qualities of discipline and sacrifice and fosters in each individual the spirit of brother-
hood and amity. A well integrated and as well as a coodinated programme of military
training would immensely beneficial to canalise the vast energies of our youth, young and
would lead to their all-round development and in enhancement of the welfare of the nation.
‘The people can defend and safe guard their houses trom robbery and dacoity which are
increasing day by day. Many innocent people are murdered in day light, As the extremist
activities are on increase in the country, Central and State Governments have not been
able to provide adequate protection to general public. Therefore, self-defence has become
a must for every individual.

With this in view, the Bill seeks to provide for compulsory military training to all
able-bodied citizens.

‘The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Dewar; VILAS MUTTEMWAR
November 8, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide compulsory
{nilitary training to all able-bodied persons tor a period ot not lex than one year and for
the purpose shall establish such number of institutions and shall token

si
Governments for carrying out the provisions of this Bit The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
. 115 likely to involve an
annual recurring expenditure of about rupees seven thousand crore per annum,

‘A non-recurring expenditure of abont rupees three crore is also likely to be involved,


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

L 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
॥ the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
e ion of legisiative power is of a normal character,