1
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2017
By
SHRI OM BIRLA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called as the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act),—
(a) after clause ( b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;";
Bill No. 5 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5
10
Amendment
of section 3.

2
(b) after clause (c) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ca) "child" means a boy or a girl who has not attained the age of eighteen
years;";
(c) after clause ( g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ga) "Council" means the Nutrition Council constituted under section
17A;"; and
(d) after clause ( h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ha) "educational institution" includes—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate
Government or a local authority; or
(ii) a school receiving aid or grants from the appropriate
Government or the local authority to meet whole or part of its expenses;
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; or
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to
meet its expenditure; or
(v) an educational institution managed by a private entity, society
or a trust, which imparts elementary education;".
3. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER IIA
REGULATION OF SALE AND ADVERTISING OF FOOD
PRODUCTS CAUSING OBESITY AMONGST CHILDREN
17A. The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette,
establish a Council to be known as the Nutrition Council to regulate sale and
advertising of food products which cause obesity amongst children.
17B. The Council shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) not more than three members having expertise in medicine with at
least fifteen years of experience in handling issues related to nutrition and
child health;
(c) one expert each in the field of labelling and claims, advertisement, food
additives, processing aids; and
(d) one member from the Union Ministry of Women and Child Development
not below the rank of Joint Secretary.
17C. The Council shall—
(a) lay down policies and principles to regulate sale and advertising of food
products causing obesity amongst children;
(b) determine its procedure in the performance of its functions;
(c) admit any complaints regarding non-implementation of its policies; and
(d) initiate action for violating provisions of this Chapter.
17D. The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and other
employees to the Council as may be necessary for efficient discharge of its functions.
Insertion of
new Chapter
IIA.
5
10
15
25
30
35
40
Establishment
of Nutrition
Council.
Composition
of Nutrition
Council.
Functions of
the Council.
Central
Government
to provide
Officers and
employees.
20

3
17E. All food products containing high sugar, calories, sodium, saturated fat or any
other ingredient present in food products beyond limits stipulated and detrimental to health
of children shall bear label warning about the presence of excess ingredient in black bold
letters.
17F. All food products labelled under section 17E shall not be sold within a radius of
one kilometer of educational institution.
17G. All food products labelled under section 17E shall not be advertised in print,
television or any other form targetting children below the age of eighteen years.
17H. Whoever sells a labelled food product in contravention of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years
and fine which may extend upto rupees ten lakhs.
17I. Whoever advertises a labelled food product in contravention of provisions of this
Chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto two years
and fine which may extend upto rupees five lakhs.".
Labelling of
food products
by the
Council.
Prohibition of
sale of
labelled food
products near
educational
institution.
Prohibition
on advertising
of labelled
food products.
Punishment
for sale of
labelled food
products.
Punishment for
advertisement
of labelled food
product.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Increasing exposure to variety of fast foods has led to rise in consumption of food
products which are largely detrimental to the health of the persons. While adults can recognise
the harmful effects the targeted advertising of such unhealthy food products towards younger
population has led to poor lifestyle standards amongst youth. The need is to regulate the
sale and advertising of such food products so as to save children from their harmful effects.
Childhood obesity is a major challenge in the battle against rising rate of non-
communicable diseases in India. While India is already facing strong challenge in providing
affordable healthcare access to its citizens, the effects of poor lifestyle habits among its
urban citizens adds further burden on the country's resources. The establishment of Nutrition
Council under the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with adequate representation
of professionals will be vital in regulating use of ingredients resulting in obesity. A warning
label on food products having more than permissible limit of certain ingredients would
caution the consumers about their ill-effects.
It is also necessary to place restriction on advertisement of food products which
cause obesity and sale of such food products near educational institutions. The Bill,
accordingly, seeks to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 with a view to reduce
consumption of unhealthy food products by children.
N
EW DELHI; OM BIRLA
November 21, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute a Nutrition Council to regulate the sale and
advertising of food products which cause obesity amongst children. It also provides for
appointments of experts, officers and employees to the Nutrition Council. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore per annum would be involved from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS ACT, 2006]
NO. 34 OF 2006
* * * *
3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * *
(b) "advertisement" means any audio or visual publicity, representation or
pronouncement made by means of any light, sound, smoke, gas, print, electronic
media, internet or website and includes through any notice, circular, label, wrapper,
invoice or other documents;
(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Food Authority;
* * * *
(g) "contaminant" means any substance, whether or not added to food, but
which is present in such food as a result of the production (including operations
carried out in crop husbandry, animal husbandry or veterinary medicine), manufacture,
processing, preparation, treatment, packing, packaging, transport or holding of such
food or as a result of environmental contamination and does not include insect
fragments, rodent hairs and other extraneous matter;
(h) "Designated Officer" means the officer appointed under section 36;
* * * *
* * * *
Definitions.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
————
(Shri Om Birla, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3994LS(S3)—18-01-2017.