1
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI HARIBHAU JAWALE, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 19 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
"19A. No person shall sell or offer for sale any fruit or vegetable unless it has
been graded and marked for ripening by food laboratory according to such standards
and in such manner as may be specified by the Food Authority.".
Bill No.  5  of  2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new section
19A.
Grading and
marking for
ripening.
5
10
34 of 2006.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The issue of artificial ripening of fruits and vegetables especially mangoes and banana
has been raised from time to time in various parts of the country. Usually farmers harvest
fruits prior to maturity with a view to get premium price or to transport them to remote
destinations where they are ripened before retailing with aids like calcium carbide, ethylene
gas and ethrel/ethephon. The use of ethylene gas either directly from cylinders or as liberated
from ethephon, is recognized as a safe alternative for ripening of fruits by scientific research
provided it is used at low concentration.
As per the traditional practice, the use of calcium carbide commonly known as ripening
masala is very popular. Calcium carbide is a carcinogenic substance and can cause mouth
ulcer, food poisoning or even cancer. Hence,  it is dangerous for human life.
Therefore, the Bill seeks to provide for a legal mechanism of grading of ripened fruits
and vegetables before they are offered for sale. Such a mechanism will ensure that artificial
ripening of fruits and vegetables has been carried out using safe chemicals.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; HARIBHAU JAWALE
November 24, 2010.
2

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.
—————
(Shri Haribhau Jawale, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—6150LS(S3)—14-02-2011.