As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

10 JUL 1998

Bill_No. 49 of 1998

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998

By

‘Suri Susi Kumar Suine, M.P.
rN
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

| by Parliament in the Forty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
‘This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1998.
In article 327 of the Constitution, —

(i) after the words “delimitation of constituencies”, the words “ and rotation
constituencies reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes” shall
inserted;

(ii) the following proviso shall be added at the end, namely:—

“Provided that while delimiting the constituencies, the number of seats
reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of
the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State under article 330 or 332, as
the case may be;shall be readjusted in accordance with the proportion of their
respective population to the total population of the country, as ascertained at
the last.preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.”.

Short title.

Amendment
of article 327,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In the fiftieth year of Independence it would be in fitness of things to review the
system of delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies. It is observed that
for decades together the same constituencies continue to be reserved for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes. This evidently runs contra to the spirit of Parliamentary democracy
insofar as the choice of candidates in such reserved constituencies is restricted to those
belonging to such classe of people and the people do not have a right to elect representatives
of their choice. This is equally unfair to people of non-reserved classes. This practice thus
creates a sort of vested interest in reserved seats.

Though even unde* the existing provisions of article 327, there is no bar on the
Delimitation Commission, as and when constituted, to rotate such reserved constituencies,
yet reserved seats have never been rotated,

The number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the
House of people or Legislative Assembly of the State are to be suitably increased in
accordance with the proportion of thei» population to the total population of the country.
Accordingly, it is proposed to amend the Constitution suitably.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut, SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
April 20, 1998.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * *

| Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections to
ubject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may from time to
make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with,
either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the Legislature
including the preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies
‘matters necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses.

* * * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—363LS—22-4-98,