Bill No. 60 of Its? 
THE GOVERNMENT SA VINGS BANKS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 27TH AUGUST, 1959) 

8m No. 60 of 1959 
THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS BANKS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Government Savings Banks Act, 1873. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:--
1. This Act may be called the Government Savings Banb Short tide. 
(Amendment) Act, 1959. 
5 2. In section 3 of the Government Savings Banks Act, 1873 (here- Amendment 
in after referred to as the principal Act), after the definition of of s«:tiO(1 3· 
"minor", the following definition shall be inserted, namely:-
'''prescribed'' means prescribed by rules made under this Act.'. 
3. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following sections shall Subltitutioa 
be b · ~~ 10 su stltuted, namely: - sections for 
T~ 
section ". 
"4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for ~7ina~oll 
the time being in force, or in any disposition, whether testamen- Y epol1tor. 
tary or otherwise, by a depositor in respect of his deposit, where 
any nomination made in the prescribed manner purports to 
confer on any person the right to receive the deposit on the death 
of the depositor, the nominee shall, on the death of the depositor 
l.ecome entitled, to the exclusion of all other persons, to be paid 
the deposit, unless the nomination is varied or cancelled in the 
prescribed manner. 
(2) Any nomination referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
become void if the nominee predeceases, or where there are two 
or more nominees, all the nominees predecease, the depa.itot'. 

PaymauOD 
deatbof 
depoeitor. 
(3) Where the nominee is a minor it shall be lawful for 
the depositor to appoint in the prescribed manner any person to 
receive the deposit in the event of his death during the minoritv 
of the nominee. .• 
4A. (1) If a depositor dies and there is in force at the time 5 
~f the death of the depositor a nomination in favour of any 
person, the deposit shall be paid to the nominee. 
(2) Where the nominee is a minor, the deposit shall be paid-
(B) in any case where a person has been appointed to 
receive it under sub-section (3) of section 4, to that person; 10 
and 
(b) where there is no such person, to the guardian of 
the minor for the use of the minor. 
(3) Where a deposit is payable to two or more nominees 
and either or any of them is dead, the deposit shall be paid to th~ IS 
SUrviving nominee or nominees. 
(4) If a depositor dies and there is no nomination in force 
at the time of his death and probate of his will or letters of 
administration of his estate or a succession certificate granted 
under the Indian Succession Act, 1925, is not within three months ao "of IPS. 
of the death of the depositor produced to the Secretary of thf' 
Government Savings Bank in which the deposit is, then-
(a) if the deposit does not exceed five thousand rupees, 
the Secretary may pay the same to any person appearing to 
him to be entitled to receive it or to administer the estate of 25 
the deceased; and . 
(b) within the afore&aid limit of five thousand rupees, 
any officer employed in the management of a Government 
Savings Bank who is empowered in this behalf by a general 
or special order of the Central Government may, to the)O 
extent to which he is empowered by such order and subject 
to any general or special orders of the Secretary in this 
behalf, pay the deposit to any person appearing to hitn to 
be entitled to receive it or to administer the estate. 
(5) Nothing contained in thie section shall be deemed to J~ 
require any person to accept payment of a deposit, which is II 
time deposit, before it has become due.". 

• 
39 of 19:15. 
10 
3 
4. In section 5 of th~ principal Act,- Ameodmeftt 
ofMCdon S. 
(a) for the words "Such payment", the words "Any pay-
ment made in accordance wi th the foregoing provisions of this 
Act" shaD be substituted: 
(b) the words and figures "or Act No. 26 of 1655" shall be 
omitted. 
5. In section 6 of the principal Act,- ' AmendmoDt 
of ,ectlon 5. 
(a) for the words and figure "under section 4", the words, 
brackets and figures, "under sub-section (4) of section 4A" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words and ftgure "to whom he pays any money 
under section 4", the words, brackets, and figures "to whom he 
pays any money under sub-section (4) of section 4A" shall be 
substituted. 
IS 6. In section 7 oi the principal Act, for the words and figure Amenf ~ent o seetum 7. 
"under section 4", the words, brackets and figures "under sub-section 
(4) of section 4A" shall be substituted. 
7. Sections 9 and 11 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of sections 9 
8Ild II. 
S. In section 13 of the principal Act, for the words and figures Ame~ent of seetion 
3D "the Indian Succession Act, 1865, section 4", the words and figures 13. 
"section 20 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925" shall be substituted. 
t. For the heading "Rules" and for section 14 of the principal Act, Subatitutioa of new 
the follOWing heading and sections shall be substituted, namely: - ,ectiona for 
, section 14. 
"MISCELLANEOUS 
as 14. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the ~tectio~ of . action ta .. eo 
35 
Secretary or any other officer of the Government m respect of in aood 
.anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under faith. 
this Act. 
15. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Power to 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this make ruin. 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality 
of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of 
the following matters, namely:-
(a) the persons by whom and the terms and conditions 
subject to which deposits may be made in a Government 
Savings Bank; 

4 
(b) the maximWll limits of deposits and the condition8 
as to interest or discount relating to deposits generally, or 
any class of deposits in particular; 
(c) the non-accrual of interest on deposits when the 
maximum limits are exceeded and the recovery of any S 
interest paid in excess in the same manner as an arrear of 
land revenue or in any other manner; 
(d) the persons to whom and the manner in which 
deposits may be paid; 
(e) the form of nominations, the manner in which, the 10 
persons in whose favour and the conditions and restrictions 
subject to which, nominations may be made and the regis-
tration of nominations; 
<f> the variation or cancellation of nominations; 
(g) the fees that may be levied for registration of I ~ 
nominations and for variation or cancellation thereof; 
(h) the manner in which any person may be appointed 
for the purpose of sub-section (3) of section 4. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament 20 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and 
if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately follOWing, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the 2S 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modilied form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.". 30 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 4 of the Government Savings Banks Act, 1873, 
deposits in a Government Savings Bank belonging to the estate of 
a deceased person are payable to his legal heirs on production of 
probate of his will or letters of administration of his estate or a 
succession certificate granted under the Indian Succession Act, 
1925; but if the deposit does not exceed Rs. 5,000 and any of the docu-
ments referred to above is not produced within a period of three 
months of the death of the depositor, payment can be made by the 
Postal Authorities to any person appearing to them to be entitled to 
receive it or to administer the estate of the deceased. 
2. Suggestions have been made from time to time that, as the 
production of legal proof of succession involves considerable delay 
and expense, the depositors may be allowed the right to nominate a 
person or persons to receive the amounts due to the deceased deposi-
tors without the production of legal documents. This Bill, accord-
ingly, seeks to allow nomination facilities to the depositors in the 
Government Savings Bank by amending the Savings Banks Act, 
1873. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI R. DESAI. 
The 26th June. 1959. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The proposed section 15 sought to be inserted by clause 9 of the 
Bill empowers the Central Government to mak~ rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Act· The particular matters in respect of 
which rules may be made are specified in sUb-section (2) thereof. 
These provisions would enable the Central Government to make 
rules relating mainly to matters of procedure, for example, the 
pers~ns by whom, and the terms and conditions subject to which, 
deposits may be made, the form of nominations, the registration, 
cancellation or change and the manner of payment of deposits under 
the Act. These are all matters of a routine nature and the delega-
tion of legislative power is of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS ''ROM THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS BANKS ACT. 1873 (5 OF 187:3) 
• • • 
Deposits belonging to the estates of deceased persona 
4. If a depositor dies and probate of his will or letters of adminjs- PaymeDt 011 
tration of his estate or a succession certificate granted under the ~=i~!r. 
39.' 192,. Indian Succession Act, 1925, is not within three months of the death 
of the depositor produced to the Secretary of the Government 
Savings Bank in which the deposit is, then-
(a) if the deposit does not exceed five thousand rupees, the 
Secretary may pay the same to any person appearing to him to 
be entitled to receive it or to administer the estate of the deceas-
ed, and 
(b) within the aforesaid limit of five thousand rupees, allY 
officer employed in the management of a Government Savings 
Bank who is empowered in this behalf by a general or special 
order of the Central Government may, to the extent to which 
he is empowered by such order and subject to any general or 
special orders of the Secretary in this behalf, pay the deposit to 
any person appearing to him to be entitled to receive it or to 
administer the estate. 
5. Such payment shall be a full discharge from all further liability PaymcDt 
in respect of the money 60 paid: dt~_1c a 
J ...... u,c. 
But nothing herein contained precludes any executor or adminis- savina of 
trator, or other representative of the deceased, from recovering ~~~~:r. 
from the person receiving the same the amount remaining in his 
hands after deducting the amount of all debts or other demands law-
fully paid or discharged by him in due course of administration. 
And any creditor or claimant against the estate of the deceased Savin,o( 
may recover his debt or claim out of the money paid under this Act. ~~~t~~. 
or Act No. 26 of 1855, to any person, and remaining in his hands 
unadr:1inistered, in the same manner and to the same extent as if 
the latter had obtained letters of administration of the estate of 
the deceased. 
7 

Security for 
due admi-
nistration. 
Power to 
administer 
oath. 
Penalty for 
fall': state-
m:llts. 
Act not to 
apply to 
deposits 
belonging to 
estates of 
European 
aoldien or 
d~.rteIS. 
Legalization 
of like 
payments 
heretofore 
made. 
Paymel't of 
married 
women', 
depolitll. 
6. The Secretary of any such Ban k or any officer empowereci 
under section 4 may take such security as he thinks necessary from 
any person to whom he pays any money under section 4 for the due 
administration of the money so paid, 
and he may assign the said security to any person interested in 
such administration. 
7. For the purpose of ascertaining the right of the person claim-
ing to be entitled as aforesaid, the Secretary of any such Bank or 
any officer empowered under section 4 may take evidence on oath 
or affirmation according to the law for the time being relating to 
oaths and affirmations. 
Any person who, upon such oath or affirmation, makes any 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to 
be false or does not believe to be true, shall be deemed guilty of an 
offence under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 ol186o . 
• • • • 
9. Nothing hereinbefore contained applies to money belonging 
to the estate of any European officer, non-commissioned officer, or 
soldier dying in Government service in India, or of any EuroPE'an 
who, at the time of his death, was a deserter from the said service. 
Deposits belonging to minors 
• • • • 
11. All payments of deposits heretofore made to minors or their 
guardians by any Secretary of a Government Savings Bank shall 
be deemed to have been made in accordance with law. 
* • * • • 
Deposits made by married women 
13. Any deposit made by or on behalf of a married woman, or 
by or on behalf of a woman who afterwards marries, may be paid 
to her, whether or not the Indian Succession Act, 1865, section 4, 10 of 1865. 
applies to her marriage; and her receipt for money paid to her under 
this section shall be a sufficient discharge therefor. 
Rules 
Rules re- 14. All certificates under section 8, and all payments under 
SOJlating section 10, section 12 or section 13, shall be respectively granted and certi6cates under ICC- made by the Secretary of the Bank, subject to such rules consistent 
tion 8, and with this Act as the Central Government may, from time to time, payments . 
Wlda'sections prescrIbe. 
10,12 OJ '3. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Government Savings Banks Act, 1873. 
The President has, in pursuance of claus. (I) of article II? of the 
Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, the 
introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai, Minister of Fi"ance) 