As INTR()J)UCED IN LoK SA8~ ,o~,~ 
'. ' 
THE HOOGHLY DOCKING AND ENGINEERING COMPANY LIMITED 
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) 
BILL; 1984 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPI'ER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitiom. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND 'IRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the under_ 
takings of the Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Power of Cent~al 'Governme~t to' direct vesting of the undertak-
ings of the Company in an existing Government company. 
6. Transfe; 'Of undertakings of the Company from an existing Gov-. 
ernment company to a llewGovernrnent .company. 
7. Company to be liable for certain· prior liabilities. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
8. Payment of amount. 
9. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTEH IV 
MAN~GEl\IENT .. ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY 
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company. 
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of 
the Company to deliver all assets, etc. 
12. Duty of }'efsons to account for assets, etc., in their possession. 
CHAPTF..R V 
PROVISIONS l\ELATTNG TO THE· EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY 
13. Continuance of employees. 
14. Provident fund and other funds.' 

it 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
CLAUSES 
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. 
16. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
17. Certain powers of the Central Government or the Government 
company. 
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
19. Priority of claims. 
20. Examination of claims. 
21. Admission or rejection of claims. 
22. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants. 
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company. 
~4. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general 
revenue account. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCEJ,LANEDUS 
25. Act to have overriding effect. 
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central . .. Government or the ·Government company. 
27. Prot~ction of action taken in good faith. 
28. Delegation of powers. 
29. Penalties. 
3Q. Offences by compani.es. 
::11. Power to make rules; 
32. Power to remove difficulties. 
33. Repeal and saving. 
THE SCHEDULE. 

Bill No. 60 ~f 11M . 
THE HOOGHLY DOCKING AND ENGINEERING COMPANY 
LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF'" UNDER-
TAKINGS) BILL n}84 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and tmn.sfer oj the ~ndertakings Of the 
Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited with a view 
t" seCU,'l"ing the better utilisdtton of the available i1rfrG8truetwre thereof, 
to1tlodernise .and incre4se the ca.pacity for shipbuilding and ship 
repairing so as to redu.ce the import of ships, vessels and craft and to 
augment the poroduction Qf grey iron, non-ferrous and alloy casting. 
by the said undertakings s~ as to subserve the interests Of the general 
public by ensuring the continued slL'pply of the said articles which are 
essential to. the need. of the economy of the ccmntry, and for matters 
connec:ted therewith and incidental thereto. 
WHEllEAS the Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited 
is, through its undertakings, engaged in shipbuildini, ship repairtn,. 
sen era} eneineering and other activities; 

Short title 
udcom-
IMIICIID8Dl 
AND WHEREAS the Company has the capacity and infrastructure to 
effect an increase in the country's capacity to manufacture ships and 
other vessels and craft; 
,AND WHEREAS an increase in the production of such vessels and 
craft wOl11d reduce' the need of the country to make imports of such 5 
vessels and craft and would thereby enable the country to save foreign 
exchan&e; 
AND WHEREAS the Company is also engaged. in the production of 
grey iron, non-ferrous and alloy castings which are essential to the, 
needs of the economy of the country; 10 
AND WHP'J'EAS the Company had been suffering heavy losses for a 
number of years mainly due to lack of fresh investment and moderni-
sation; 
AND WHEREAS further investment of substantial sums of money 
is needed to run and modernise the undertakings of the Company: 15 
but in view of the serious adverse financial condition of the Company 
if is not in a position to secure such investment; 
.AND WHEREAS the liqUidation of the Company, by reason of its 
inability to pay its debts, would prejudicially affect the country's 
capacity to manufacture such ships, vessels and craft and would there- 20 
by be prejudicial to the public interest; 
AND WHEREAS in view of the position aforesaid it is necessary to 
acquire the undertakings of the said Company to' enable the Central 
Government to make necessary investments for securing the proper 
utilisation of the available facilities for shipbuilding and ship repair- 25 
ing (including the production of vessels and craft) and also for the 
produ!.1ion of grey iron, non-ferrous and alloy castings which are 
essential to the needs of the economy of the country; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India 8S follows:-
CftAPTER I 
Plu!:I.D.aN ARY 
\ 
1. (l) This Act may be called the Hooghly Docking and Engineering 
Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1984. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 28th day .of June, 
19&4. . \ I ' 35 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date of commencement of thil 
Act; 

( 
10f 195'. 
I of 1956. 
(0) • 'Commissioner" means ':he Commissioner of Payments Detlnitiolil. 
appointed under section 15,; 
10 
(c) "Company" means the Hooghly Docking and Engineering 
Company Limited, being a company as defined in the Companies 
Act, 1956, and having its registered office at 12, Mission Row, 
Calcutta-700001; 
-
(d) "existing Government company" means $. Government 
company which is carrying on business on the appointed day; 
(e) "new Government company" means a Government cpm-
pany formed and registered on or after the appointed day; 
(f) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules rr.ade under this 
Act; 
15 (h) "specified date", in relation to any provision of this Act, means 
20 
such date as the Central Government may, by notification, specify 
for the purposes of that provision and different dates may be specified 
for different provisions of this Act; 
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but de-
fined in the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meanings, respec-
tively, assigned to them in tilat Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AN!) TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE CoMPANY 
3. On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the 
~ right, title and intereSt of thf;' Company in relation to its updertakinp, 
2;> shall, by virtue of this Act, stand trilnsferred to, and vested iu) 
the Central Govenlment. 
4. (1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include 
all assets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all 
o property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, 
3 stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash on 
hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other rights and 
interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before 
the appointed day in the 9wnership, possession, p()wer or control of the 
Company, whether within or outside India, and all bGoks of account, 
35 re~sters and all other documents of· whatever nature relating thereto. 
Transfer 
to, aDd 
vestin,in, 
the Colltral 
Govern-
mentol'the 
uDdertat-
inpol the 
Compaoy. 
Cre8eral 
effec:tof 
vestiD,. 
, 

(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed 
and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and 
all other ineumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, 
. decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority restricting the 5 
use of such properties in any manner shall be deemed to have been -
withdrawn. 
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this 
Act in the Central Government and' every person holding any 
charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, 10 
shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, 
an intimation to the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or 
other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort-
gagee of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other per- 15 
son holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any 
such property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance, with his rights 
and interests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole 
or in part, out of the "amount specified in section 8 and also out of the 
amount determined tinder section 9, but no such mortgage, charge, lien 110 
or other interest shall be en~rceable against any property which has 
vested in the Central Government. 
(5) Any licence or other .instrument granted to the Company in 
relation to· any undertaking which has vested in the Central Government 
under section 3, at any time before the appointed day and in f,orce im- 125 
mediately before that day, shall continue to be in force on and after such 
day in accordance with: its tenor in relation to, and for the purposes of, 
such undertaking and on and from the date of vesting of such undertaking 
under section 5, in an existing Government company, or under section 
6, in a new Government company, the existing, or new, Government 30 
company, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be substituted in such 
licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had 
b<:'en grante4 to such existing, or new, Government company and such 
f'Yisting, or nr!W, Government company shall hold it for the remainder 
of the period for which the company would have held it under the 35 terms thereof. 
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding 
of whatever nature in relation to ",ny property which has vested in the 
Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred by or against 
the Company is p<.>nding, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, 40 
in any way, prejud~ial1yaffected by reason of the transfer of the under-
takings of the Company or of anything contained in this Act, but 
the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or 
enforced by or against the Central Government, or, where the undertak-
ings of the Company are directed, under section 5, to vest in an existing 45 
Government company or become transferred by virtue of the provisions 
of section 6 to a new Government company, by or against such Govern-
ment company, 

-
• 
I. U) Notw.ithstanding anything contained in sec~ons 3 and 4. and 
lubject to the provisions of section 6, the Central Government may. if it 
i.I satisfied that an existing Government company is willing to comply, 
or has complied, with such terms and co~diti~ns as that Government may 
5 think fit· to impose, direct, by notification, that the undertakings of the 
Company, and the !fight, title and interest of the Company in relation to 
its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under 
section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Governmellt, 
vest in that existing Government company either on the date of publica-
10 tion of the notification or on such earlier or later date (not being a date 
earlier than the appointed ~ay) as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to 
its undertakings vest, under sub-section (1), in an existing Government 
company, that Government company shall, on and from the date of such 
15 vesting be deemed to have become, and until the transfer of the under-
takings by virtue of the provisions of section 6, to a new Government 
compllny, be deemed to be, the owner in relation to such undertakings and 
the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such 
undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vestinJ, be deemed to 
20 have become, and until the date of such transfer, be deemed to be, the 
rights and liabilities, respectively, of that existing Government company. 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything. contained in sections 3 and 4, where 
the undertakings of the Company have been directed, under sub-section 
(1) of section 5, to vest in an existing Government company, the C€mtral 
25 Government may, if it is satisfied that a new Government company fs 
willfng to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as 
that Government may think fit to impose, declare, by notification, that 
the undertakings of the Company be transferred to that new Government 
company; and on the issue of such declaration, the right, title and interest 
30 of the Company in relation to its undertakings, which had been directed 
under sub-section (1) of section 5 to vest fn an existing Government 
company, shall, instead of continuing to vest in that existing Government 
company, vest in tha.t new Government company with effect from the 
date. on which such declaration is made. 
35 (2) Where the right, title and interest of the existing Government 
company in relation to the undertaicings of the Company ~st under sub-
section (1) in a new Government company, that new Government 
company shalt, on and from the date of such vf"sting, be deemed to have 
become the owner in relation to such undertakings and 'the rights l'Ind 
40 liabilities of the existing Government company In re'ati'on to such 
undertakings, shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed 
to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that' new 
Government company. 
7. (1) Every liability, other than the Uability speciftedin sub-section 
45 (2), of the Company in respect of any period prior to the aDpointed day, 
shall ~ the liability of the Gompany and shall be enforceable against it. 
and not against the Central Government, or where the undertakings of 
the Company vest in an existing, or a new, Government company, against 
such Government Company. . 
,50 (2) Any· liability arising in respect of a4vanees from customers for 
shipbuilding and non-shipbuilding OJ'ders shall, on and from the appointed 
,lay, be the liability of tbe Central Government or of the existing, or new, 
Power of 
~ntral 
Gpvern-
mentto 
direct 
vestin, 
of the 
under-
taldn,so1· 
the Com-
pany In an 
existin, 
Govern-
ment 
COJDPlDY. 
Transferol 
UDder-
tatiDas of 
the Com-
panyfrom 
an exist-
1111 Gov-
ernment 
company 
to a new 
Govern-
mentcoID-
pany. 
Company 
tl> be liabel 
for certain 
prior 
liabilities. 

Payment of 
amount. 
Payme.nt oa 
ftlrtMr 
amount. 
e 
Government company aforesaid, and shall be discharged by that Govern. 
ment or, as the case may be, the exiSting, or new, Goverllluent company. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that,-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no 
liaLility of the Company in relation to its undertakings, in respect 5 
of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable against 
the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Company 
vest in an existing, or a new, Cklvernment company, against such 
Government company; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 10 
authority in relation to the undertakings of the Company, passed 
on or after the appointed day in respect. of any matter, claim or 
dispute, which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against 
the Central Government,,'or where the undertakings of the Company 
vest in an existing, or a new, Government company, against such 15 
Government company; 
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before tM appointed 
day for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being 
in force shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or 
where the undertakings of the Company vest in an existing, or a 20 
new, Government company, against such Government company. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF' AMOUNTS 
8. For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Govenlm~nt, under 
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and 25 
interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings, there shall be 
paid by the CentwGovernment to the Company, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees ,ix hundred and 
fifty lakhs. .. • 
9. (1) The amount specified in section 8 shall carry simple interest 30 
at the rate of four per cent. per annum for t"e period commencing on 
the appointed day and ending on tbe date on which-payment of such 
amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
(2) The amoun~ determined in a{'cordance with the provisions 01 
sub-sec1ion (1) shall be paid by the Central Government to the Com- 35 
nany in addition to the amount specified in section 8. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities 
of the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vegted In 
the Central Government under section 3. shall be discharged from the 
amount referredio in section 8, and also from the amount determined 40 
under sub-section (1) in accordance with the rights and interests of 
the creditors of the Company. 

'1 
,CHAPTtR IV 
10. The gener:l !!uperintendencc, direction, control and management 
of the ~;{'f,J ,.:, and business of th~' !mdertakings of the Company, the right, 
5 title ~nd interest in T'!la'lion. to Mdt~.c~ have vested in the Central Gov-
ernment under section 3, shall,---
. (a)' where a direction has been made by the Cel'ltral Government 
under sub-section (1) of section 5, vest, on and from the date 
specifi<idin' such dIrection, in the existing Government company 
IO '!:' r's!,eeHi~d therein; or 
(b) ',-,here a declaration ha::; been made under sub-section (1) 
: ~ . of sectiotl 6, v('>st, ~on and from the du'te' of such ~laTatlon, in th~ 
new Govt'tnment company specified therein, 
tind the'tettpon the existing, or n~w, Government company. as the ca'lle 
15 ~8;; be. shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion of all other per-
som an such Dowers and do all such things as th~ Company is aut,ho-
ri!'led to exercise and do in ,relation to the undertakings owned by it, 
'. 11. (1) On the veS'tiri/t of the management' of tfte und'!rtakingsof 
tneCrimpanyin the existing, or new, Governmtllt compan.y, all persons 
20 in charge of the managem~nt of the undertakings of the Company 
lmme'd-fately before such v~ting, shall be bound to deliver to such 
~..ov·elnment company, all assets, books of account. registers and otb'!r 
dOOlmenis in their custody relatln~ to '~he nndertakings of the Company. . . , 
(2) The Central Government may issur such directions as it may 
25 deem desirable in ~hp.· circumstances of the case to the existin~. or new. 
Oovernment company and such Government company may also. if it 
is considered necessary so to do. apply to the Central Government at any 
tfn'\efor instructions ~s to the mann~r in which the m:ana~ment of the 
undertakinf!s of the. Company shall he conducted or In relation to any 
30 other matter luisin.q in the course of <m<.>h management. 
M ..... -
.... ele .• 
oldie 
under-
takiqs 
oldie 
Company. 
Dutl'of 
perlCiaiin 
,cltaraeot 
rna ..... 
lDUlof 
the Ulllier-
takiJlpof 
die o.a-
pa.yto 
dell\ICr all 
all8ets, etc. 
n.(l) Any, pers0!l ,who haa, ~n the apPoiI?ted day. in his possession 
or under his ('ontrol. any assets, books. doCuments or other papers rela-
ting. to . any of the undertakings owned by the Company. which have 
vestedi;n the Central Government or in the existing. or new, Government 
35 company tH'rler this Act. ann which belong to the Company or 
: w()uld h'wl' ~1 belonrred. ·if the u'1dertakings owned by the Company bad 
not vested in the Central Govemmcnt or such Governml"nt company. 
shaH be ~t.al)](· to ~('count for the said asseb;. books. documents and other 
papers to the Central Government or the .Government cnmpany and shall 
Dutyot 
persons to 
account for 
aueta. etc., 
ill tbeIr 
poueaslon. 
. 40 deliver them up to the Central Government or the Government company 
or to such penJDn o~,persons as the Central Government or the Govern-
_ ment COmpany may .specify in this behalf. 
(2) The Central Government mav take or cause to be tak!"n all neces-
sary steps for. securfn~ possession~f the undertakinfi!.<; "f the Coinpany 
45 which hvve vested in it .under section .3. 
(.1) The Company shan. -within svch period as the Central Govel'n-
rnent mav nllow in ihis behalf. furnish to that Government ::I complett'l 

. ·'i,. t, 
,,'j, \ 
8 
inventory of all its properties and assets, as on the appointed day, ~­
taining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Govern-
merit under section 3, and, for this purpose, the Centrw. Government or 
the exi9ting,or new, Government company sh~l1 afford to the Company 
all reasonable facilities. 5 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF 'I'KB COMPANY 
Conti. 13. (1) Every person who has been, imm.ediate1.y before the ap-
nuance of pointed da::, employed in any of the undertakings of the Company shall 
employees. ' 10 lecome,- , 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central 
Government; and ' 
(b) where th,e undertakings of the Company are vested in an 
existing, or a new, Government company, an employee of that com-
pany on and from the date or sl}ch vesting, 15 
flnd shall hold, office or service under the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, withihe 
s:mre rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters .. 
would have been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting 
I ani shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under the 20 
Central Government or the existing, or new: Government company, as 
the case may be, is duly terminated ,or unt,il his remuneration and 
other conditions of service are duly altered by the Central Govemmenf 
or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case, may be:' 
Provided that, unless any extension 'of service is granted to such 25 
peMlOl'l 'after the appointed day in accordance· with the rules in that 
hehalf in force for the time being, such person shall retire compul-
sori'y from the service of the Central Government or the existing, or 
n?W, C'TOVel'nment company, as the case may be,-
(a) where be has 3ttai~ed or attains the a~e of flfty-eight 30 
vears be-fore, or on, or within a period of three months from, the 
npoointed day, on the date of expiry of the said period of three 
months or on the, date on which he shall retire compulsorily from 
service in accordance with the conditions of, service applicable t.o 
him, immediately before the appointed day, whichever date is 35 
f'<lrher; 
(b) in any other c?se, on his attaining the age of fifty-eight 
years. 
(2) Notwithstanding anythin'~ contaJned itt the Industrial Dispu-
tes Art, 1947~ or in any other law' for the time being in foree, the 40 14 of 1941. 
transfer of the services of any offi{'er or other perl'lOn employed in any 
I.;nnr',.takin~ of the Company to the Central Government or the exi~ 
ing, O'l' new, Gove-rnment compan~1 shall not entitle such offic~r or other 
employee to any compensation under this Act or under any other 
,law for the time being in force and no such claim Rhall be enter- 4~' 
t!lined hy nny court, tribunal or other authority, 

14. (1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund Or any other fund for the benefit of the 
persons employed in any of the undertakings of the Company, the 
monies relatable to the officers or other employees, whose services; 
5 have become· trClnsierred, by or under this Act to the Central 
Government. or the existing, or new,' Government company, shall, out 
(If the momes standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of. such 
provident fund,. superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund , 
stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government or the 
10 Government company, as the case may be. .. 
(12) The monies which stand transferred· under sub-section (1) 
to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government ·com-
pany, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or 
that company in Ruch manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
COM.MlSSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
15. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of disbursing 
the amounts payable unded sections 8 and 9, by notification, appoint a 
Commissioner of Payments. 
20 (2) Tlte Central Government may appoint such· ott1er persons as it 
may thiBk fit to assist the Commissioner and t~reupon the Commis-
siellel' may authorise one or more of scuch persons also to exercise all 01'" 
any of the powers exerclsableby him under this A.ct and different 
persons may be authorised to exercise diiferent powers. 
25 l3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been con-
ferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of 
authorisation. 
30 (4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other 
persona appointed under this section shall be defrayed out of the COD-
solidated Fund of India. 
16. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from the 
specified date; pay, in cash, to the ~ommissioner, for payment to the 
35 Company-
Provident 
fund,and 
other 
funds. 
Appoint-
ment of 
Commis-
sioner of 
PaYIDents. 
J'aymeot 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment (a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 8, and 
(b) an amnunt equal to the a~unt payable to the Company 
under section 9. 
to the 
Commis_ 
sioner. 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Governlnent 
40 in favour of the Commissioner, in the Public Account of India, and every 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be depo&ited 
by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit· 
account shall be operated by the Commissioner. 
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of 
45 the undertakings of the Company in relation to which payment has been 
made to him under this Act. 

" ;. 
Certai. ' 
powers of 
t,ovem-
ment 
io the 
Company. 
aaint~ 10 
he made 
to the 
Commis-
sioner. 
Priority of 
claims. 
Ellamina-.. , 
tioD of 
daiml_ 
~o 
(4) The interest accruini on the atll;)Wlt sta.niling to ~ cr~dit,~f the' 
depOsit accou~t'referred to in sub~Section (2) sb8.il enure to the .bEm~ftt elf the Com any. ': ' ',,' , " ,," " <,' 
p , " '",,,, " ' 
U. (l),The ~entral Government or thef,Uusting, or neM, ~Gbverti1tlen,t 
<>ompany, as'ttw ca8e may be, shall be 'entitled to receive ~p to the speci~ t', 
ilec.iCia.1e, tQlJ:ie ~x.clusion otaH other penions, any money'fi'Ue': t'o the 
~u.pany, in rel&~ion to i1.6!undel1:akines which hllye'vested iI1,t~ Centra! 
ij,lovernment or sUt:h Govemment ,(..'Ompany, and :realised. after' the 
apP0.ll1tedciay, nOLwithstanding that the realisation pertains to' a peridd, 
prJ.or to the appointed. day. ,', ' '10 
\~) 'fhe CenLralGovern~nent or the existing. or new., Government 
. cQmp.tny,.as the case may oe, may ~ke a claim to :t4eC~mnliiiliiollejfW!ta, 
'n:i~'u tuevel~y payu11mt m.adeby~nat liov,ernmentol.' I..iovermnent Q01B" 
pany, atterJle aplX,-l,llll.ed a.ay Lor ,CilSchal'glllg any ~tullty oltae .~ompany 
.• 1 J.'c.auon to any period prior to tile appomted aay; and every such claim 15 
shall nave priorIty in accordan~e. wAh, me priorities attachl.ng, under thiS I ~ 
ACt, to tne mal.ter 10 reiation lv whlch such liabibty has been dis-
charged by the Central Governmet1'~or the Government l:ompany. 
(J)i:tavc a& oth~rwise prov.wed in ,tlus, Aet~ . tileltabilitie& ofl the 
t.;OlllPiUl,y, m 1'1*i~t,~ any tl·anl::ilil.c~lVn, pnoc '.$) the, appointed day,' 'whidl 20 
nave not been dischargec1 on Of -before the speciii:ed,tlate,' shttU 'be"th~ 
liabilitIes of the Company. 
• . \ ! ') ~ f I" 
"la, Ev~.ry pe~so~ ,Pr-vms, ac~aim :~.n*'tl{lei Coz,npany..:.wiJ4.,!rejaJ.:Q, 
to ~9Y ot the ma~~~ specl1j,trd. ~~l thf! ;:),~l~dLU~£lCrt~n4lU ~W ~e,: \4Q~tU'~ 
~~I"'Ul,pofth,o C~~y shal~ 'prefer,su~l1 ~LO,~~ol'e .4wI.GOlUllllWOllil-l' .z5 
within thil'ty days from ~,s~'C~ll~d,~te: ,; \ ".H", .1"" ,':::'I'I,! 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the clainutnt was 
pnrvehted, by sufficient cause 'fiom 'preferring the claim . within the saia 
p~i'lOd of thirty day., he IrU1y 'entertain the clain1 With ill a fUrther peridd 
of Hurty days and not ther~after. \ : ' " , 30 
19. The claims, made under .,section 18 shall have .. ;priol'~ties in 
..I:~ol'darlce with the following principles~ nam;iy:~' ". , \11 I .; 
• ',t.", - ",,' ;:,' ;\! '~I, ~ .• ;",~, '.;t'! -"';~~ 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over'l~lt othetlca'WgOH~s 
and Category II shall have, precedence over Catt;g()ry .1~l, ~d .~~ on; 
(b) ,the claims spe<.-ified' in each Of the categonessh'all rnrtk' equally 35 
and be paid in full, but, if me amount is insufficient to meet such \, 
claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly j and . . 
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to 
a matter specified in a lower catc~ory shall arise only if a surpluS 10 
is left after meeting all the ,liabili ties specified in the immediately , . . ' " ' 
higher category ... 
.:\ 
" ' .. 
20. (1) On receipt of, the claims ,~ade J.Ul4er. sect~on 1~1': th~ 
Commissioner !:lhall arrange the claims in the order of priorities speci-
Iled ih the Schedule and ~xatriine tl,<, same in accordance' with such 45 
erder of. priorities. 

(2) If, PH, rxaminatioll, ; o~ the claims, ,tht}, Commissioner is o( Q'piuJon 
t4a\ tAte, Q{no"nt. Vaic;j.tp·, h~ un~r, thii"A~t is llQt suft\ciellt l'U> 
~~.( ~e,'li~~~it~I?,$pecified, in an)'! .lower . ,category" he, shall not ,be 
~.!9~~e~ t9 ~xanUne the c,laims ill respect of such ~owef cat~gOJ;y. 
, ' , 
'5 21. (l) After examining the claims with reference to the priori-
ti,~,~, set i 9~~, in tl}~ S~hedule, theC;::ar,nmi~sipner shall ,fi~ a certain ',date 
on 01' I#or,e which every claimant I shall file th~, PWOf .. ,. of his .cl~ilIl. ; 
q J ~.,! ,. ;. , \ \ \' " . . r .-J •• 
: i' 'i 
,,(2) l';qt less 'ih~n fourteen days' notice of the date sodix.ed> shall be 
given by advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper 
io in the English language having circulation in the major part of the 
c~flt,t;Y and one .issue of. an~, daily, newspaper in, such,regional, langu-
ag~, ~s t~e ,C~mmissi\lIH!r. mtayconsider suitable, an4 eVery, ,such nptice 
shaU" call \lPOll the. claimant to file the proof ,of his claim with thQ Com-
missioner within the period specified in the ad.vertisement., " 
T5' ,(3), Every claimant whofails to file th~proof ~f ,~s c1~im ;within 
the, time specified by the' Commissioner 5ltalI be excluded trom th~ dis-, 
bursem~nts' 'made' 'by' the Commissioner. ' , ' , 
" !'" , .,,' , , 
, , 
(4) The Commission~r shali, after such investi"ation as ~ay, in 
hlsiJpi~idn,be necessary and after 'giving the Company an opportu-
20 nitY' of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant' a reas'on~b~e 
opp6rtunity 'of' being heard,' by order'in wtiting. admit or reject the 
cla~m in. whole. or. iu part. I ~ 
(5)" The Commissioner shall have ,the power, to 'Degulat-e bis own 
pr(lcredufe I in, all ,matters al'isUlg out 0-£ the clisch.arge .of his functions, ' 
25 including th~ place or places a.t which he may, hold his sittings. and 
shAll, , ~(I~ the purPQse of, making lUl, investigation under this Act, 
h~ve t~~ :;;am~ pow:er;s aa ~r.e vested in a civil court under ,the Code of 
5 of 1908. Civil PrO!!eAwe" 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the, folloWing 
matters, nam~J.y,:~ 
go (a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
witness and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
, 'irultel'ial object producible as evidence; 
• ) !! ~ . '. iii i , 
,ee) ,the reception of, evidence on affidavits; 
35 '(d) the issuing (Wany commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
" (6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deeIl'led to 
, be' '8 ' judi8al ,proceeding within the meaning of ,sectiOns 193 and 228 
45 of 1860. ' of ' the 'trlcl'iart :Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be 
2 of 1974. 40 a, ~ivl1' court for the purposes of section 195 and 'Chapter XXVI of the 
C();leof. Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
45 
,(7) AcIaimant, who is dissatisfied with the decisjon of the Com .. 
~r11f,sionel'. may, prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal. 
rivil court of oriRinal jurisdicti()n within the local Hmits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated: 
Ad~si»on 
or rejec-
tion"Q~" 
claims. 

Disburse-
ment of 
money by 
the Com-
missioner 
to 
claimants. 
Disburse-
ment of 
amounts tl 
the Com-
pany. 
Undisburs-
ed or 
unclaimed 
amount 
to be 
deposited 
to the 
General 
revenue 
account. 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
Contracts 
1o cause to 
have 
effect 
unless 
ratified by 
the Central 
Govern-
ment 
or the Gov 
emment 
Company. 
Provided that where a person who is a Judie of a' Hiih Cow-t is 
appointed. to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall lie to the Hi.h 
Court exercising jurisdiction over the place in which the registered 
office of the Company is situated and such appeal shall be heard and 
disposed of by not less than two Judges of that High Court. 
·Z2. After admitting a claim under this Act, the amount due 
in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the per-
son or pnsons to whom such amount is due. and on such payment, 
the Uabili ty of the Company in respect of such claim shall stand 
discharged. 
23. (l, If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to the under-
takings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabi-
lities as speeifted in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse 
s~ch balance to the Company. 
5 
10 
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other 15 
property has vested in the Central Government or the existing, or new, 
Government company under this Act, but such machinery, equip-
ment or other property does not belong to the Company, it shall be 
lawful for the Central Government or the existing, or new, Govern-
ment company to continue to possess such machinery or equipment or flO 
other property on the same terms and conditions under which they 
were possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day. 
24. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which 
the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shalt' be w-ansferred 25 
by the CommiSSioner, before his office is finally wound up, to the gene-
ral revenue account of the Cen~ral Government; but a claim" to any 
money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by 
the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such 
transfer had not been made, and the order, if any, for payment of the 
c:;laim, being treated as an order for the refund of revenue. 30 
CHAPTER VII 
M't6o£LLANnOUS 
25. The provlslons of this Act shall have effect nO,twithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 3 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of' any law, 5 
other than this Act or in any decree or order of any court, tri1?unal 
or other authority. 
26, Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its 
undertakings, which has vested in the Central Government under section 
3, for any service, sale or supply and in force immediately before the 40 
appointed day, shall, on and from the expky of one hundred and eighty 
days from the appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract 
is, before the explt:y of that period, ratified, in writing, by the Central 
Government or th~ existing, or new, Governmen:t company, in which such 45 
undertakings have been vested under this Act, and in ratifying 
such contract. the Central Government or the Government company may 
make such alteration 01' modification therein as it may think fit: 

5 
IO 
I~ 
Provided that the Central Government or such' Government company 
&hall not omit to ~atify a contract and shall not make any alteration or 
modification in a contract-
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or 
has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests 
,of the Central Government or the Government company; and 
fb) except after giving to the parties to the contract a reason-
able opportunity 'of being heard and except after' recording in 
writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making 
any alteration or modification therein. 
1.7. (1) No suit, pl'osecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against Pro~ion 
the Ce~trlll Government or any officer or otber employee of that Govern- of action 
ment . .or the existing, or new, Government company or other person tWD in 
15 authorised by the Central Government or the Government company for load faith. 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done unqer this 
Act. 
'(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie again~t the Central 
~vernment or any of its officers or other employees or the existing, or 
'20 new, Government company or other person authorised by the Central 
Government or the Government company for any damage caused or likely 
to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act. 
28. (1) The Central Government may, by notification. direct that all • Delegation or any of the powers exercisable bv it under this Act. other than of 
25 the powers conferred by this section, se"ctlon 31 and section 32. may also powen. 
be eXeTclsed by such person or persons as may be specified in the 
notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under ~ub-section 
30 (1). the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under 
the direction, control and supervision ·of the Central Government. 
29. Any person who,-
fa) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of the undertakings of the Company, wronRfully with-
110lds such property from the Central Government or the ex,isting, 
or new, Goyernment company; or 
(b) wrongfulIy obtains possession of, or retains, any pt'Operty 
forming part of the undertakings of the Company; or 
(e) wilfUlly withholds or fails to furnish to the Cenf;ral Gov-
ernment or the existing. or new, Government company or any per-
40 Ron or bQQY of persons ~ecifted by that Government or the Gov-
ernment company, as the case may be. anv document relating to 
the undertakinRs of the Company. which may be in his possession, 
custody or control; or . 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the existing, 
45 or new, Government company or to any person or body of peI'llOns 
:;peciftecl by that Government ot the Government cGmpany. aay 
Penalties. 

Power 
10 make 
raJ-. 
14 ; 
. assets, books of nccOtmt, registers or' 6ther 'd~utnerits in t1f~" po~s­
slo1'1, cU!:ItC'ldy ()r<~nn!t'nl. n~1~1illg to t.he undertakiYlgs'onhf.t'C~p~~~ 
or ' '.:,! ~.;. ;~t~ t.f!"l~~rl)f~dl' 
(e) wrongfully r~move$ or d~stroys lI,!)y w:opemYt fC(lJWing part .5 qf the,undertakings of the Company; or " ; )".'("." .,' ,(\ ;Ii~ , 
<f> .' prefers any claim under this Act I which") bel' knows 
or has reasonable cause to 'be1ievl~ to be false or grossly inaccurate, 
, .,Ir' t ,1.\ 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term whlSh .m~y. e~t,epd to 
two years, or with fine which ,may extend to ten thou~at)~ r~~1 or 
with both. '10 !:,', 
30. (1) Where an offence under this. Act bas beeJl c~mIlli,tted 
by a corr'l.pa~y, every person who, at the time the offence was ,C~~)~I 
was in charge of, find was responsible to, the company, for, Jbe 'coi;tduct 
of the business of the' com pH ny, as well as the compa~y, shaltb{a~~¥e~ ~S 
to be guilty of the offence and shall ~e liable to be proceeded agabiSt ' . 
and punished accordingly: . . ". l' ,. 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all duedili., 
gence to prevent the commission of such offen~. gO 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence umler this Act has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director,manager. secretary '01: other ofticer of the company. such direc- 25 
tor. manager, secretary or other officer shall be deem.ed to be guilty 
of that offen('e and shall be liable to be proceeded against and" punished 
accordingly. . 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a.) ucompany" means any body corporate and includes a ftrm 30 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a ftrm, means a partner in the 
finn. 
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rul~s foJ;' 
carrying Olit the provisions of this Act. 35 
(2) Yn p9rticular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore .. " 
going power, such rules ml;lY provide for all or any of the feU.wlng 
matters, namely:-. 
(a.) the time within which and the manner in which, an inti-
mation sheil be given to the Commissioner under sub:"ct1on (3) of 40 
sec:tion 4: . 
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or 
other. fund' under section 14 shall be dealt with; , 
(e) any other matter whfcr is required to be, ,or maYlH!;preao 
crtbed. ..' 45 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Gcm!rnment under ',this. AM; 
shall be laid,u soon as may ·be after it is made; ~. ~: ltOtise of 
P8fUamel1t, whlle it is In !essfon, for a ~otal pel1~ of" thirty daylll 

15 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedi~tely following 
the' 'session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
malting any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
5 should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modificII-tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
32. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the prOvisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
10 
provisions of thi!; Act, remove the difficulty; 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the appointed day. 
} I:werto 
;emove 
aifficul. 
filS 
33. (1) The Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited Rl'pcal and 
7 ef 1984. 15 (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ord,tnance, 1984, is hereby saving. 
repealed. 
20 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sec:tions 18, 20, 21 and 23) 
ORDO OF PRIORITIES I'OR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY 
Ccteg01'Y 1-
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of 
25 the Company. 
(b) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the 
Company to the provident\ fund, Employees' State Insurance Fund, 
Life Insurance Corporation premium and any other arrear under 
any law for the time being in force. 
30 Category Il-
35 
Loans and interests for which Government of India have giVP.D 
guarantees to the public financial institutions. 
Category 111-
Secured loans with interest advanced by-
(4) public financial institutions; 
(b) banks. 
Categ01'y IV-
Statutory dues. 

)8 
Category V-
Unpecured loans WIth mterest advanced by tb,e public financial 
institutions, banks or other creditors. 
Category VI-
Any credit availed of by the Company for the pucpose of carrying on 
any trading or manufacturing operations. 
Category V II-
Any other loans or dues. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited consists of 
two production units, namely, Salkia Works at Salkia, Howrah and Port 
Engineering Works at Howrah. The Company is engaged in shipbwlding 
and ship repairing and in the prQductionof grey iron, non-ferrous and 
alloy castings. More than 2,500 persons are employed in the aforesaid two 
units. 
2. The units had become sick ever since mid sixties and assistance 
from the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India (IRCI) was made 
available to it from 1973 onwards. It was being managed by IRCI since 
then. However, the units continued to be sick due to lack of adequate 
finance for working capitaL fresh investment andtnodemisation. Inter:' 
est burden, which continued to mount owing to accumulated losses, 
created further difficulties. IRC! also found it no longer possible to 
finance. the units further. Employees' dues and other payments went 
into arrears. Wages of the employees could not be paid in time. BeCause 
of the uncertainty about the future of the Company, many technical and 
managerial personnel left the Company. It became difficult to keep the 
Company's operations going. 
3. The revival of the undertaldngs by restructuring the capital was 
considered to be an immediate necessity for the purpose of securing the 
better utilisation of the infrastructure of the undertakings to modernise 
and increase' the capacity for shipbuilding and ship repairing so as to 
reduce the import of ships and to augment the production of grey iron, 
non-ferrous and alloy castings by the said undertakings so as to ensure 
the continued supply of the said articles.. The revival was also considered 
neces<;ary to save the workers employed in the undertakings from un-
employlnent . .I ,'Among ,the various alternatives, acqwsitiOl'l and transfer 
of the undertakings by the Government was considered to be the only 
effective alternative to achieve the process quickly followed by a 
modernisation ,programme involving substantial capital expenditure. 
The Hooghly D~king and Engineering Company Limited (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Unciertakings) Ordinance, 1984 (7 of 1984) was accord-
ingly promulgated on the 28th June, 1984 . 
. 4. TheBiU seeks to replace 'the aforesaid Ordinance. 
Nl:w DELIII; NARAYAN DATT TIWARI. 
The l~h July, 1934. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA . 
[Copy of letter No.1 (12)/83-HE. n, dated the 24th July, 198. from 
Shri Narayan Datt Ti~ari, Minister of Industry to the Secretary-General, 
Lok S~bha:] . 
::I. 
'. TbePresident; having beeQ informed of the subject matter of the 
Hooghly Decking and Engineering' CompanytJ.mi~d (Acquisition' and 
Transfer· oIc;Underlakings) Bill, 1984, recommends under clauses (1) 
and (3) of article 117 of the ConstituijQn the introdu.ctton of the said 
Bill, ·m:and, its consideration! by Lok' Sabha. 
17 

FINANCIAl .. MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that, on the appointed day, the right, 
title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings, sh,,:U 
stand transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government. 
2. Under sub-c)a'Qse (2) of clause '1 of the Bill, any liability uf.inI in 
respect of advances from customers for shipbuilding and non-shipbuild,ing 
orders shall, on and from t.he appointed d~y, i.e., on and from the 28th 
June, 19M, be th~liabUity of the Central Gove,rnment Or of the eXisting, 
or new, Governm~t company in which the undertakings stand vellted. 
It. is estimated th8t this amount is likely to be of the Dreier of &. 1,7,90 
la.kh$. 
3. Cla~se 8 of the Bill proyides fllr payment in cash an @wunt of 
ru~s ,ix hun~red and fifty lakl;ls for the tr~r to, and vesting in, the 
Central ~o~~~ th~ right, ti~le and inter, .. t of the Company in rela .. 
ti()n ~9 its uncler~~~~. 
, 4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 9 of the Bill provides for payment of 
simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annwn on the amount 
.pacified under clause 8 for the periOd commencing on the appointed day 
aDd ending on the date on which payment o,f such amount is made by 
the Central Govemment to the Commissiorier of Payments. It 1.8 esti. 
lDated that tb1s amount will be of the order of Rs. 2.20 lakhs per month. 
5. Clause 15 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments and may also appoint such other 
persons as it may think fit to assist the Commissioner and that th~ 
salaries and allowanees of the CommisSion~ and other persons 
appointed under the said elilu8e shall· be' ~frayE,d out o~ tbe Con!lpli-:-
dated F\md of India. The ,estimated experiditure otl this a(:~ounf is li~y 
to be of the' order 'Of lis. 25,000 per month. ' 
6:' FuDds will.18o have to be provIded 10 the existing, 0., new, Gov~m­
ment·~y in which t~ unctertal,dngs of th~ Hf?OihIy Dq~ldng,.tn4 
Erlgiaeering Company Limited'stand vested, towards rectincation·, 01 
immediate defiCiencies durin,g Phase J period, and layout of 'the units, 
transfer of technology and provision of ~alancing ecJui~nt, when 
required during Phase II period. The estimated cost of impl~menting 
Ph~~ ,Ian~ P~s, II w01.lld be around Rs. 800 lakhs. " , . 
7. It is anticipated that all the liabilities specified in ,the Schedule to 
the Bill are not likely to be discharged fully by the Commissioner I)f 
Payments out of the amounts paid to him under the provisions of the 
3m· Tile Central ~v~nm~, prOPO'~8tO assume some of -the' undis~ 
charged iiabUities, suc)l ,." rtp'YJ;Dent of.' secured loans advanced by 
the banks and the financial institutions anc:i tbeiuterest. thereon. For 
thls- pwPOSe, the liabilities on ~c~o!lnt' ~(~~~rest "On. ih~ lo.~ ~ P"P" 
~!.to be assumed t1p to the appomted day in respect of all ~ l~' 
except the ones advanced under the guarantees given by theCentr8I 
Government .where the ip'.,teres~ ~~9i~ ~l PIt, 'MS~qd in;tenns of 
:-~r:.:~.".f::' t~~:::~'::h!~=:'~':'! hi& report' .. " " 
, , '8. fte.BiU,-H enl\cteti,fJ ~~f!lJt!lY'¥> ~~ffiv.o~y "e.r ~g ut' 
non-recUlrmg expenditure. ' " . I: ... ~ 
." .. 
18 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATJON 
Clause 31 of the Bill empower!; the Central Government to make ru.t. 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which 
rules may be made, inter alia, relate to the time within which, and the 
manner in which, intimation, regarding any mortgage, charge, lien or 
other interest in, or in relation to, the properties which have vested in 
the Central Government under clause 3 of the Bill, shall be given to the 
Commissioner of Payments and the manner in which the moneys in any 
provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund maintained by the 
Company shall be dealt with by the Central Government or the existing, 
or new, Government company, as the case may be. 
2. The matters in respect of which :oWes may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail. The delegation of Jegi~lative power 
is thus of a normal character. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the 
Hoogbly Docking and Engineering Company Limited with a view to 
s~curing the better utilisation of the available infrastructure thereof 
to modernise and increase the capacity for shipbuilding and" ship 
repairing so a3 to reduce the import of ships, vessels and craft and 
to augment the production of grey iron, non-ferrous and alloy castings 
by the said undertakings so as to subserve the interests of the gene-
. raj public by ensuring the continued supply of the said articles which 
ate essential to the needs of the economy of the country, and for 
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
(Shri Narayan Datt Tiwa~i, MinISter of Indwtry.) 