As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABHA ON 
-
BiU No. 10 of 1989 
THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1989 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortitth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amend-
ment) Act, 1989. title and 
---com-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
10 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In Part IX of the Constitution, after Chapter I, the following 
Chapters shall be inserted, namely:-
'CHAP'rli1R n.-NAGAR PANCHAYATS 
243N. (1) There shall be constituted in every State a Nagar 
Panchayat (by whatqver name called) for a transitional area, that 
is to say, an area in transition from a rural area to an urban area, in 
accordance with the provisions of this Part. 
(2) The Governor of a State may, having regard to the density 
t; of population, the revenue generated for local administration, the 
mence-
Mento 
Irisertion 
of new 
Chaptel'l 
II to V. 
Constitu- , 
tion, etc .•. " of Na'pr , '," . 
Pan-
ch.yat.. 

Defini-
tions. 
Constitu-
tion of 
Municlpa-
litie'. 
2 
perce,ntage of employment in non-agricultural activities, the econo-
mic importance or such other factors as he may deem fit, specify 
by public notification an area with a population of about ten thousand 
or more but less than twenty thousand, to be a transitional area for 
the purposes of clause (1). S 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and (2), the Gov-
ernor may, by order, declare that any town committee, town area 
committee, notified area committee or any other similar body (by 
whatever name called) existing immediately before the commence-
ment of the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1989, in 10 
relation to an area having a population of less th::tn ten thousand, 
shall be deemed to be a Nagar Panchayat for the purposes of this 
Part. 
(4) The Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the Nagar 
Panchayats with such powers, authority and responsibilit'es referred 1 S 
to in article 243E and article 243U as may be specified in such law. 
CHAPTER HI.-MuNICIPALITIES 
243-0. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Metropolitan area" means one or more contiguous 
agglomorations having a population of about twenty lakhs or more, 20 
comprised in one or more d:stricts and consisting of two Or more 
Municipalities or Panchayats or other adjoining areas, specified 
by the Governor of a State by public notification to be a Metro-
politan area for the purposes of this Part; 
(b) "Municipal area" means the territorial area of a Muni- 2S 
cipality; 
(c) "Municipality", that is to say, Nagarpalika, means an 
institution (by whatever name called) of self-governmen.t for 
the urban areas constituted in accordance with the provisions 
of article 243P, and includes a Nagar Panchayat. 30 
243P. (1) There shall be constituted in every State, in accord-
ance with the pro\"isions of this Part,-
(a) a Municipal Council for an urban area having a popu-
lation of about twenty thousand or more but less than three lakhs; 
(b) a Municipal Corporation for an urban area having a 3S 
population of about three lakhs or more. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the Governor of 
a State may, by order, declare that every Municipal Corporation 
existing immediately before the commencement of the Constitution 
(Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1989, in relation to an area having a 40 
population of less than three lakhs, shall be deemed to be a Munlcf-
pal Corporation for the purposes of this Part. 

5 
10 
15 
a 
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, notwithstanding 
anything in clause (1) and in clause (2) of article 243N, provide for 
the constitution of-
(a) a Nagar Panchayat for a transitional 
population of less than ten thousand but not 
thousand; 
area having a 
less than five 
(b) a Municipal Council for an urban area having a popu-
lation of less than twenty thousand but oot less than ten 
thousand; 
(c) a Municipal Corporation for an urban area having a 
population of less than three lakhs but not less than twenty 
thousand in the capital of a State, 
where such area is in an island or a hilJy or a desert terrain. 
243Q. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Legislature 
of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to the compo-
sition of Municipalities. i : 
(2) Save as provided in clauses (3), (4) and (5), all the seats 
in a Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election 
from territorial constituencies in the Municipal area and. for this 
20 purpose. each Municipal area shall be divided into territorial constitu-
encies to be known as wards. 
(3) Where Wards Committees are constituted within the terri-
torial area of a Municipal Council under article 243R. the Chairpersons 
of all such Wards Committees shall also be members of that 
25 Municipal Council. 
(4) Where Zonal Committ·ees are constituted within the territorial 
area of a Municipal Corporation under article 243S. the Chairpersons 
of an such Zonal Committees shall also be members of that Cor-
poration. 
10 (5) The Legislature of a State may. by law, provide for the 
reore<;ent1ti0l1. in a Ml1nicip~litv. of pe~ons havin~ special know-
ledcte or experienc4'> of Municipal ::uimini!'ltr::ltion in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be specified in such law: 
Provided that such person~ shall not have the right to vote in 
3S the meetings of the Municipality. .' 
40 
(6) The Chairperson of a Municipality shall be elected by, and 
from amongst, the elected mem~rs thereof. 
(7) No resolution by a Municipality for removing the Chair-
person of the Municipality from the office of the Chairperson shall 
be valid and effective unless such resolution bas been passed by a 
majority of the total number of tJ-.e elected members of the Munici-
pality and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of such mem~ 
present and voting. 
Composi. 
tion of 
Municipa. 
litiell. 

03nsti-
tution and 
composi-
tion of-
Wards 
Commit-
tee.. 
Constitu-
tion and 
composi-
tion of 
Zonal 
Commit-
tees. 
4 
243ij.. (1) There shall be constituted in every State, in accord~e 
with the provisions of this Part, Wards Committees (by whatever nallle 
called) within the territorial area of a Municipality having a popula-
tion of one lakh or more. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with 5 
respect t~ 
(a) the composition and the territorial a",a of a Wards Com-
mittee: 
Provided that the territorial area of a Wards Committee shall, 
(i) in the case of a Municipal Council. comprise two or 10 
more wards; and 
(ii) in the case of a Municipal Corporation, comprise one 
or more wards; 
(b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee shalJ 
be filled by persons chosen by dirert elect!on from the territorial 15 
area of the Wards Committee. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in dause (1). Wards Committees 
may not be constituted within the territorial area of a Municlpal Cor-
poration ref-:rred to in clause (2) of article 243P. 
(4) Every member representing a ward! in a Municipal area com- 20 
pri~ within the tenitorial area of a Wards Committee shall be a 
member of that Committee. 
(5) The Chairperson of a Wards Comm;Uee shall be elected by, 
and from amoanst, the members thereof. 
2438. (1) There shall be ('onstituted jn every State, in accordance 25 
with the provisions of this Part, at a level between the Wards Com-
mittees and the Municipal Co~ration. Zonal Committees (by what-
ever name called) within the territorial area of a Municip'll Cor-
poration. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law. make provision with 30 
r£;ped to the territorial area of a Zonal Committee. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), Zonal Committees 
may not be coastRuted within the .territorial area of a Municipal 
Corporation referred to in clause (2) of article 243P. 
(4) The Chairpersons of all the Wards Committees comprised 3S 
within the territorial area of a Zonal Committee shan be members 
of that Committee. 
(5) The Chairperson of a Zonal Committee shall be elected by, 
and from amongst, the members thereof.' 

5 
5 
243T. (1) The provISIons of articles 243C, 243D, 2438, 2431, 
Z43J and Z43K shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to Munici-
palities and Wards Committees as they apply in relation to Paachayats. 
(2) The provisions of article 243C shall, so far as may be, apply 
in relation to the Committees constituted under article 243Y and 
article 243Z as they apply in relation to Panchayats: 
Provided that the reservation of seats in such Conunittees shall 
be detennined with reference to 'the district as a whole and not 
separately with reference to the Pancha~'ats and Municipalities. 
AppliCa_ 
tion Of 
certain 
articles 
of Chapter 
Ito 
Municipa_ 
ilities, etc. 
]0 (3) The prov',i'lns of artie'c 24:lF .!'h:tH, "0 far as may be, apply 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
in relation to Municipalities as they apply in relation to Pal)chayats. 
(4) The provisions of articles 2438 ancf. 24~ shall, so far as 
may be, apply in relation to Zonal Committees as they apply in 
relation to Panehayats. 
243U. Subjl2ct to the provlSlons of this Constitution, the Legis-
lature of a State may, by law, endow-
(a) the Municipalities with such power3 and authority as 
may be necessary to enable them to function as institut'ons of 
self-government and such law may contain provisions for the 
devolution of powers and responsibilit:es upon MuniCipalities. 
subject to 'Such conditions as may be specified therein, with 
respect to-
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development 
and social .i'ustice; 
(ii) the pr:rfo'"mance of functions and the implementa-
tion of schemes as may be entrusted to them including those 
in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule; 
(b) the Wards Committees or, as the ca~e may bp., 
the Zonal Committees with such powers and authority as ma-r 
be necessary to enabl:- them to carry out the responsibilitie. 
conferred upon them including those in relation to the matten 
listed in the Twelfth Schedule. 
Powers, 
authority 
and rea-
ponsi_ 
biHies 
of Muni-
cipalities, 
etc. . t 
243V. (1) The Finance Commission referred to in clause (2) Finance 
shall review the financial position of the Municipalities and make Commis. 
recommendations to the Governor as to- sion. 
(a) the prinCiples which should govern-
(i) the determination of the.! taxes, duties, tolls and fees 
which may be assigned to, o,r appropriated by, the Municipa-
lities; 

Chapters 
II toVnot 
to aPPly 
to certain 
areas. 
Conti-
nuance Of 
existing 
laws and 
MUlIllcipa-
lities, etc. 
Distrjct 
Planninl. 
6 
(U) the distribution between the State and the Munici- l'-. 
palities of the net proaeeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees 
which are to be, or may be, divided between them under this 
Part and the allocation between the Municipalities of their 
I'IeSpective shares of such proceedsj 5 
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the 
Consolidated Fund of the State; 
(b) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by 
the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Municipali-
ties. 
(2) The Finance Commission constituted under article 24'30 
shall be the Finance Commission for the purposes of clause (1). 
10 
(3) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by 
the Finance Commission under this article together with an expla-
natory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before 1 5 
the Legislatur~ of the State. 
243W. (1) Nothing in Chapters II to V shall apply 
to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal 
areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution" the Gover- 20 
nor of a State may, in his dis<!retion and subject to SUch exceptions 
and modifications as he may specify, by public notification, extend 
Chapters II to V to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), 
or the tribal areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244, comprised 
within that State. 25 
243X. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of 
any law relating to Municipalities, Wards Committees and 
Zonal Committees in force immediately before the commencement 
of the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1989, which is 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in 30 
force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature Or other 
competent authority or, until the expiration of one year from such 
commencement, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that all the Municipalities, Wards Committees 
and Zonal Committees existing immediately before such commence- 35 
ment shall cOlltin'le·· till the expiration of their duration, unless 
sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legisla-
tive Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a 
Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of that State. 
CHAPTER JV.-PLANNING 
243Y. (1) Subject to the provisions of clause (2), the Governor 
of a State shall by public notification constitute a Committee in 
every Panchayat at the district level. to consolidate the plans pre-
pared by the Panchayets and the Municipalities jn the district and 
40 
to p"pare a draft development plan for the district as a whole, 45 

1 
.(2) The Committee shall consist of such number of persons not 
exceeding twenty-one as the Govemor may, by order, specify and 
the members of the Committee shaH be el~ted by, and from 
amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district level 
5 and the Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio bet-
ween the population of the Panchayat at the d1striet level and of 
the Municipalities in the district. 
(3) The Chairperson of the P~chayat at the district level 
shall be the Chairperson of the Committee. 
10 (4) The tenn of ofBce of a member of the Committee shaD 
come to Illl end as soon as he ceases to be a member of the Pan-
cbayat at the district l'evel or, as the case may be, the MunicipaUty 
from which he was elected. 
(5) The Committee shaH, in preparing the draft development 
15 plan,-
20 
25 
(a) have regard to-
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats 
and the Munic:palitics. includinl'r spatial planning. sharing 
of water and other physical and natural resources, the inte-
grated development of ~tructure and (environmental 
conservation; 
(ii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the Gov-
ernment of India and the Government of the State; 
(iii) the extent and type of available reso1lJ'ee8, whe-
ther financial or otherwise: 
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Gov-
emor may, by order, specify. 
(6) The Chairperson of the Committee shall forward the deve-
lopment plan, as recommended by the Committee, to the Govem-
30 ment of the State. 
35 
40 
243Z. (1) Subject to the provisions of clause (2), the Governor 
of a State shall by public notification constitute a Committee in 
every Metropolitan area to prepare a draft development plan for 
the Metropolltan area as a whole. 
(2) The Committee shall consist of such number of persons not 
exceeding thirty-one as the Govemor may, by order, specify, of 
whom,-
(a) two-thirds of the members shall be elected by, 
and from amongst, the 'elected members of the Municipalities 
and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area in 
proportion to the ratio between the popUlation of the Munici-
palities and of the Panchayats in that area; and 
Metro-
politan 
planning. 

JDlections 
to Pan-
chayats, 
Municipa-
lities, etc. 
to be held 
simultane_ 
ously. 
Disquali-
ficatioJlB 
for mem-
bership. 
(b) the rest 'shaD be such penons and such representativeS 
of the Government of India and the Government of the State 
and of such organisations and institutions, as the Governor may 
in such order specify. 
(3) TheChairp~rson of the Committee shall be appointed by S 
the GOvernor. 
(4) The term of office of an elected member of the Committee shall 
come to an end as soon as he ceases to be a member of the Municipa-
lity or, as the case may be .. the Panchayat from which he was elected. 
(5) The 'CGlnm:ittee shall. in preparing the draft development 10 
plan,-
(a) ....... to-
(z) tile plans prepared by die MUDIdpaIities and the P.ac. 
yaIB in .. Mm'opuIitan area; 
(Ii) IDIItter's Of common interest between the Municipalities IS 
and the Panchayats. including co-or.d:inated spatial planDinr 
of the area, sharing of water and other physical and natural 
I'eSOUne8, the integrated development of infl'BStructure and, 
environmental conlK"rvation; 
(iii) the overall objectives 8Ild priorities set by the Govem- 20 
Dient of India and the Government of the State. 
(iv) the extent and nBture of investment Hkely to be made in 
the MetrOpolibm 8fta by agencies of the Government of India ad 
of the Government of the State; 
(v) file extent and type of available resources, wbether ftmm. 25 
dal or otb.erwise; 
(b) CODIUIt soda inMitudons Uld orgaoisa4ions 1M the Governor 
.." by order, specify. 
(6) 'I1Ie 0Iairpen0n Of the Conimlttee shaD forward fhe demopment 
plan, .. I'eCOIIIIIaIlcled by the Commit", to the Gom1lment of the St*. 30 
CHAPTER Y.-MISCELLANEOUS 
243ZA. Elections to the Panchayats, Municipalities and Wards 
Committees in every State shall be held simUltaneously. 
243ZB. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as. 
and fod being,. a member of a Panchayat or M'unicipality or Wards 35 
Committee-
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government 
of India or the Govemment of any State, or a Panchayat or 
Municipality or Wards Committee or Zonal Committee in a State. 

LO( SA3HA. 
ernn I :';2i'ID Po 
t::> 
(To ba1As illtrc~:hced i:i i,oi: S:.lb:ia) ... - ~'," . .. .. . '. -... ,.-..... ~ .... - .... ,--- - .... ---.... ---
l. Page 2. line 20,-
i..Q.~ "agglomorations:' ~.~9. .. ;·ag.)lomerations U 
2. Page 4. line 24,-
f.oI~ flamognstlt ~. Uamongst" 
3. Page 8, line 35,-
NEW DELHI; 

9 
other than an office declared by the Legislature of the State by 
law not to disqualify its holder; 
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent court; 
5 (C) if he is an undischarged insolvent; 
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquir-
ed the citizenship of a foreign. State.. or is under any acknow-
ledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State; 
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time 
10 being in force fo,r the purposes of elections to the LegislatUre 
of the State concerned; 
(f) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the 
Legislature of the State. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Pan-
15 chayat or Municipality or Wards Committee has become subject to 
any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question shall 
be referred for the decision of the Governor and his decision shall be 
final. 
(3) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Gov-
20 erno.r shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall 
act according to such opinion. 
25 
243ZC. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,-
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of 
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, 
made or purporting to be made under article 243J or under article 
243T, shall not be called in question in any court; 
(b) no election to any Panchayat. or Municipality or Wards 
Committee shall be called in question except by an election 
petition presented to such authority and in such manner as may 
30 be provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature 
of a State.'. 
35 
3. After the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution, the following 
Schedule shall be added. namely:-
''TWELFTH SCHEDULE 
(Article 243U) 
1. Public health. 
2. Sanitation, incl .... ding conservancy senices, public conveniences. 
solid waste collection and disposal and recycling of waste 
water. , 
I 
40 3. Drainage, sewerage and sewage disposal. 
4. Hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries. 
5. Veterinary services. 
6. Burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds. 
Bar to 
interfer_ 
ence by, 
courts in 
clect0ral 
matters. 
Addition 
of 
Twelfth 
Schedule. 

10 
7. Pounds and the prevention of cattle trespassj prevention of 
cruelty to animals. 
8. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths. 
9. Prevention of adulteration of foodstuffs and other goods. 
10. Communications, including roads, bridges, rerries, municipal 5 
tramways, ropeways and inland waterways. 
11. City passenger transport and other vehicles, whether propelled 
mechanically or otherwise. 
12. Maintenance of community assets. 
13. Works, lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of I() 
the Municipalities. 
14. Fire services. 
15. Welfare of thE' weaker sections, and in particular, of the Sche-
duled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 
16. Social welfare, including welfare of the handiC'apped and men· IS 
tally retarded. 
17. Women ani child development. 
18. Family welfare. 
19 .. Education, including p.rimary and secondary schools. 
20. Technical training and vocational education. 
21. Adult and non-formal education. 
22. Libraries, museums ani other similar institutions. 
23. Water supplies for drinking, industrial and commercial pur-
poses. 
24. Urban electrificatiOn., including distribution of electricity. 
25. Non-conventional energy sources. 
26. Town planning, including heritage conservation, urban arts and 
aesthetics. 
27. Urban housing. 
28. Parks, play grounds and recreational facilities. 
29. Regulation and promotion of land use and buildings. 
30. Slum improvement. 
31. Urban forestry. 
32. Investment, promotion and development of indUstrial and com-
20 
25 
mercial estates. 3-5 
33. Urban poverty-alleViation programmes. 
31. Public distribution system. 
35. Cultural activities. 
36. Licensing of theatres and dramatic performances. 
31. Pilgrimages.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A review of the working of the urban local bodies has shown that 
in many States they have become weak and inet!ective on account of a 
variety of reasons, including the failure to hold regular and periodical 
elections, prolonged supersessions, inadequate representation to the 
weaker sections like the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and 
women, lack of financial resouroes and inadequate devolution of powers 
and responsibilities upon them. 
2. Having regard to the inadequacies in the existing system and 
keeping in view the need to endow urban local bodies with such powers 
and authority as are necessary to enable them to fUnction effectively as 
units of local self-governmEnt, it is proposed to add n~w provisions in the 
Constitution relating to the Municipalities, that is to say, the Nagar-
palikas. 
3. The Bill proposes, inter alia, to-
(a) make provisions for the constitution of three types of 
Nagarpalikas: 
(i) Nagar Panchayats for transitional area, i.e., areas in tran-
sition from rural to urban with a population between 10,000 and 
20,000; however, the Governor is being ~mpowered to declare the 
existing town committees, notified area committees, etc., with a 
population of less than 10.000 as Nagar Panchayats; 
(ii) Municipal Councils for urban areas with a population 
between 20,000 and 3,00.000; 
(iii) Municipal Corporations for urban areas with a popula-
tion exceeding 3,00,000; however, tbe Governor is being empower-
ed to declare the existing Corporations with a population of less 
than 3,00.000 as Mun:cipal CorporaticlDs; 
(b) make provisions for the constitution of Wards Committees 
in Nagarpalikas with a population of more than 1,00,000 and, in the 
territorial area of Municipal Corporations, of Zonal Committees at 
an intermediate level between the Wards Committees and the Mu-
nicipal Corporation; 
(c) provide for seats in NagarpaUkas, including Nagar Paneha-
yats, and Wards Committees to be fUled by direct eloection and for 
Zonal Committees to be constituted by the Chairpersons of the Wards 
Committees comprised within. the territorial area of the Zonal Com-
mittees; however. Chairpersons of Wards Committees shall be re-
presented in Municipal Councils and Chairpersons of ZonaJ Com-
mittees shall be represented In MunicipaJ Corporations; 
11 

12 
(d) provide for reservations in Nagarpalikas, including the 
Nagar Panchayats, and Wards Committees to ensure the due repre-
sentation of the Scheduled Castes, the Schedul'ed Tribes and women; 
(e) ensure a fixed tenure of five years for the Nagarpalikas, in-
cluding the Nagar Panchayats, and Wards Committees; howev~r, if 
a Nagarpalika or a Wards Committee is dissolved before the expiry 
of its term, provision is made for the conduct of elections within a 
period of six months of its dissolution to reconstitute the body for 
the remainder of the term; . 
(f) provide for the devolution by the State Legislatures of 
powers and responsibilities upon the Nagarpalikas, Wards Commit-
tees and Zonal Committees with respect to the preparation of plans 
for 'Economic development and social justice and for the implemen-
tation of development schemes; 
(g) make provisions for the constitution of a Committee at dis-
trict level for harmonising and consolidating the plans of Panchayats 
and Nagarpalikas in the district and preparing a draft development 
plan for the district as a whole; 
(h) provid~ for filling of seats in the Committee at the district 
level by election from and amongst the members of the Panchayat 
at the district level and the Nagarpalikas in proportion to the ratio 
of the population covered by them respectiV'e1y; 
(i) make provrsion for constituting a Committee for metropolitan 
areas for preparing, in association with other agencies concerned, a 
draft development plan for the metropolitan area as a whole; 
(j) provide for the sound finance of the Nflgarpalikas by secur-
ing authorisation from State Legislatures for grants-in-aid to the 
Nagarpalikas from the Consolidated Fund of the State as also assign-
ment to, ot' appropriation by, the Nagarpalikas of the revenues of de-
signated taxes, duties. tolls and fees; 
(k) provide for a Finance Commission to review the fin~nces of 
the Nagarpalikas ~d recommend principhs on the basis of which 
State Legislatures may dete"mine the taxes to be appropriated by, 
Or assigned to, the Na~arpalikas. as also grants-in-aid to the Nagar-
palikas from the ConsoHdated Fund of the States; 
(1) vest in the Klection Commission the superintendence, direc-
tion and control of elfJciions to the Nagarpalikas, including Nagar 
Panchayats and O'ther eleeted committees established under this Part; 
(m) empower the Comptroller and Auditor-Gene"al of. India to 
cause the accounts of the Nagarpalikas, Wards Committees and 
Zonal Committees to b'!l audited in such manner as he may deem fit; 

13 
(n) exempt certain areas and territories from the application of 
the proposed provisions or empower the President and the Governor 
to modify them in their application to Union territories and Sche-
duled Areas and tribal areas respectively; 
(0) specify factors which would disqualify a person from mem-
bership of a Panchayat or Nagarpalika or Ward Committee; and 
(p) bar the jurisdiction of Courts in matters relating to elections 
to the Panchayats, the Nagarpalikas and the Wards Committees. 
4. The Bill ~eeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives. 
NEW DELHI; RAJIV GANDHI. 
The 1st August, 1989. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert articles 243N to 243ZC in Part IX 
of the Constitution. 
2. Articles 243R, 2438, 243Y and 243Z envisage the formation of Warc-a 
Committees, Zonal Committees, a Committee for consolidating and pre-
paring a deV'E!'lopment plan for a district and a Committee for preparing 
a development plan for a Metropolitan area, respectively. The constitu-
tion of Municipal bodies in accordance with the proposed provisions 
would require certain modifications and readjustments. This will call 
for strengthening the administrative capability of the urban local bodies 
at various levels and may also imply certain training requirements. 
Though the responsibility in this regard would primarily be that of 
the local bodies concerned and the State Governments, the Central Gov-
ernment may be required to share some portion of the extra expendi-
ture that may be- involved in this process. It is, however, difficult to 
estimate the annual recurring expenditure that will be involved in the 
exercise as it will depend upon specific decision!! taken bv the State 
Governments in this behalf. 
3. Article 243T provides for auditing of accounts of the Municipalities 
Wards Committees and Zonal Committees in such manner as the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India deems necessary. Similarly that 
article provides for superintendence, direction and control of the 
elections to the Municipalities' and Wards Committees to be vested in 
the Election Commission. These provisions are likely to increase the 
work in the office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India as 
well as in the Election Commission and may necessitate augmentation 
of their staff. However, both the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India and the Chief Election Commissioner have indicated that in the 
absence of details regarding exact worklO8d involved, it would be 
difficult for them at the present moment to estimate the additional 
expenditure that wO'Illd be involved. There will be no other recurring 
or non-recurring expenditure. 
14 

..... ~ .... 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri Ra;iv Gandhi, Prime Minister.) 