~ II •. 6,0 of' 1961 
THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY 
BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
ON 2JST NOVBMBD, 1961) 

tHE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY BILL, 1961 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Declaration of certain institutions as institutions of national 
importance. 
3. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE INSTITUTES 
4. Incorporation of institutions. 
5. Effect of incorporation of institutions. 
6. Powers of Institutes. 
7. Institutes to be open to all races, creeds and classes. 
8. Teaching at Institute. 
9. Visitor. 
10. Authorities of Institutes. 
11. The Board of Governors. 
12. Tenn of office of, vacancies amo!lg, and allowances payable 
to, members of Board. 
13. Functions of the Board. 
14. Senate~ 
15. Functions of Senate. 
16. Chairman of Board. 
17. Director. 
18. Deputy Director. 
19. Registrar. 
20. Other authoritieS and officers. 
21. Grants by Central Government. 
22. Fund of the Institute. 
23. Accounts and audit. 
24. Pension and provident fund. 

Cii) 
CLAUSES 
25. Appointments. 
26. Statutes; 
27. Statutes how made. 
28. OrdinancesJ 
29. Ordinances how made. 
30. Tribunal of Arbitration. 
CHAPrERIII 
THE COUNCIL 
31. Establishment of Council. 
", 
32. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable 
to, members of Council. 
33. Functions of Council. 
34. Chairman of Council. 
35. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANIlOUS 
36. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by v.acancies, etc. 
37. Power to remove difficulties. 
38. Transitional provisions. 
39. Repeal and savings. 
THE SCHEDULE. • 

Bm No. 60 011,61 
THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABKA) 
A 
BILL 
to declare certain institutions of technology to be institutions of 
national importance and to provide for certain matters connected 
with such institutions and the Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kharagpur. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Institutes of Technology Act, Short title 
1961 and com-
. meuc:ement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and differ-
ent dates may he appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
10 Z. Whereas the objects of the institutions known as the Indian Declar,:tion 
Institute of Technology, Bombay, the Indian Institute of Technology, f:,~f~~':ns 
Kanpur and the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras are such as as institution 
to make them institutions of national importance, it is hereby declar- ~~~. 
ed that each such institution is an institution of national importance. 
IS 3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) "Board", in relation to any Institute, means the Board 
of Governors thereof; 
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Board; 

2 
(C) "corresponding Institute" means,-
(i) in relation to the society known as the Indian Insti-
tute of Technology, Bombay, the Indian Institute of Techno-
logy, Bombay; 
(ii) in relation to the society known as the Indian Insti- • 
tute of Technology (Kanpur) Society, the Indian Institute 
of Technology, Kanpur, and 
(iii) in relation to the society known as the Indian Insti-
tute of Technology, Madras, the Indian Institute of Techno-
logy, Madras; 10 
(d) "Council" means the Council established under sub-
section (1) of section 31; 
(e) "Deputy Director", in relation to any Institute, means 
the Deputy Director thereof; 
(f) "Dir(!C1;or", in relation to any Institute, means the Direc- IS 
tor thereof; 
(g) "Institute" means any of the Institutions mentioned in 
section 2 and includes the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharag-
pur, incorporated under ·the Indian Institute of Technology 
(Kbaragpur) Act, 1956; 5 ot 1956• 
ao (h) "Registrar", in relation to any Institute, means the Regis-
trar thereof; 
(i) "Senate", in relation to any Institute, means the Senate 
thereof; 
(j) "society" means any of the following societies registered 25 
under the Societies Registmtion Act, 1860, namely:- :II of 11I1I0. 
(i) the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay; 
(ii) the Indian Institute' of Technology (Kanpur) 
Society; 
(iii) the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras; 30 
(k) "Statutes" and "Ordinances", in relation to any Institute, 
mean the Statutes and Ordinances of the Institute made under 
this Act. 
CHAPI'ER II 
THE INSTITUTIS 
" (1) Each of the Institutes mentioned in section 2 shall be a 
~~O::d- body cGrporate having perpetual succession and a common seal and 
t u tiona. shaU, by its name, sue and be sued. 
35 

10 
20 
3 
(2) The body corporate constituting each of the said Institutes 
shall consist of a Chairman, a Director and other members of the Board 
for the time being of the Institute. . 
S. On and from the commencement of this Act,- Btfec:t of in-
corporation 
(a) any reference to a society in any law (other than this :o~:.titu­
Act) or in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as 
a reference to the corresponding Institute; 
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging 
to a society shall vest in the corresponding Institute; 
(c) all the rights and liabilities of a soci~ty shall be trans-
ferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the corresponding 
Institute; and 
(d) every person employed by a society immediately before 
such commencement shall hold his office or service in the 
corresponding Institute by the same tenure, at the same remune-
ration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the 
same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provi-
dent fund and other matters as he would have held the same 
it this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so 
unless and until his employment is terminated or until such 
tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered 
by the Statutes: 
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to 
such employee, his employment may be terminated by the 
Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with the 
employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on 
payment to him by the Institute of compensation equivalent to 
three months' remuneration in the case of permanent employees 
and one month'~ remuneration in the case of other employees. 
30 ft (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Institute shall Pow~n of 
exercise the following powers and perform. the following duties, ~::!~ 
namely: - ,. .. ~ 
(a) to provide for instruction and research in such branches 
of engineering and technology, sciences and arts, as the Institut·e 
3S may think fit, and for the advancement of learning and dissemi-
nation of knowledg~ in such branches; 
(b) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and 
other academic distinctions or titles; 
(c) to confer h~norery degrees or, other distinctions; 

.. 
(d) to fb:, demand and receive fees and other charges; 
(e) to eltablilh. maintain ;and manage halls and hostels for 
the residence of students; 
(f) to supervise and control the residence and regulate the 
discipline of students of the Institute and to make arrangements S 
for promoting their health. general welfare and cultural and 
corporate life; 
(g) to provide for the maintenance of units of the National 
Cadet Corps for the8tudents «the Institute; 
(h) to institute academic and other posts and to make 10 
appoiDtmatl thereto {except in the case of the Director); 
(i) to frame Statutes and Ordina.nees and to titer, modify or 
rescind the same; I 
(;). to deal with any property belonging to or vested in the 
Institute in such manner as the Institute may deem fit for advanc- IS 
ing the objects of the Institute; 
(k) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from 
the GoverDlJleDt and to receive bequests, donations and transfers 
of JnOI!.I9ble 01' immovable pr0periie6 from testators, donors or 
transferors. as the case may be; I 20 
(l) to co-operate with educational or other institutions in any 
part of the world having objects wholly or partly similar to 
those of the Inltitute by exehange of teachers and seholars and 
genen:lly in such manner al may be conducive to their common 
~~;. ~ 
(m) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibi-
tions, prizes and medals; and . 
(ft) to do all sueh things as may be neces&ll1'Y, incidental or 
conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the 
Institute. I 30 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an 
Institute shall not dispose of in any manner any immovable property 
without the prior approval of the Visitor. 
te to 7. (1) Every Institute shall be open to persons of either sex and 
be open to all of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall 3~ 
=sc:.~ be impoaed as to religious belief or profession in admitting or appoint-
ing members, students, teachers or workers or in any other connec-
tion whatsoever. I 

(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be 
accepted Iby any Institute which in the opinion of the Council involves 
conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this 
section.. I 
S 8. All teaching at each of the lmItitutes shall be conducted by 01' ~hinl at 
in the name of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and ::::.-
Ordinances made in this behalf. 
9. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor ot INery Visitor. 
IIUlti~t~' I 
10 (2) The VisM.or may appoint one' or more persons to review the 
work and progress of any Institute and to hold inquiries into the 
affairs thereof aDd to report thereon in nch· manner as the Visitor 
may direct., i 
(3) Upon receipt of any such report; the' Visitor may take such 
IS action and issue such directions as he COlIsiders necessHy in respect 
of any of the matters dealt with in the' report and the Institute shall 
be bouncl to comply with Nch direetions~ 
10. The following shall be the authorities of an Inati,tute, namely: - Authorities 
of Insti-
(a) a Board of Governors; i tutes. 
20 (b) a Senate; and I 
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes 
to be the authorities of the Institute. 
11~ 'nle Board' of an Institute shall consist of the following persons, The Board 
namely: - of Gover-
nOli. 
2S (01) the Chllirman, to be nominated' by the Visitor; 
(b) the Director, ex-officio; 
(c) one person to be- nomiftated by ~ Government of each 
of the States comprisil'lg the zone in which the Institute is 
situated, from aml»ng par.sons who, in the opinion of that Gov-
30 ernment, are technologists or industrialists of repute; 
(d) four persons having speciel knowledge or practical 
experience' in respect of education, engineering or science, to be 
nominated by the Council; and 
(e) two pIlofesscmr of the IDStitu~ to' be nominated by the 
.3S Senate. I 
Erepla.na.ticm.-In this' section, the '~on "zone" means a zone 
as for the time being demaYcated by the AIMndia'Council for Techni-
cal Education for'the purposes of this Act: 

" 
6 
r= 01. we- 12. (l) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of 
~:ilamong office of the Chairman or any other member of the Board shall be 
~e8 pa;bi~- three years from the date of his nomination . 
• 0 members 
of Board. (2) The term of office of an ex-officio· member shall continue so 
long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member. 5 
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under clause (c) 
of section 11 shall be two years from the 1st day of January of the 
year in which he is nominated. i 
(4) The term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual 
vacancy shall continue for the remainder of the term of the member 10 
in whose place he has been nominated. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an out-
going member shall, unless the Council otherwise directs, continue in 
office until another person is nominated as a member in his place. 
(6) The members of the Board shall be entitled to such ellow- IS 
ances, if any, from the Institute as may be provided for in the 
Statutes but no member other than the persons referred to in 
clauses (b) and. (e) of section 11 shall be entitled to any salary by 
reason of this sub-section. 
Functionaof 13. (1) Subject to the prov:isions of this Act, the Board of any 20 
the Board Institute shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direc-
tion and control of the effairs of the Institute and shall exercise all 
the powers of the Institute not otherwise provided for by this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to review 
the acts of the Senate. ' 25 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the 
Board of any Institute sball- I 
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the 
administration and working of the Institute: 
(b) institute courses of study at the Institute; 30 
(c) make Statutes; 
(d) institute and appoint persons to academic as well as other 
posts in the Institute; ! 
(e) consider and modify or cancel Ordinances; 
(f) consider and pass ~olutions on the annual report, the 35 
annual accounts and the budget estimates of the Institute for the 
next financial year as it thinks fit and submit them to Council 
together with a statement of its development plans; 

. -_ ... _---.... 
.• - . .-....III 7 ..•. -...... . ---. --
(p) exercise such other powers and perform 'such other 
duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by this Actor the 
St.wtes. 
(3) The 'Board ·shall have the power to apPoint . such committees 
5 as it considers necessary for the exercise of tts powers -and the"per-
formance of its duties under this Act. 
,14.; The .. ,Senate·of itacl1.,Iastiiute slilaU' consist ,of the .following SeDate. 
per5$1lS;' _mely:-
(a) the Director, e:x:.o{ficio,.whoshall. be the Chairman of 
10 the Senate;' 
(b) .the ~l,lty .Director, ~:x:-:()tJi.cio; 
(c) the pr-ofeilOrs"'P~lor l'~sed.:8Si ~h·bY':lthe 
Institute' for .- Ithe : ,purpose of impartiD.g iQtl1.lCtion . lin . ·the 
Institute: 
IS (d)· thtee..persons, not .being eqJI)lo~ees ·of ,the ,Institute, to 
. be nomiuated·by.the ClaairJ;D.anin consultation with.theDireqtor, 
from. a~g edu~tio~ists of repute, one each from the fields of 
science, engineering and humanities~ and 
(e) such other members of the. staff as may be laid down in 
20 the ·Statutes. 
15. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the'-Statutes and . the PullctioR. of 
.Orciimnces, :tlte Stfilate.ofl,.Qll ·Institu.tedshalt bave"t.he .~n'rol and Senate . 
.- I,ener.al regu}atia~. -.d.be ~spoDSible.forthe. rualnt~e.: of ~tand-
ards of instruct ion, education and examination in the Institute and 
25 shall exercise.suchother .. powersa.nd.;perf,orm such ot.aer ciumes as may 
·be confet"redor imposed upon' it by the,Statutes. 
,,16. (1). The Chairman .shall ordinl3.rily ~esUie! at the meeti.ngs Chairman of 
of the Board and at the CODtvocations of the Institute. Board . 
(2). ·It.:N1all be, the @,ty.ofthe Chaipnan. to ;~ure tbat thp 
3'::> decisions taken by the Board are implemented. 
(3) "The' Chairman. shall, sereise sueh other .-powers -and perform 
. such ·otlaerduties:. as 'may be . assigned to him by this Act or the 
Statutes. 
17. (1) The Director of each Institute shall be appointed by the Director. 
35 Council with the prior approval of the ·V4sitor. 
(2) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive 
officer of the Institute and'shall be ·responsible for the proper admin-
istration . of thel . Institute· and' for:' tlte Imparting· of .1nstMction ,and 
maintenance of, disci~line therein., . I 

8 
(3) The Director shall submit annual reports and accounts to the 
Board. 
(4) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perfonn 
. such other duties as'may be assigned to him by this Act or the Sta-
tutes or C>rdUlances. S 
=~. 18. The Deputy Director of each Institute shan be appOinted on 
such tenns and conditions as may be laid down by the Statutes and 
shall exercise such powers and perfonn such duties as may be assign-
ed to him by this Act or the Statutes or by the Direction. 
llesiltrar. 19. (1) The Registrar of each Institute shall be appointed on 10 
such terms and conditions as may be laid down by the Statutes and 
shall be the custodian of records, the common seal, the funds of 
the InStitute and such other property of the Institute as the Board 
shall commit to his charge. 
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board, the 15 
Senate, and such committees as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the 
proper discharge of his functions. 
(4) The Registrar shan exercise such other powers and perform 
such other duties as may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes 20 
or by the Director. 
~thor .u~ ZOo The powers and duties of authorities and officers other than 
O:rs. a those hereinbefore mentioned shall be detennined by the Statutes. 
g;uu:. by 21. For the purpose of enabliDg the Institutes to discharge their 
G!ernment. functions efftclently under this Act, the Central Government may, 25 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, 
pay to each Institute in each financial year such sums of money 
and in such manner as it may think fit. 
Pund of the Z2, (1) Every Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be 
Iaatitutc. credited- 30 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government; 
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute; 
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, 
gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; and 
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other 35 
manner or from any other source. 
(2) A1l moneys credited to the Fund of any Institute shall be 
deposi~ed in such Banks or invested in such manner as the Institute 
may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide. 

19 of I92S. 
9 
(3) The Fund of any Institute shall be applied towards meeting 
the expenses of the Institute including expenses incurred .in the 
exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act. 
23. (1) Every Institute shall maintain proper accounts and oth~r ~tI and· 
S relevant records and prepare an annual .statement of accounts, in-
cluding the balance-sheet, in such form as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of every Institute shall be audited by the 
10 Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure in-
curred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by 
the Institute to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the. accounts of 
J S any Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and nuthority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India has in connection with the audit of the Govern-
ment accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
20 documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the Institute. 
(4) The accounts of every Institute as certified by the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Govern-
2S ment shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parlia-
ment. 
M. (1) Every Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its em- PODI.ioD aD4I 
ployees, including the Director, in such manner and subject to such C~deDt 
conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes, such pension, in-
30 surance and provident funds as it may deem fit. 
(2) Where any such provident fund has been so constituted, the 
Central Government may declare that the provisions of the Provi-
dent Funds Act, 1925 shall apply to such fund as if it were a Gov-
ernment Provident Fund. 
3S 25. All appointments on the staft of any Institute, except that Appolnt-
of the Director, shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid DIeDte. 
down in the Statutes, by-
(4) the Board, if the appointment is made on the academic 
staft in the post of Lecturer or above or if the appointment is 

Statutes. 
mad:t. iCII:the nOI1"8lUldemic I 3taff in I any ·cad~ the'm8ldmumot 
the .paY'~aale for wtlich 'exee-eds ·Iix ,hundred, rupees penntmthj 
(b) by the Director, in any other case. 
26.' Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may pro-
vide' for all' 'or any of 'the following matters, namely:~ S 
(4) ,the-'canfeiment .. of honorary' deg1'l!es; 
(b) the formation of departments of teaching; 
(c) lthe-fees to' be '1:harged .. fdr' ct)urses 'of studY'in the Irtsti-
tu~"&aafdr 'admlsslon' to·theexaminatibns of idegrees 'and 'dip.:. 
10Ri,... oNhe~Irlstitute~ JO 
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, 
rneaale.«nd priJies~ 
(.e)tbe term of 'offi~e and the method of appointment of 
ofti"t'!ers of the Institute; 
(f) the qualifications' of teachers of the Institute; IS 
(g) . the' classification, the methOd of appointment and the 
determirtation of the terms and conditions of 'service of, teach-
ers and other staff of the Institute; 
(h)) th~ cltmtitutian ·of '·pension, insurance and 'provident 
fundit.forthe-, benefit of 'the ;ofB~ers;' teaehm and other·staff·c.f·20 
the "Institute;' 
(i) the constitution; powers and duties of the a1.lthorities of 
the Institute;" 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels; 
(k)the" cenditions.·of 'residenee of students IOf . the . htstitl1te 25 
and the levyingucf ·fees for residence, in· ,the- hall. ;and"'hOllteJs: ' 
and·-of·other cha~geIJ;' 
(l) the mannet' of filling va«aRcies'amongmemhers ·of tht' 
Board; 
(m) . the allowances to be,:paid to ,the Chainnanarut. mem. 30 
her.s ~fthe Board; 
(11.) the authentication of the orders ';aRd dee*isiOns· of the 
Board; 
(I\) the' Jrt~tings·of the Board, the Senate, or any Com-
mitte4!!; thequoruh1' at such 'meetings and the' procedure to be 3S 
followed in the conduct of their business; 
(p~. any other mattel',whl .. ··by·;thls Aet'ilJ to· b.-or may be 
preserlbed :by' the' Statutea'. 

Ii 
2'7:1 (1) The fitrt Statutes of each IristituteshaH be framed by'the 'Statutes ho. 
Couneil' With 'the -previous 'approval of the Visitor' and a copy' of the made. 
same lIhall be-laid 'as soon as may' be befdre' each Hbuse oi'Parlia-' 
ment. 
5 (.2),The,&ard"may,. from'time·to timej make new· or ,additional 
Statutes or· may "amend, -or . reP"l the Statutes -in, the manner ,here--
after. in "thiS' seeman .;provideci. 
(3)J lE\-ery new Statute or ·additian to the Statutes 'or any' amend-' 
ment"or-'repeal- of"aStatute 'shallrequir(> the previous approval of ' 
10 the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or' remit it· 
to the Board ,·for lcans.i.dention. 
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing'an'existing , 
Statute, shall have no validity unless: it, .bas been QltIeIltedto" by <the \ 
Visitor., 
15 28. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances. 
OrdiDanolslof··:e.hLInSltitQt~ may prov~, far all or any of, the, 
following matters, namely:-
(a). ,the admission! I()f the ! stud8lllts ,to the Institute, 
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees 
20 and diplomas of the Institute; 
30 
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted 
to the degree or diploma courseS' 'and to the examinations of 
the.·Inatitute,aRd .. shall be.. eligibledor degrees ·amd diplDmu; 
(d) 'the condititms of 'award of the fellowships, scholarships; 
exhibitiOns, mecism 'and prizes; 
(e) 'the conditions and mode of appointment 'and duties of 
examining bodies, examiners and moderators; 
(f) the conduct of' exanrtna~ns; 
(g) the maintenance of discipUne ,among .. the students of 
the Institute; and 
(h), any other ,matter which by· this. Act or· the, Statutes is 
to be or may be provided for by the Ordinances. 
au (1) SQveD'otherwise 'pravided' 'in this section; Ordinances Ordin8llCe1 
shall be made by the Senate. how made • 
. 35 (2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from. 
such date as it may direct, but every Ordinance so made shall be 
submitt~iJ d' 1I00ft'BS- 'may i b~;' to 'the.' Boat'd. and 'shall "be considered 
by the Board at its next succeeding meeting. 

Ii 
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or can-
cel any such Ordinance and such Ordinance shall from the date of 
such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case 
may be. 
Tribunal of Arbitration. 38. (1) Any dispute arising eut of a contract between an Institute 5 
BIt_bUlh-
IIICDt of 
COIIDciL 
and any of its employees shall, at the request of the employee con-
cerned or at the instance of the Institute, be referred to a Tribunal 
of Arbitration consisting of one Inember appointed by the Institute, 
one member nominated by the employee, and an umpire appointed 
by the Visitor. 10 
(2) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and shall not be 
questioned in any court. 
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any 
matter which is required by sub-section (1) to be referred to the 
Tribunal of Arbitration. loS 
(4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its 
own procedure. 
(5) Nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to 
arbitration shall apply to arbitrations under this section. 
CHAPTER III 
THE COUNCIL 
31. (1) With effect. from such date sa the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
there shall be established a central body to be called the Council. 
20 
(2) The Council shall consist of the following members, name-
ly:-- 25 
(a) the Minister in charge of technical education in the 
Central Government, ez officio, as Chairman; 
(b) the Chairman of each Institute, ez officio; 
(c) the Director of each Institute, ez officio; 30 (d) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, ez 
officio; 
(e) the Director-General, Council of Scientiftc and Indus-
trial Research, ez officio; 
<f) the Chairman of the Council of the Indian Institute of 
Science, B!lngalore, ez officio; :,C; 
(1/) the Director of the Indian Institute of Science, Banga-
lore, ez officio; 

5 
10 
13 
(h) three persons to be nominated by the Central Gov-
ernment, one to represent the Ministry concerned with technical 
education, another to represent the Ministry of Finance and the 
third to represent any other Ministry; 
(i) one person to be nominated by the All-India Council for 
Technical Education; 
(j) not less than three, but not more than five, persons to be 
nominated by the Visitor, who shall be persons having special 
knowledge or practical experience in respect of education, indus-
try, science or technology; 
(k) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be 
elected by the House of the People from among its members and 
one by the Council of States from among its members. 
(3) An officer of the Ministry of the Central Government con-
IS cerned with technical education shall be nominated by that Govern-
ment to act as the Secretary of the Council. 
32. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of Term o~ 
office of a member of the Council shall be three years from the date =e~' VI-
of his nomination or election, as the case may be. amollS,lnd 
allowance. 
2.0 (2) The term of office of an ex-officio member shall continue so pay~ to, . 
long as he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member. C~uncii~ 01 
(3) A member of the Council referred to in clause (h) of sub-
section (2) of section 31 shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Central Government. 
2.5 (4) The term of office of a member elected under clause (k) 
of sub-section (2) of section 31 shall expire as soon as he ceases to 
be a member of the House which elected him. 
(5) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill a 
casual vacancy shall continue for the remainder of the term of the 
30 member in whose place he has been nominated or elected. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section an out-
going member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise 
directs, continue in office until another person is nominated or elected 
as a member in his place. 
35 (7) The members of the Council shall be paid such travelling and 
other allowances by the Central Government as may be determined 
by that Government, but no member shall be entitled to any salary 
~by reason of this sub-section. 

14 
PWlCtiona"of :33. (l) It-Ilhall be,.t.he • .-.eral duty i)f:the G~il to co-ordinate 
Council. . thet:acUvities~f all the ·Itlstitutes . 
. (2)"Without prejudice to the prGvisions of sub-section (1), the 
Council shall perform the' following functions, namely:-
(a) to advise on matters relatiJ)g to the, dur.ation of the 5 
courses, the degrees and other academic distinctions to be con· 
,femoeci by the lnstitutes",admisswnstandards an.d other academic 
raatters; 
(b) to lay down policy regardiQg cadr~s, methods of recruit· 
ment and conditions of service of employees, institution of 10 
,.scholus4iPs·,and beeships,rleVYjng of ·fees and other matters of 
·.OOIIlfl1GniJlteltest; 
(c) to examine the development plans of each Institute and 
, t(hMJPl'~e such· of them ·as. are -GNlsidered Reeeuary, and also to 
-inliicate broadly: ·the·financial implications of streh, apprQwd IS 
plans; 
(d) to examine the annual b~dget estimates of each Institute 
and to recommend to ·the 'Central'Government the allocation of 
funds for that purpose; 
(e) to advise the Visitor, if so l'equired.,.in respect of any 20 
function to .be performed. by him. under this Act; and 
(I), t~. perform MlCh· Qtltell' fWlCtioDSj ra~ fIl'~·.,.il'led. ~ it by 
.or UDder this,Act. ' 
Chllinnan, of 3(. (1). The Chairman of the CounciLshall ordinarily preside. at 
r.ouncil. the meetings of the Council. 2S 
(2) It shall be the duty;of theJ~hairman of.the c-ueultCJ _sure 
that the decisions taken by the Council are iIllplemented. 
(3) , The. Cbairman:labaU exercise: .such other' powers and periorm 
such 0fA!lel" duties as.are .. 8Ssigaed to. rum, by this-.Act. 
Power to ; 35. '(1) The Central Government may ·make rules to carry out the 30 
make rule. in'purposes of ,this Chapter. : 
re'pectof 
~tt~~i;er. (2) In particular and without prejudice. to the .. geoer.a1ity of, the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a).the manner of'filling vacanoies.among the'membe'rs of 35 
the Council; . 

IS 
(b) . ;the: .disqualifications . for beiDg chosen as, al'ld- ft.!' being, 
a member of the ColmcU; , 
(c) the circumstances in which, and the authority by which, 
memben; may be removed; 
5 (d) the meetings of the Council and the procedure of con-
ducting business thereat; 
(e) the travelling and other allowances payable to members 
of the Council; and ' 
<f) the functions of the Council and the mqner in which 
10 such functions may be exercised. 
• 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
36. No act of the Council, or any Institute or Board or Senate or Actlandpro-
any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid :~:l=~~ 
IS merely by reason of- 'datedbyva-
canc:iet, etc • 
20 
. (a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof, or 
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of 
a person acting as a member thereof, or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits 
of the case. 
37. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official ~de •• 
Gazette, make such provision or give such direction not inconsistent 
with the purposes of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
2S expedient for removing the difficulty. 
30 
3S 
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,- Tnlllitionil provialoDi. 
(a) the Board of Governors of an Institute functioning as 
such immediately before the commencement of this Act shall 
continue to so function until a new Board is constituted for that 
Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board 
under this Act, the members of the Board holding office before 
such constitution shall cease to hold office; 
(b) any Academic Council constituted in relation to any 
Institute before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed 
to be the Senate constituted under this Act until a Senate is con-
stituted under this Act for that Institute; 

i6 
(c) until the fu:st Statutes and the Ordinances ,ate ~d.e 
under this Act, the Statutes and 'Ordinances of the Indian Insti-
tute of Technology, Kbaragpur as in force immediately before 
the commencement ot this ~t sPall cqn~in~e to .pply to that 
Institute and shall, with the' necessary modifications and a~pta- ~ 
tions, also apply to any other Institute, in so far as t¥y are not 
inconsistent With ihe provisions of ~is Act. ' , 
Repeal aDd 31. (1) The Indian Institute of 1l'echnology (Kharagpur) Act, 1~56 501,95 6• 
~vina'; is hereby repealed. ' 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, the proYisions of the said Act 10 
~et out in the Schedule shall continue to have 'effect: .' ' 
• Provided that in the said provisions, the expression "this A:~" 
me.ans the said ~ro~sio~.' ' , ' 

(See section 39) 
Provisions of the Indian Institute of Technology (Kbaragpur) Act, 
1956, continued in force. 
; 2. Whereas the objects of the institution lmown as the Indian ~~~~C:Il 
Institute of Technology at Kharagpur in the district of Midnapore in InsUlUtcof 
the State of West Bengal are such as to make the institution one of ~:~O:) 
national importance, it is hereby declared that the institution known ~ an inatilU-
as the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, is an institution of :tic!~ 
10 national iDiportance. . importance. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-=- nc81litiolll. 
(b) "Board" means the Board of Governors of the Institute; 
(c) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Board; 
(e) "Director" means the Director of the Institute; 
(g) IIInstitute" means the Institute known as the Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, incorporated under thiS Act. 
4. (1) The first Chairman, the first Director and the first members Illc:orpora-
of that Board who shall be the persons appointed in this behalf by lioll. 
the Central Government, by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, and 
20 all persons, who may hereafter become or be appointed as officers or 
members of the Board, so long as they continue to hold such office or 
membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of 
the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. 
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common 
~5 seal, and shall sue and be sued by the said name. 
S. (1) Subject to the prOvisions of this Act, every person who is 
permanently employed in the Indian Institute of Technology at =c~f of 
Kharagpur immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, aistinJ em-
Qn and from such commencement, becon:te an employee of the Insti- ~~~~~ 
~o tute and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, InltilU!t of 
at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions -:;e~~ 
and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, put. 
provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same on 
the date of commencement of this Act if t,Qis Act had not been passed. 
" 

18 
(2)Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Institute may, with the prior approval of the Visitor, alter the terms 
and conditions of any employee specified in sub-section (1), and if the 
alteration is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the S 
contract with the employee or, If no provision is made therein in this 
behalf, on pa~nt to him by the lnstitu~ of compensation ·equivalent 
to three months' remuneration. 
(3) .ery pemm employed in the' IncUanmstitute ()f'Tdnmogy 
at- Kharagpur otberthan any such panlOn as is referred to kl BUb- 10 
8eCtiOn (1) .• haU, on aIld'from the commeneement of tbis'Aet, become 
·an .. ployee of the"InsUtute upon stlth terms and cendlttoDJ as may 
be pztOVided for ill the Statutes, and until such provl&ion Is made, ~ 
the terms and conditions applicable to him immediately b6fore weh 
commencement. IS 
r 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In order to provide facilities on an extenaiw scale fer post.gra-
duate courses, advanced work and research in the various banclles of 
science, engineering and technology, for whicb faei1iUes in the COWl-
try were inadequate, the Sarker Committee recommended iD. 1945 
that four institutions on the lines of the famous MusachUJetts IDIti. 
tllte of Technology, U.s.A. be established, one in each of tIae four 
regions of the country. Government accepted this recommendation 
and the first institution named as the Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kharagpur startetl'ln 1950 in the eastern region as a G&verniftent In· 
stitution. Although situated in the east, it 'bas tu.nettoned as an All 
India institution in consonance with the original decision that these 
institutions should be open to students from all parts of the country. 
Later, the Institute at Kharagpur was declared by Parliament as an 
institution of national importance under tbe Indian Institute of Tech-
nology (Kbaragpur) Act, 1956. The Act came into force on the 1st 
April, 1957 and the Institute has ·been since functioning as an auto-
nomous body corporate.' 
2. The three other institutions named as the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Bombay, the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, 
and the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur were started in 
1958, 1959 and 1960 respectively and were registered under the Soct. 
ties Registration Act. 1860. All the four institutions provide Mt 
degree courses in addition to facilities for post·graduate studies and 
advanced research. This requires and provides cooperation between 
work at the post-graduate level and the ftrst degree level for the 
mutual benefit of both and also results in full utilisation of the 
facilities created in these institutions. They aim at training per· 
sonnel who will combine the highest technical competence with 
broad human sympathy as well as a practical outlook and awarness 
of the social implications of planning. The institutes have already 
succeeded in creating an atmosphere which instils in the minds of 
students a spirit of objective enquiry and a sense of purpose and 
are helping them develop a balanced and integrated personality. 
3. One of the important tasks of the institutions is to meet the 
present and future needs of industry and technology. They therefore 
have an individuality and purpose of their own distinct from' those 
of a University. The broad objectives of the four Institutes are the 
19 

~ 
same, although in their actual working, there will be difterence of. 
emphasi5 011. separate fields, particularly at the advanced level&. 
The Bill seeks (i) to retain the individuality of the instituticns by 
declaring them institutions of national importance under Article 
246, read with 7th Schedule, List I, entry 64 of the Constitution; 
(if) to bring in the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 
which has already been so declared and incorporated by an Act of 
Parliament, within the ambit of the proposed Act, and (iii) to make 
provision for the coordination and regulation of the affairs of the 
foUr Institutes. The Institutes will have the power to grant degrees, 
diplomas and other academic distinctions as at present possessedbr 
the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. 
NEW DEuD; I HUMAYUN KABIlt 
The 13th November, 1961. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill contemplates the declaration of the Indian Institute of 
Technology, Bombay, the Indian Institute of Technology, . Madras, 
and the Indian Institute of Te~ology, ~npur, as bodies corporate. 
1~ ~o conteJll~lates br~nging in the indian Institute of Technology, 
~aragpur, which has already been so declared and incorporat~ br 
8!l Act of Parliament, within the ambit of the proposed Act. 
2. The Instit~tes will maintain the departments covering varioUi 
fields of science, eng41eering and technology for training of techni~ 
cal personnel. Finances required by them for exe~ise of their 
powers and discharge of their functions shall be payable by tqe 
pentral Qove~ent in the shape of grants-in-aid each yea~. At t~ 
stage it is no~ possible to frame an accurate estiinate of the man,:: 
~ow:er:~ equipment, etc.. needect to enable the Institutes to exercise 
~heir powers and discharge the functions proVided under the Bill but, 
since the development of the Institutes will be according to the pro~ 
~als that may be approved by the Government, the funds to be 
given will be for programmes so approved. They will depend on the 
number of courses and departments that may be opened by each 
Institute as determined! by the Govermnent. to fulfil its obligation to 
the industrial need's of the nation. The Indian Institute of Techno-
logy, Kharagpur, since its inception in 1950, has incurred an expendi. 
ture of about Rs. 5· 84 crores on buildings (including those for the 
residence of students and members of the staff) and equipment uJlto 
the end of the Second Plan period and proposes to spend another 
B.s. 1· 6 crores during the Third Plan period on these items. Having 
regard to the fact that eosts of building and equipment have risen 
considerably, it is estimated that the non-recurring cost on each of 
ether three institutions will be of the order of about Rs. 8 crores. The 
annual recurring expenditure of the Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kharagpur'reached a level of Rs. 65 laIms in 1960-61 (the last year of 
the Second Five Year Plan) and is expected to be of the order of 
:as. 85-90 lakhs in 1965-66. 
3~ The (ollowing Budget provisions has been made for grants-in--
aid'to the Institutes during the year 1961-62 under Demand No. 81-
S~EL Ii C.A. for eaeb of the institutions:-
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
lndian Institute of Technology, Bombay 
(In lakhs) 
RI. 131·36 
Rs. 137·211 

li 
tndian Institute of Technology, Madras 
Indian Institute of Technology. Kanpur 
Rs. 132'65 
Rs. 121'88 
Funds to be mac:le·a¥aiJ.able in the BUibeequent years will be deterM 
mined each year. The total provision made for grants-in-aid to the 
four iBltitutiona during the. Thinl. Five Year PlaD.. (Apcll., 1981 to 
14u'c:h.. 1966). is.&. lj' oa, crOftJB. 
4. The Institutes han been empowered to receive grants, giftI. 
dGftaticms, beftefaetions, bequests or transfers from private bodies or 
indfriduali. 
5. All monies placed at the disposal of each of the Institutes will 
eanstttute the Fund of the respective Institute and will not lapse at 
the e!ld. of the -year. It all be taken into account in making funds 
anUable to the respective Institute in subsequent years. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDIlVG DELEGATto LEGIStATION 
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Council to frame, with the 
previous approval of the Visitor (President of India), the first 
Statutes of each Institute in respect of matters specified in clause 26. 
The Board of Governors of each Institute has been empowered by 
this Bill to amend, repeal or add to any of the Statutes thus made 
by the Council. The matters in respec~ of which the Statutes may 
be made inter alia relate to the conferment of honorary degrees; the 
formation of departments of teaching; the fees to be charged for 
courses of study and for admission to examinations; the institution 
of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; the term 
of office, the method of appointment and the conditions.of service of 
officers, teachers and other staff of the Institute; the constitution of 
pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the em-
ployees of the Institute; the constitution, powers and duties of autho-
rities of the Institute; the manner of filling vacancies among members 
of the Board and the allowances payable to them; and the meetings 
of the Board, the Senate or any Committee and the procedure to 
be followed in the conduct of their business. It is not possible at this 
stage to provide for these matters especially in the Bill. The Bill, 
however, prescribes that all such Statutes will be operative after the 
Visitor has approved them. 
2. Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Senate of each Institute to 
make Ordinances consistent with the provisions of the Act Rnd the 
Statutes. The matters in respect of which such Ordinances may be 
made are specified in clause 28. They inter alia relate to the admis-
sion. of students to the Institute; the courses of study to be laid down 
for degrees and diplomas of the Institute and the conditions under 
which students shall be admitted to degree or diploma courses and 
to examinations of the Institute; the conditions of award of fellow-
ships, scholarships, medals and prizes; the conditions and mode of 
appointment and duties of examining bodies; the conduct of exami-
nations and the maintenance of discipline among students of the 
Institute. 
3. Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
make rules in respect of matters specified in that clause. These mat-
ters relate to the manner of filling vacancies among members of the 
23 

24 
Council, the disqualUlcations for being such member, meetings of the 
Council and the procedure of conducting business thereat., the allow-
ances payable to members, and the functions of the Council. 
4. The delegation of legislative power is of a character normal to 
such Acts. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to declare certain institutions of technology to be institutions 
of national importance and to provide for certain matters 
connected with such institutions and the Indian Institute 
of Technology, Kharagpur. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of Indja, recommended to 
Lok Sabha, the con~ideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Humayun Kabir, 
Minister of Scientific Research 
and Cultural AffaIrs.) 