:., 
\ 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA m: 
Bill No. 60 of 1966 
THB DELHI MUNICII>AL CORPORATION (VALIDATION 
OF ELECTRICITY TAX) BILL, 1966 
A 
BILL 
to validate the imposition and collection of certain taxes on tht 
consumption or sate of electricity by the Delhi Municipal Cor-
poration. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
• 
1. This Act may be called the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Vali- Short title. 
dation of Electricity Tax) Act. 1966. 
, 2. (1) Notwithstanding ~mything contained in section 150 read Validation 
~ ... with su'b-section (2) of section 109 of the Delhi Municipal Corpora- of levy. 
tion Act. 1957. the resolution of the Delhi Municipal Corporation collection, 
dated the 24th June, 1959, passed under sub-section (3) of section tete .• of ~ ~M !"" 150 aforesaid, in so far as the said resolution relates to the deter-

consump_ 
tion or 
sale of 
electricity. 
2 
mination of the rates &t which tax sl,all be leviable on the co"'-
sumption or sale of eleetricitv shall be of'!'med to have bf'en passed 
in nC"Clrdancf:' with 1;1\'.' ;1!1rl th" ratf'~ ~Df'('ifi('d i" the s~id r('<;oluti on 
in respect of tax on th'? consumption or sale of el"ctricity shall bp 
deemed to hI?, and to 1,:\\'(-' hpen. the a('tual rat"s of the til';" under S 
th" sain Act with piffle! on ann frnm the l.:;t de'!\" f)f .Tu!v. HJ~9 r)~d liP 
to and inclusive of thr :3 1"t na\' of ~larch. 19f1fl. 
(2) NotwithshnainQ :,'l\,th;n r1 C()ll!:>;n,..d in anv .;udgme"t, decrp£, 
or order of any court to the cnntrary. all taxes on the consumption 
or s~ Ie of electricity lpvjf'd or cl"ll1ect"d or purportinp, to have been TO 
levipd 'or collected in ntJr"'tlance of thp resolution referred to in 
sub-section (1) shall. fnr all '1l1TpOS'?S. be deemed to be, and to have 
always been. validly lev'ed or colleeted. and accordingly-
(a) all acts, prl"lceeding!'= or things done or taken bv the 
Delhi Municipal Cornoration or by any other authority in con- TS 
nection with the lev\' or collection of such taxes shall. for all 
purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been, done or 
taken in accordance with law; 
('b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or con-
tinued in any court again~t the Government, the Delhi Muni- 20 
eipal Corporation or any person or nuthority whatsoever for the 
refund of any taxes so paid; and 
(c) no court shall ell force any decree or order directing the 
refund of any taxes so paid. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
By its resolution dated the 9th February, 19;)!1, till' Delhi Muni-
cipal Corporation decided to levy a tax on the consumption and sale 
of electricity under sections 113(2) (d) and 150(1) of the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act. This resolution was submitted under 
section 150 (2) of that Act to the Central Government for its sanc-
tion and in conve'ying its sanction on the ,20th June, 1959, the Gov-
ernment made certain modifications in the rates of tax on the assump-
tion that its power to grant sanction to the proposals carried with it 
the power to make such modifications. Under ~,ection 150 (3) of the 
said Act, the Corporation passed a second resolution on the 24th 
June, 1959, to the effect that the rates of tax as sanctioned by Gov-
ernment, should be the actual rates at which the tax would be 
, leviable with effect from the 1st July, 1959. The levy (If the electri-
l\ city tax in terms of the second resolution was set aside by the Punjab 
,dli~h ... C()uft·, Tb~ Co~,t held that in according sanction to the ~rst 
, ..... rcso}ution ,of the Corporation, the Government had no power 
(, " . ' 
to modify or enhance the rates proposed by the Corporation in that 
resolution and that the Corporation in its second resolution could 
not adopt rates in excess of the rates detennined in the first resolu-
tion. The Court also held that the liability to pay the tax could 
commence only from the 1st April, 1960. 
,2., The Bill proposes to validate the levy of the tax by the Cor-
~<D01~atlion on the consumption or sale of electricity, in accordance 
"'tt"~:~,,,,, 
;;~~:" 
Ute rates specified in the afore-mentioned second resolution of 
", Corporation, with effect from the 1st July, 1959 and until the 
, of such rates in accordance with the provisions of the 
Municipal Corporation Act. These rates have been altered 
with effect from the 1st April, 1966. 
JAISUKHLAL HATlfI. 
3, 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
t~ validate the imposition and collection of certain taxes on 
the conswnption or sale of electricity by the DelhiMuni 
.cipal Corporation. 
r;j " . , . ~ 
) " \'. 
;.:. .. 
(ShriJai Sukh La! Hathi, 
Minister of State in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs)~ 