2S of 1961. 
AB INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA OK 
2 1 DEC l;~J 
.. .., ... 
}~7(~) 
J.4--J'~~J . 
Bill.,. fO of I"'" ... ",~~;, ........ ~;.~1I" 
TIm ADVOCATES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the' Advocates (Amen.dmell.t) Act. Short 
1963. title. 
S 2. In section 4 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred Amead-
to as the principal Act), after sub-section (2), the following sub- ment of 
section shall be inserted, namely: - section 4. 
II (3) The term of ofllce of a member of the Bar Council of 
India elected by a State Bar Council shall be for the period for 
10 which he holds office as a member of the State Bar Council, and 
every such member shall continue to hold oftlce as a member 
of the Bar CoUncil of India until his successor is elected: 
Provided that where a member of a State Bar Council who 
holds office ex-of]i.cio is so elected, the term of his office shall 
J 5 be two years from the date of his election. ". 
3. In section 8 of of the principal Act,- Amend-
mentof 
(i) for the words "Bar Council", the words "State Bar section 8. 
Council" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "elected to each such Council", the words, 
20 brackets and figures "elected to each such Council (reconstitut ... 
ed on the expiry of the term of office of the elected members of 
the State Bar Council under section 54)" shall be substituted. 

Amend-
mentof 
aection9. 
Insertion 
of new 
leetion 
lOA. 
Dilqualifl-
cation of 
membel'l 
of Bar 
Council. 
Amend-
mentof 
aectlon 15. 
Amend. 
mentof 
seet10n 18. 
2 
•. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(0 in sub-section (1), for the words Clfive", "tbra." and 
Cltwo shall be persons", the words IIthree", "two" and "one 811all 
be a person" shall respectively be substituted; 
(ii) for Bub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be S 
substituted, namely:-
II (2) The Bar Council of India shall constitute one or 
more disciplinary committees, each of which shall consist 
of three persons of whom two shall be persons elected by 
the Council from amongst its members and one shall be a 10 
persoD elected by the Council from amongst advocates who 
are not members of the CouncIl. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2), any disciplinary committee consti-
tuted prior to the commencement of the Advocates (Amend- IS 
ment) Act, ]963 may dispose of the proceedings pending 
before it ~g if those sub-sections had not been amended 
by the said Act.". 
5. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:- 20 
"lOA. An elected member of a Bar Council shall be deemed 
to have vacated his ofDce if he is declared by the Bar Council 
at which he is a member to have been absent without sufficient 
excuse from three consecutive meetings of such Council, or if 
hJs name is, for any cause, removed from the roll of advocates.". 25 
8. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-J 
(i) for clause I a), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(a) the election of members of the Bar Council In-
cluding the conditions subject to which persons can exoer- 30 
else the right to vote, the manner in which election shall 
be held rmd the manner in which results of election shall 
be published;". 
(it) in clause (e), for the words "Bar Council", the words 
"State Bar Council" shall be substituted. 35 
7: In sect.ion 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), the fol-
lowing proviso shall be inserted, J)amely:-
-pz.ovided that where any such senior advocate makes an 
appUcation before the 31st December, 1964 to the Bar Council 
maintaiDing the roll in which his name has been entered that 40 

3 
he does not desire to continue as a senior advocate, the Bar 
Council may grant the application and the roll shall be altered 
accordingly.". 
8. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the fol- Amend-
S lowing proviso shall be inserted, namely: - ment of 
sElCtion 18. 
"Provided that where any such application for transfer is 
10 
made by a person against whom any disciplinary proceeding is 
pending or where for any other reason it appears to the Bar 
Council of India that the application for transfer has not been 
made bona fide and that the transfer should not be made, the 
Bar Council of India may, after giving the person making the 
application an opportunity of making a representation in this 
behalf, reject the application.". 
I. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the Amend-
IS words "Entries in each part of the common roll shall be in the order mentot 
of seniority and such seniority shall be determined as follows", the section 20. 
words "Entries in each part of the common roll shall be maintained 
in such manner as the Bar Council of India thinks ft.t and the senio-
rity of an advocate on the common roll shall be determined as 
20 follows" shall be substituted. 
30 
35 
10. For section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall Sut . b&t!tu-Ion 0 .. 
be substituted, namely: - new sec-
tion for 
"22. There shall be issued a certificate of enrolment, in the section 22. 
prescribed form,- Certificate 
(i) by the State Bar Council to every per80D whose ot enrol-
name is entered in the roll of advocates maintained by it Mento 
under t~ A£tj and 
(ii) by the Bar Council of India to every person whose 
name is entered in the common roll without his name hav-
ing already been entered in any State roll". 
11. In section 24 of the principal Act,-
(A) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) in clause (c) ,-
(a) in sub-clause (iii), the words "or elsewhere" 
shall be omitted; 
(b) after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(iv) in any other case, from any University 
outside the ten-itory of India, if the degree u 1'8-
Amend-
mentot 
section 2 •. 

4 
cognised for the purposes of this Act by the Bar 
Council of India; or"; 
(ii) in clause (d)-
(a) • the words Clafter such training" shall be omit-
tEHi: S 
(b) in the proviso, for paragraph (i) ,the follow-
ing paragraph shall be substituted, namely:-
"(i) a person who has obtained a degree in law 
from any University in India before the 31st day 
of December, 1963 or a barrister who was qualified 10 
as such before the said date or a barrister who, 
having qualified after that date, has received such 
practical training in law as may be recognised in 
this behalf by the Bar Council of Indiaj"; 
(B) in sub-section (2),- . IS 
(i) the words "or who is not a law graduate but was 
entitled to be enrolled as an advocate of a High Court im-
meciiately before the appointed day under any law then 
in force,", shall be omitted; 
(C) after sub-section (2), the following Bub-section shall 20 
be inserted, ~amely:-
CI (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Bub-section 
(1), a person who-
(a) before the 1st day of December, 1963-
(i) has been an attorney of any High Court 2S 
or has been an advocate on the roll of the Court 
of Judicial Commissioner in any Union territory 
under any law in force in that territory; or 
(ii) was entitled at any time to be enrolled 
under any "law then in force as an advocate of a 30 
High Court (including a High Court of a former 
Part B State) or of a Court of Judicial Commis-
sioner in any Union territory, or 
(iii) has been a pleader for at least five years; or 
(b) before the 15th day of August, 1947, has been 3S 
an advocate of any High Court in any area which wu 
comprised within India as defined in the Government 
of India Act, 1985: or 

s 
(c) before the 1st day of April, 1937, has been an 
advocate of any High Court in any area which was COlD-
prised witlrln Burma as defined in the Govermnent of 
India Act, 1935, 
5 may be admitted as an advocate on a State roll if he-
10 
(i) makes an application for such enrolment in accord-
ance wiiil. the provisions of this Act not later than the 311t 
day of December, 1964; and 
(ii) fulfills the conditions specified in clauses (a), (b), 
(e) and (1) of sub-section (1) .... 
12. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after Amend. 
the words, brackets and figures "sub-sections (2) and t3)", the men:t of 
words "and to any direction that may be given in writing by the sectIon 26. 
State Bar Council in this behalf" shall be inserted. 
IS 13. In section 28 of the principal Act, in clause (b) of sub-section Amend. 
(2), the words "after such training" shall ,be omitted. ment of section 28. 
20 
14. In section 35 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the Amend. 
following Explanation shall be added, namely:- ment of 
"ExpZanation.-In this section, the expressions "Advocate- section 35. 
General" and "Advocate-General of the State" shall, in relation 
to the Union territory of Delhi, mean the Additional Solicitor-
General of India.". 
15. In section 54 of the principal Act,-
(i) the words "the Bar Council 
omitted; 
Amend. 
of India and" shal1. be ment of seotionM. 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that such members shall continue to hold 
otlice until the State Bar Council is reconstituted in accord-
ance with the provisions of this Act.", 
30 16. In section 58 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the Amend· 
words "the issue and renewal", the words "the renewal or the issue ment of 
section 58. 
3S 
by way of renewal" shall be substituted. ... 
17. After section 58 of the 'PrinCipal Act, the following sections 1nieition'-
shall be inserted, namely: _ of new section. 
58Aand 
58B. 
"58A (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in this Act, Sp~~ . provlIlona all advocates who, immediately before the 26th day of July, 1948, with res. 
were entitled to practise in the High Court in Allahabad or the peet to 
Chief Court in Oudh and who under the provisions of the United certain 
acivocatel. 

Special 
provision 
relating 
to certain 
discipli-
nary pro-
ceeding •. 
6' 
Provinces High Courts (Amalgamation) Order, 1948 were recog-
nised as advocates entitled to practise in the new High Court of 
judicature at Allahabad but whose names were not formally 
entered on the roll of advocates of that High Court merely by 
reason of the non-paym-ent of the fee payable to the Bar Council S 
of the said High Court shall, for the purposes of clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) of section 17, be deemed to be persons who were 
entered as advocates on the roll of the said High Court undel' 
the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926 and every such person may, 38 of 1928. 
on an application being made in this behalf, be admitted as an 10 
advocate on the State roll of Uttar Pradesh. 
-(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all 
advocates who, immediately before the 10th day of October, 1952 
were entitled to practise in the High Court of Hyderabad but 
whose names were not formally entered on the roll of advocates IS 
of that High Court merely by reason of the non-payment of the 
fee payable to the Bar Council of the said High Court shall, for 
the purposes of clause (0) of sub-section (1) of section 17, be 
deemed to' be persons who were entered as advocates on the roll 
of the said High Court under the Indian Bar Councils Act, 192620 38 of 1926. 
and every such person may, on an applioation being made in 
this behalf, be admitted as an advocate on the State roll of 
. Andhra Pradesh. 
(3) Notwitbstandi!lg anything contained in this Act, all 
advocates who, immediately before the 1st dey of May, 1960 were 2S 
entitled to practise in the High Court of Bombay and who applied 
to get their names entered on the roll of advocates of the High 38 of 1026. 
Court of Gujarat under the provisions of section 8 of the Indian 
Bar Councils Act, 1926 but whose names were not so entered by 
reason of the repeal of the said provision shall, for the purposes 30 
of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 17, be deemed to be 
persons who were entered as advocates on the roll of the High 
Court of Gujarat under the said Act and every such person may, 
on an application being made in this behalf, be admitted as an 
advocate on the State roll of Gujarat. 3S 
58B, (1) As from the 1st day of September, 1963, every pro-
ceeding in respect of any disciplinary matter in relation to an 
existing advocate of a High Court shall, save as provided in the 
firsl proviso to sub-section (2), be disposed of by the State Bar 
Council in relation to that High Court, as if the existing adve- 40 
cate has been enrolled as an advocate on its roll. 
(2) If immediately ·before the said date there is any pro-
ceeding in respect of any disciplinary matter in relation to an 
existing advocate pending before any High Court under the 
Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, such proceeding .hall stand trana .. 4' 38 of 1I~38. ~ 

88 of 1928. 
10 
IS 
20 
25 38 of 1926. 
1 
ferred to the State Bar Council in Il'elation to that High Court, 
as if it were a proceeding pending before the corresponding Bar 
Council under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 56: 
Provided that where in respect of any such proceeding the 
High Court has received the finding of a Tribunal constituted 
under section 11 of the Bar Councils Act, 1926, the High Court 
shall dispose of the case and it shall be lawful for the High 
Court to exercise for the purpose all powers conferred on it 
under section 12 of the said Act as if that section has not been 
repealed: 
Provided further that where the High Court has referred 
back any case for further inquiry under sub-section (4) of sec-
tion 12 of the said Act, the proceeding shall stand transferred to 
the State Bar Council in relation to that High Court as if it were 
a proceeding pending before the corresponding Bar Council under 
cleuse (c) of sub-section (1) of section 56. 
(S) If immediately before the said date there is any proceed-
ing in respect of any disciplinary matter pending in relation to 
any pleader, vakil or attorney, who has been enrolled as an 
advocate on any State roll under the Act, such proceeding shall 
.tand transferred to the State Bar Council on the roll of which 
he has been enrolled and be dealt with under this Act as if it 
were a proceeding arising against him thereunder. 
(4) In this section "existing advocate" means a person who 
was enrolled as an advocate on the roll of any High Court under 
the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926 and who, at the time when 
any proceeding in respect of any disciplinary matter is initiated 
against him, is not enrolled as an advocate on a State roll under 
this Act. 
(5) The provisions of this section shall have eftect, not-
withstanding anything contained in this Act.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The working of the Advocates Act, enacted in May, 1961, has 
revealed certain practical difficulties and representations in this behalf 
have been received from various State Bar Councils and other asso-
ciations. The Bar Council of India has also suggested certain 
amendments to the Act. Difficulties were being experienced mainly 
in regard to the functioning of the Bar Councils and the Committees 
thereof and also in regard to the enrolment as advocates of certain 
classes of persons who may not fall strictly within the scope of 
sections 17 and 24 of the Act. 
2. It is considered necessary that the Act should be suitably 
amended for removing such difticulties and for fecilitating the imple-
mentation of its provisions. The principal amendments proposed in 
the Bill are-
(1) that the term of oftlce of a member of the Bar Council 
of India elected by a State Bar Council should normally be for 
the same period for which he holds oftlce as a member of a State 
Bar Council; 
(2) that the Bar Council of India should be empowered to 
form more than one disciplinary committee, and that the dis-
ciplinary committee of a Bar Council should consist of three 
members only; 
(3) that the Bar Council of India should be empowered to 
refuse, in suitable cases, the applications for the transfer of the 
name of an advocate from one State roll to another; 
(4) that the Bar Council of India should be permitted to pre-
pare and maintain the common roll in such manner as it thinks 
ftt; 
(5) that certain categories of persons who may not at pre-
sent be entitled to be enrolled as edvocates should be so 
entitled; 
(6) that the State Bar Council should have more effective 
control over its enrolment committees; and 
8 

~ 
(7) that the disciplinary jurtsd.iction of State Bar Counci1l 
mould bft extended to certain proceedings which are not at 
present covered by the Act. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. Opportunity hal ala 
been taken to make certain other amendments of a minor character. 
\ 4. The notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the pro-
visions thereof. 
NEW DELHI: 
The 7th December, 1963. A. It. SEN. 

Clauses 2, 3 a.7Id IS.-These clauses seek to amend sections 4, 8 
and 54 of the Act. Under section 8 of the Act. the term of oftice of 
elected members of the Bar Council of India and of State Bar Coun-
cils is six years, and one-third of the members has to retire on the 
expiration of every second year. The Bar Council of India con-
sists mainly of elected representatives of States Bar Councils, and the 
principle of rotation which has been introduced, ·both in the Bar 
Council of India and the State Bar Councils; may enable a member 
of the Bar Council of India to continue in oftice even after he has 
ceased to be , member of the State Bar Council. This is an anoma-
lous position. Cla~e 2 seeks to amend section 4 to provide that the 
term.' of office of a member of the Bar Council of India elect~ by a 
State Bar Council should be for the sa~e period for which he holds 
oftice as a member of a State Bar Council. It further provides that 
where the AdvocRte-General of a State who is an ex ofJi.cio member 
of the State Bar Councll, is elected to the Bar Council of India, he 
should hold office for two years only from the date of his election. 
The existing section 8 provides for the term of office of members 
of the Bar Council of India as also of the State Bar Councils. In 
view of the amendment made by clause 2 relating to the term of 
oftice of the members of the Bar Council of India. clause 3 res-
tricts the application of this section to State Bar Councils only. 
Under section 54 of the Act, the term Qf office of elected members 
of a State Bar Council constituted for the ftrst time is two years. 
Clause 3 (ii) seeks to make it clear that the provisions of section 8 
shall apply to a Sta~ Bar Council when it is reconstituted on the 
expiry of the term of oftice specifted in section 54. 
In view of the amendment made to section 4, the provil'lions of 
section 54 have also beoen restricted to State Bar Councils only. 
The' elp-Mion to the vRrious State Bar Councils may not be 
complete before the expiry of the term of their members under 
sectlen 54. To overcome this difficulty. it has been provided in clause 
15 that the elected members of a State Bar Council shall continue 
to hold office until it is reconstituted in accordance with the provisiOns 
of the Act. 
Clause 4.-Under section 9, the disciplinary committee of a Bar 
Council is to consist of five members. It is felt that this makes the 
10 

~omm.ittee unwieldy. The sirength of the committee is therefore 
proposed to be reduced to three. 
It is further considered desirable that the Bar Council of India 
should also have the power to constitute more than one discipli-
nary committee. Section 9 is being amended for the purpose. 
Cl(J.uae 5.-There is DO provision in the Act relating to disqua,. 
lification of members. The proposed section lOA specifies the cir-
cumstances under which an elected member of a Bar Council shall 
be deemed to have vacated his office. . 
Cla.use 6.-Section 15 deals with the power of a Bar Council to 
make rules. This clause seeks to amend this section to make it 
clear that the rules may lay down the conditions subject to which 
persons can exercise the right to vote. 
Clause 7.-By virtue of sub-section (4) of section 16 of the Act, 
the advocates of the Supreme Court who were senior advocates on 
1st December, 1961 automatically became senior advocates under the 
Act. The senior advocates are subject to certain restrictions in the 
matter of practice as prescribed by the Bar Council of India. It is 
proposed to give such advocates an option to relinquish their status 
as senior advocates and become ordinary advocates of the Supreme 
Court. 
CZauae B.-sectioD 18 of the Act provides for the transfer of the 
name of an advocate from one State' roll to another. When a person 
makes an application for such transfer, the Bar Council of India has 
no· discretion in the matter and it has to issue necessary directions 
for such transfer. There may be cases where the transfer of the 
name of a person from one State roll to another is undesirable and 
the Bar Council of India should be empowered to reject an appli-
cation for transfer in suitable cases, after giving the applicant a rea-
sonable opportunity of representing his case. This clause seeks to 
amend the section for the purpose. 
C'l4uae 9.-Under section 20 of the Act, the Bar Council of India 
has to prepare and maintain a common roll of advocates in the order 
of seniority. .The Bar Council of India has pointed out that prepa~ 
ration of the common roll after fixing inter Be seniority of advocates 
all over India will be a laborious task and that the preparation of tbe 
eommon roll may therefore ·be delayed. This clause seeks to amend 
Iec:tlon 20 to enable the Bar Council of India to decide the manner 
In which the COI'QJD8ll roU Ihall be maintained: 

b 
CZ4uae 10.-Section 22 deals with the issue of certi1icate of ~Ilrol· 
.ment. In eases where the State Bar Councils have issued the certi-
ficates of enrolment, there may be no necessity for the Bar Council 
of India to issue a ~resh certificate again. This clause seeks to amend 
the· 1Kti0D to that effect. 
CIa"" ll.-Section 24 of the Act prescribes the qualiflcaUons 
which a person is required to possess for enrolment as new advoca-
tes. It haa been brought to the notice of Government that certain 
classes of persons who were treated as advocates or who were en-
tiUed to be enrolled as advocates before the commencement of 
Chapter III of the Advocates Act would not stricUy fall within the 
leope of section 24. It is also considered necessary to enlarge the 
1C0pe of section 24 to cover certain other classes of persons as well 
who by. reason of their training or experience should be eligible for 
enrolment whether they are law graduates or not. The proposed 
sub-section (3) of section 24 specifies the various classes of persons 
who should be entiUed to be enrolled as advocates. They are as 
follows:-
(i) advocates on the roU of Judicial Commlssionel'l' Courts, 
(ii) attorneys of High Courts, 
(iii) advocates of the Chief Court of Sind before l~th 
August, 1947, 
(iv) advocates of Rangoon High Court before 1st April. 
1937, 
(v) all persons who were entitled to be enrolled as advo-
cates of a High Court (including a High Court of a former Part B 
State), or of a Judicial Commissioner's Court, and 
(vi) all pleaders who have put in five years of practice before 
1st December, 1963. 
The Act was amended by Act 32 of 1962 exempting law graduates 
who passed the final law examination before the 28th February, 
1963, from undergoing training and passing the examination conducted 
by the Bar Council. Since the necessary arrangements for the im-
plementation of the scheme of training could not be completed by 
aU the State Bar Councils, it is proposed to extend the said period 
of exemption from 28th February, 1963 to 31st December, 1963. It 
is also proposed to enable the law graduates to pus the examina-
tion even during the course of training. 
Other amendmmu 11'. of • elariJ\eatorJ' Uture. 

13 
Clauae l~.-Section 10 of the Act provides for the constitution of 
an enrolment committee and section 26 deals with the functions of 
the enrolment committee. As a committee of the State Bar Council, 
the enrolment committee should carry out the functions subject to any 
rules that may be made or any directions that may be given by the 
Bar Council. This clause seeks to amend section 26 10 make the 
position clear. 
Clause 16.-As the Act provides for one class of legal practitioners 
only, namely, advocates, it is proposed to make it clear that under 
section 58 (4), there should not be any fresh enrolment of pleaders or 
other class of legal practitioners. Certificates may, however, be 
issued to existing legal practitioners by way of renewal. 
Clause l7.-The Chief Court of Oudh and the High Court of 
Allahabad were amalgamated by an order made in 1948 and a new 
High Court of Allahabad was constituted. The advocates of both the 
High Courts were recognised as advocates of the new High Court but 
they were required to pay ten rupees each for enrolment as advocates 
in the new High Court. Many advocates did not pay this amount 
and they were not formally enrolled as advocates of the new High 
Court. A like situation has arisen in respect of certain advocates of 
the former State of Hyderabad as well. Similarly on the reorganisa-
tion of the Bombay State in May, 1960 a new High Court of Gujarat 
was constituted and many of the advocates of the Bombay High Court 
who opted for Gujarat could not get themselves enrolled within the 
prescribed time. It is necessary to make suitable provision to enable 
these persons to get enrolled as advocates. Proposed new section 
&SA is intended to achieve this purpose. 
• 
Chapter V of the Act deals with disciplinary jurisdiction of the 
Bar Councils and it has been brought into force from 1st September, 
1963. Under the Chapter, a disciplinary committee of a State Bar 
Council can take action only against those advocates who are on 
the State roll. The State rolls are not complete and there are many 
advocates who -have not yet been enrolled as advocates under the 
new Act. It is necessary to make suitable provision relating to dis-
ciplinary matters in respect of them. It is also necessary to make 
suitable provision for the disposal of disciplinary proceedings pend-
ing at the commencement of Chapter V. A Removal of Difficulties 
Order was issued at the time of enforcement of that Chapter. It 
is proposed to incorporate the provisions of that order in the Act 10 
that the validity of the order may not be chal1anged in a court of 
law. Proposed new lIection 58B ill Intended to achieve the purpose. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISi..A.TtON 
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 15 of the Act, whick 
deals with the rule making power of the Bar Councils. It is pro-
posed to make it clear that the rules may also lay down the' condi· 
tions subject to which persons can exercise the right to vote. Clause 
9 purports to amend section 20 of the Act leaving. it to the Bar 
Council, of India to decide the manner in which the common roll 
.han be maintained. 
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character . 
• 
. ' 

• 
BD'UftS noM THE· ADvOCATIIB Act, 1&81 
(25 or 1961) 
• • • • 
8. The term of oftlce of the elected members of a Bar Counef1 J::::t 
shall be six years, but as nearly as possible one-third of the mem;. m(mben of 
bers first elected to each such Council shall retire on the expiration Bar COWlCIiI. 
of every second year in the prescribed manner, and the vacancies 
80 <:aused shall be filled. by the election of new members in the 
prescribed manner. 
t. (1) A State Bar Council shall constitute one or more dJ.scipUn-~~:!::" 
ary committees, each of which shall consist of five persons of whom 
three shall be persons elected by the, Council from amongst its 
members and two shall be persons elected by the Council from 
amongst advocates on its roll 'Yho are not members of the Council. 
(2) The Bar Council of India shall constitute a disciplinary com-
mittee consisting of five persons of whom three shall be personl 
elected by the Council from amongst its members and two shall be 
persons elected by the Council from amongst advocates on the com-
mon roll who are not members of the Council. • 
• • • • • 
u. (1) • • • • Power to 
makeruJel. 
(2) In. particular. and without prejudice. to the aenenUt, of. the 
foftlolDg. power, such ruleti1 may provide for-
(a) the manner in which the election of members of the 
Bar Council shall be held aDd the mann~ in which results of 
elections shall be publlahed; 
• • • • • 
(e). the manner in which the order of retirement by rota-
tion of the members of the Bar Counell shall be determined; 
• • • • • 
IS 

IeDiotIDd 
other lId.,o-
C&tea. 
CRAPTDm 
II. (1) • • • - • 
(4) An advocate of the Supreme Court who was a senior advocate 
of that Court immediately before the appointed day shall, for the 
purposes of this section, be deemed to be a senior advocate . 
• • • • • :tm° f 18. (~) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17, an), 
ODe State person whose name is entered as an advocate on the roll of any 
!,!Dtheto State Bar Council may make an application in the prescribed form _0 r. 
to the Bar Council of India for the transfer of his name from the 
Coaunoo 
roll of 
lId.oeatn. 
roll of that State Bar Council to the roll of any other State Bar 
Council and, on receipt of any such appUcation the Bar Council of 
India shall direct that the name of such person shall, without the 
payment of any fee, be removed from the roll of the first mentioned 
State Bar Council and entered in the roll of the other State Bar 
Council and the State Bar Councils concerned shall comply with 
such direction. 
• • • • • 
It. (1) • • • • • 
(3) Entries in each part of the common roll shall be in the order 
of seniority and such seniority shall be determined as follows:-
• • • • • 
Certificate of n. There shall be issued a certificate of enrolment In the pres-
:arolment. cribed form to every person whose name is entered in any roU of 
advocates maintained under this Act. 
• • • • • 
Pe1'lOlll who H. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and the rules made 
=i~.1 thereunder, a person shall be quaUAed to be admitted as an advocate 
adVOC&tCl OIl on a State roll, if he fulfils the following conditions, namely:-a State roll. _ 
• •••• 
(c) he has obtained a degree in law-
• • • • • 
(iii) after the 28th day of February, 1963, from any 
Vniversity in the territory of India or elsewhere, if the 
degree is recognised for the purposes of this Act by the Bar 
Council of India; or 
be fa • barrister; 

11 
(d) he has under gone a course of training in law and 
paued an examination after such training both of which shall 
be prescribed by the State Bar Council: 
~ded that this clause shall not apply to-
(i) a barrister who has received practical training in 
England or a person who has obtained a degree in law from 
any University in India before ~e 28th day of February, 
1883; 
• • • • • 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I), a 
vakil, pleader or an attorney who is a law graduate, or who is not 
a law graduate but was entitled to be enrolled as an advocate of a. 
High Court immediately before the appointed day undef" any law 
then in force, may be admitted as an advocate on a State roll if he-
• • • • • 
ZI. (1) A State Bar Council shall refer every application for ad~ DiaPGlalJlcati of 
-~. d ~ ~ ££&UilD1OIl as an a vocate to its enrolment committee, and subject to for 1Idmi .. 
the provisions of sub-seclions (2) and (3), such committee shall ::so:c:: 
dispose of the application in the prescribed manner. 
• • • • • 
II. (1) • • • • • 
(2) . In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
• • • • • 
(b) a course of practical training in law and the examina-
tion to be Pueed after such training for admission as an advo-
cate' on the roll of the Bar Council; 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER V 
CONDUCT Of' ADVOCATIlS 
PowertD . 
mlkcnaJa. 
35. (1) Where on receipt of a complaint or otherwise a State Bar Puni.hment 
eouneu has reason to believe that any advocate on its roll has been 1!:=~ 
guUty of professional CIr other misconduct, it shall refer the case for CODduct. 
disposal to its diBclplinary committee. 
(2) The dillclpUnary committee of a State Bar Council, if it does 
not summarily reject the compll.lnt, shall ftx a date for the hearing 
pf the case and shall cause a notiCe thereof to be given to the advo. 
cate concerned and to the Advocate General of the State. 

.~, . 
18 
(3) The cUaciplin.8rY committee of a State Bar CO\IDcil after giving 
the advocate concerned and the Advocate-General an opportunity 
of being heard, may make aay of the following orciers, namely:-
(4) dilDlisa the complaint or, where the proceedings were 
iD.1tiated at the instance of the State Bar CouDdl, c:tJ.rect that the 
proceedings be 1Ued; 
(b) reprimand the advocate; 
(c) suspend the advocate from practice for such period as 
it may 4.eem At; 
(d) remove the name of the advocate from the State roll of 
advoeates. 
(4) Where an advocate is suspended from practice under daUie 
'(c) of sub-secUon (3), he shall, during the period of suspeIlGon, be 
debaITed from practising in any court or before any authority or 
person in India. 
(5) Where any notice is issued to the Advocate-General under 
sub-aeetion (2), the Aclvoeate-General may appear befean the eli.-
ciplhw'y eoemniitee of the &ate Bar COUDCil either m peI'8DIl GI' 
through any advocate appearing on hia behalf . 
.. • • • • 
':~f st. Notwithstanding anything contained in thia Act, the term of 
~~~ot' oftlce of the elected members of the Bar COUDCil of India and • State 
~~ f Bar Council constituted for the first time, Ihall be two yean fram 
lacSia ad the date of the first IneetiDg of the Councll. 
State Bar 
COUIICilI. .. .. .. • • 
. 18. (1) ... .. .. .. .. 
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal by sub-section (2) of section 50 
of the provisions of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 or of the Bombay 18 of I 7'· 
Pleaders Act, 1920, or of any other law relatin, to the admission and 
enrolment of legal practitiOll9fi, the provisions of the Acts and law Bomba, Act. 
aforesaid and any rules made thereunder in so far as they relate to ~~ of 
the issue and renewal of • cert.1tkate ·to a legal practitioner authoris-
. iug him to practise shall have effect until Ch~pter IV comes into 
force and, accordingly, everycex:tiftcate issued or ren~ed to a legal 
practitioner (who is not enrolled as an advocateuncler this Aet) 
. which is or purports to be issijed or renewed Mder the provi:s1ons 
of either of the aforesaid Acts or of the other law during the periOd 
begl!l!ling with the 1st day of December, 1961 and en.dlng with the 
date on wlrlch Chapter IV' comes into. force, shall be deemed to haft 
been validly iIIned CII' renewed. 
• • .. • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funber to amead the Advocates Act, 1961. 
(Shri Asoke K. S"" 
Minister of L4fJJ.) 

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
tHNISTRY OF LAW 
(Legisl~ive Dep~rtment) 
StAtement giving brief reasons for the 
• withdrawal of the Advocqtes (Amendment) 
Bill, 1963 introduced in the Lok a,bhA 
on the 21st Decemberj 1963. 
Since the introduction of the Advocqtes 
(Amendment) Bill, 1963, representations have been 
received from the B~r Council of IndiR and other 
bodies and individu~ls suggesting sever~l Qmer.dments 
to the Advoc A.t as Act. The ronendmcn ts suggested 
would be outside the scope of the Bill now pending 
before P~rliRment. In the circumstances, ~t is 
proposed to withdraw the Bill now pending before 
Parli~ment on the ground th~t th€ Bill is to be 
replAcod by q more comprehensive Bill which will 
include, in Addi tion to the previsions contained 
in the pending Bill, other romendcents to the AdvocRtes 
Act. 
New Delhi, 
April 10, 1964 
h.K. SEN , 
Minif)ter of Ltlw 