8W No. 60 of .,62 
THE ASSAM RIFLES (AMENDMENT) 
BILJ:,1g62 
(As INTRODUCBD IN Lolt SABRA 
ON 22ND JUNE, 1'}62) 

s of 1941. 
1 of 1872. 
Bill No ~o of 1'~2 
THE ASSAM RIFLES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Assam Rifles Act. 1941. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called ~Ie Assam Rifles (Amendment) Act, Short title. 
1962. 
5 !. In section 1 of the Assam Rifies Act, 1941 (hereinafter referred Amendment 
to as the principal Act). in sub-section (2), for the words "the whole of sectfoo I. 
of Assam", the words "the whole of India" shall be substituted. 
10 
15 
%0 
3. For section 10 of the principal Act, the followini sections shall SubltftutJoQ 
be substituted., namely: _ of D~ sectionS for 
section Io. 
"10 (1) A Commandant, Assistant Commandant or rifleman Privfleaelof. 
shall be entitled to all the privileges which a police officer has:rd r:; 
under section 125 of the Indian Evidence Act. 1872, and any other d::e b~~ 
enactment for the time being in foree. ~~_ 
. tant Com-(2) In any SUIt or proceeding against a Comtnandant. Assist- mandant, 
ant Commandant or rifleInan for any act done by him in pursu- ete. 
anee of a warrant or order of a competent authority, it shall be 
lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him under 
the authority of such warrant or order. 
(3) Any such plea may be proved by the product1on of the 
warrant or order directing the act, and if it is so proved. the 
Commandant, Assistant Commandant or rifleman. as the case 

Powers and 
duties tbat 
maybe 
concerted. or 
imposed br the Centra 
GovernmeDt 
oDCom-
mandant, 
A •• istant 
CoIlUllaD-
daln, etc. 
2 
may be, shall thereupon 'be discharged from liability in respect 
of the act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the 
jurisdiction of the authority which issued such warrant or order. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, any legal proceeding (whether civil 5 
or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against a Comman-
dant, Assistant Commandant or rifleman for anything done or 
intended .to be done under the powers conferred by, or in 
pursuance of, any provision of this Act or the orders or rules 
made thereunder, shall be commenced within three months 10 
after the act complained of was committed and not otherwise, 
and notice in writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof 
shall be given, where the defendant is a rifleman, to his superior 
officer, and in other cases, to the defendant, at least one month 
before the commencement of such proceeding. IS 
lOA. (1) The Central Government may, by general or special 
order, confer or impose upon any Commandant, Assistant Com-
mandant or rifleman, any of the powers or duties conferred or 
imposed on a police officer of any class or grade by any law for 
the time being in force. 20 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal ~ocedure, 1898, the Central Government may invest 5 of 1898. 
any Commandant or Assistant Commandant with the powers of 
a Magistrate of any class for the purpose of inquiring into or 
trying any offence committed by a rifleman and punishable 25 
under this Act or any offence committed by a rifleman against 
the person or property of another rifleman or of any person act-
ing with or assisting the Assam RUies .... 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Assam Rifles Act', ·1911, eXtends to the whole of Assam and is 
applicable to members of the Assam Rifles wherever they may be. 
Since the Assam Riftes are required to serve in areas outside the 
State of Assam, the restricted application of the Act to that State 
raises legal di1!lculties as regards exercise of powers under the Act 
l"by ;magistmtes and. -other authorities outside the State. To remove 
these difficulties it is proposed to extend the Act to the whole of 
India. 
Under section 10 of the Act. only the Commandants and Assistant 
Commandants are entitled to all the privileges which a police 
officer has under sections 42 and 43 of the Police Act, 1861, section 
125 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and any other enactment for 
the time being in force. It is considered necessary to confer such 
privileges on the riftemen elso. It is also considered that the 
Commandants, Assistant Commandants and rifiemen should have 
the same protection for acts done by them in the discharge of police 
duties as has been conferred on the members of the Central Reserve 
Pollce Force. 
The rifiemen are posted for duty in the N.E.F.A., Nagaland and 
other border areas where there are no regular pollce forces. During 
the discharge of their duties, it is necessary for them to make 
searches, arrests, etc. To enable them to make searches, arrests, etc., 
it is proposed to confer on them the powers of a police officer. To 
facilitate the inquiry and trial of offences committed by riftemen, it 
is also proposed to co~er magisterial powers on the Commandants 
and Assistant Commandants. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
Nsw J)a.BI; 
The 13th June, 1962. LAKSHMI N. MENON. 

Short title, 
extcatancl 
application. 
ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE AssAM RII'LJ'.S ACT. 1941 (5 or 1941) 
• • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Assam Rifles Act, 1941. 
(2) It extends to the wb01e ol Aam and applies to all members 
of the Assam RUles whlnftr..,..., be ...... 
• • • • 
Pmileacs of 10. A Commandant or Assistant CommaDdant shall be· entitled to 
~':: all the privileges which a pollee ofBcer has under seetla 42 and 43 
Alsiltant of the Pollee Act, 1861, seetion 125 of the IndIm Evldmce Act, 1811, J« .... 
~~- and any other enactment for the time being in farce. 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Assam Rifles Act, 1941. 
(Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, 
Minister of State in the 
Ministry of '&tmlal Affal".) 