As Ixrropucen IN Lox SaRHA

10 JU) 1098

Bill No. 60 of 1998

THE INCOME-TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
Stara’ Satya PAL. JAIN, MP.
A
BILL
further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961.
| it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

©
‘This Act may be called the Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1998,

2. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, for clause (13A), the following clause
be substituted, namely:—

"(13A) (i) any payment received by an employee of the Central Government or a
‘Government or a local authority towards house rent allowance (by whatever name
); and

(ii) any payment of the nature referred to in sub-clause (i) received by an employee,

than an employee of the Central Government or a State Government or a local

ity, subject to such limit as the Central Government may, by notification in the
icial Gazette, specify in this behalf.

‘Short tile,

Amendment
‘of section 16.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Section 10(13A) of the Income-tax, 1961, inter alia, Provides for exemption from incot
tax of the allowances of the nature of house rent allowance granted by the employer to
employees. Rule 2A of the Income-tax Rules, 1962 made under that section Provides for
the limits of exemptions and the conditions subject to which such exemption may be alloy
An employee seeking for exemption is required to submit necess;
rent receipts, etc. to the drawing and disbursement officer. Provisi
in the present form, while not contributing to revenue in any
caused much harassment to the employees, works as an impedii

increasing housing stock in the country and adds to avoidable
the following reasons: —

jon under section 10(13A)
substantial manner, has
ment to the movement 0
work of the employers for

(a) due to reluctance of landlords to issue rent receipts or not to issue the receipt
for the full amount of rent tendered, employee-tenants are made to sutfe
either by not claiming the exemption at all or exposing themselves to suffer
the vagaries of law by producing false receipts or to succumb to the press
of landlords by giving extra money for getting a receipt;

(b) employees in general and the Government employees in particular do not
have the much desired incentive to build houses for their own living since

of house rent allowance gets reduced because.

(c) Government employees in occupation of Government accommodations an

allowance which they get works as a disi
Government accommodation in turn addin,
for allotment; and

incentive leading to shortage of |

(d) employers are put to avoidable trouble of collecting rent receipts and श्णं।
into the genuineness and adequacy thereof thus adding to their troubles,

The Central Government long back abandoned its dual policy in matter of house rent
allowance entitlement — one, for those claiming house rent allowance on the Pproductic
of a rent receipt, two, for those without arent receipt or living in the houses owned by them
or their family members, Both husband and wife are entitled to full house rent allowance if
they are employees of Central Government. The logic of the matter is that one who has n
been provided an accommodation by the employer is Meeting expenditure towards renting:

a house or maintaining a house owned by him or his family wherein he is living and
the entitlement.


3

Bill provides that the house rent allowance paid to a Government employee shall
be included in his total income and for those in the employments other than the
mment, the Central Government shall determine the amount of their exemption
gh a notification. Exemptions of the gratuity, leave travel concession, etc. under section
of the Income-tax Act, 1961 are similarly regulated,

»
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

SATYA PAL JAIN


PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

[Copy of letter No. 142/20/98-TPL, dated 2 June 1998 from Shri Yashwant Sinha,
Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha.)

The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Income-tax
(Amendment) Bill, 1998 (Amendment of section 10) by Shri Satya Pal Jain, Member of
Parliament, has recommended, under clause (1) of article 117 and under clause (1) of
article 274 of the Constitution, the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha.


ANNEXURE
(43 of 1961)

Extracts FROM THE INcomE=tax Act. 1961

* * * *

computing the total income of a previous year of any person, any income falling Incomes not
in any of the following clauses sI not be included —

* * + *

(13A) any special allowance specitically granted to an by his employer to meet

yenditure actually incurred on payment of rent (by whatever name called) in respect of
tial accommodation occupied by the assessee, to such extent as may be prescribed

g regard to the area or place in which such accommodation is situated and other
it considerations,

{Explanation—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing contained
clause shall apply in a case where—

(a) the residential accommodation occupied by the assessee is owned by him; or

(0) the assessee has not actually incurred expenditure on payment of rent (by whatever
called) in respect of the residential accommodation occupied by him]

* * * *

* * + *


LOK SABHA

A

BILL

further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961,

(Shri Satya Pal Jain, M.P.)