LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIF$ (PREVENTION) BIT..IL, 1967 
(To be/As introduced 1n Lok Sabha) 
1, Page 1, lin@ 8,-
after "requires" for It." read II II - , 
2. Page 2, line 11,-
betore "means" insert 
3. Page 6, line 39,-
" II , 
after "securities" omit II II , 
4. Page 8, line 3,-
after Ilmayll omit 
5. Page 8, line 8,-
-
II " , 
after "sub-section (4)" insert 
6. Page 8, line 36,-
It " , 
after "notification" insert "issued l1 
7. Page 8, line 42,-
after "YElare" insert It " , 
8. Page 11, line 1,-
after" any" insert " " , 
9. Page 14, line 4,-
after "relate" insert " " , 

~. ... '. 
:nd under such conditions, if' a:;r.:! may b~pecified in the notifica-
tion, be exercised also by a,ny State Government and the State Gov-
ernment may, with the previous approval of the Central Govern-
ment, by order in writing !iirect that any power which has been 
5 directed to be exercised by it shall, in such circumstances and under 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be exer-
cised by any person subordinate to the State Government as may 
be specified therein. 
20. The provisions of this Act or any rule or order made there-
10 under shall have effect notw.ithstanding anything inconsistent there-
with contained in any enactment other than this Act or any instru-
ment having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act. 
Effect of 
Act and 
rules, etc., 
inconsis-
tent with 
other 
enact-
ments. 
21. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Power to 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. make 
rules. 15 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
mg matters, namely:-
20 
" 
(a) the service of notices or orders issued or made under 
this Act and the manner in which such notices or orders may 
be served, where the person to be served is a corporation, com-
pany, bank or association; 
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal or a Dis-
trict Judge in holding any inquiry or disposing of any applica-
tion under this Act; 
25 (c) any other matter wh!ch has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this sec-
tion shall be laid, as sOO'n..lS may be after it is made, befOre each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 
30 sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session. in which it is so laid 
or the session immediately follOWing, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
35 ;hat any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done' under that rule. 

· --
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Pursuant to the acceptance by Government of a unanimous re-
commendation of the Committee on National Integration and Region. 
alism appointed by the National Integratian Council, the Constitu-
tion (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, was enacted empowering 
Parliament to impose, by law, reasonable restrictions in the interests 
of the sovereignty and integrity of India, on the-
(i) freedom of speech and expression; 
(ii) right to assemble peaceably and without arms; and 
(iii) right to fonn associations or unions. 
2. The object of this Bill is to make powers available for dealing 
with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of 
India. 
NEW DELHI; Y. B. CHA V AN. 
The 23rd May, 1967. 
, 
12 

1 
tmANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill, 1967 pro-
vides for the constitution of a Tribunal, to be known &iii the Uniaw-
ful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal, consisting of a Chairman and 
two other mEl!lDhers to be appointed by the Central Government. All 
expenses to be incurred in conn~ion with the Tribunal would be 
met from the Consolidated Fund of India. It will be constituted as 
and when necessary. The expenditure is not expected to be large 
and is not likely to exceed as. 99,210 during the year in which such 
a Tribunal is constituted . 
.. ! 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATEb LEGISLATION 
-Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Governm~nt to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill. The matters in resPect 
of which rules may be made relate inter alia, to the service of 
notices or orders issued or made under the Bill and the manner in 
which such notices or orders may be served, where the persC1Q to 
be served. is a corporation, company, bank or association; the pro-
cedure to be followed by the Tribunal or a District Judge in holding 
any inquiry or disposing of any application under the Bill. These 
matters pertain to procedure or detail necessary for the effective 
administration of the provisions of this Bill and as such the: delega-
tion of legislative power is of a normal character. 
2. Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
direct the State Government to exercise all or any of the powers 
exercisable by it under the Bill and further empowers the State 
Government to direct, with the previous approval of the Central Gov_ 
ernment, any person subordinate to the State Government, to exer-
cise any power which has been directed to be exercised by the State 
Government. The delegation to the State Government of any power 
exercisable by the Central Government under the Bill is necessary 
for the effective administration of the Bill and is of a normal 
character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlaw-
ful activities of individuals and associations and for 
matters conne.ed therewith. 
(Shri Y. B. CNman, 
Minister 0/ Home AJJairs.) 