• 
BUI No. 60 of 1,$5 
• 
THE CONSTITUTION (FIFTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As IlIiIRODUCED IN LOIC SABRA) 

5 
-10 
IS 
20 
- BUI No. 60 of 195.5 
THE CONSTITUTION (FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1955. 
2. In article 3 of the Constitution, for the proviso, the following Amendment. 
proviso shall be substituted, namely: _ of article 3· 
"Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in 
either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of 
the President and unless, where the proposal contained in 
the Bill affects the area, boundaries or name of any of the States 
specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule, the Bill has 
been referred by the President to the Legislature of that State 
for expressing its views thereon within such period as may be 
specified in the reference." 
3. (1) In article 100 of the Constitution,-
(a) in clause (3), for the words "Until Parliament by law 
otherwise provides", the words "Save as otherwise provided by 
rules regulating the procedure of the House" shall be substituted; 
and 
(b) clause (4) shall be omitted. 
Amendment 
of articles 
100 and 189. 

(2) In article 189 of the Constitution,-
(4) in clause (3), for the words "Until the Legislature of the 
State by law otherwise provides", the words "Save as otherwise 
provided by rules regulating the procedure of the House" shall 
be substituted; and 
(b) clause (4) shall be omitted. 
Amen~t 4. (1) In article 101 of the Constitutioll, in clause (3), sub-clause 
~~I. ~;~I~90 (a) and the brackets and letter" (b)" shall be omitted. 
and 192. 
Decision on 
question a. 
to disquali-
fication. of 
members •• 
(2) For article 103 of the Constitution, the following article shall 
be substituted, namely:- 10 
"103. (1) If it is represented to the Chairman or the Speaker 
that a member of the Council of States or, as the case may be, of 
the House of the People is disqualified for being such a member 
under the provisions of article 102, or was so disqualified at any 
time since being chosen as such member, and the member does 15 
not admit that he is or was so disqualified, the question shall be 
referred to the Election Commlssion for decision, and its decision 
shall be final: -
Provided that where the db;qualification in question arises 
from circumstances which subsisted at the time of his being 20 
chosen as such member, no such representation as aforesaid shall 
be entertained- . 
(a) unless it is made after the expiration of the period 
prescribed by law for presenting an election petition calling 
in question the election of the member, and 25 
(b) if such an election petition is pending or has been 
tried, unless the Chairman or Speaker, as the case may be, is 
satisfied that the question of the member's disqualification by 
reason of those circumstances has not been raised, or as the 
case may be was not raised, in the proceedings on the election 
petition. 30 
(2) Where on a representation made under clause (1) the 
member 8<;lmits that he is or was disqualified under the provisions 
of article 102, or where on a reference made under that clause the 
Election Commission decides that the member is or was so dis-
qualified, his seat shall thereupon become vacant." 3S 
(3) In article 190 of the Constitution, in clause (3), sub-clause 
(0) and the brackets and letter .. (b)" shall be omitted. 

3 
(4) For article 192 of the Constitution, the following article shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"192. (1) If it is represented to the Speaker or the Chairman ~ti='~: 
that a member of the Legislative Assembly or, as the case may to disquaUfi-
be, of the Legislative Council of a State is disqualified for being :!:~:~~ 
such a member under the provisions of article 191, or was so dis-
qualified at any time since being chosen as a member, and the 
member does not admit that he is or was so disqualified, the ques-
tion shall be referred to the Election Commission for decision, and 
10 its decision shan be final: 
IS 
20 
Provided that where the disqualification in question arises 
from circumstances which subsisted at the time of his being 
chosen as such member, no such representation as aforesaid shalt 
be entertained-
(a) unless it is made after the expiration of the period 
prescribed by law for presenting an election petition calling 
in question the election of the member, and 
(b) if such an election petition is pending or has been 
tried, unless the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may be, is 
satisfied that the question of the member's disqualification by 
reason of those circumstances has not been raised, or as the 
case may be was not raised, in the proceedings on the election 
petition. 
(2) Where on a representation made under clause (1) the 
2S member admits that he is or was disqualified under the provisions 
of article 191, or where on a reference made under that clause the 
Election Commission decidei that the member is or was so dis-
qualified, his seat shall thereupon become vacant". 
5. (1) In article 148 of the Constitution, to clause (4), the follow- Amendment 
30 ing Explanation shall be added, namely: - ~!8a':n~e~I9. 
3S 
40 
"Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, the office of a 
Minister for the Union or for a State shall not be deemed to be an 
office either under the Government of India or under the Govern-
ment of a State". 
(2) In article 319 of the Constitution,-
(a) for the word "employment" wherever it occurs, the word 
"office" shall be substituted; and 
(b) the following Explanation shall be added at the end. 
namely:-
"Explanation.-For the purposes of this article, the office 
of a Minister for the Union or for 8 State shaU not be deemed 

Amendment 
of article 
276. 
Amendment 
of article 
297· 
Amendment 
of article 
311. 
Amendment 
of article 
316. 
4 
to be an office either under the Government of India or under 
the Government of a Stare.". 
6: In article 276 of the Constitution, in clause (2), tor the words 
"two hundred and fifty rupees" wherever they occur, the words "one 
thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
7. In article 297 of the Constitution, after the words "territorial 
waters", the words "or the continental shelf" shall be inserted. 
8. In article 311 of the Constitution, for clauses (2) and (3), the 
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-
5 
"(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or re- 10 
moved except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of 
the charge..!! against him and given a reasonable opportunity of 
defending himself: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply-
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed on the 15 
ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a crimi-
nal charge; or 
(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or re-
move a person is satisfied that for some reason to be recorded 
by that authority in writing it is not reasonably practicable 20 
to hold such inquiry; or 
(c) where the President or Governor or Rajpramukh, as 
the case may be is satisfied that in the interest of the security 
of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry; or 
(d) where the person to be dismissed or removed belongs 2S 
to any such class of employees in a commercial or industrial 
establishment of the Union or of a State as the President, 
Governor or Rajpramukb, as Ule case may be, may by order 
specify in this behalf. 
(3) If in respect of any such person as aforesaid a question 30 
arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such an inquiry 
as is referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon of the autho-
rity empowered to dismiss or remove such person shall be final.". 
9. In article ·316 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the follow-
ing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
" (1A) If the oftlce of Chairman of a Commission becomes 
vacant or if any such Chairman is by reason of absence or for any 
other reason unable to perform the duties of his office, those 
~utie$'shall, until some person appointed under clause (1) to the 
35 

.s 
vacant office has ent~red on the duties thereof or, as the case may 
be, until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed by 
such one of the other members of the Commission as the Presi-
dent, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, 
and the Governor or Rajpramukh of the State in the case of a 5 
Stat, Commission, may appoint for the purpose.". 

6 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks to amend certain provisions of the Constitution 
for the reasons indicated below. 
Clause 2.-Under the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution, no 
Bill for the purpose of forming a new State, increasing or diminish-
ing the area of any State or altering the boundaries or name of any 
State can be introduced in Parliament unless the views of the State 
Legislatures concerned with respect to the provisions of the Bill 
have been ascertained by the President. It is desirable that there 
should be provision that when the State.s concerned are consulted 
the Presid.ent should be enabled to prescribe the time within which 
the State should convey to the President their views in the matter. 
It is for this purpose that it is proposed to amend the proviso to 
article 3 of the Constitution. The intention of the proviso is only 
to ensure that the Legislatures of all the States affected by a reorga-
nisation proposal have a reasonable opportunity of expressing their 
views. 
Clause 3.-Articles 100 and 189 of the Constitution contain provi-
sions in regard to the quorum of either House of Parliament and 
either House of a State Legislature which in practice have been 
found to be unduly rigid. In particular, clause (4) of each of these 
two articles, which imposes a duty on the Chairman or Speaker or 
the person acting as such either to adjourn the House or to suspend 
the meeting whenever there is no quorum, has given rise to practical 
diftlcl,llties. It does not seem necessary to have such detailed and 
rigid provisions in the Constitution itself for regulating quorum. 
It should be sufficient ~o indicate that the quorum would normally 
be one-tenth of the total membership of the House and leave the rest 
to be regulated by rules of procedure of the House. Clause 3 of the 
Bill seeks to amend articles 100 and 189 accordingly. 
Clause 4.-The decision of the Supreme Court in Election Com-
mission vs. Saka Venkata Rao (1953 S.C.R. 114) that articles 190 (3) 
(a) and 192 (1) of the Constitution are applicable only to disqualifi-
cations to which a member "becomes subject" after he has been 
elected as such, leads to an anomalous position. Where a candidate 
under a disqualification gets elected and no election petition is 
lodged against him, he can continue aa a member despite the man-
datory prov~sion in article 102 (1) or, as the case may be, article 191 
(1) that he shall be disqualified, not only for being chosen as, but 
also for being, a member. 
Articles 103 and 192 refer vaguely to questions arising as to whe-
ther a member has become subject to a disqualification without 
indicating how or before whom the question has to be raised and 
the proper method for referring the question for the decision of the 

J 7 
President or the Governor. Although these articles appear to maKe 
the President and the Governor the deciding authorities, they have 
to ?~tain the ?pinion of the Election Commission and give their 
decIsIon accordIng to that opinion. This appears to be an unneces-
sarily round-about method. The necessity for bringing in the Head 
of State into disputes of this type is not at all clear. As a matter 
pertaining to the due constitu tion of a House of the Legislature it 
would be more appropriate for the question to be raised before the 
Speaker or Chairman and then referred to the Election Commis-
sion for decision. 
In order to remove these anomalies and difficulties, it is proposed 
in clause 4 of the Bill to omit sub-clause (a) of article 101 (3) and 
sub-clause (a) of article 190 (3) and to revise articles 103 and 192. 
Clause 5.-Articles 148 (4) and 319 render respectively the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General and the Chairman and members 
of Public Service Commissions ineligible for further office either 
under the Government of India or under the Government of any 
State. Since these two articles do not contain an explanation on 
the lines of articles 102 (2) and 191 (2), the inference is that the 
prohibition extends to the office of a minister for the Union or for a 
State. It is considered that there should be no bar to the Comptrol-
ler and Auditor-General or a member of a Public Service Commis-
sion having a political career after retirement and becoming a 
minister. It is accordingly proposed to insert explanations in articles 
148 (4) and 319 on the same lines as those contained in articles 102 (2) 
and 191(2). 
Clau.se 6.-Article 276 (2) provides that the total amount payable 
in respect of anyone person to the State or to anyone local autho-
rity by way of taxes on profe~sions, trades, callings and employ-
ments shall not exceed Rs. 250 per annum. The State Governments 
and local bodies have .been finding this limit to be too low. The 
Local Finance Enquiry Committee in 1951 and the Taxation Enquiry 
Commission this year have both recommended raising this limit. 
It is accordingly proposed to amend article 276 (2) raising the limit 
to Rs. 1,000. 
Clause 7.-India's sovereign rights under international law over 
the sea-bed and sub..soilof the continental shelf adjoining its terri-
tory and beyond its territorial waters have recently been ~sserted 
in a President's proclamation. As a corollary to this assertion it is 
necessary to provide in the Constit~tion that. thi~ sea-bed and all 
things of value underlying it vest In the UnIon In the same way 
al all lands, minerals and other things of value underlying the 

8 
Jean within the territorial waters by virtue of article 297. It 
is accordingly proposed to amend that article by referring to· the 
continental shelf of India along with the territorial waters of India. 
Clause S.-Article 311 (2) provides that no civil servant shall be 
dismissed or removed or reduced in rank until he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him. This has been interpreted by the 
courts as proyiding the civil servant an additional statutory oppor-
tunity after a definite conclusion has been reached as to the actual 
punishment proposed to be inflicted on him. Thus, in practice, two 
opportunities have to be given at two different stages of the 
dep8l'tmental inquiry which consequently becomes a long-drawn 
aftair. 
Secondly, the article extends, not only to dismissal and removal 
from service, but also to reduction in rank. This latter expression 
has been interpreted differently by different authorities and courts. 
Furthermore, there does not seem to be sufficient justitlcation for 
placing reduction in rank on a par with the much more severe 
punishments of dismissal and removal from service and given a 
special Constitutional safeguard. 
Thirdly, a large number of persons are employed in the com. 
mercial and industrial establishments of the Central Government, 
as . well as of the State Governments. Being technically civil 
servants these persons are entitled to the protection of this article 
in addition to the privileges they enjoy under the general labour 
laws. Since this is not conducive to the maintenance of proper dis-
cipline and efticient administration, it is considered that there should 
be power to exclude specified categories of commercial or industrial 
employees of Government from the purview of the article. 
It is accordingly proposed in clause 8 to revise clauses (2) and 
(3) of article 311. 
Clause 9.-There is no provision in article 316 for the appoint-
ment of an acting Chairman of a Public Service Commission when 
that office is vacant or when the permanent Chairman is on leave or 
otherWise unablt, to perform the duties of his office. It is, therefore, 
proposed in clause 9 to insert a clause in article 316 providing for 
the appointment of an acting Chairman in those· circumstances. 
C. C. BISWAS. 
NEW DELHI; 
Th~ 13th November, 1955. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• • • • • • 
PART I 
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY 
• • • • • • 
3. Parliament may by law- Formation 
of new 
(a) form a ne-:I State by separation of territory from any States .and 
S . . aiteratlo.:l tate or by umtmg two or more States or parts of States of areas, 
or by uniting any territory to a part of any State; ~u:!!,,~e'of 
(b) increase the area of any State,' existing States. 
(c) diminish the area of any State; 
(d) alter the boundaries of any State; 
(e) alter the name of any State: 
Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in 
either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the 
President and unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill affects 
the boundaries of any State or States specified in Part A or Part B 
of the First Schedule or the name or names of any such State" or 
States, the views of the Legislature of the State or, as the case may 
be, of each of the States both with respect to the proposal to intro-
duce the Bill and with respect to the provisions thereof have been 
ascertained by the President. 
• 
• 
• • • • 
PART V 
THE UNION 
CHAPTE1t II.-PARLIAMENT 
• * • * 
* 
• 
100. Voting in 
• • • • •• Houses, 
flwcr of 
(3) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the quorum to ac~u~~~~fth. 
constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament shall be one- standi'!g 
f h H vacancIes tenth of the total number of members 0 t e ouse. and quorum. 
(4) If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quo-
rum, it shall be the duty of the 'Chairman or Speaker, or person act-
ing as such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting 
until tbere is a quorum. 
9 

10 
Disqualifications of member.· 
Vac:ation of 101. 
leatl. 
• • • • • • 
(3) If Q member of either House of Parliament-
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned 
in clause (I) of article 102, or 
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to 
the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be. 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
• • • • • • 
Decision on 103. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of either 
qUd~tio~ffi House of Parliament has become subject to any of the disqualifica-
:t~::: of - tions mentioned in clause (I) of article 102, the question shall be 
members. referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be 
CoInl'troUer 
and Auditor-
General of 
India. 
final. 
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Presi-
dent shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall 
act according to such opinion. 
• • • • • • 
1 •. 
• • • • • • 
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall not be eligible 
for further office either under the Government of India or under 
the Government of any State after he hali ceased to hold his office. 
• • • • • • 
PART VI 
THE STATES IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
• • • • • • 
189. 
• • • • • • 
Votinl in 
H.ousce, 
f,lWC!r of 
a;:'~~itll- (3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, 
standing the quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature 
vacancies h and quorum. of a State shall be ten meml;Jers or one-tenth of t e total number 
of members of the House, whichever is greater. 
(4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly 
or the Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be 

II 
the duty of the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, 
either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting Wltil there 
is a qaorum. 
• • • • • • 
190. 
• • • • • • 
(3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of a Sta~ 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned 
in clause (I) of article 191j or 
(b) resigns his .seat by writing under his hand addressed to 
the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
• • • • • • 
Vacation of 
seatl. 
192. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member of a DcciaiOD on 
House of the Legislature of a State has become subject to any of ~~=tt 
the disflualifications mentioned in clause (I) of article 191, the adona of 
question shall be referred for the decision of the Governor and membe": 
his decision shall be final. 
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the 
Governor shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and 
shall act according to such opinion. 
• • • • • • 
PART XII 
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS 
• • • • • • 
276. 
• • • • • • 
Tuee on 
profellionl, 
trades ca1l-
inpandem-
(2) The total amount payable in respect of anyone person to ploymentl. 
the State or to anyone municipality, district board, local board or 
other local authority in the State by way of taxes on professions, 
trades, callings and employments shall not exceed two hundred and 
fifty rupees per annum: 
Provided that if in the finanCial year immediately preceding the 
commencement of this Constitution there was in force in the case 
of any State or any such municipality, board or authority a tax on 
professions, trades, callings or employments the rate, or the maxi-
mum rate, of which exceeded two hundred and fifty rupees per 

12 
annum, such tax may continue to be levied until provision to the 
centrary is made by Parliament by law, and any law so made by 
Parliament may be made either generally or in relation to any 
specified States, municipalities, boards or authorities . 
• • • • • • 
Things o~ . 291. All lands, minerals and other things of value underlying the 
~~n :~;~i~ ocean within the. territorial waters of India shall vest in the Union 
torial wate!' and be held for the purposes of the U Dion. to Velt In 
the Union. *..... 
PART XIV 
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES 
• • • • • • 
Dismissal. 311. (1) No person who is a member of a civil service of the 
:d~i!:rin Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a State or holds 
rank of t:r- a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed 
::si~ch~l by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed. 
capacities . 
under the (2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed 
~~!~~ or a or reduced in rank until he has been given a reasonable opportunity 
of showing cause against tne action proposed to be taken in regard 
to him: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply-
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank 
on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction 
on a criminal charge; 
(b) where an authority empowered to dismiss or remove a per-
son or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some rea-
son, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not 
reasonably practicable to give to that person an oppor-
tunity· of showing cause; or 
(c) where the President or Governor or Rajpramukh, as the 
case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security 
of the State it is not expedient to give to that person such 
an opportunity. 
(3) If any question arises whether it is reasonably practicable .to 
give to any person an opportunity of showing cause under clause 
(2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or 
remove such person or to reduce him in rank, as the case may be, 
shall be final. 
• • • • • • 

13 
319. On ceasing to hold office- Prohibition 
(a) the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission h~ldi~' t!f 
shall be ineligible for further employment either under officClbe by mem nof 
the Government of India or under the Government of a Commission 
St t . on ce8sinJ a e, to be such 
(b) the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall 
be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any other 
member of the Union Public Service Commission or as 
the Chairman of any other State Public Service Commis-
sion, but not for any other employment either under the 
Government of India or under the Government of a State; 
(c) a member other than the Chairman of the Union Public 
Service Commission shall be eligible for appointment as 
the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission 
or as the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission, 
but not for any other employment either under the 
Government of India or under the Government of a 
State; 
(d) a member other than the Chairman of a State Public 
Service Commission shall be eligible for appointment as 
the Chairman or any other member of the Union Public 
Service Commission or as the Chairman of that or any 
other State Public Service Commission, but not for any 
other employment either under the Government of India 
or under the Government of a State. 
members. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri C. C. Biswas, Minister o/14w) 