1
THE ACID (CONTROL) BILL, 2014
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for control of sale and distribution of acids in order to prevent the acid
attacks on human beings particularly women and girls and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted  by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Acid (Control) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the Union territories only.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "acid" means any acidic solution, the sale and distribution of which is declared
by the Central Government to be governed by or under the provisions of this Act;
(b) "dealer" means a person carrying on either personally or through any other
person the business of selling any acid, whether wholesale or retail;
Bill No.  60 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title
and extent.
Definitions.
5

2
(c) "Controller" means the Controller of Acids appointed by the Central
Government under section 4; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, publish a
list of acids to which the provisions of this Act shall apply.
(2) The Central Government may, at any point in time, amend the list published under
sub-section (1).
4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a
Controller of Acids to control and regulate the sale and distribution of acids in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1),
the Controller shall be empowered to,—
(a) ban the retail sale of acid to specified persons;
(b) prescribe compulsory licences for dealers authorised to sell acid in retail;
(c) ensure that the dealers, who sell acids, shall record the sale transactions in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Controller shall be assisted by such number of officers, inspectors and
employees as may be prescribed.
(4) The salary, allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of service of the
officers and employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
5.  Subject to provisions of section 6, no person other than the authorised dealers shall
sell or possess any acid.
6. The Controller may, by notification, exempt any bonafide industrial or academic user
from the provisions of this Act.
7. (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or fails to comply with
any direction made under authority conferred by this Act shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees or with both.
(2) The Court may, at any stage of trial, order that the whole or any part of the stock of
acids in respect of which the offence was committed be forfeited to the Government and the
establishment from which the stock was released be sealed.
8. Where a person committing an offence punishable under this Act is a company
or an association or a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, every director,
manager, secretary, agent or other officer or person concerned with the management
thereof, shall, unless he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent its commission, be deemed to be
guilty of such offence.
9. In all trials for offences under this Act, the magistrate shall follow the procedure
prescribed in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for the trial of summary cases.
10. In trials of offences under this Act, it shall be presumed, unless and until the
contrary is proved, that the accused has committed an offence under this Act in respect of
any acid preparations for the possession of which he fails to account satisfactorily.
Central
Government
to publish list
of acids.
Appointment
of Controller
of Acids.
Authorised
dealers to sell
acid.
Exemptions
on use of
acids.
Penalties.
Offences by
corporations.
Offences to be
tried
summarily.
Presumption
of possession.
1 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
11. Any person competent to investigate an offence under this Act may search any
place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been, or is being
or is likely to be committed, and take possession of any stock of acid in respect of which the
offence has been or is being committed and the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, shall, so far as may be applicable, apply to any search or seizure under this Act as they
apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under that Code.
12. (1) Any officer exercising powers under this Act or the rules made thereunder
who—
(a) without reasonable ground for believing that it is necessary so to do, searches
or causes to be searched any house, building or enclosed place or any vehicle, vessel
or aircraft;
(b) vexatiously or unnecessarily seizes any acidic preparation;
(c) vexatiously or unnecessarily detains, searches or arrests any person; or
(d) commits, as such officer, any other act resulting in an injury to any person,
without having any reason to believe that such act is required for the execution of his
duty;
shall for every such offence be punished with fine which may extend to twenty thousand
rupees.
(2) Any person who wilfully and maliciously gives false information so as to cause an
arrest or a search to be made under this Act shall be punished with a fine which may extend
to twenty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or
with both.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any
other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, makes rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power of
search and
seizure.
Vexatious
search and
seizure.
Saving of
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
1 of 1974   5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
During the past few years there is a sudden spurt in the incidents relating to acid
attacks particularly on women in the country. Every year many women are killed, maimed,
blinded or scarred for life by the acid attacks. The main and simple reason for increase in such
incidents is the absence of any law in the country to regulate the sale of acids. As of now,
anybody can walk down to the nearby store and purchase any amount of acid over the
counter for less than twenty rupees. In many countries, including Bangladesh, there is an
Acid Control Act which regulates the sale of acids and also the way it is produced, stored
and transported. Unfortunately, in our country, the acid is carelessly allowed to become a
deadly weapon. Once this weapon is used on any woman, the victim goes through a trauma
throughout her life as even after many cosmetic surgeries and corrections the scar does not
leave.
Besides, there is permanent scar on the mind of a woman reminding her of the gruesome
incident throughout her life. There is a constant demand that a separate law should be in
place to punish offenders of acid attacks but at the same time there is also a proposal that the
focus of the remedial action should be on controlling the sale of acids, rather than punishing
the perpetrators. It is, therefore, high time that a law on controlling the sale of acids should
be framed and the violators should be severely punished. However, the bona fide users for
industrial, research and academic purposes should be exempted from the purview of such
law which shall be applicable to Union territories only in view of the jurisdiction of the
respective Governments on the subject.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
June 27, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for appointment of  Controller of Acids, Officers, Inspectors
and other employees by the Central Government to control and regulate the sale and
distribution of acids. It is estimated that an amount of rupees one hundred crore per annum
would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India as recurring expenditure.
It is also estimated that a non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore will be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for control of sale and distribution of acids in order to prevent the acid attacks
on human beings particularly women and girls and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1312LS(S4)—23.07.2014.