22 00 4093

AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
By
Surt RAMESH CHENNITHALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003. Short title

2. In article 275 of the Constitution, in the clause (1), after the second proviso, Amendmentof
5 the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— article 275.

"Provided further that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of
India as grants-in-aid of the revenué of the State of Kerala every year to the tune of
rupees one thousand crore for developmental and infrastructural works."


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

% Kerala is an important tourist destination. With its natural splendour and national
health centres, Kerala attracts a large number of foreign tourists. Lack of infrastructural
facilities however, hampers promotion of tourism and realisation of its full potential.
Though, tourism generates considerable income, it does not provide sufficient funds for
development of infrastructural facilities to the desired level. It is therefore, essential that
Central Government provides sufficient funds by way of grants-in-aid for development of
tourism in Kerala.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; e RAMESH CHENNITHALA.
July 22, 2003



ANNEXURE,

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITSUTION OF INDIA

* * * * * + *

275. (1) Such sums as Parliament may by law provide shall be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as

Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance, and different sums may be fixed for
different States:

Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-
aid of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may be necessary to
enable that State to meet the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken
by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of promoting the
welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of the
Scheduled Areas therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State:

Provided further that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as

grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and recurring,
equivalent to—

(a) the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the two years
immediately preceding the commencement of this Constitution in respect of the
administration of the tribal areas specified in '[Part I] of the table appended to
paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule; and

(b) the costs of such schemes of development as may be undertaken by the
State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of raising the
level of administration of the said areas to that of the administration of the rest of
the areas of that State.

* * * * * * *

Grants from
the Union to
certain States,


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM) ~

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that a sum of rupees one thousand crore shall be paid
out of the Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenue of the State of Kerala
per annum for developmental and infrastructural works.

This will involve recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India to the

tune of rupees one thousand crore per annum. No non-recurring expenditure would be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.



LOK SABHA.

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, MP.)

MGIPMRND—2326LS—07.08.2003.