Bill No. 60 of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR GEO-MAPPING OF
TREES IN THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN BILL, 2022
By
SHRI C.P. JOSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to  provide  for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to
meet the expense of geo-mapping of trees and saplings
during plantation in State of Rajasthan.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance for Geo-Mapping of
Trees in the State of Rajasthan Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Geo-mapping" means the process of converting raw data from surveys into
a geo map that helps by providing a visualization of the location of utilities quickly and
accurately;
Definitions
5
10

5
(b)  "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(c) "sapling" means a young tree specifically one not over four inches
(about 10 centimetres) in diameter at breast height; and
(d) "tree" includes palm, skump, brush-wood and cane;
3.  There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial
assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of geo-mapping of trees and saplings
during plantation in the State of Rajasthan.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Rajasthan.
2

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Rajasthan, according to geographical area, ranks 15th in terms of the Recorded Forest
Areas (RFA), is a forest deficient State. As per the Champion and Seth Classification of
Forest Types (1968), the forests in Rajasthan belong to two type groups i.e. Tropical Dry
Deciduous and Tropical Thorn Forests which are further divided into 20 Forest Types.
Situated in the north-western part of the country, the largest State of the country,
Rajasthan covers an area of 3,42,239 sq km, which is 10.40 per cent. of the geographical area
of the country. The State has 4 distinct regions namely, Western Desert with Barren Hills,
Level Rocky and Sandy Plains, the Aravalli Hills and South-Eastern Plateau.
The climate of the State varies from semi-arid to arid. Western part of the State,
including Thar Desert (also known as The Great Indian Desert), is relatively dry and infertile
whereas in the south-western part, the land is wetter, hilly, and more fertile. The average
annual temperature ranges between 0°C to 50°C and the average annual rainfall is in the
range of   500 mm. to about 750 mm. The State is drained by a number of rivers which include
Banas, Chambal, Luni and Mahi. The State has 33 districts.
As per the 2011 Census, Rajasthan has a population of 68.55 million accounting to
5.66 per cent. of India’s population. The rural and urban population constitute 75.10 per
cent. and 24.90 per cent. respectively. The population density is 200 per sq. km. which is
much lower than the national average of 382 persons per sq. km. The 19th Livestock census
2012 has reported a total livestock population of 57.73 million in the State.
Trees play many valuable roles in our lives. They sequester carbon, produce oxygen,
fix nitrogen and help in controlling pollution. Trees play a role in cleaning the air.  Properly
located trees reduce the heating and cooling costs of buildings, as well as, contributing to
more comfortable outdoor spaces. Trees reduce soil erosion and provide important habitat
and food sources for animals including humans. Dead trees provide hunting perches
for raptors and other birds. They can provide vital housing for many species of birds
and animals.
The Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change has estimated nearly 1 billion of
hectares of trees are needed to reduce climate change to about 1.5OC. The challenge,
however, is where to put those trees. A new study indicates that through geo-mapping
of trees and sapling during plantation can identified the locations where new trees can
be planted.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Central Government should provide special
assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of geo-mapping of trees and saplings
during the plantation in the State of Rajasthan.
         Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; C.P .  JOSHI
1 February, 2022
3

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may be due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to meet the costs of Geo-Mapping of
Trees and Saplings during the plantation in the State of Rajasthan, as may be undertaken by
the State with the approval of the Government of India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of Consolidated Fund
of India. As the sums of moneys which will be given to the State of Rajasthan as special
financial assistance by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after
the plans to be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government
of India are identified,  it is not possible at present to give the estimates of recurring
expenditure, which would be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund
of India.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to  provide  for special financial assistance to the State of Rajasthan to
meet the expense of geo-mapping of trees and saplings
during plantation in State of Rajasthan.
————
(Shri C.P. Joshi, M.P.)