11 DEC 204

As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 60 of 2004

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2004

By
‘Suet Suravaram Supvakar Reppy, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be 10 enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2004. Short title,

2. After article 47 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted namely:— Insertion of
new article
ATA.

"47A. The State shal set up one primary health centre in every village with all Duty of State

basic medical facilities.". to set up one
primary

health centre



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

Even more than fifty years after independence, the State has not fulfilled its |
of ‘Health for All In fact, it is becoming more and more difficult for people especially for
those living in urban slums, villages or remote tribal regions, to have access to primary health
services. The condition of Government hospitals is worsening day by day. Nowadays, in
most of the Government hospitals there is inadequate staff, the supply of medicines is
insufficient and the infrastructure is also inadequate to provide health care to the large
population. At the village level the situation is much worse as there is no resident health care
provider to attend to patients or to implement preventive measures. Due to lack of availability
of Government health care services, the private hospitals are charging exorbitantly which is
beyond the reach of poor people. This often leaves common people in rural areas with no
other option but to resort to treatment from quacks. Thus the common man is being deprived
of the basic right to health care, which is essential for healthy living.

Article 47 of the Constitution makes it the responsibility of the Government to regard
improvement of public health as its duty. Yet the successive Governments are backtracking
from fulfilling this responsibility, This is obvious from the fact that the allocation of expenditure.
on public health services has been declining over the successive years. It is, therefore,
necessary to make an amendment in the Constitution with a view to making it the duty of the
State to set up one primary health centre in every village with all necessary medical facilities
including necessary infrastructure, staff, medicines etc. to provide basic health care to the
people.

New Devin; SURAVARAM SUDHAKAR REDDY
July, 21,2004.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up of a primary health centre with all basic
medical facilities at village level throughout the country. This Bill, therefore, if enacted, is
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of approximately rupees one hundred crore from the
Consolidated Fund of India per annum in respect of setting up of health centres in Union
territory and assistance to State Governments for setting up of the centres in the States.

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of Inc

(Shri Suravaram Sudhakar Reddy, M.P)

MGIPMRNO—1604LS—18.08.2004.