1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI P.P. CHAUDHARY, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. After article 220 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
"220A. The Chief Justice or any other Judge of a High Court shall not be eligible
for further office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any
State or in any Public Sector Undertaking after he has ceased to hold office.".
Bill No.  60 of 2015
Short title.
Insertion of
new article
220A.
Prohibition as
to the holding
of office by the
Chief Justice or
a Judge of a
High Court on
cessation of
office.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Independence of judiciary is an essential attribute of rule of law, which is a basic
feature of the Constitution. Judiciary must be free from all pressure including the pressure
from executive as well as psychological pressure relating to their appointment after retirement.
The Judges are required to ensure the independence and impartiality of judiciary by keeping
themselves free from any allurement or employment under the Government after their
retirement.
The Constitution specifically prohibits the Chairman of Union Public Service
Commission and its Members, the Chairman of State Public Service Commission and its
Members for further employment either under the Government of India or under the
Government of any State. The Constitution on the otherhand nowhere restricts or prohibits
retired Chief Justice and Judges of the High Courts to hold further employment either under
the Government of India or under any of the State Government.
Likewise article 148(4) provides that the Comptroller and Auditor General of India shall
not be eligible for further office either under the Government of India or under the Government
of any State after he has ceased to hold his office.
The Chief Justice and Judges of the various High Courts, the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission, the Chairmen and
members of the State Public Service Commissions are constitutional functionaries and they
should be kept free from all kinds of allurement or employment under the Government after
cessation of their office. It is presumed that reappointment of Judges would have effect of
undermining the independence and fairness of judiciary.
In the present scenario, the Chief Justice and Judges of High Courts are getting
handsome salary, other amenities, perks and post retirement benefits. The Chief Justice and
Judges of the High Courts are adjudicating rights of citizens which have been jeopardized by
the Government. The Judges are coming in contact with the Government on every step. As
such need of the moment is to insert a provision in the Constitution for prohibiting the retired
Chief Justice and Judges of the High Courts from holding any office/employment under the
Government of India or under the Government of any State or in any Public Sector Undertaking.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.P. CHAUDHARY
February 13 , 2015
2

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of  India.
————
(Shri P .P . Chaudhary,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4758LS(S3)—03-03-2015.