THE DISPLACED PERSONS WELFARE BILL, 2011
By
SHRI S. S EMMALAI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for rehabilitation of displaced persons and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Displaced Persons Welfare Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "displaced person" means any person whose land, whether fertile or barren,
or any other immovable property has been acquired by the appropriate Government
for any purpose and whose livelihood has been affected by such acquisition;
Bill No. 60 of 2011
Short title
and
commencement.
Definitions.5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
45
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(d) "project" means any project including an industry, housing, establishment,
highway, infrastructural project, hospital, educational institution, exploration of natural
resources, railway project or for any civil or defence purpose, whether on lease or
transfer or public-private partnership mode, launched by appropriate Government or
any private entity; and
(e) "tribunal" means Displaced Persons' Rehabilitation Tribunal set up under
section 6.
3. The Central Government shall before acquiring land for any project consult
Government of the State wherein the land is situated.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall prepare a comprehensive plan for the
rehabilitation of persons displaced as a result of acquisition of their land or any other
immovable property for any purpose.
(2) The rehabilitation plan referred to under sub-section (1) shall include,—
(i) payment of compensation to displaced persons which shall not be less than
the market rate of the said land or immovable property;
(ii) provision of job to at  least  one member of the family of displaced person in
the project developed on the acquired land;
(iii) ensuring alternate means of livelihood to displaced persons;
(iv) provision of loan to displaced persons at reasonable rate of interest to
enable them to earn livelihood through self-employment;
(v) launching special housing or plot allotment schemes for displaced persons;
and
(vi)  such other matters as the appropriate Government may deem necessary
for the welfare of displaced persons.
5.  The appropriate Government shall ensure that agricultural or fertile land shall be
acquired to the minimum extent possible.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Tribunal to be known as the Displaced Persons' Rehabilitation Tribunal (hereinafter
referred to as the Tribunal).
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairperson, who shall be appointed by the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed; and
(ii) four other members, who shall be appointed by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The qualification, salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions
of the service of Chairperson and other members of the Tribunal shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(4) The headquarters of the Tribunal shall be situated in New Delhi.
(5) The Tribunal shall have its benches at such other places as the Central
Government may  deemed necessary.
(6) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of the officers
and other employees required to assist the Tribunal and its benches in the discharge of its
functions and provide the Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think
fit.
Comprehensive
rehabilitation
plan for
displaced
persons.
Displaced
Persons'
Rehabilitation
Tribunal.
Central
Government to
consult State
Government
before acquiring
land.
Appropriate
Government to
ensure
minimum
acquisition of
agricultural or
fertile land.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the officers and other employees of the Tribunal and its benches shall be such as
may be prescribed.
7. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for
effective implementation of the provisions of the Act.
8. (1) Any displaced person aggrieved by the violation of any of the provisions of this
Act, may file a complaint in writing with the Tribunal or a bench thereof.
(2) Any complaint filed under sub-section (1), shall be disposed of within three months
of the date of the complaint.
9. (1) No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Tribunal
is empowered by or under this Act to determine.
(2) The appeal against the decisions of the Tribunal shall lie to a High Court.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force in respect of matters dealt with in this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session  immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Procedure
regarding filing
of complaint,
etc.
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Provisions of
this Act to be
in addition to
other laws.
Power to make
rules.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Land is acquired for various projects. But whenever lands are acquired for any project,
it has been seen that a large number of innocent people are displaced.
They are not given adequate compensation for their lands. After whatever nominal
compensation they get, they are left to fend for themselves. No additional provision is made
for their rehabilitation. They have no place to go and live. They have been depending upon
their lands for their livelihood. When they find that their lands have been acquired, their lives
are shattered. Since they are given a paltry amount as compensation, they are not able to go
for self-employment also.
Therefore, with a view to mitigate their sufferings, it is proposed to provide that
adequate compensation at the rate of prevailing market rate must be given to land owners.
Necessary steps must be taken for their rehabilitation. It is also proposed that employment
should be provided to families of displaced persons. They should be provided with alternate
means of earning their livelihood, opportunities for self-employment, housing schemes, etc.
so as to facilitate their speedy rehabilitation. Special Tribunals are also proposed to be set up
for speedy redressal in case of disputes within a time bound manner.
The Bill also proposes that agricultural and fertile land should be acquired to the
minimum extent possible.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; S. SEMMALAI
August 2, 2011.

5
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides comprehensive plan for land acquisition including payment
of adequate compensation at the prevailing market rates in case of land acquisition.
Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government shall ensure that agricultural or fertile
land shall be acquired to the minimum extent possible. Clause 6 of the Bill also seeks to
constitute special Tribunals and benches for implementation of the provisions of the Bill.
Provision has also been made for appointment of officers and staff for the Tribunal. Clause
7 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall assist the State Governments in
implementation of the provisions of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide for framing of rules for carrying out the purposes
of the Bill.  As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power
is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for rehabilitation of displaced persons and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri S. Semmalai, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—1352LS(S3)—25-08-2011.