BIJJ No: 61 or 12SS 
THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1955 
(As INTR:>DUCED IN LOlC SABHa\) 

5 
10 
IS 
2.0 
Bill No. 61 of 1955 
THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTH AMENPMENT) BILL, 
1955 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1955. 
2. In article 216 of the Constitution, the proviso shall be omitted. Amf en:dm1 ent o artlc e 
:u6. 
3. In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words Amendment 
"shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty years", the follow- ~~;.rtjcle 
ing words and figures shall be substituted, namely:-
"shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, 
as provided in article 224, and in any other case until he attains 
the age of sixty years". 
4. For article 220 of the Constitution, the following article shall Substitutio~ 
• of new art!-be substItuted, namely: - cle for article 
220. 
"220. No person who, after the commencement of this Consti- Restriction 
tution, has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court shall ~fter b~:ce 
plead or act in any court or before any authority in India except permanent a 
the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.". Judge . .J 
5. For article 224 of the Constitution, the following article shall Subatituticn 
b b t 't t d 1 . Of new arti-e su S 1 U e ,name y.- cle for arti-
cle 224. 
//224. (1) If by reason of any temporary increase in the busi- Appoint-
ness of a High Court or by reason of arrears of work therein, it :~~~!al 
appears to the President that the number of the Judges of that and acting 
Court should be for the time being increased, the President may Judges. 

2 
appoint duly qualified persons to be additional Judges of the Court 
for such period not exceeding two years as he may specify. 
(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief 
Justice is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable to 
perform th~ duties of his office or is appointed to act temporarily 5 
as Chief Justice, the President may appoint a duly qualified 
person to act as a Judge of that Court until the permanent Judge 
has resumed his duties.". 
Inlertion. of 6. After article 258 of the Constitution, the following article shall 
new arucle. d I 2S8A. be mserte , name y:- 10 
Power ofthe "258A. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the 
States to Governor or Rajpramukh of a State may, with the consent of the 
~ro~~~; Government of India, entrust either conditionally or uncondition-
Union or ita ally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to 
oflicen. any matter to which the executive power of the State extends.". IS 
SfUbltituti~ 7. For articLe 298 of the Constitution, the following article shall o new artl- . de for article be substItuted, namely:-
298. 
Power to 
carry on 
trade or 
bUlincu. 
etc. 
"298. The executive power of the Union and of each State 
shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or business and to the 
acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the making of 20 
contracts for any purpose: 
Provided that-
(a) the said executive power of the Union shall, in so far 
as such trade or business or such purpose is not one with 
respect to which Parliament may make laws, be subject in 25 
each State to legislation by the State; and 
(b) the said executive power of each State shall, in so 
far as such trade or business or such purpose is not one with 
respect to which the State Legislature may make laws, be 
subject to legislation by Parliament.". 30 
Amendment 8. In the Second Schedule to the Constitution, in paragraph 10, 
3!coa.d r~ to sub-paragraph (1), the following proviso shall be added, namely:-
dulc •. 
"Provided that if a Judge of any such High Court at the time 
of his appointment is in receipt of a pension (other than a dis-
abilit} or wound pension) in respect of any previous service 35 
under th:! Government of India or any of its predecessor Govern" 
ments or under the Government of a State or any of its prede-
cessor Governments, his salary in respect of service in the High 
Court shall be reduced by the amount of that pension.". 

s 
3 
9. In each of the following provisions of the 
namely:-
(i) article 49. 
(ii) entry 67 of the Union List, 
(iii) entry 12 of the State List, and 
(iv) enJ,ry 40 of the Concurrent List, 
Constitution, Amendment of cer-
tain provi-
aions relatin. 
to ancient 
and hiltori-
cal monu-
menta, etc. 
for the words "declared by Parliament by law", the words "declared 
by or under law made by Parliament" shall be substituted. 
10. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, entry 33 of the ~o:::~c::~~: 
10 Unbn List and entry 36 of the State List shall be omitted and for the Lilts re-
entry 42 of the Concurrent List, the following entry shall be substi- ~~~~r.ition to 
tuted namely: - and requili-, '. tioning of 
"42. Acquisition and requisitioning of propety." property. 
11. In the Seventh Schedule to th~~~itution, in entry 24 of the 1mendment 
IS State List, for the word and figunes "efitty-52", the words and figures ~f Se~:!ti!t 
"entries 7 and 52" shall be substitut~ 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks to amend certain provisions of the Constitution 
relating to the High Courts and High Court Judges, the executive 
power of the Union and the States, and a few entries in the legisla-
tive lists. 
Clauses 2 to 5.-As regards the High Courts, the main amendments 
proposed are in clauses 4 and 5 of the Bill. An important factor affect-
ing the selection of High Court Judges from the bar is the total pro-
hibition contained in article 220 of the Constitution on practice after 
retirement. It is proposed to relax this complete ban and permit a 
retired judge to practise in the Supreme Court and in any High 
Court other than the one in which he was a permanent judge. 
The provision in article 224 for recalling retired judges to function 
on the bench for short periods has been found to be neither adequate 
nor satisfactory. It is therefore proposed in clause 5 to replace this 
article by a provision for the appointment of additional judges to 
clear off arears and for the appointment of acting judges in tempo-
rary vacancies. The amendments of articles 216 and 217 proposed 
in clauses 2 and 3 of the Bill are more or less consequential. 
Clause 6.-While the President is empowered by article 258(1) to 
entrust Union functions to a State Government or its officers, there 
is no corresponding provision enabling the Governor or Rajpramukh 
of a'State to entrust State functions to the Central Government or 
its officers. This lacuna has been found to be of practical conse-
quence in connection with the execution of certain development pro-
jects in the States. It is proposed to fill the lacuna by a new article 
258A. 
Clause 7.-In this clause it is proposed to revise and amplify the 
scope of article 298, mainly to make it clear that the Union Govern-
ment, as well as the State Governments, are competent to carryon 
any commercial or industrial undertaking, whether or not it is relat-
ed to a matter within the legislative competence of the Union or, 
as the case may be, of the State. Similarly, the holding, acquisition 
and disposal of property and the making of contracts by the Union 
or a State could be for any purpose without constitutional impro-
priety. At the same time, the revised article provides that this ex-
tended executive power of the Union and of the States will be sub-
ject, in the fonner case, to legislation by the State, and in the latter 
case, to legislation by the Union. 
4 

5 
Clause 8.-A minor amendment to paragraph 10 of the Second 
Schedule relating to the salaries of High Court judges in Part A 
States is proposed in this clause. Sometimes it becomes necessary 
to appoint a retired district judge as a judge of a High Court. In the 
absence of a legal provision for withholding the pension due to such 
a judge, it has been the practice to obtain from him an undertaking 
that he would not claim the pension for the period for which he 
serves as a High Court judge. Since this is obviously unsatisfactory, 
it is proposed to add a proviso to paragraph 10 (1) of the Second 
Schedule on the same lines as the proviso to paragraph 9 (1) there-
of regulating the salary of a judge of the Supreme Court in similar 
circumstances; 
Clause 9.-Entry 67 of the Union List refers to "ancient and histo-
rical monuments and records, and arch~ological sites and remains, 
declared by Parliament by law to be of national importance". A 
large number of ancient monuments, arch~ological sites, etc., have 
been declared to be of national importance by an Act of Parliament. 
It requires another Act of Parliament to make the slightest altera-
tion in, or addition to, the lists in that Act, which seems to be an 
unduly cumbrous procedure. It is, therefore, proposed to amend 
the entry substituting for the words "declared by Parliament by 
law", the words "declared by or under law made by Parliament". 
The same amendment is also proposed to be made in the co~ected 
provisions, entry 12 of the State List, entry 40 of the Concurrent 
List and article 49. 
Clause 10.-The existence of three entries in the legislative lists 
(33 of List I, 36 of List II and 42 of List III) relating to the essentially 
single subject of acquisition and requisitioning of property by the 
Government gives rise to unnecessary technical difficulties in legisla-
tion. In order to avoid these difficulties and simplify the constitu-
tional position, it is proposed to omit the entries in the Union and 
State List and replace the entry in the Concurrent List by a eom-
prehensive entry covering the whole subject. 
Clause n.-Although the Union List has two entries, 7 and 52, 
relating to industries, the latter alone is referred to in entry 24 of 
List II. The omission of entry 7 of List I appears to be due to an 
oversight and is sought to be rectified in this clause. 
NEW DELHI; C. C. BISWAS. 
The 18th November, 1955. 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• • • • • • 
PART IV 
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY 
• • • • • • 
Protection of 49. It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monu-
:':f;i::atl ment or place or object of artistic or historic interest, declared by 
and objects Parliament by law to be of national importance, from spoliation, 
i!po~~:~:~ disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case 
may be. 
• • • • • • 
PART VI 
THE STATES IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
• • • • • • 
Constitution 216 .. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and such 
of High other Judges as the President may from time to time deem it neces-Courts. sary to appoint: 
Provided that the Judges so appointed shall at no time exceed in 
number such maximum number as the President may, from time to 
time, by order fix in relation to that Court. 
Appoinbnent 217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the 
and contiili President by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with 
~:ti~ ~f : the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in the 
11-: cf a case .of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the 
I ourt. Chief Justice of the High Court. and shall hold office until he attains 
the age of sixty years: 
Provided that--
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to .the 
President, resign his office; "" 
(b) a Judge may be rem<wed from his office by the President 
in the manner provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the 
removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court; 
6 

7 
(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appoint-
ed by the President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court 
or by his being transferred by the President to any other 
High Court within the territory of India . 
• • • • • • 
220. No person who has held office as a Judge of a High Court Prohibit!op 
after the commencement of this Constitution shall plead or act "in r! ~~~C:::I~~ 
any court or before any authority within the territory of India. before any authority by 
• • • • • • Judges. 
224. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Chief Justice Attenda~ce 
of a High Court for any State may at any time, with the previous J~dge~tJre:r 
consent of the President, request any person who has held the office ~~~g8 of 
of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to sit and act as Ig Courts. 
a Judge of the High Court for that State, and every such person so 
requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such al-
lowances as the President II¥ly by order determine and have all the . 
jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall not otherwise be 
deemed to be, a Judge of that High Court: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require 
any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that High 
Court unless he consents so to do. 
• • • • • • 
PART XI 
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES 
• • • • • • 
258. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Prest- Power of the 
dent may, with the consent of the Government of a State, entrust ~~f'e~ to po-
either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its Wers, etc., 
officers functions in relation to any matter to which the executive ~~~:.::. 
power of the Union extends. 
• • • • • • 
PART XII 
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS 
• • • • • .. 
298. (1) The executive power of the Union and of each State Power to 
shall extend, subject to any law made by the approp"iate Legisla- ~~~tY. 
ture, to the grant, sale, disposition or mortgage of any property 
held for the purpose of the Union or of such State, as the case may 
be, and to the purchase or acquisition of property for those purposes 
respectively, and to the making of contracts. 
(2) All property acquired for the purposes of the Union or of a 
State shall v~t in the Union or in such State, as the case may be. 
• • • • • • 

8 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
• • • • 
PARTD 
PROVISIONS AS TO THE JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT AND OF THE HIGH 
COURTS IN STATES IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
• • • • • 
9. (1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the Supreme Court, in 
respect of time spent on actual service, salary at the following rates 
per mensem, that is to say:-
The Chief Justice 
Any other Judge 
Rs. 
5,000 
4,000 
Provided that if a Judge of the Supreme Court at the time of his 
appointment is in receipt of a pension (other than a disability or 
wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the Govern-
ment of India or any of its predecessor Governments or under the 
Government of a State or any of its predecessor Governments, his 
salary in respect of service in the Supreme Court shall be reduced by 
the amount of that pension . 
• • • • • 
10. (1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the High Court of 
each- State specified in Part A of the First Schedule, in respect of 
time spent on actual service, salary at the following rates per men-
sern, that is to say:-
. The Chief Justice 
Any other Judge . 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
• • • 
List I-Union List 
• • • • 
• 
• 
Rs. 
4,000 
3,500 
• 
• 
7. Industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for 
the purpose :of defence or for the prosecution of war. 
• • • • • 
33. Acquisition or requisitioning of property for the purposes of 
the Union. 
• • • • • 

9 
52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest. 
• • • • • 
67. Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archeolo-
gicat sites and remains, declared by Parliament by law to be of 
national importance. 
• • • • • 
List U-State List 
• • • • • 
12. Libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled 
or financed by the State; ancient and historical monuments and re-
cords other than those declared by Parliament by law to be of 
national importance. 
• • • • • 
24. Industries subject to the provisiOns of entry 52 of List I. 
• • • • • 
36. Acquisition or requisitioning of property, except for the pur-
poses of the Union, subject to the provisions of entry 42 of List III . 
• • • • • 
List m-Concurrent List 
• • • • • 
40. Archeological sites and remains other than those declared" by 
Parliament by law to be of national importance. 
• • • • • 
42. Principles on which compensation for property acquired or 
requisitioned for the purposes of the Union or of a State or for any 
other public purpose is to be determined, and the form and the 
manner in which such compensation is to be given. 
• • • • * 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
(Shri C. C. BimJas, Minister oj LarD) 