AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

“UN Jue 1998 -

Bill No. 61 of 1998

PREVENTION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT BILL, 1998
By
‘SHRIMATI JAYANTI PATNAIK, M.P.
A
BILL

to prevent sexual harassment of women employees at their work places.

| enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as

(J) This Act may be called the Prevention of Sexual Harassment Act, 1998.
Tt extends to the whole of India.

It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
ation in the Official Gazette, appoint.

In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means the Central Government or the State
jovernment, as the case may be;

(6) ‘employer’ in relation to a Government office means—

(i) the head of the Department or supervisor or officer in charge of the
affairs of the organisation or the person in charge of the work place where the
female employee is employed;

(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the proprietor, supervisor or
agent or contractor including sub-contractor or by whatever name called, the
person in charge of the affairs of the establishment or work place where the
female employee is employed.

Short title,
extent and

Definitions.


2

(c) ‘sexual harassment’ means and includes—

(i) harassing any employee by virtue of her being a female;

(ii) indecent representation of women with a view to or
irritate her and which results in mental injury of a female employee;

(iii) detaining a female employee before or after normal working
hours in the absence of other employees and where there is no work to be
performed by that female employee, with a view to outrage her modesty
or molest her;

(iv) paying less wages, or giving of work more than required of
her, to a female employee, than her male counterpart;

(४) refusing to grant leave of absence to a female employee or
permission to her during her pregnancy/termination of pregnancy or
other periods when she would not be physically or biologically fit to
perform her work to her fullest capacity;

(vi) passing of obscene or lewd comments against a female employee
or in her presence;

(vii) making a female employee attend office on holidays or ००
to such place where her presence is not required in connection with her
employment;

(viii) compelling a female employee to attend a party/dance or any
musical programme or to dine with her employer or any other person if
the female employee is not willing to do so;

(ix) refusal to allow rest to a female employee as provided un
the provisions of any other law for the time being in forc

(x) making her dress in a way which would present her in an obscene
manner;

(xi) make her perform such a job or duty which would denigrate
her personality;

(xii) touching or otherwise fondling or flirting bodily of a fet
employee in the guise of teaching her the job or help her in her job;

(xiii) making her perform such duties which she cannot with
physical condition would be able to perform;

(xiv) gestures or actions either by word or by written materi
intending to insult or cause mental injury to a female employee;

(xv) showing pornography or other obscene literature to a female
employee;

(xvi) sexual advances with a view to assault or molest or out
modesty of a female employee;

(wii) offering unwanted suggestions or advice about physic
appearance or on other matters of a female employee with a view to
her;

(xviii) doing of any other act or causing any act by using positi
as an employer with a view to exploiting a female employee.

Special Officer 3. (1) The appropriate Government shall designate an officer, who shall be a wom:
todealwith as it may deem fit, to be the Special Officer in every department or office under its jurisdicti
eaeoTa tie: to deal with cases arising out of this Act.

Government

offices (2) The Special Officer so designated under sub-section (7) shall deal with complai

lodged by female employees in her department or office or establishment.


3

क्‍ The appropriate Government shall appoint a Special Officer, who shall be a
, for every district to deal with cases arising out of provisions of this Act within
jurisdiction of that district.

5. No person being an employer or manager or supervisor in charge of the office/
isation or a factory or establishment or any other work place or any other employee
‘any other person shall indulge or caused to be indulged in sexual harassment of women
ees.

6. If any female employee has been subject to sexual Harassment, she may approach
concerned Special Officer for redressal of her grievances.

7. As soon as a complaint has been lodged with the Special Officer, she shall make
॥ caused to be made an inquiry into the facts and circumstances of the complaint.

8. If after inquiry, the Special Officer finds any person guilty of violating the provisions
‘this Act, she shall—

(a) in case the guilty is an employee of the Government, recommend to the
appropriate authority for taking such disciplinary action as she may deem fit;

(b) in case the guilty is not employed in Government service, recommend to
the employer or other person in charge of the affairs of the organisation where the
accused is employed, recommend such action as she may deem fit:

Provided that if it is brought to the notice of the Special Officer that no a ction
has been taken by the employer or the person in charge of the affairs of the organisation
where the accused is employed—

(i) in'case it is an office or establishment under the control of the
appropriate Government, the appropriate Government may terminate the
services of both the accused person and the person in charge of the office
where the victim is employed;

(ii) in case the work place where the victim is employed is not under the
control of the Government, the facilities and concessions extended to that
organisation by the appropriate Government shall be withdrawn forthwith.

9. A Special Officer while discharging her functions under the provisions of this Act
have the powers of a Civil Court and the proceedings thereof shalll be in accordance
th the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

10, Any person who violates the provisions of this Act shall be punished with
isonment for a period of not less than seven years and with fine not less than fifty
rupees and shall be disqualified from entering the Government service.

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette. make rules
| carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Special Officer
forevery
district.

Women
employees not
tobe harassed.

Women
‘employees to
approach
Special Officer
im case of
harassment.

Special Officer
to make
inquiries

Special Officer
torecommend
action against
guilty,

Special Officer
tohave powers
ofa Civil
Court

Punishment,

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Women are weaker and vulnerable sections of the society. They are a |
They are subject to sexual harassment at their work places by the employers and oth
Despite the increased contribution by women in the nation building activities, they
still treated as second-class citizens. Employers, proprietors and others use their pos:
to their advantage and exploit women employees. Even the Supreme Court has directo
the Government to legislate a law for Preventing sexual harassment of women emplo:

The Bill proposés to prevent the sexual harassment of women employees hy award
Suitable punishment o the guilty. The Bill also seeks to make provision for speedy redres
of the grievances of the female employees.

Hence thi:

New Detxt; JAYANTI PATNAII
May 26, 1998.



HINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall appoint a Special
Officer for every district to deal with c: arising out of sexual harassment of women
employees, Some officers and staff may have to the recruited to assist the Special Officers

discharging their functions. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involves expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of appointment of Special Officers, etc. for
ion territories. Though the concerned State Governments will meet the expenditure in

for implementing the provisions of the Bill. It is expected to incur an annual recurring
enditure of about rupees twenty five crore from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-
ing expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character,


LOK SABHA

BILL

to prevent sexual harassment of women employee at their work places,

(Shrimati Jayanti Patnaik, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—866LS—16-6-98.