) I 
THE ADMINISTRA TORS-GE~ERAL BILL, ~ 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoIC SABRA 
ON UND JUNE, 1962) ,. 
..' .: 
" 
t .. ~ ~ 'J AUG t· 

THE ADMINISTRATORS-GENERAL BILL, 1962 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE OFFICE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GDERAL 
3. Appointment of Administrator-General. 
4. Appointment and powers of Deputy Administrator-General. 
5. Incorporation. 
CHAPTER III 
RWFfTS, PO'\'ERS AND DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL 
(a) Grant of letters of administration and probate 
6. Jurisdiction of High Court for the whole State. 
7. Administrator-General entitled to letters of administration, 
unless granted to next-of-kin. 
a. Administrator-General entitled to letters of administration 
in preference to creditors, certain legatees or friends. 
9. Right of Administrator-General to apply for administration 
of estates. 
10. Power of Administrator-General to collect and hold assets 
where immediate action is required. 
11. Grant of probate or letters of administration to person ap-
pearing in the course of proceedings taken by Adminis-
trator-General. 
12. Grant of administration to Administrator-General in cer-
tain cases. 
(i) 
1060 (B) LS-l. 

(ii) 
CLAUSES 
13. Administrator-General not precluded from applying for 
letters within one month after death. 
(b) Reuocation of grants 
14. Recall of Administrator-Genera!!s administration and 
grant of probate, etc., to executor or next-of-kin. 
15. Cost of obtaining administration, etc., may, on revocation, 
be ordered to be paid to Administrator-General out of 
estate. 
16. After revocation, letters granted to Administrator-General 
to be deemed. as to him, to have been voidable only. 
17. Payments made by Administrator-General prior to revoca-
tion. 
• 
(c) General 
18. Administrator-General's petition for grant of letters of ad-
ministration. 
19. Name in which probate Dr letters to be granted. 
20. Effect of probate or letters granted to Administrator-· 
General. 
21. Effect of grant by the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir. 
22. Transfer by private executor or administrator of interest 
under probate or letters. 
23. Distribution of assets. 
24. Appointment of Official Trustee as trustee of assets after 
completion of administration. 
25. Power of High Court to give directions regarding Admin-
istration of estate. 
26. No security to be required from Administrator-General. 
27. Manner in which petition to be verified by Administrator-
General. 
28. Entry of Administrator-General not to constitute notice of 
a trust. 
CHAPTER IV 
GRANT OF CERTIFICATE -
29. In what cases Administrator-General may grant certificatE' 
30. Grant of certificate to creditors and power to take ch~rge 
Qf certain estat~!J, 

(iii' 
CLAUSES 
31. Administrator-General not bound to grant certlnQlte UnIes. 
satisfied of claimant's title, etc. 
32. Effect of certificate. 
33. Revocation of certificate. 
34. Surrender of revoked certificate. 
35. Payment to holder of certificate before it is revoked. 
36. Admini~trator-General not bound to take out administra-
tion on account of assets for which he has granted 
certificate. 
37. Transfer of certain assets to executor or administNtor In 
country of domicile for distribution. 
CHAPTER V 
LIABILITY 
38. Liability of Government. 
39. Creditor's suit against Administrator-General. 
40. Notice of suit not required in certain cases. 
41. Fees. 
42. Disposal of fees. 
CHAPTER VI 
FD:s 
CHAPTER VII 
AUDIT OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL'S ACCOUNTS 
43. Audit. 
• 44. Auditors to examine accounts and report to Government. 
45. Power of auditors to summon and examine witnesses, and 
to call for documents. 
46. Costs of audit, etc. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
47. General powers of administration. 
48. Power to summon and examine witnesses. 
~. Power of person beneficially interested to inspect AdmIn-
istrator-Genera!'s account, etc., and take copl ... 

(i\I) 
CLAUSES 
50. Jtalse evidence. 
51. Assets unclaimed for twelve years to be transferred to 
Government. 
52. Mode of proceeding by claimant to recover principal money 
so transferred. 
1)3. Succession Act or Companies Act not to affect Administra-
tor-General. . 
54. Savings of provisions 'of Police Acts for presidency-towns. 
55. Order of court to be equivalent to decree. 
56. Provision for administration by Consular Oftlcer is case of 
death in certain circumstances of foreign subject. 
57. Letters of administration not necessary in respect of smaD 
estates administered by Administrator-General in ac-
cordance with certain Acts. 
68. Powers to grant Administrator-General letters limited for 
purpose of dealing with assets in accordance with the 
Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) 
Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957. 
59. Act not to affect Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private 
Property) Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957. 
60. Saving of provisions of Indian Registration Act, 1908. 
61. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
62. Power of State Government to make rules. 
83. Laying of rules made by Central Government before 
Parliament. 
M. Repeal and savinis. 

SUI No.61 of 1961 
THE ADMINISTRATORS-GENERAL BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to conso1iclate and amend the law relating to the ofJice and duties 
of Administrator-General. 
. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of t.he 
.kepubhc of Indla as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be C'311ed 'the Administrators-General Act, Sh on tit'e, 
1962. extent and 
COJllmeeu»-
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu DtCllt. 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
10 ment m~y, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "assets" means all the. property, movable and immov-
able, of a deceased person, which is chargeable with and appli-
cable to the payment of his debts and legaciea, or awilable fClr 
15 distribution amon, his heirs and next-of .. k1nj 
Defl.iti •••. 

(b) "letters of administration" includes any letters of ad-
ministration whether general or with a copy of the will annex-
ed or limited in time or otherwise; 
(c) "next-of-kin" includes a widower or widow of a dece1s-
ed person, or any other person who by law would be ent"itled to 5 
letters of administration in preference to a creditor or legatee 
of the deceased; and 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under thi. 
Act. 
CHAPTER II 10 
THE OFFICE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL 
Appoint- 3. (1) The State Government shall appoint an Administratcr-
ment of General for the State: Adminiltra-
tor-General. Provided that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar 
the appointment of the same person as Administrator-General for J" 
two Or more States. . 
(2) No person shall be appointed to the office of Administrator-
General unless he has been for at least-
(a) seven years an advocate; or 
(b) seven years an attorney of a High Court; or 20 
(c) ten years a member of the judicial service of a State; or 
(d) five years a Deputy Administrator-General. 
Appoint- 4. (1) The State Government may appoint a Deputy or Deputies 
ment and to assist the Administrator-General; and any Deputy so appointed 
be;; of shall, subject to the control of the State Government and the general 25 
Adminiltra- or special orders of the Administrator-General, be competent to dis-
tor-General. charge any of the duties and to exercise any of the powers of the 
Administrator-General, and when discharging such duties or exer-
CiSing such powers shall have the same privileges and be subject to 
the same liabilities as the Administrator-General. 30 
(2) No person shall be appointed as a Deputy under this section 
unless he has been for at least three years-
(a) an advocate; or 
(b) an attorney of a High Court; or 
(c) a member of the judicial service of a Staw. 'JS 

3 
. 5. Th~ Administrator-General shell be a corporation sole by the I.t1Corpol'l-. . . . tlon. name of the AdmInistrator-General of the State for whIch he IS 
appointed, and, as such Administrator-General, shall have perpetual 
succession and an official seal, and may sue and be sued in his 
5 corporate name. 
CHAPTER III 
RIGHTS, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL 
(a) Grant of letters of administration and probate • 
6. So far as regards the Administrator-General of any State, the J~%~ioJl 
10 High Court shall be deemed to be a Court of competent jurisdiction ~ourt for 
for the purpose of granting probate or letters of administration ~e whole 
under any law for the time being in force, wheresoever within the tate. 
State the estate to be administered is situate: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as affect-
15 ing the jurisdiction of any district court. 
7. Any letters of administration granted by the High Court shall AdmGinistra-, . . tor enera be granted to the AdmInIstrator-General of the State unless they entitled to 
are granted to the next-of-kin of the deceased. Ie tte.n. of adminIStra-
tion, un'ess 
granted to 
next-of-kin. 
8. The Administl'ator-General of the State shall be deemed by Adninistra-
20 all the courts in the State to have a right to letters of administra- ~~~itl~J~~ral 
tion other than letters pendente lite in preference to that of- lette~ .of admmlstra-
(a) a creditor; or tion in pre-ference to 
(b) a legatee, other than a universal legatee or a residuary ~~~~~~rs, 
legatee or the representative of a residuary legatee; or· lelPtees or 
fflends. 
25 (c) a friend of the deceased. 
30 
9. (1) If~ .J Riaht of 
Administra-
(a) any person has died leaving within any State assets tor-General . . to apply for exceedmg rupees five thousand In value, and administra-
tion of 
(b) (whether the obtaining of probate of his will or letters estates. 
of administration to his estate is or is not obligatory), no per-
son to whom any court would have jurisdiction to commit ad-
ministration of such assets has, within one month after his 
death, applied in such State for such probate, or letters of ad. 
ministration, and 

.. 
(c) (in cases where the obtaining of such probate or lettel'l 
of administration is not obligatory under the provisions ·of the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925), no person has taken other proceed-
ings fer the protection of the estate, 
the Administrator-General of the State in which such assets s 
are, may, subject to any rules made by the State Government, 
within a reasonable time after he has had notice of the death of 
such person, and of his having left such assets, take such pro-
ceedinls as may be necessary to obtain from the High Court 
letters of administration of the estate of such person. 10 
(2) The Administrator-General shall not take proceedings under 
this section unless he is satisfied, that there is apprehension of mis-
appropriation, deterioration or waste of such assets if such proceed-
ings are not taken by him or that such proceedings are otherwise 
necessary for the protection of the assets. 15 
~~=~~~rl- 10. (1) Whenever any person has died leaving assets within any 
tor-General State excee::l.ing rupees five. thousand in value, and the High Court 
~~~o~:fJ for that StatE' j-; satisfied that there is imminent danger of misappro-
11ISets where priation, d -t('!r!n~'ation or waste of such assets, requiring immediate 
~~ed!l.te action, the High Court may, upon the application of the Administra- 20 
_~onJ . 
required. tor-General or of any person interested in such assets or in the due 
administration thereof, forthwith direct the Administrator-General-
(a) to collect and take possession of such assets, and 
(b) to ho'd. deposit, realise, sell or invest the same accord-
ing to the directions of the High Court, and, in default of any 2S 
such directions. according to the provisions of this Act so far 
as hIe same are applicable to such assets. 
(2) Any order of the High Court under sub-section (1) shall 
entitle the Administrator-General-
(a) to maintain any suit or proceeding for the recovery of 30 
such assets; • 
(b) if he thinks fit, to apply for letters of administration of 
the estate of such deceased p::-rson; 
(e) to retain out of the assets of the estate any fees charge-· 
able under rules made under this Act; and 35 
(d) to reimburse himself for all payments made by him in 
respect of such assets which a private administrator might law-
fully have made. 

5 
10 
" 
) 
11. If, in the course of proceedings to obtain letters of adminis- Grant of 
, h' , f t' 9 t' 10 probate ~ tratlon under t e proVIslons 0 sec lon or sec lon ,- letters of 
d t bl' h h' I' administra-(a) any person appears an es a IS. es 15 c aun- tion to 
d perlOn .p-(i) to probate of the will of the decease ; or pearin, Ul 
(ii) to letters of administration as next-of-kin of the ~~ep~=_ 
deceased, and gives such security as may be required of him in,. taken 
by Ad-
by law; or miniltrator-
(b) any person satisfies the Court that he has taken and is General. 
prosecuting with due diligence other proceedings for the protec-
tion of the estate, the case being one in which the obtaining of 
such probate or letters of administration is not obligatory under 
the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 192!S; or 
(c) the court is satisfied that there is no apprehension of 
misappropriation, deterioration, of waste of the assets and that 
tke grant of letters of administration in such proceedings is not 
otherwise necessary fer the protection of the assets; 
the Court shall-
(1) in the case mentioned in clause (a), grant probate of 
the will or letters of administration accordingly, 
20 (2) in the case mentioned in clause ('b) or clause ee), drop 
the proceedings; and 
(3) in all the cases award. to the Administrator-General 
the costs of any proceedings taken by. him under those sections 
to be paid out of the estate as part of the testamentary or intes-
25 tate expe~es thereof. . 
• 12, If, in the course of proceedings to obtain letters of adminis- Grant ,of 
tration under the provisions of section 9 or section 10, and within =tI~_ 
such period as to the Court seems reasonable, no person appears and ministratOr-
establishes his claim to probate of a will, or to a grant of letters of ~I In 
30 administration as next-of-ldn of the deceased, or satisftea the Court easel. 
that he has taken. and Is prosecuting with due diligence other pro-
ceedillgs for the protection of the estate, the case being one in which 
the obtaining of such probate or letters of administration is not obli-
gatory under the provisions of the Indian Succeaion Act, 1925, and 
35 the Court is satisfied that there is apprehension of misappropriation, 
deterioration, or waste of the assets or that the grant of letters of ad-
ministration in such proceedings is otherwise necessary for the pro-
tection of the assets; 
or if a perion who has established his claim to a grant of letters 
40 of adminiatratiorl .. nat.-of-kfn of the deceued falls to give such 
security u may be requfred of him by law, 
1060(B)~2, 

6 
the Court may gnmt letters of administration to the Administra-
tor-General. 
Administta- 13. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to preclude the Admin-
lor-General istrator-General from applying to the Court for letters of adminis-
~I~:dfrom tration in any. case within the period. of one month from the death , 
appl~1 for of the deceased. letters 
within one 
month after 
dcath. 
(b) Revocation of gran.ta 
~~:~~!ra- 14. If an executor or next-of-kin of the deceased\, who has not 
tor-Gc.nerals been personally served with a citation or who has not had notice 
:::,:u.:::~tra- thereof in time to appear pursuant thereto, establishes to the satis- 10 
p1IDt of faction of the Court a claim to probate of will or to letters of ad-
Fo~~~t:" ministration in preference to the Administrator-General, any letters 
o~ next-of a of administration granted in accordance with the provisions of this 
kin. Act to the Administrator-General-
COlt of 
obWaiDa 
admiaistra-
don, etc., 
may, on 
re yoc:atiOA, 
be ordered 
to bc paid 
to Admmil-
trator-Ge-
neral out of 
cstate. 
Afler revo-
cation 
!ettcn 
pntcdto 
(4) shall be revoked, if a will of the deceased is proved in IS 
the State; 
(b) may be revoked, in other cases, if an application for 
that purpose is made within six months after the grant to the 
Administrator-General and the Court is satisfied that there has 
been no unreasonable delay in making the application, or in 20 
transmitting the authority under which the appUcation is made; 
and probate or letters· of administration may be granted to such exe-
cutor or next-ol-kin as tlle case may be. 
15. If any letters of administration granted to the Administrator-
General in accordance with the provisions of this Act are revoked, 25 
the Court may order the costs of obtaining such letters of adinint. 
tration, and the whole or any, part of any fees which would other-
wise have been payable under this Act, together with the coats of 
the Administrator-General in any proceedings taken to obtain such 
revocation, to' be paid to or retained by the Administrator-GeneI1l1 30 
out of the· estate: 
ProVided that n9thing in this section shall affect the provisions 
of clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (2) of section 10. 
18. If any letters of administration granted to the Adminlstrator-
General in accordance with the provisions of this Act are revoked, 35 
the same shall, so far as regards the Administrator~eral aJid all 

7 
persons acting under his authority in pursuance thereof, be deemed Administra-
to have been only VOidable, except as to any act done by any: such ~or~Deral 
Administrator-General or other person as aforesaid, after notice of a d~med, a, 
will or of any other fact which would render such letters void: ~~::tc~ 
voidable 
S Provided that no notice of a will or of any other fact which would only. 
render any such letters void shall affect the Administrator-General 
or any person acting under his authority in pursuance of such letters 
unless, within the period of one month from the time of giving such 
notice, proceedings are commenced to prove the will, or to cause the 
10 letters to be revoked, and such proceedings are prosecuted without 
unreasonable- delay. 
17. If any letters of administration granted to the Administrator- PaymCDls 
General in accordance with the provisions of this Act are revoked, ~.!:'itra­
upon the grant of probate of a will, or upon the grant of letters of to~-GeDeral 
IS administration with a copy of the will annexed, all payments made ~~~on . 
. or acts done by or under the authority of the Adminfstrator-General 
:n pursuance of such letters of Administration, prior to the revoca-
tion, which would have been valid under any letters of adminis-
tration lawfully granted to him with a copy of such will annexpd, 
20 shall be deemed valid notwithstanding such revocation. 
(c) General 
18. Whenever any Administrator-General applies for letters of Admini 
administration in accordance with the provisions of this Act, it shall lOr Ge.:c:l~. 
be sufficient if the petition required to be presented for the grant =u:rtoJ' 
25 of such letters states,- letter. of 
(i) the time and place of the death of the deceased to the ~ni.ua­
best of the knowledge and belief <)f the petitioner; 
(ii) the names and addresses of the SUrviving next-of-kin 
of the deceased, if known; 
30 (iii) the particulars and value of the 8SSel$ likely to come 
into the hands of the petitioner; 
(iv) particulars of the liabilities of the estate, if known. 
18. AU probates or letters of administration granted to aay Ad- Name in 
ministrator-General shall be granted to him by that name. which pro-
bate or 
letters to 
be granted. 
?5 ZOo (1) Probate or letters of administration granted by the High Sffect of 
Court to the Administrator-General of any State shall have eft'ect fe:e~ or 
over all the· assets of the deceased throughout the territories to .,.nted to 
Which this Act· extends and 'shall be conclusive as to the representa- !~~~~!:i. 
~ive title against all debtors of the 9ece8Sed and all persons hold-
40 mg such assets, and shall afford full indemnity to all debtors payin~ 

Effect of 
lrant by 
the Hip 
Coun of 
Jammu and 
Kasbmlr. 
Transfer by 
private 
executor or 
administra-
tor of In-
terelt under 
probate or 
lltten. 
8 
their-debts and all persons delivering up such assets to such Admin-
istrator-General. 
(2) Whenever a grant of probate or letters of administration t. 
made by a High Court to the Administrator-General, the High Court 
shall send to the High Courts for the other States a certificate that S 
such grant has been made, and such certift.cate shall be flIed by the 
Court receiving the same. 
21. Probate or letters of administration granted b" the HiP 
Court for the State of Jammu and Kashmir to the Administrator-
General of that State shall have effect over all the assets of the de- 10 
cea!ed throughout all the States to the High Courts of which a cer-
tificate is sent by the High Court for the State of Jammu and Kash-
mir that such grant has been made, and shall be conclusive as to 
the representative title against all debtors of the deceased and all, 
persons holding such assets, and shall afford full indemnity to aU 15 
debtors paying their debts and all persons delivering up such assets 
to such Admintstrator-General. 
22. (1) Any private executor or administrator may, with the 
previous consent of the Administrator-General of the State in which 
any of the assets of the estate, in respect of w!!.ich such executor 20 
or administrator h!!S obtained probate or letters of administration, 
are lituate, by an instrument in writing under his hand notified in 
the Official Gazette, transfer the assets of the estate, vested in him 
by virtue of such probate or letters to the Administrator-General 
by that name or ey other suftlc1ent deseription. 2S 
(2) As from the date of such transfer, the transferor shall be 
exempt from all liability: as such executor or administrator, as the 
case may be, except in respect of acts done before the date of such 
transfer, and the Administrator-General shall have the rights whicn 
he would have had, and be subject to the liabilities to which he 30 
would have been subject, if the probate or letters of administration, 
as the' case may be, had been granted to him by that name at the 
date of such transfer. 
Distributioa 23. (l) When the Administrator-General has given the prescrib-
of .. lett. ed notice to creditors ad others to send in to him their claims 35 
againat the estate of the deceased, he shall, at the expiration of the 
time therein named for sending in claims, be at liberty to distri-
bute the assets or an, part .thereof in dlseharge of such lawful 
claims u he haa notice of. 

:a of 1913. 
9 
(2) The Administrator-General shall not be liable for the asset! 
'10 distributed to any person of whose claims he had not notice at 
the time of such distribution. 
(3) No notice of any claim which has been sent in and has been 
, rejected or disallowed. in part by the Administrator-General shall 
affect him, unless proceedings to enforce such claim are commenced 
within one month after notice of the rejection or disallowance of 
such claim has been given in the prescribed manner and unless such 
proceedings are prOiecuted without unreasonable delay. 
10 (4) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the rig~t of any· cre-
ditor or other claimant to follow the assets or any part thereof in 
the hands of the persons who may have received the same respec-
tively. 
(5) In computing the period of limitation for any suit, appeal 
I S or application under the provisions of any law for the time being 
in force, the period between the date of submission of the claim of 
a creditor or other claimant to the Administrator-General and the 
date of the final decision of the Administrator-General on such claim 
shall be excluded. 
20 24; (1) When the Administrator-General has, so far as may be, Appoint-
discharged all the liabilities of an estate administered by him, he ~~ r 
shall notify the fact in the Oftlcial Gazette, and he may, by an ins- Trul~ee as 
trument in writing, with the consent of the Official Trustee and sub- ~n;=e.ftf 
ject to any rules made by the State Government, appoint the Official c~mpleti: 
2S Trustee to be the trustee of any assets then remaining in his hands. :!ti!r:,nIS-
(2) Upon such appointment, such assets shall vest in the Official 
Trustee as if he had been appointed trustee in accordance with the 
provisions of the Official Trustees Act, 1913, and. sball be held by 
him upon the same trusts as the same were held Immediately be-
30 fore such appointment. 
25. The High Court may, on applicaticm made to it by the Ad- f 
ministrator-General or any person interested in the assets or in the ~~;:~~ 
due administration thereof, give to the Administrator-General of td~ gi~ 
th Stat ral . JJ":ctIOftS 
e e any gene or special directions as to any estate in his regardinl 
3S charge or in regard to the administration of any such estate. ~~8tra-
estate. 
26. No AdDWniBtrator-General shall be required by any Court to No IICCIlrity 
enter into any admJnfstraUon bond or to give other security to the to be re-
C rt th ' quired from ou ,on e grant of any letters of administration to him by that Admir.iltra-
name. tor-GeneraL 

10 
MInner in 27. No Administrator-General. shall be required to verify, other-
=~o~- wise than by his signature, any petition presented by him under 
verifted by the provisions of this Act, and, if the facts stated in any such peti-
Ad~lttai tion are not within his own personal. knowledge, the petition may 
tor- ra. be subscribed and verified by any person co~petent to make verift- 5 
t:XD~!u.-
tor-General 
Dot to 
CODItitutc 
DOUce of. 
tfUlt. 
cation. 
28. The entry of the Administrator-General by that name in the 
books of a company shall not constitute notice of a trust, and a com-
pany shall not be entitled to object to entering the name of the 
Administrator-General on its register by reason only that the Ad- 1 (J 
ministrator-General is a corporation, and in dealing with assets the 
fact that the person dealt with is the Administrator-General shall 
not of itself constitute notice of a trust. 
CHAPTER IV 
GRANT 01' CERTII'lCATE 
29. (1) Whenever any person has died leaving assets within any 
State and the Administrator-General of such State is satisfied that 
such assets, excluding any sum of money deposited in a Government 
Savings Bank or in any provident fund to which the provisions of 
IS 
ID what 
ealCl 
Administra-
tor-General 
may .... ut 
certi1k:ate. 
the Provident Funds Act, 1925, apply, did not at the date of death 20 19 of 192,. 
exceed in the whole five thousand I11pees in value, he may grant to 
any person, claiming otherwise than as a creditor to be interested 
In such assets or in the due administration thereof, a certificate un-
der his hand entitling the claimant to receive the assets therein 
mentioned left by the deceased within the State, to a value not ex- 25 
ceeding in the whole five thousand rupees. 
(2) No certificate under this section shall be granted before the 
lapse of one month from the death unless before the lapse of the 
said one month the Administrator-General is requested so to do by 
writing under the hand of the executor or the widow or other per- 30 
son entitled to administer the est8Ite of the deceased and he thinlts 
fit to grant It. 
(3) No certificate shall be granted under this sectlon.-
(i) where probate of the deceased's will or letters of aCl-
ministration of his es1ate has or have been granteCl; or, 
• (ii) in respect of any sum of money deposited in a Govern-
ment Savings Bank or in any provident fund to which the pro-
VIsions of t1}.e Provident Funds Act, 1925, apply. 
3S 
19 of 1925. 

II 
30. (lJ If, in cases falling within section 29. no perIOD claim- ara~.f 
. ed th . than edito· h t certl1icat& ing to be mterest 0 el"WlSe as a cr r m suc asse s or to :rcditurl 
in the due administration thereof obtains, within thr~ months of an~wer 
the death o·f the deceased, a certificate irom the Adminiatrator- :II'IC of 
5 General under that section, or probate of a will or letters of admi- certain 
nistration of the estate of the deceased, the Administrator-General eatatel. 
may administer the estate without letters of administration, in the 
same manner as if such letters had been granted to him. 
(2) If the Administrator-General neglects or refuses to adminis-
10 ter such estate, he shall, upon the application of a creditor, grant a 
certifica1e to him in the same manner as if he were interested in 
such assets otherwise than as a creditor;· and such certificate shall 
have the same effect as a certificate granted under the provisions of 
section 29, and shall ·be subject to all the provisions of this Act which 
15 are applicable to such certificate. 
(3) The Administrator-General may, if he thinks fit, before 
granting a certificate under sub-sectien (2). require the creditor to 
give reasonable security fo~ the due administration of the estate 
of the deceased. 
20 31. The Administrator-General shall not be bound to grant any Adminiltta-
certificate under section 29 or section 30 unless he is satisfied after :-;~= 
making such inquiry as he thinks fit of the title of the claimant and to ~ram 
of the va,lue of the assets left by the deceased wi~in the State. =te 
aatiafied of 
claim_'. 
title, etc. 
32. The holder of a. certificate granted in accordance with the Bft'cc:t of 
25 provisions of section 29 or section 30 shall have in respect of the c:eni&:Ite. 
assets specified in such certificate the same powers ~d duties, and 
be subject to the same liabilities as he would ha'Ve had or been 
subject to if letters of administration . had been granted to him: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to require 
30 any person holding such certiftcate,-
(a) to file accounts or inventories of the assets of the 
deceased before any court or other authority; or 
(b) save as provided In section 30, to give any bond for the 
due administration of the estate .. 
35 33. (1) The Administrator-General may revoke a certificate RevocatiOD 
granted under the provisions of section 29 or section 30 on any of of certifi-
the following grounds, namely:- cate. 
(i) that the cettHleate was obtained by fraud or misrepre-
sentation made to him; I '-

Surrender 
of revoked 
certificate. 
Payment to 
holder of 
certificate 
before it 
is re\'oked. 
AdmiDisua-
tor-General 
not bound 
to take out 
administra-
tion OD 
accoUnt of 
aSlets for 
which he 
has granted 
certificate. 
Transfer of 
certain 
assetS to 
executor or 
adminiltra-
tor in 
country of 
do lDiei Ie for 
diatributioa. 
12 
(ii) that the certificate was obtained by means of an un-
true allegation of a fact essen,tiBl in law to justify the grant 
though such allegation was made in ignorance or inadvertently. 
(2) No certificate shall be-revoked under this section unless the 
holder of the certificate has been given a; reasonable opportunity S 
of showing cause why the certificate should not be so revoked. 
34. (1) When a certificate is revoked in accordance with the pro-
visions of section 33, the holder thereof shall, on the requisition of 
the Administrator-General, deliver it up to such Administrator-
General, but shall not be entitled to the refund of any fee ?aid 10 
thereon. 
(2) If such person wilfully and without reasonable cause omits 
to deliver up the certificate, he shall be punishable with imprison-
ment which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. IS 
35. When a certificate is revoked in accordance with the provi-
sions of section 33, all payments made in good faith under such 
certificate to the holder thereof before such revocation, shall, not-
withstanding such revocation, be a legal discharge to the person 
making the payment and the holder of such certificate may retain, 20 
and reimburse himself in respect of, any payments made by him 
which the person to whom a certificate or probate or letters of ad-
ministration may afterwards be granted might lawfully have made. 
36. The Administrator-General shall not be bound to take out 
letters of administration of the estate of any deceased person on 2S 
account of the- assets in respect of which he grants any certificate 
under section 29 or section 30, but he may do SO if he revokes such 
certificate under section 33, or ascertains that the value of the estate 
exceeded five thousand rupees. 
37. Where-
(a) a person not having his domicile in any State to which 
this Act extends has died leaving 88Ie't8 in any State and in 
the country in wliich he had his domicile at the time of his 
death, and 
30 
(b) proceedings for the administration of his estate with 3S 
respect; to asaets In ay IUeh State have heeD taken UIlder section 
29 or section 30, and 

13 
(c) there has been a grant of administration in the coun-
try of domicile with respect to the assets in that country, 
the holder of the certificate granted under section 29 or section 30, 
01' the Administrator-General, as the case may be, after having 
5 given the prescr.ibed notice for creditors and others to send in to 
him their claims against the estate of the deceased, and after having 
discharged, at the expiration of the time therein named, such law-
ful claims as he has notice of, may, "instead of himself distributing 
any surplus or residue of the deceased's property to persons resid~ 
10 ing out of India or in the State of Jammu and Kashmir who are 
entitled thereto, transfer, with the consent of the executor or ad-" 
ministrator, as the case may be, in the country of domicile, the 
surplus or residue to him for distribution to those persons. 
CHAPTER V 
IS LIABILITY 
: .~ .. 
'.I . 
38. The Government shall be liable ttO make good all sums re-t Liability of 
quired to diseharge any liability which the Administrator-GeDeral, Govern-
if he were a private administrator, would be personally liable to ment. 
discharge, except when the liability is one to which neither the Ad-
ministrator-General nor any of his officers has in any way eGDtribut-
20 ed, or which neither he n.or any of his officers could, by the 8Xer~ 
eiae of reasonable diligence, have averted, and in either of those 
cases the Administrator-General shall not, nor shalt the Govem-
ment, be subject to any liability, 
39. (1) If any suit be brought by a creditor against any Admi- Creditor', 
25 nistrator-General, such creditor shall be liable to pay the costs of At a=. 
the suit unless he proves that not less than one month previous to tor~Deral. 
the institution of the suit he had applied in writing to the Adminis-
trator-General, stating the amount and other particulars of his 
claim, and had given such evidence in support thereof as, in the cir-
30 cumstances of the case, the Administrator-General was reasonably 
entitled to require. 
(2) If any such suit is decreed in favour of the creditor, he shall, 
nevertheless, unless he is a secured creditor, be only entitled' to 
payment of the amount decreed or ordered by the court to be paid 
35 nut of the assets of the deceased equally and rateably with the other 
creditors, 
40. Nothing in section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Notice of 
shall apply to any suit against the Administrator-General in which ~:ot ~ 
no relief is claimed against him personally. cauin C81e1. 

14 
CHAPTER VI 
FEEs 
Ii U. (1) There shall be charged in respect of the duties of the 
.' 'Administrator-General such fees, whether by way of percentage 
or' otherwise, as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
(2) The fees under this section may be at different rates for difte-
'rent 'estates ot classes of estates or for different duties, and shall, 
S 
so far as may be, be arranged so as to produce an amount suffi-
clent to discharge the 9IBlaries and all other expenses incidental 
tcf the working of this Act, (including such sum as the State Gov- 10 
emment may determine to be required to insure the Government 
against loss under this Act). 
:piIpoIal of 42. (1) Any expenses which might be retained or paid out of 
fea. any estate in the charge of the Administrator-General, if he were 
a private Administrator of such estate shall be so retained or paid 15 
;' ,and the fees described under section 41 shall be retained or paid 
'ili'like manner as and in addition to such expenses. 
(2) The Administrator-General shall transfer and pay to such 
authority in such manner and at such time as the State Govern" 
,., ment' may prescribe, all fees received by him under this Act, and 20 
.. the Same shill be carried to the account and the credit of the Gov-
·'emment. 
CHAPTER VII 
AUDIT OF THE ADMINISTRATOR-GENERAL'S ACCOUNTS 
Audk. 43. The accounts of every Administrator-General shall be audit- 2S 
ed at least once annually and at any other time if the State Govern-
., :ment so directs, by the prescribed person and in the prescribed 
manner. 
Au4itOn to M. The auditors shall examine the accounts and forward to the 
eamiDc "~State Government Q statement thereof in the prescribed form, to- 30 
= ~ gether with a report thereon and a certificate signed by them show-
Go¥erD- 'Ing-..... 
(a) whether the accounts have been audited in the pres-
cri:bed manner; 
" (b) whether, SO far as can be ascertained by such audit, the 3S 
acoounts contain a full and true account of everything which 
ought to be inserted therein; 

5 of 1908. 
I, 
(C) whether the books which by any rules made q,nder tWa 
Act are directed to be kept by the Administrator-General~ 'have. 
been duly and regularly kept; and . 
(d) whether the assets and securities have been duly kept 
5 and invested and deposited in the manner prescribed by this Act, 
or by any rules made thereunder; 
or (as the case may be) that such accounts are deficient, or that ~e 
Administrator-General has failed to comply with this Act or the 
rules made thereunder, in such respects as may be specified in such 
10 certificate. 
IS 
45. (1) Every auditor shall have all the powers vested in a civil =. ... of 
court under the . Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit, to .:a_ 
in respect of the following matters, namely:- u::. eamiae 
W~.eI. 
the attendance of witneJSSeS:: = 
meat .. ~ .. 
(a) summoning and enforcing 
and examining them on oath; 
(b) discovery and inspection; 
(e) compelling the production of documents; and 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses . .. . 
(2) Any person who when summoned refuses, or, without reason· 
20 able cause, neglects to attend or to produce any document or thing 
or attends and refuses to be sworn, or to be examined,. shall be 
deemed to have committed an offence within the meaping of, I(lncJ.. 
45 of ISa;,. punishable under, section 188 of the Indian Penal Code~ and t1te .. , 
auditor shall reporJ every case of such refusal or negl~t to ,the . 
2S State Government. 
46. The costs of and incidental to such audit and exam*~atio~ CollI 0( "IT' 
shaH be determined in accordance with rules made by the Stat~. auctit.-;~ .... ~~:. 
Government, and shall be defrayed in the prescribed mann~r! 
CHAPTER VIII 
30 MISCELLANEOUS 
47. The Administrator-General may, in addition to, and not in General 
derogation of, any other powers of expenditure lawfully exercls,~l!! powen of 
by him, incur expenditure- ' " . . '=!DiIaa-
(n) cn such acts as may be neceS6ary for the proper care 
35 and lTl'lnagement of any property belonging to any estate in his 
ehar~e; and 
(b) with the sanction of the High Court, on such relilf~u". 
charitable an~ other objects, and on such improvements,&!! may 
be reasonable and proper in the case of s-pcn property. 

Power to a. (1) The Administrator-General may, whenever he desires, for 
11IIIUIlOIl. the purposes of this Act, to satisfy himself regarding any question of 
=~ faet, exercise all the powers vested in a civU ~urt under the Code o! 
Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit, in resp:d of the following 
matters, namely:-
5 of I§lCS. 
Power of· 
PCno.D. beaeficiaUy 
illl:ereltCd 
to mlpCCt 
Adminisua-
tor-
General', 
ICCOUDt, 
etc., and 
take copiel. 
Palle 
evldeDCe. 
AuetlUD-
claimed for twelve,.n 
to beuaal-
fened to 
GO'fCl'D-
meAt. 
Mode of 
diq 
~iJIlant 
to recover 
pripcipa\ 
DIODe, 10 
tanaferred. 
S 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses 
and examining them on oath; 
(b) discovery and inspection; 
(c) compelling the production of documents; and 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses. IU 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (2) of section 45 shall apply in 
relation to a person summoned by the Administrator-General un-
der this section as they apply in relation to a person summoned un-
cler that section. 
; 49. Any person interested in the administration of any estate IS 
which is in the charge of the Administrator-General shall, ~ubject 
to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be en-
titled at all reasonable times to inspect the accounts relating to such 
estate and the reports and certificates of the auditor, and on pay-
ment of the prescribed fee, to copies thereof and extracts therefrom· 20 
50. Whoever, during any examination a.uthorised by this Act, 
makes upon oath a statement which is false and which he either 
knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, shall 
be deemed to have intentionally given false evidence in a: stage of 
a judicial proceeding, 25 
51. All assets in the charge of the Administrator-General which 
have been in his custody for a period of twelve years or upwards, 
whether before or after the commencement of this Act, without any 
application for payment thereof having been made and granted by 
him shall be transferred, in the prescribed manner, to the a.ccount 30 
and credit of the Government: 
Provided that this section shall not authorise the transfer of any 
such assets as aforesaid, if any suit or proceeding is pending in res-
. pect thereof in any court. 
U. (1) If any claim is hereafter made to any part of the assets 35 
trmsterred to the account and credit of the Government under the 
provisions of this Act, or any Act hereby repealed, and if such claim 
is estabUshed to the satisfaction of the prescribed authority, the 
State Gbv:~rnment shall pay to the claimant the amount of the "prin-
cipal so transferred to its account and credit or so' much thereof 40 
U has'been found by the said auth(>rity to be dUE1 t(> the claim~nt, 

·" ,19 of 1925. 
:""'1'01 1956 • 
. ;~J ,. 
40 of 1950. 
6~ of 1957. 
17 
(2) If the claim is not established to the satisfaction of the pres. 
cribed authority. the claimant may, without prejudice to his right 
to take any other proceedings lor the recovery of such assets,' apply 
by P,etition to the 'High Court against the State Government and 
5 such Court. after taking such evidence as it thinks fit, shall make 
such order in regard to the payment of the whole or any part of the 
said principal sum as it thinks fit, and such order shall be bindin, 
on all parties to the proceedings. 
(3) The Court may further direct by whom the whole or aay 
10 part of the costs of each party shall be ?aid. 
53. Nothing contained in the Indian Succession Act. 1925, or the Sua:caaioD 
Companies Act. 1956, shall be taken to supersede or affect the ::I~: ~111-
rights, duties and privileges of any Administrator-Genetal. ld~ 
tor-General. 
54. Nothing contained in the Indian Succession Act, 1925, or in S.via~ of 
15 this Act, shall be deemed to affect, or to have affected, any law for ~PV~i:D' 
the time being in force relating to the movable property under four Act, lor 
hundred run~e1 in valu~ of persons dying intestate within any of io"!::.ency-
the presidency-towns which shall be or has been taken charge of 
by the police for t...~e purpose of safe custody. 
20 55. Any order made under this Act by any court shall have the Order of be . court to same effect as II; decree. equi .... !ent 
1:10 decree. 
56. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, or in any other law ProvJ.~ . 
for the time being in force, the Central Government may, by gene- :~i~~I" 
ral or special order, direct that, where a subject of a foreign State ConlUlar 
2S dies in the territories to which this Act extends, and it appears that ~~f fn 
there is no one in the said territories, other than the Administrator- death in 
General, entitled to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for:= 
letters of administration of the estate of the deceased, letters of of foreign 
tadministration shall, on the application to such court by any Consu- aubiect. 
30 lar Offi.cer of such foreign State, be granted to such Consular Oftlcer 
on such terms and conditions as the Court may, subject to any rules 
made in this behalf by the Central Government, think ftt to imlX'se. 
57. It shall not be necessary for the Administrator-General to take Lett~ of 
out letters of administration of the estate of any deceased person ~::~d-
3S which is being administered'ily him in accordance with the provisions ~cceaary 
of the Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950. :,. ~ 
or the Navy Act, 1957, if the value of such estate does not, on the date =~ is 
when such administration is committed to him, exceed rupees two eel b; te~ 
thousand, but he shall have the same power in regard to such estate AdlQinilna. 

18 
tor-GeDeral as he would have had if letters of administration had been granted 
~~ to him. 
cenaInAct •• 
5 40 of 1950. 
62 of 1957. 
46 of 1950. 
45 of 1950. 
Powen to 58. If the Administrator-General applies in accordance with the 
Clnittra- provisions of the Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) 
tor-General Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957, for letters of administration of the 
l:~ for estate of any person subject to the Army Act, 1950, or the Air Force 
= o! Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957, the Court may grant to him letters 
:SIC'll inwlth of administration limited to the purpose of dealing with such estate 
accordaDce in accordance with the provisions of the Army and Air Force (Diapa-
A~ ~d sal of private property) Act, 1950, or, as the case may be, the Navy 10 
Air Foa Act, 1957. 
(Dilpoeal 
ofPriwte 
Propcrt)') 
Aa, 1950, 
orthcNavy 
AI:t, 1957. 
AI:t not to 51. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions of 
::rAt,nn' the Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950. or 
Force (DiI- ' the Navy Act, 1957. 
poIAlof 
Private Pro-' 
peny) &:t, 
1950, or 
the Navy 
Act, 1957. 
40 of 1950. 
62 of 1957. 
Savini of 60. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed' to affect the provisions of IS 
~~:::. the Indian Registration Act, 1908. 16 of 1908. 
ReIP8tratioD 
Act .. 1908. 
Power of 61. The Central Government IIlQY, by notification in the Official 
~:-n!meDt qazette, make rules as to the terms and conditions on which letters 
to make of administration may be granted to Consular Officers under 
rules. ' section 56. 20 
rwer of 12. "'(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
C:::mment Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act, and for 
to1mate regulating the' proceedings of the Administrator-General. au ea. 
(2) . In particu],ar, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for- 25 
(a.) the' accounts to be kept by the Administrator-General 
and the audit ,and· inspection thereof; 
(b)tbe safe custody, deposit and investment of assets and 
securities whieh come into the hands of the Administrator-
General; 30 

3 Clf 1913. 
3 of 1913. 
10 
IS 
20 
19 
\c) the remittance of sums of money in the hands of the 
Administrator-General in cases in which such remittances are 
required; 
(d) subject to the provisions of this Act, the fees to be paid 
under this Act and the collection and accounting for any such 
fees; 
(e) the statements, schedules and other documents to be 
submitted to the State Government or to any other authority by 
the Administrator-General, and the publication thereof; 
<f) the realization of the cost of preparing any such state-
ments, schedules or other documents; " 
(g) the manner in which and the person by whom the costs 
of and incidental to any audit under the provisions of this Act 
are to be determined and defrayed; 
(h) the manner in which summonses issued under this Act 
are to be served and the payment of the expenses of any person 
summoned or examined under the provisions of this Act, and of 
any expenditure incidental to such examination; and 
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed under this Act. 
63. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act LaJiDI of 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of ~Cenm:!i 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, Govcnuncnt 
which may be comprised in one "session or in two successive sea- =:nmt. 
2S sions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making 
any modifioo.tion in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may he; SO however that 
30 any such modification of annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
64. (1) The Administrator-General's Act, 1913, is hereby repealed. RepeallDd 
uvi .... 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897, relating to the effect of repeals, the repeal 
3S effected by this section shall not affect the incorporation of any person 
holding the office of Administrator-General at the commencement of 
this Act. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the pro-
visions of section S9B of the Administrator-General's Act, 1913, shall 
40 continue to apply as if that Act had not been repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks to implement the recommendations of the Law 
Commission contained in its Nineteenth Report on the Administrator-
General's Act, 1913. The Notes on Clauses explain the deviatiollli 
made from the existing Act. 
NEW DELllIj ASOKE K. SEN. 
The 15th June, 1962. 
20 

Notes on ClauseS 
Clauses 2.-This is a reproduction of existing section 2 but for the 
omission of certain definitions, l'he definitions of "exempted persara" 
and "Indian Christian" are being omitted as irrelevant in the scheme 
of the Bill; that of "High Court" as superfluous in view of the defini-
tion of the term in the General Clauses Act, 1897, and that of "Gov-
ernment" as unnecessary in view of the use of the expression "State 
Government" in the substantive sections. 
Clauses 3 and 4.-These correspond to existing sections 3 and 4. 
Qualifications for Administrators-General have been revised and 
those for deputies have been prescribed, keeping in mind the changed 
conditions under which persons with the necessary qualifications are 
easily available. As a Deputy can under the Act discharge any of the 
duties of the Administrator-General, it is advisable to prescribe some 
qualifications for that office also in the Act itself. 
Clause 5.-This reproduces existing section 5. 
Clause 6.-This corresponds to existing section 6, except that it is 
now made clear that the concurrent jurisdiction of the district courts 
is not affected. 
Clause 7.-This replaces existing section 7 with the omission of 
certain obsolete words. 
Clause a.-Under section 8 'as it now stands, the Ad·ministrator .. 
General cannot have any preference over a universal legatee in the 
matter of the grant of letters of administration. A residuary legatee 
and his representative should stand on the same footing as a univer-
sal legatee for this purpose. Clause a reproduces section 8 with the 
above modification. 
Clauses 9 and 10.-These replace existing sections 9, 10 and 11 
with fundamental changes. The benefits under sections 9, 10 and 11 
are 'confined at present either to non-exempted persons (primarily 
Europeans) or properties situated in the presidency towns. It has 
been felt that as the object of the Act is essentially to protect the pro-
perty of a deceased person from being misappropriated or wasted, the 
availability of the protection shOUld not be made dependent on such 
considerations as whether the property is situatM in one place or the 
21 

2:1 
other or whether the person is an exempted person. The clauses have 
been drafted so as to enable the Administrator-General to intervene 
in all cases in which it is necessary. Such intervention is made option-
al, in view of the large number of cases which may arise. 1t is con-
fined to cases where the assets exceed in value rupees 5,000 (assets of 
lesser value being covered by the simpler procedure in clause 29) end 
there is apprehension of misappropriation, etc. of the assets and inter-
vention is necessary on account either of failure on the part of inte-
rested. persons to take appropriate steps for the protection of the 
estate (clause 10) or the presence of imminent danger of misappro-
priation, etc. of the assets requiring immediate action. Care has, how .. 
ever, been taken to ensure that nothing in this clause would render 
it obligatory for any person to obtain probate or letters of adminis.. 
tration in cases in which it is not at present obligatory to do so under 
the Indian Succession Act. 
Clauses 11 and 12.-These reproduce existing sections 12 and 13 
with changes rendered necessary by the new clauses 9 and 10. 
Clause la.-This reproduces existing section 14. 
Clause H.-This reproduces the substance of existing section 18 in 
simplified language and provides further that where a will of the 
deceased is proved in the State, the grant made to the Administrator-
General shall be revoked. 
Clauses 15 to 19.-These reproduce, in effect, existing sections 19 
to 23. 
Clause 20.-This corresponds to existing section 24. It is now 
provided that a grant by the High Court to the Administrator-General 
of a State shall have effect over all the assets of the deceased through-
out India, without a certificate being required (as at present) to 
specify the States wherein the grant will be effective. 
Clause 21.-This is new and is intended to make the grant of pro-
bate or letters of administration by the High Court of Jammu and 
Kashmir in favour of the Administrator-General of that State effec-
tive in all the other States of India. A corresponding provision will 
be made in the State law by the State Legislature of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
Clause 22.-This reproduces existing section 25. 
Clause 23.-This reproduces existing section 26 with one change, 
namely that the rule of limitation embodied in sub-section (5) of the 
section is extended to cover claims by any person instead of conftnin. 
it as at present to claims by creditors only. 

33 
Clause 24.-This reproduces existing section 27. 
Clause 25.-This reproduces in substance existing section 28. 
Clause. 26. 27 and 28.-These correspond to sub-sections (1). (2) 
and (3) of existing section 29. . 
Clause 29.-This corresponds to section 31, but the power of the 
Administrator-General to issue certificates in respect of small estates 
has been extended to cover estates upto five thousand rupees in value 
instead of upto rupees two thousand as at present. 
Clause 30.-This reproduces existing section 32 with certain con-
sequential changes. 
Clause 31.-Existing section 33, which this clause replaces, is being 
modified so as to leave the Administrator-Ge~eral sumcient discretion 
in the matter of granting or refusing certific~.tes under clause 29. 
Clause 32.-This reproduces existing section 34 with consequential 
c~anges. "''7'1 .... ~ 
Clause 33.-This reproduces existing section 35, but it is expr~ssly 
provided that before revoking a certificate, the certificate holder 
should be given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
revocation. 
Clause 34.-This reproduces existing section 36. 
Clause 35.-This is new and is intended to indemnify payments 
made to the holder of a certificate before Its revocation. 
Clauses 36 and 37.-These reproduce existing sections 37 and 38 
with some consequential changes. 
Clause S8.-This corresponds to existing sub-section (1) of section 
39. Sub-section (2) of that section is being omitted as no longer 
necessary and the words "revenues of" in sub-section (1) are being 
omitted in view of the constitutional provisions regarding consolidated 
fund. 
Clause 39.-This rep!oduces existing section 40, with a small change 
on the lines of an amendment made in West Bengal to. make the inten-
tion clear. 
Clause 4O.-This reproduces existing section 41. 
Clause 41.-This reproduces existing section 42 except that the pro-
visos to sub-section (1) of that section have been omitted as obsolete 
or unnecessary and the words "revenues of' in sub-section (2) are 
omitted for reasons similar to those stated against clause 38. 
Clauses 42 and 43.-These reproduce existing sections 43 and 44. 

24 
Clause 44.-Existing section 45 which this clause replaces has been 
slightly amplified by the addition of sub-clause (a). 
Clause 45.-This reproduces with minor drafting changes existing 
section 46. :' .,.1 ! 
Clause~ 46 C'nd 47.-These reproduce existing sections 47 and 48. 
Clause 48.-This corresponds to existing section 30 which is being 
amplified so as to clothe the Administrator-General with some of the 
powers of a civil court to enable him to satisfy himself with regard to 
questions of fact. 
Clauses 49, 50 and 51.-These reproduce existing sections 49, 51 and 
52. ' !! 
Clause 52.~This reproduces existing section 53 with a verbal 
mange to make the intention clear. 
Section 54 of the exifting Act is being omitted for the reasons given 
in paragraph 51 of the Law Commission's Report. 
Clause 53.-This reprod~ces sub-section (1) of existing section 55 
with some consequential changes. 
Clause 54.-This reproduces sub-section (2) of existing section 55 
with 0 change to bring it into harmony with the Bombay Police Act, 
1951 (Bombay Act 22 of 1951). 
Clauses 55 and 56.-These reproduce existing sections 56 and 57. 
Clauses 57, 58 and 59.-These replace existing sections 16, 17 and 15 
with certain consequential changes, in addition to raising the mone-
tary limit in section 16 from rupees one thousand to rupees two 
thousand. 
Clause 60.-This reproduces existing section '59. 
Clause 61.-This is new and is intended to provide separately for 
the rule making power of the Central Government under clause 56. 
Clause 62.-This reproduces existing section 50. 
ClaUse 64.-WhiIe repealing the existing Act, this clause provides 
for the continued operation of section 59B of the existing Act which 
contains special provisions regarding Administrators-General affected 
by the recent re-organlsation of States. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 provides for the appointment of an Administmtor-
General by the State Government which in respect of Union Terri-
tories would be the Central Government. The practice at present 
followed is for the Administrator-General of an adjoining State to be 
the Administrator-General of a Union Territory as permitted by the 
existing Act, a provision which is being repeated in the Bill. Even 
so, some expenditure may be involved from the Consolidated Fund 
of India on this account. 
Clause 38 makes the Government liable to make good, subject to 
certain qualifications, all sums required to discharge any liability 
which the Administrator-General, if he were a private administrator, 
would be personally liable to discharge. Clause 42 provides for the 
carrying to the account and credit of the Government all fees'receiv-
~d by the Administrator-General. The scheme of the existing Act 
[See also cl. 41 (2)] is that the fees leviable should be so arranged as 
to produce an amount sufficient to meet all expenditure in connec-
tion with the working of the Act (including such sum as may be 
required to insure the Government against loss under the Act). 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 61 empowers the Central Government to make rules as to 
t.he terms and conditions on which letters of administration may be 
granted to Consular officers of foreign States in respect of estates of 
subjects of foreign States. In the matter of imposition of terms and 
conditions, some discretion has necessarily to be vested in the 
executive. 
Clause 62 empowers the State Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Act and for regulating the pro-
ceedings of the Administmtor-General. The matters in respect of 
which such rules may be made pertain to the fees to be paid under 
the Act, the accounts to be kept by the Administrator-General and 
the audit and inspection of the same and certain other matters of 
procedure, form or detail. 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
cbaracter. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law rdating to the office and duties 
of Administrator-General. 
(Shri Asoke K. Sen, 
Minister of Law.) 