LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE FINANCE (NO.2) BILL, 1967 
( As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
IRe-print With line numbers? 1. Page 5;- line 1,- -
before Ii a" ins.Eirt "(B )It 
2. Page 8, line 4,-
attQr "assessee" for 
-
3. Page 14., line 23,'" 
Ii • II , read 
-
" It • 
• 
for "in sUb-clause (i1) of clause (2)" 'read • 
-
"in clause (11) of eub .. seetion. (2)" 
4. Page 25, line 2~,-. 
after "195" for 
5. Page 28, line 6,-
" n • read n." , ' 
bElfore "BA" for I" r read "I II 
-
6. Page 30, line 35,-
for" judisdiction" read "jur1sdiet1on" 
7. Page 31, line 40,-
aftpr "or Gift-tax Officers" 1.nsert· n :," 
s. P~ge 33, 11.ne 36, ~ .. 
f ' 
after "ins erted" for ".11 read '''';'' 
9. Page 34, line 8,-
, for "Inu read II in" 
-
10. Page 37, line 15,-
t· t " ... ". I . 
"for ,II a.d volerem" read"'~- yalorem'" 
11. Page 43, line 34,,~ 
after "Rs .14, 500" ,.~.·.J.I .11 
12. Page 52, line 4,-
I 
for "vhere" read ",where" 

.. : 2 :-
13. Page 53, line 28,-
after"Rs" ins ert tt " • 
14. Page 55, line 31,-
!s1!.. "1ncom" read "incomp" 
15. Page 58, line 41,-
before "1n addition" insert It (B)" 
16. Page 61, line 15,-
for "20000" read. "20,000" . 
, .. 
17. Page 61, line 25,-
!2!. '~.~()O')O" read "40,0')0". , 
18. Page 61, line 34,-
after "income" for 11.11 , read ":" - -
19. Page 63, line 27,-
for "insta1leo" ~ "installed" 
20. Page 63 , line 36,-
after "cost" 
21. page 63, line 37,-
after "Ma.rch" 
insert " It , 
i!1.sert 
22. Page 65, li'ne 39,,: ... 
after "sf"ctions 87" for 
23. Page 66, line 35,-
" " , 
" 11 • 
for "deduct-It read "deduc-" - -
read " II , 
24. Page 66, 1n the marginal heading to spetion aOA,-
25. 
after "total" insp.rt "income." 
~age 71, 1n the' marg1na~ bead1ilg to sect ton SOD --" '" . ' , 
i' after "respect" insert "of" , , 
26. I,Page 72, line 5,- ! " . 
j~ Jdr "hereinafter" ~ nhereart~r· 
-

-: 3 :-
?'1, Page 13. line 6.-
.!Q!. "hereindter" ~ "hereefter" 
?8. Pa~e 85. in the tlar:-:inel he&din~ to section 8OL,-
for" certd" reed" certain" ------ -.-
"~' Pa;e 10?, line 5 from bottom.-
for"o etl read "of an 
iQ!. "0,000" read "50,COO" 
31. Correct line numbers on ?e~es 2.3.~t5.1O,1l.55.61.66.· 
74 and 90. 
[13li1 J3l1-rr; 
June 1. 1961 
Jy~i stha 11. 1889 (;~!e!ta) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 25TH MAY, 1967 
Bill No. II of 1967 
THE FINANCE (NO.2) BILL, JcM 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
CHAPl'ER II 
I NCOME-TAX AND ANNUITY DEPOSITS FOR THF. 
FINANCIAL YEAR 1967-68 
2. Income-tax. 
3. Annuity deposit, 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS IN TIlE INCOME-TAX ACT. 
4. Amendment of section 2. 
5. Amendment of section 10. 
6. Amendment of section 23. 
7. Amendment of section 29. 
8. Amendment of section 32. 
9. Amendment of section 33. 
10. Amendment of section 33A. 
11. Insertion of new section 33B. 
12. Amendment of section 34. 
13. Amendment of section 35. 
14. Amendment of section 35A. 
15. Amendment of section 36. 
16. Amendment of section 43. 

(U) 
CI..AUSIS 
17. Insertion of new section 43A. 
18. Amendment of section 44. 
19. Amendment of section 47. 
~. Amendment of section 49. 
21. Amendment of section 55. 
22. Amendment of section 72. 
23. Insertion of new section 80F. 
24. Amendment of section 84. 
25. Substitution of new section fOr section 85. 
26. Alnendment of section 88. 
27. Amendment of Chapter XIII. 
28. Amendment of section 138. 
29. Amendment of section 172. 
30. Amendment of Chapter XVII. 
31. Amendment of sections 209 and 215. 
32. Amendment of Fir~t Schedule. 
33. Certain amendments in the Income-tax Act to take effect 
from 1st April. 1968. 
CHAPTER IV 
OrHER DIRECT TAXES 
34. Amendment of Act 27 of 1957. 
35. Amendment of Act 18 of 1958. 
36. Aml·ndment of Act 7 of 1964. 
CHAPTER V 
INalRECT TAXES 
37. Amendment of Act 32 of 1934. 
38. Special duties of customs. 
39. Regulatory duties of customs. 
40. Amendment of Act 1 of 1944. 

(iii) 
CLAUSIS 
41. Special duties of excise on certain goods. 
42. Regulatory duties of excise. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. Amendment ot Act 6 of 1898. 
44. Amendment of Act 47 of 1961. 
45. Certain amendments made in Act 52 of 1963 by Act 17 of 
1966 to be given retrospective effect. 
46. Recovery of tax on income volun1aril,r disclosed. 
47. Repeal. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 

-
LOK SABHA 
00 RRIGBNDA NO. 2 
THE FINANoB (NO.2) BILL, 1967 
(As mtr2dlloeq .!s._ .~OA~) 
. LIte-print with line numbersJ 
• 1. Page 10, line 34,-
i9.!: "(iv)" ~ "(vi)" 
2. Page 14. line 20,-
!2£ "in sub-clause (b)(ii) of clause (1)" 
read" in olause (b)(ii) of sub-seotion (1)" - . 
NE\'I DELHI 
June 12 , 1 961 
Jya1stha 22, 1839 {Sakal 

s 
Bill No. 61 of 1967 
THE FINANCE (No.2) BILL, 1967 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the fina.ncial proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1967-68. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) TIns Act may be called the Finance (No, 2) Act, 1967. Short 
title anrl 
, 'd d i th' A t i commence-(2) Save as otherwIse provl e n IS c, sect ons 2 to 36 and ment, 
44 to 46 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of 
April, 1967. 

2 
CHAPTER n 
INCOME-TAX AND ANNUITY DEPOSITs FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1967-68 
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), 
for the assessment year commencing on the lst day of April, 1967, 
income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in Part I of the 5 
First Schedule and, in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B, C and D 
of that Part apply, shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes 
of the Union and a special surcharge for purposes of the Union cal-
culated in either case in the manner provided therein. 
(2) In making any assessment for the assessment year commenc- 10 
ing on the 1st day of April, 1967, where the total income of a com-
pany, other than the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, includes any profits 
and gains from life insurance business, the income-tax payable by 
it shall be the aggregate of the income-tax calculated- IS 
(i) on the amount of profits and gains from life insurance 
business so included, at the rate applicable in the case of the 
Life Insurance Corporation of India, in accordance with Para-
graph E of Part I of the First Schedule, to that part of its total 
income which consists of profits and gains from life insurance 20 
business; and 
(ii) on the remaining part of its total income, at the rate 
applicable to the company on its total income. 
31 of 1956. 
(3) In cases to which Chapter XII of the' Income-tax Act, 1961 43 of 1961. 
(hereinafter referred to as the Income-tax Act) applies, the tax 2S 
chargeable shall be determined as provided in that Chapter, and 
with reference to the rates ."imposed by sub-section (1) or the rates 
as specified in that Chapter, as the case may be. 
(4) (a) In respect of any assessment for the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1967, in the case of an assessee 30 
being a domestic company Or an assessee other than a company,-
(i) where his total income includes any profits and gains 
derived from the export (made before the sixth day of June, 
1966) of any goods or merchandise out of India, he shall be 
entitled to a deduction, from the amount Of income-tax with 35 
which he is chargeable, of an amount equal to the income-tax 
calculated at one-tenth of the average rate of income-tax on the 
amount of such profits and gains included in his total income; 
(ii) where he is engaged in the manufacture of any articles 
in nn industry specified in the First Schedule to the Industries 40 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and has, during the 65 of 1951. 

52 of 1962. 
a 
previous year. exported before the sixth day of June, 1966 such 
al ticles out of India, he shall ~e entitled, in addition to the 
deduction of income-tax referred to in sub-clause (i), to a further 
deduction, from the amount of income-tax with which he is 
5 chargeable for the assessment year, of an amount equal to the 
income-tax calculated at the average rate of income-tax on an 
amount equal to two per cent. of the sale proeeeds receivable by 
him in respect of such export made before the date aforesaid. 
10 
IS 
20 
Explanation.-In this sub-clause, the expression "sale 
proceeds" does not include freight or insurance attributable to 
the transport of the articles beyond the customs station as defined 
in the Customs Act, 1962; 
(iii) where he is engaged in the manufacture of any articles 
in an industry specified in the said First Schedule and has, 
during the previous year, sold before the sixth day of June, 1966 
such articles to any other person in India who himself has 
exported them out of India, and evidence is produced before 
the Income-tax Officer of such articles having been so exported, 
the assessee shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amount 
of income-tax with whiCh he is chargeable for the assessment 
year, of an amount equal to the income-tax calculated at the 
average rate of income-tax on a sum equal to two per cent. of 
the sale proceeds receivable by him from the exporter in respect 
of such articles sold to the exporter before the date aforesaid. 
25 (b) The aggregate amount of the deductions under this sub-
30 
3S 
section shall in no case exceed the amount of income-tax otherwise 
payable by the assessee. 
(c) Nothing contained in sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii) of 
clause (a) shall apply in relation to-
(1) fuels, 
(2) fertilisers, 
(3) photographic raw fUm and paper, 
(4) textiles (including those dyed, printed or otherwise 
processed) made wholly or in part of jute, including jute twine 
and rope, 
(5) newsprint, 
(6) pulp-wood pulp, mechanical, chemical, including 
dissolving pulp, 
(7) sugar, 
(8) vegetable oils and vanaspathi, 
(9) cement and gypsum products, 

(10) arms and ammunition, and 
(11) cigarettes, 
respectively, specified in items 2, 18, 20, 23(2), 24(2), 24(5), 25, 
2B, 35, 37 and 38 of the First Schedule to the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951. S 65 of lilil. 
(d) The amount of any profits and gains derived from the export 
of any goods or merchandise out of India in respect of which deduc-
tion of income-tax is admissible under sub-clause (i) of clause (a) 
shall be computed in accordance with the rules made by the Board 
in this behalf. 10 
(5) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under sections 193, 
194, 194A and 195 of the Income-tax Act at the rates in force, the 
deduction shall be made at the rates specified in Part II of the First 
Schedule. 
(6} In cases in which income-tax has to be calculated under the IS 
first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act 
or charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of 
section 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 or deducted 
under section 192 of the said Act from income chargeable under the 
head "Salaries" or in which the "advance tax" payable under Chapter 20 
XVII-C of the said Act has to be computed, at the rate or rates in 
force, such income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" shall 
be so calculated, charged, deducted or computed at the rate or rates 
specified in Part III of the First Schedule. 
(7) For the purposes of this section and the First Schedule,- 2S 
(a) "company in which the public are substantially 
interested" means a company which is such a company as is 
referred to in section 108 of the Income-tax Act; 
(b) "domestic company" means an Indian company, or any 
other company which, in respect of its income liable to income- 30 
tax under the Income-tax Act for the assessment year commenc-
ing on the 1st day of April, 1967, has made the prescribed 
arrangements for the declaration and payment within India of 
the dividends (including dividends on preference shares) payable 
out of such income in accordance with the provisions of section 3S 
194 of that Act,' 
(c) "earned income" means any income of an assessee who 
is an individual, or a Hindu undivided family,' or an unregistered 
firm [not being an unregistered firm assessed under clause (b) 
of section 183 of the Income-tax Act] or an association of persons 40 
or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, not being-
(A) a company, or 

s 
-10 
IS 
11 of 1"22. 2, 
30 
35 
. __ ) a local authority, or 
(C) a registered firm, or 
(D) an unreeistered firm assessed under clause (b) of tIM 
laid section 183-
.(i) which is chargeable under the head "Salaries"; 
or 
(ii) which is chargeable under the head "Profits and 
gains of business or profession" where the business or 
profession is carried on by the assessee or, in the cue 
of a firm, where the assessee is a partner actively engaged 
in the conduct of the business or profession; or 
(iii) which is chargeable under the head "Income 
from other sources" if it is immediately derived. from 
personal exertion or represents a pension or superannua-
tion or other allowance given to the assessee in respect 
of the past services of any deceased person, or which is 
chargeable under that head under clause (ia) of sub-
section (2) of section 56 of the Income-tax Act, and. 
includes any such income which, though it is the income ot 
another person, is included in the assessee's total income under 
the provisions of the Income-tax Act, but does not include any, 
such -income on which income-tax is not payable under clause 
(iii) or clause (v) of section 86 of that Act or which is exempted 
from tax under a notification issued under section 60 or section 
60A of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, as continued in force 
by clause (1) of sub-section (2) of section 297 of the Income-tax 
Act; 
(d) "industrial company" means a company which is mainly 
engaged in the business of generation or distribution of electri-
city or any other form of power or in the construction of shipi 
or in the manufacture or processing of goods or in mining. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, a company 
shall be deemed to be mainly engaged in the business- of gene-
ration or distribution of electricity or any other form of power 
or in the construction of ships or in the manufacture or proces-
sing of goods or in mining. if the income attributable to an,. one 
or more of the aforesaid activities included in its total income 
of the previOUS y .. r (a8 computed btlore mallin. any dedUCtlOD 
under Chapter VIA of the Income-tax Act) is not Ie. than fifty-
one per cent. of such total income; 
. (e) IItax free security" meaas any IeCU1it,. of the C.tral 
GoverJUAeAt l8Iued 01" decW-ed to be iaoome-tu &ree, or ., 

Ameft4I. ment of 
MCUoD J. 
e 
ieeurtiy of a State Government issued income-tax free, tiii 
inCome-tax whereon is payable by the State Government; 
(f) uunearned income" means income which is not "eamecl 
lDcome"; 
(g) all other words and expressions used in this section aDd , 
the First Schedule but not defined in this sub-section and defined 
in the Income-tax Act, shall have the meaninis respectivel1 
assijned to them in that Act. 
I. (1) Save as otherwise provided in Chapter XXIIA of the 
Income-tax Act, annuity deposit for the assessment year commencinl 10 
on the 1st day of April, 1967 and annuity depOsit to be made durina 
ttle financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1967. shull 
be made by every pE'l';;on to whom the provisions of that Chapt~r 
ailply, at the rate or rales speci.fied in the Second Schedule. 
(2) For the purposes of this section and the Second Schedule, the IS 
expressions "adjusted total income", "annuity deposit" and "deposi-
tor" have the meanings respectively assigned to them under clausa 
(1), (5) aDd (6) of section 280B of the Income-tax Act. 
CHAPTER III 
to In section 2 of the Income-tax Act,-
(4) after clause (1), the following clause' shall be inaertecI. 
namely:-
zo 
'(lA) "amalgamation", in relation to companies, meana 
-the merger of one or more companies with another company 2S 
or the merger of two or more compames to form one company 
(the company or compames which so merge being referred 
to as the amalgamating company or companies and the com-
pany with which they merge or which is formed as a rault 
of the merger, as the amalgamated company) in IUch .30 
manner that-
(i) all the property of the amalgamating company 
or companies immediately before the amalgamation 
becomes the property of the amalgamated company by 
virtue of the amalgamation; 3S 
Hi) all the liabilities of the amalgamating company 
Ql companies immediately before the amaliamatiOA 

b~me the liabilities of the amalgamated ccXnpaftJ by 
virtue of the amalgamation; 
(iii) shareholders holding not less than nine-tentba 
In value of the shares in the amalgamating company ar 
companies (other than shares already held therein im-
mediately before the amalgamation by, or by a nomlnN 
for, the amalgamated company or its subsidiary) 
become shareholders of the amalgamated company by 
virtue of the amalgamation, 
to ~therwise than as a result of the acquisition of the propert7 
of one company by another company pursuant to the pur-
chase of such property by the other company or as a result 
of the distribution of such property to the other compu7 
after the winding up of the first mentioned company;'; 
I, (b) after clause (37), the following clause shall be lDJet1ecl. 
namely:-
'(37 A) "rate or rates in force" or "rates in foree", in rela. 
tion to an assessment year or financial year, mean-
(i) for the purposes of calculating income-tax under 
the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132, or com. 
puting the income-tax chargeable under sub-section (4) 
of section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 174 or section 
175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 or deducting income-
tax under section 192 from income chargeable under the 
head "Salaries" or computation of the "advance tax" 
payable under Chapter XVII-C, the rate or rates nf 
income-tax specified in this behalf in the Finance' Act of 
the relevant year; 
(it) for the purposes of deduction of tax under 101:'-
tions 193. 194, 194A and 195, the rate or rates of Income-
tax ~pecifled in this behalf in the Finance Act of the 
rele,,·ant y£'ar; , ; 
(e) in clau~e (42A), in clau!e (i) of the ErplaftotiOft.-
(i) in sub-claU"f> (b). for the words. bra~kets and ftgu~1 
35 "clauses (i) to (iii)", the words. brackets and figure "sub-
section (1)" shall be substituted; 
(it) after sub-clause (b), the foUowin, SUb-claUie IhaD 
be inserted. namely:-
U(c) in the case of a capital asset being a .hare er 
4e Iharea in an IDd.jq company. which beca:IDeI the pro. 

Ampr.d-
ment of 
Hetlan 10, 
I 
...... ,. 
perty of the assessee ill. consideration of a transfer re-
ferred to in clause (vii) at section 47, there shall be in-
cluded the period for which the share or shares in the 
amalgamating company were held by the assessee;". 
, 5. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (27), the words, S 
figures and letters "which is assessable for the assessment year com-
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1965, 1966 or 1967" shall be omitted. 
Amend- 6. In section 23 of the Income-tax Act, in the proviso to sub-see-
~~~~:~3. tion (2), for the words "total income of the owner,". the followinl 
shall be substituted, namely:- 10 
"total income of the owner "(the total income for this purpose 
being computed without including tnerein any income from such 
property and before making any deduction under Chapter VIA 
or section 2800)". 
~:r~f "I. In section 29 of the Income-tax Act, for the words and figure. IS 
section 2.lI. ''sections 30 to 43", the words, figures and letter Usections 30 to 43A" 
shall be substituted. 
Amend- 8. In section 32 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (2) of the Ex-pta-
:~~~:f32.".iltion to clause (iii) of sub-section (1), Rfter the words "for the time 
being in force", the following words shall be' added, namely:- 20 
"but does not include a transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation, of 
any asset by the amalgamating company to the amalgamated 
company where the amalgamated company is an Indian com-
pany", 
Amend- 9. In section 33 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section ,(S), the fol- 25 
mectint of"3 low,ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
51' on." 
"(3) Where. in a scheme of amalgamation, the amalgamat-
ing. company sells or otherwise transfers to the amalgamated 
company any ship, machinery or pInt in respect of whIch 
development rebate has been allowed to the amalgamating com- 30 
pany under sub-section (1) or sub-section (lA),-
(a) the amalgamated company shall continue to fulfil 
the conditions mentioned in sub-section (3) of section 34 in 
respect of the reserve created by the amalgamating company 
and in respect of the period within which such ship, machtn- 3S 
ery or plant shall not be sold or otherwise transferred and 
in default of any of these conditions, the provisions of sub-
.. Je~jQXl{S) o! Bectipn 155 shall apply to tltt ,malpmatec:l.;. 

I 
~~y Ai they would have applied to the amalpmatma 
company had it committed the default; and 
(b) the balance of development rebate, if any, It ill out-
standing to the amalgamating company in respect of IUM 
. , ship, machinery or plant shall be allowed to the amal,amat-
ed company in accordance with the proviltoJll of lub..ee-
tion (2), so, however, that the total periocl for which the 
balance of development rebate shall be earrie'd forward in 
the aaessments of the amalgamating company and the amal-
10 ,amated company shan not exceed the period of. eight years 
specified in sub-section (2) and the amalgamated eompany 
shall be treated a. the aaeuee in relpect of BUM lhip, 
machinery or plant for the purposel of thi. Bection anel 
section M.". 
I, 10. In aeetion 33A of the Income-tax Act, for IUb-seetion (5), !:':t 
20 
30 
3S 
the followin, sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - eeetloa alA. 
"(5) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amal,amatinl 
company sells or otherwise transfers to the amalgamated com-
pany any land in respect of which development allowance hal 
been allowed to the amalgamating company under sub-section 
(1),-
(Il) the amalgamated company shall continue to fulftl 
the conditions mentioned in sub-section (3) in respect of the 
reserve created by the amalgamating company and in respect 
of the period within which such land. shall not be sold or 
otherwise transferred and in default of any of these eondi-
tions, the provisions of sub-section (SA) of section 155 shall 
apply to the amalgamated company as they would kave 
applied to the amalgamating company had it committed the 
default; and 
(b) the balance of development allowance, if any, .till 
outstanding to the amalgamating company in respect of weh 
land shall be allowed to the amalgamated company in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-seetion (2), ItO, how-
ever, that the total period for which the balance of develop-
ment allowance shall be carned forward in the assessment. 
of the amalgamating company and the amal~amated com-
pany shall not exceed the periGd of ei~ht years specified tn 
sub-section (2) and the amalgamated company shall be 
treated as the assessee in respect of such land for the pur· 
J'O"" of tbi. aectlon.", 

tuertt. 
lit new 
lecUoo 
aaa. 
ltehabW-
tattoo 
allow .... 
m 
u. After eeetiOft 33A of the Ineome-tu Act, the foUewm, eeettoa 
ahall be inserted, namely:-
'33B. Where the business of any industrial underlakfnl 
carried on in India is discontinued in any previous year by 
reason of extensive dama~e to. Or destruction of, any buildtn~, 5 
machinery, plant or furniture owned by the asse~s~ and used 
for the purposes of such business as a direct result of-
(i) flood, typhoon, hurricane, cyclone, earthquake or 
other convulsion of nature; or 
'(li) riot or civil disturbance; or 
(iii) accidental fire or explosion; or 
(iv) action by an enemy or action taken In eombatlnl 
an enemy (whether with or without a declaration of war), 
10 
and, thereafter, at any time before the expiry of three years 
from the end of such prE"vtous year. thE" bu~ines~ is re-estab1fshed. IS 
reconstructed or revived by the assessee. he shall. in rest)t'ct of 
the pTt'vtous year in which the businE"C:s is 50 TE'-estab1l5hed, 
reconstructed or revived. be allowE"d a deduction of a sum by 
way of rehabilitation allo".-ancE' equivalent to sixty per cent. of 
the amount of the deduction allowable to him under clause (iii) 20 
of sub-section (1) of section 32 in respect of t.he building, 
machinery, plant or furniture so damaged or destroyed. 
Erplanation.-In this section, "industrial undertaking" 
means any undertaking which manufactures or produces articles.·. 
AIDIDd- 11. In section 34 of the Income-tax Act, for the ExplanatiOn to 2S 
meat of clause (i) of sub-section (2), the following E~lana.tion. ahall be 
NCUOil at. substituted, namely:-
"ErpTanatfo?'l.-Whe~ 8 capital a~5f't is tr8n!llf~d-
'cn by a holdin~ ('omTlany to it~ subsidiary company or 
by a subsidiary company to its holding company, or 30 
(if) by a company to another company in a scheme of 
amalgamation, 
and the conditions specifif'd in clause (iv). or c1aU!~e (v). or. u 
the case may be, clause (iv) of section 47 are'satisfied, then, til 
detennininR the aggregate of all deductions in respect of depre- 3.5 
ctat!on under this clause, account shall also be taken of the 
deduetIons in respect of depreciation allowed in the ease of the 
compaD1 from which the asset has been transtem!ld;lt. 

11 
.0: In section 35 of the Income-tax Act, after sulHeetlcm (4), the ~~ 
fallowing sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - !:Uon IL 
"(5) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the arnalgamaUna 
company sells or otherwise transfers to the amalgamated com-
pany (being an Indian company) any asset representing expendI-
ture of a capital nature on scientific research,-
(i) the amalgamating company shall Dot be allowed the 
deduction under clause (ii) or clause (iii) of sub-section (2); 
and 
10 (ii) the provisiOns of this section shall, a, far as may be, 
apply to the amalgamated company as they would have 
app!ied to the am31gamating company if the latter had not 
so sold 01' othenvi!:c lransIcrn~d the asset.". 
U. In section 35A of the Income-tax Act, after sub-section (5), AmeDd-
15 the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: _ ~~~ cat 
IIA. 
"(6) Where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amal,amatiDI 
company sells or otherwise transfers the rights to the amalia-
mated company (being an Indian company),-
(i) the provisions of sul>-sections (3) and (4) shall not 
apply in the case of the amalgamating company; and 
(ii) the provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, 
apply to the amalgamated company as they would have 
applied to the amalgamating company if the latter had not 
10 sold or otherwise transferred the rights.". 
25 15. In section 36 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (i,r) of sub- Amend-
IeCtion (2), in the third proviso, for the words, brackets and figure, ::t 0\ .. 
30 
35 
",ub-aection (2) of section 35", the words, brackets and figures "sub- on 
.etion (2) and sub-section (5) of section 35" shall be lub.tituted. 
16. In section 43 of the Income-tax Act,- Amelld-
ment of 
(i) in clause (1), after Explanation 6. the followtna MCtloD 41. 
EzpZanation shall be inserted, namely:-
"E.rpZanatiOn 7.--Where, in a scheme of amalgamatloD, 
any capltal asset is transferred by the amalgamating com-
pany to the amalgamated company and the amalgamated 
company is an Indian company, the actual cost of the trans-
ferred capital asset to the amalgamated company shall be 
taken to be the same as it would have been if the amalgamat-
Ing company had continued to hold the capiW uset for the 
P'AI"POHS of ita own busineilj"; 

IllHrtl_ 
e1 DeW 
aecUOD 
43A. 
Special 
provill1ona 
con .... 
queotial 
to cban,el 
in rate ot eXcAaille ot cur-
rea~. 
11 
(it) m ClaUle (6), after BzpiGtwHion 2, the foUeWini 
ExplQ1IGtion shall be inserted, namely:-
"E:tpl4nation 2A.-Where, in a scheme 01. amalgamation, 
any capital asset is transferred by the amalgamating company 
to the amalgamated company and the amalgamated company S 
is an Indian company, the written down value of the trana-
ferred capital auet to the amalgamated company ahall be 
taken to be the same as it would have been if the amalga-
matin, company had continued to hold the capital ueet for 
the purposes of its business.". 10 
17. After section .a of the Income-tax Act, the followiOl IeCtion 
ahan be inserted, namely:-
'~A. (1) Notwithstandinl anything contained in any other 
provision of this Act, where an assessee has acquired any asset 
from a country outside India for the purposes of his business or 15 
profession and, in consequence of a change in the rate of ex-
change at any time after the acquisition of such asset, there is an 
increase or reduction in the liability of the assessee as expressed 
in Indian currency for making payment towards the whole or a 
part of the cost of the asset or for repayment of the whole or a 20 
part of the moneys borrowed by him from any perlOn, 
directly or indirectly, in any foreign currency specifically for the 
purpose of acquiring the asset (being in either case the liability 
existing immediately before the date on which the change in the 
rate of exchange takes effect), the amount by which the liability 2S 
aforesaid is so increased or reduced during the previous year 
shall be added to, or, al the case may be, deducted from, the 
actual COlt of the asset al defined in claule (1) of section -i3 or the 
amount of expenditure of a capital nature referred to in clauae 
(iv) of sub-section (1) of section 35 or in section 35A or in clause 30 
(~) of sub-section (1) of section 36 or, in the cale of a capital 
asset (not being a capital asset referred to in section 50), the cost 
of acquisition thereof for the purposes of section 48, and the 
amount arrived at after such addition or deduction shall be taken 
to be the actual cost of the asset or the amount of expenditure of a 35 
capital nature or, as the case may be, the ~t of acquisition of 
the capital asset as aforesaid. 
EzptGt14ticm I.-In thlJ lub-teCUOIl, ual_ the eant., otha'-
.. iN reqmre.,-
(0) "rate of exchan.e" mean. the rate of exchaqe 40 
determined or recolniled by the Centl'al GoYe~t for 1ile 

conversion of Indian currency into foreign currency or 
foreign currency into Indian currency; 
7 of 1947. S 
(b) "foreign currency" and "Indian currency" have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in section 2 of the 
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. 
7 of 1947. 
TO 
IS 
20 
Explanation 2.-Where the whole or any part of the liability 
aforesaid is met, not by the assessee, but, directly or indirectly, 
by any other person or authority, the liability so met shall not be 
taken into account for the purposes of this sub-section. 
Explanation 3.-Where the assessee has entered into a con-
tract with an authorised dealer as defined in section 2 of the 
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 for providing him with a 
specified sum in a foreign currency on or after a stipulated future 
date at the rate of exchange specified in the contract to enable 
him to meet the whole or any part of the liability aforesaid, the 
amount, if any, to be added to, or deducted from, the actual cost 
of the asset or the amount of expenditure of a capital nature or, 
as the case may be, the cost of acquisition of the capital asset 
under this sub-section shall. in respect of so much of the sum 
specified in the contract as is available for discharging the liabil-
ity aforesaid. be computed with reference to the rate of exchange 
specified therein. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not be taken into ac· 
count in computing the actual cost of an asset for the purpose of th£' 
2S deduction on account 0' development rebate under section 33.'. 
18. In section 44 of the Income-tax Act, for the words and figures ~~:r(~ 
"sections 28 to 43", the words, figures and letter "sections 28 to 43A" section 44. 
shall be substituted. 
19. In section 47 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (v), the follow- Am.ad-
30 ing clauses shall be adde-d, namely:- mentjt ot 47 sec on . 
35 
"(vi) any transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation, of a capital 
asset by the amalgamating company to the amalgamated com-
pany if the amalgamated company is an Indian company; 
(vii) any transfer by a shareholder, in a scheme of amalgama-
tion, of a capital asset being a share or shares held by him in the 
amalgamating company if-
(a) the transfer is made in consideration of the allotment 
to him of any share or share-9 in the amalgamated company, 
and 

14 
(b) the amalgamated company is an Indian company!l. 
Amend- 20. Section 49 of the Income-tax Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
:~~~nOf49. section (1) thereof, and-
Amend-
ment of 
section lI5. 
Amend-
ment at 
Rection 72. 
(i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered,-
(a) in sub-clause (e) of clause (iii), after the word, 5 
brackets and figure "clause (v)", the words, brackets and 
figures "or clause (vi)" shall be inserted; 
(b) in the Explanation, for the word "section", wherever 
it occurs, the word "sub-section" shall be substituted; and 
(ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following 10 
sub-section shall be added, namely:-
"(2) Where the capital asset being a share or shares in 
an amalgamated company which is an Indian company 
became the property of the assessee in consideration of a 
transfer referred to in clause (vii) of section 47, the cost of IS 
acquisition of the' asset shall be deemed to be the cost of 
acquisition to him of the share or shares in the amalgamating 
company.". 
21. In section 55 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-clause (b)(ii) of clause (1), 
figures "section 49", the words, brackets and 
tion (1) of section 49" shall be substituted; 
for the word and 20 
figures "sub-sec-
(b) in sub-clause (ii) of clause (2), for the word and figures 
"section 49", the words, brackets and figures "sub-section (1) 
of section 49" shall be substituted. 25 
22. In section 72 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added 
at the end, namely:-
"Provided that where the whole or any part of such loss 
is sustained in any such business as is referred to in section 30 
33B which is discontinued in the circumstances specified in 
that section, and, thereafter, at any time before the expiry 
of the period of three years referred to in that section, such 
business is re-established, reconstructed or revived by the 
assessee, so much of the 109s as is attributable to such busi- 3S 
ness shall bc' carried forward to the assessment year relevant 

5 
10 
1& 
to the previous year in which the business is so re-established, 
reconstructed or revived, and-
(a) it shall be set off against the proftts and gains, 
if any, of that business or any other business carried on 
by him and assessable for that assessment year; and 
(n) if the loss cannot be wholly so set off, the amount 
of loss not so set off shall, in case the business so re-
established, reconstructed or revived continues to be 
carried on by the assessee, be carried forward to the 
following assessment year and so on for seven assess-
ment years immediately succeeding."; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), after the words "No 108s", the brackets, 
words and figure "[other than the loss referred to in the proviso 
to sub-section (1) of this section]" shall be inserted. 
IS 23. In Chapter VIA of the Income-tax Act, after section 80E, the Insertion 
following section shall be, and shall be deemed to haVe been, inserted ~~cti:: 
20 
35 
40 
with effect from the 1st day of April, 1966, namely: - 80F. 
"80F. Where, in the case of an individual who is a citizen of Deduction 
India, the total income (as computed before making any deduc- ~~ ~:=t 
tion under this Chapter and before deduction of any amount of neratlou 
annuity deposit under section 2800) includes any remuneration ~~~~ln 
received by him outside India from any University or other forei"n 
educational institution established outside India or such other ~~r~::e igf 
association or body established outside India as may be notifted prof:ssors, 
in this behalf by the Central Government in the Official Gazette, ~;~~ ers, 
for any service rendered by him during his stay outside India in 
his capacity as a professor, teacher, or research worker in such 
University, institution, assoc-iation or body, there shall be allowed 
a deduction from such remuneration of an amount equal to fifty 
per cent. thereof, in computing the total income of the 
individual: 
Provided that where the individual renders continuous ser-
vice outside India in such University, institution, association or 
body for a period exceeding thirty-six months, no deduction 
under this section shall be allowed in respect of the remunera-
tion for such service relating to any period after the expiry of 
the thirty-six months aforesaid.". 
24. In section 84 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) for sub-section (1), the follOWing sub-section shall be, 
and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
"(1) Save as otherwise hereinafter provided, income-tax 
shall not be payable by an assessee on so much of the profits 
Amend-ment ot 
sectlon 84. 

18 
and gains derived from any industri.al undertaking or busi-
ness of a hotel or from any ship, to which this section 
applies, as does not exceed six per cent. per annum on the 
capital employed in such undertaking or business or ship, 
computed in the prescribed manner."; S 
(b) in sub-section (2),-
(i) for clause (iii), the following clause shall be, and 
shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, namely:-
"(iii) it manufactures or produces articles or ope-
rates one or more cold storage plants, in any part of 10 
India, and has begun or begins to manufacture or pro-
duce articles or to operate such plant or plants, at any 
time within the period of twenty-three years next fol-
lOwing the 1st day of April, 1948, or such further period 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the IS 
Official Gazette, specify with reference to any particular 
industrial undertaking;"; 
(ii) in clause (iv), before the words "it employs ten or 
more workers", the words "in a case where the industrial 
undertaking manufactures or produces articles," shall be, and 20 
shall be deemed always to have been, inserted; 
(iii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that the condition in clause (i) shall not 
apply in respect of any industrial undertaking which is 25 
formed as a result of the re-establishment, reconstruc-
tion or revival by the assessee of the business of any 
such industrial undertaking as is referred to in section 
33B, in the circumstances and within the period specified 
in that section."; 30 
(c) for sub-section (3) and the Explanation occurring at the 
end, the following sub-section and Explanation shall, respectively, 
be substituted, namely:-
"(3) This section applies to the business of any hotel 
where all the follOWing conditions are fulfilled, namely: - 3S 
(a) the business of the hotel starts functioning on or 
after the 1st day of April, 1961, and is not fonned by 
the splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business 
already in existence or by the transfer, to a new busi-
ness, of a building previously used as a hotel, or of any 40 
machinery or plant previously used for any purposej 

s 
10 
(b) the business of the hotel is owned and carried 
on by a company registered in India with a paid-up 
capital of not less than five hundred thousand rupees; 
(c) the hotel has such number and types of guest 
rooms and provides such amenities as may be prescribed. 
having regard to the population and the tourist impor-
tance of the place in which the hotel is located; and 
(d) the hotel is, for the time being, approved for the 
purposes r¥ this sub-section, by the Central Government. 
Explanation.- Where-
(a) in the case of an industrial undertaking, any 
building, machinery or plant, or any part thereof. pre-
viously used for any purpose, or 
(b) in the case of the business of a hotel, any build· 
IS ing, or any part thereof, previously used as a hotel, or 
any machinery or plant, Or any part thereof, pre\'iously 
used for any purpose, 
is, in either case, transferred to a new business, and the total 
value of the building, machinery or plant or part so transfer-
20 red does not exceed twenty per cent. of the total value of 
the building, machinery or plant used in the business, then, 
for the purposes of clause (ii) of sub-section (2) and clause 
(a) of sub-section (3), the condition specified therein shall be 
deemed to have been COmplied with and the total value of 
25 the building, machinery or plant or part so transferred shaH 
not be taken into account in computing the capital employed 
in the industrial undertaking or the business of the hotel."; 
(d) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be, 
and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted, namely:-
30 "(3A) This section applies to any ship where all the 
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(i) it is owned by an Indian company and is wholly 
used for the purposes of the business carried on by it; 
(ii) it was not, previous to the date of its acquisition 
35 by the Indian company, owned and used in Indian terri-
torial waters by a person resident in India; and 
(iii) it is brought into use by the Indian company at 
any time within a period of twenty-three years next 
following the 1st day of April, 1948."; 
40 (e) in sub-section (5) and sub-section (6), for the words 
"profits or gains of an industrial undertaking or hotel", the 

Substitu-
tion of 
new sec-
tion for 
section 
85. 
Dividend 
from new 
industrial 
under-
taklnll or 
hotel busi-
ness or 
ship. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 88. 
is 
words "profits and gains derived from an industrial undertaking 
or business of a hotel or from a ship" shall be, and shall be 
deemed always to have been, substituted; 
(f) in sub-section (7), in clause (i), after the words "manu-
facture or produ('e articles", the words "or, as the Case may be, S 
operate the cold storage plant or plants" shall be, and shall be 
deemed always to have been, inserted; 
(g) in sub-section (8), for the words "a hotel" and "the 
hotel", the words "the business of a hotel" and "the business of 
the hotel" shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, 10 
respectively, substituted. 
(h) after sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall be, 
and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted, namely:-
"(9) The provisions of this section shall, in relation to a 
ship, apply to the assessment for the assessment year rele- IS 
vant to the previous year in which the ship is brought into 
use by the Indian company and for the fOUr assessment years 
immediately succeeding.". 
25. For section 85 of the Income-tax Act, the following section 
shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted, 20 
namely:-
"85. Subject to any rules that may be made by the Board in 
this behalf, income-tax shall not be payable by a shareholder in 
respect of so much of any dividend paid or deemed to be paid to 
him out of the profits and gains derived by a company from an 2S 
industrial undertaking or the business of a hotel or a ship to 
which section 84 applies as is attributable to that part of such 
profits and gains on which income-tax is not payable by the 
company und\~r section 84.". 
26. In section 88 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after clause (ia), the following clause 
~hal1 be inserted, namely:-
"(ib) as donations to the Prime Minister's Drought 
Relief Fund;"; 
(b) in sub-section (3), in the third proviso, after the word, 35 
brackets, figure and letter "clause (ia)", the words, brackets, 
figure and letter "or clause (ib)" shall be inserted. 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
27. In Chapter XIII of the Income-tax Act, under the sub-beading Amend-
"B J'd' t' " mcnt of - UT1S 'C ton ,- ChaDter 
(1) in section 121, for sUb-section (2), the following sub- XIII. 
section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) Where any directions issued under sub-section (1) 
have assigned to two or more Commissioners, the same area 
or the same persons or classes of persons or the same incomes 
or classes 01 income or the same cases or classes of cases, they 
shall have concurrent jurisdiction and shall perform such 
functions in relation to the said area or persons or classes uf 
persons or incomes or classes of Income or cases or classes of 
cases as the Board may, by general or special order in writing, 
specify, for the distribution and allocation of the work to 
be performed.": 
(2) for section 123, the following sectioD shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"123. (1) Inspecting Assistant Commissioners shall per- Jurlsdfc-
form their fUDctions In respect 01 such areas or 01 such per- ~~~~~tinl: 
sons or classes of persons or of such incomes or clalSCs 01 cAssfst~nt • ommls-IDcome or of such cases or classes of cases as the Com mis- sioners. 
sioner may direct. 
(2) Where any dIrections issued under SUb-section (1 ) 
ha ve assirned to two or more Inspecting Assistant Commis-
sioners, the salDe area or the same persons or classes of per-
sons or the same incomes or classes of income or the same 
cases or classes 01 cases, they shall have concurrent Jurisdic-
tion and shall perform such functions in relation to the said 
area Or persons or classes of persons or incomes or classes of 
income or cases or classes of cases as the Commissioner may, 
by general or special order in writing, specify, for the dis-
tribution and allocation of the work to be performed."; 
(3) in section 124,-
(i) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-see-
tions shall be substituted, namely:-
II ( 1) Income-tax Oftlcen shall perform their functioDs 
in respect of such areas or of such persons or classes 01 
persons or of such inco~es or classes of Income Or of 
such eases or classes of cases as the Commissioner may 
direct. 
(2) Where any directions Issued UDder sub-st".ctlon 
( 1) have assigned to two or more Income-tax OtBcers, tbe 
same area or the sante persons or classes 01 persons or 

Powers of 
Commis-
sioner rea-
pecting 
soecifted 
are ... cases, 
perSODS, 
etc. 
20 
tbe same incomes or classes of ineome or the same cases 
Or classes of cases, they shall have concurrent jurisdiction 
and shall perform such functions in relation to the said 
area or persons or classes of persons or Incomes or classes 
of income or cases or classes of cases as the Commissioner, 5 
or the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner authorised by 
him In this behalf, may, by general or special order In 
writing, specify, for the distribution and allocation of 
the work to be performed."; 
(ii) in sub-section (7), after tbe words "this sectIon", the 10 
words, figures and letter "or in section 130A" sball be in-
serted; 
( 4) for section 125, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"125. (1) The Commissioner may, by general or special 15 
order in writing, direct that-
(a) the powers conferred on tbe Income ,tax Officer 
and the Ap~llate Assistant Commissioner by or under 
this Act shall, in respect of any specified case or class of 
cases or of any specified person Or class of 20 
persons, be exercised by tbe Inspecting Assistant Com-
missIoner and the Commissioner respectively; 
(b) such of the functions assigned to the Income-
tax Officer by or under this Act, as are specified In any 
sucb order may, In respect of any specified area, case or 25 
('lass of cases, person or class of persons or class of in-
comes, be performed by an Inspector of Income-tax or 
any member of the ministerial staff, subordinate to the 
Commissioner or any other Income-tax authority 8ub-
ordinate to him, and specified in such order, subject to 30 
such conditions. restrictions or limitations as may be 
specified therein: 
Provided that the Commissi&"er shall not unless he Is 
authorised in this behalf by the Board by general or special 
order In writing, make an order under clause (b) In relation 35 
to the functions of an Income-tax Ontcer mentioned In the 
following provisions of this Act. namely, sections 131, 132. 
132A, 140A, 143, 144. 146, 147. 148, 162, 163, 1'71, 172, 174, 175, 
176, 17'7, 178, 183, 184. 185, 189. 221, 222, 226, 228, 253, and 2'71 
to 2'74 (botb Inclusive). 40 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
11 
(2) For tbe purposes of any case or person or proceeding 
under tbis Act in respect of wbicb or wbom an order under 
sub-section (1) applies,-
(a) wbere such order is made under clause (a) Of 
the said sub-section (1), references in this Act or III any 
rule made bereunder, to the Income-tax Officer and tbe 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner shall be deemed to be 
references to the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner and 
the Commissioner, respectively, and,-
(i) any provision of this Act reqU'irln, an ap-
proval or sanction of the Inspecting Assistant Com. 
missioner shall not apply; 
(ii) any appeal whicb would otherwise have lain 
to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner shal11ie to 
tbe CGmmissloner; 
(iii) any appeal wbich would have latn from an 
order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner to the 
Appellate TrIbunal shall lie from the order of the 
Commissioner; 
(b) where such order Is made under clause (b) of the 
said sub-section (1), references In this Act or in any rule 
made hereunder to the Income-tax OfBcer shall be deemed 
to include references to the Inspector of Income-tax or 
the member of the ministerial staff speclfted In such 
order."; 
(5) for section 127, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'127. (1) The Commissioner may, after giving the Power to 
assessee a reasonable opportunity of being beard In the ~as::~er 
matter, wherever It Is possible to do so, and after recording 
his reasons for doing so, transfer any case from any Income· 
tax Officer or Income-tax Officers subordinate to him to any 
otber Income-tax Officer or Income·tax OfIlcers also subor· 
dinate to him and the Board may similarly transfer any ease 
from any Income-tax Officer or Income-tax Offtcers to any 
other Income·tax Oftlcer or Income-tax Oftlcers: 
Provided that nothing In this sub-section shall be deem· 
ed to require any such opportunity to be given where the 
transfer Is from any Income-tax Officer or Income-tax Offi· 
cers to any other Income-tax Officer or Income-tax otIlcers 
and the offices of all such Income-tax Oftlcers are situated In 
the same city, locality or place: 

FuncUons 
of Inspec-
tors of 
Income-
tax. 
Income-
tax Oftlcer 
competent 
to perform 
aoy func-
tion or 
functions. 
Provided further that where any case has been trans-
ferred from any Income-tax Officer or Income-tax Officers to 
two or more Income-tax Officers, the Income-tax Officers to 
whom the case is so transferred shall have concurrent juris-
diction over tbe case and shall perform such functions In 5 
relation to the said case as the Board or the 
Commissioner (or any Inspecting Assistant Commissioner 
authorised by the CommisslOOer in this behaU) may, by 
general or special order in writing, specify, for the distribu-
tion and allocation of the work to be performed. 
(2) The transfer of a case under sub-section (1) may be 
made at any stage of the proceedings, and shall not render 
necessary the re-Issue of any notice already iSSUed by the 
Income-tax Officer or Income-tax Officers from whom the case 
10 
Is transferred. 15 
Explanation.-In this section and in sections 121, 123, 124 
an11125, the word "case", in relation to any person whose name 
Is speclfted in any order or direction Issued thereunder, means 
all proceedings under this Act In respect of any year which 
may be pending on the date of such order or direction or which 20 
may have been completed on or before such date, and In-
cludes also all proceedings under this Act which may be 
commenced after the date of such order or direction In res-
pect of any year.'; 
(6) for section 128, the following section shall be substituted, 25 
namely:-
'·128. Inspectors of Income-tax shall perform such func-
tions In the execution of this Act as are assigned to them by 
the Comrnlssloner by an order. whether made under clause 
(b) of sub-sectiOll (1) of section 125 or otherwise, or by any 30 
other Income-tax authority under whom they are appointed 
to work."; 
(7) after section 130, the following section shall be Inserted, 
namely:-
··130A. In respect of any function to be perfGrmed by an 35 
Income-tax Officer under any provision of this Act In rels. 
tlon to an assessee, the Income-tax Ofticer referred to therein 
shall,-
(a) in a case where only one Income-tax Ofllcer has 
JuJ'lICUctton over such assessee, be such Income-tax otllcer; 40 

23 
(b) in a ease where two or more Income-tax Oaced 
have concurrent jurisdiction over luch assessee, be the 
Income-tax Officer empowered to perform such function 
by the Board or, as the case may be, the Income-tax om-
eer to whom such function has been assigned by aD order 
of the Commissioner or of the Inspecting Assistant Com. 
missioner authorised by the Commissioner in tb1a 
behaU.". 
28. In section 138 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (1), the Amend-
10 following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- s=~nof138. 
IS 
7 of 1947. 
11 of 1022. 2S 
30 
11 of 1922 
3S 
"(l) (a) The Board or any other Income-tax authority speci-
fied by it by a general or special order in this behalf may furnish 
or cause to be furnished to-
(i) any officer, authority or body performing any func-
tions under any law relating to the imposition of any tax, 
duty or cess, or to dealings in foreign exchange as defined. 
in section 2(d) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 
1947; or 
(ii) such officer, authority or body performing functioDl 
under any other law as the Central Government may, if in 
its opinion it is necessary so to do in the public interest, 
specify by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, 
any such information relating to any assessee in respect of any 
assessment made under this Act or the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922 as may, in the opinion of the, Board or other Income-tax 
authority, be necessary for the purpose of enabling the officer, 
authority or body to perform his or its functions under that law. 
(b) Where a person makes an application to the Commis-
sioner in the prescribed form for any infonnation relating to any 
assessee in respect of any assessment made under 
this Act or the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, on 
or after the 1st day of April, 1960, the Commissioner may, 
if he is satisfied that it is in the public interest so to do, furnish 
or caus~ to be furnished the information asked for in respect of 
that assessment only and his decision in this behalf shall be final 
and shall not be called in question in any court of law.". 
29. In section 172 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (4), for Ametld-
the words "rate or rates for the time being", the words "rate or rates ment ot 
. f " sh 11 b bstit ted. section 172. m arce a e su u . 

Amend-
ment of 
Chapter 
XVII. 
Brokerage. 
Commis-
sion. tees. 
etc. 
24 
30. In Chapter XVII of the Income-tax Act, under the sub-heading 
"B.-Deduction at 8ource",-
(1) in section 193, the Explanation shall be omitted. 
(2) after section 194, the following section shall be inserted, 
~~~~ 5 
'194A. (1) Any person, not being an individual or a· Hindu 
undivided family, who is responsible for paying to a resident 
any income by way of-
(i) brokerage or commission, or 
(ii) fees or other remuneration for professio~l ser. 10 
vices (not being income chargeable under the head 
"Salaries"), or 
(iii) interest other than "Interest on securities", 
shall, at the time of credit of such income to the account of 
the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by 15 
issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever 
is earlier, deduct income-tax thereon at the rates in force: 
Provided tha t no such deduction shall be made in a case 
where the person (not being a company or a registered firm) 
entitled to receive such income furnishes to the person res- 20 
ponsible for making the payment an affidavit declaring that 
his total income assessable for the assessment year next fol-
lowing the financial year in which the income is credited 
or paid will be less than the minimum liable to income-tax. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply- 25 
(i) in a case where the income referred to in clause 
(i) of that sub-section credited or paid at anyone time 
does not exceed five hundred rupees or where the income 
referred to in clause (ii) or clause (iii) of that sub-section 
credited or paid at anyone time does not exceed two 30 
hundred rupees; 
. (ii) in respect of any such credit or payment of such 
incOme made before the 1st day of October, 1967.'; 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
(3) for section 196, the following section shall be substituted. 
namely:-
"196. Not\\ithstanding anything contained in the forego- Interest or 
ing provisions of this Chapter, no deduction of tax shall be ~vi:= 
made by any person from any sums payable to- :~s t:ay-
. (i) the Government, or 
(ii) the Reserve Bank of India, or 
Govern-
ment • Reserve 
Bank or 
certain 
corpOra-
tions. 
(iii) a corporation established by or under a Central 
Act which is, under any law for the time being in force, 
exempt from income-tax on its income, 
where such sum is payable to it by way of interest or divi-
dend in respect of any securities or shares owned by it or 
in which it has full beneficial interest, or any other income 
accruing or arising to it."; 
(4) in section 197, in sub-section (1), for clause (a), the fol-
lowing clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) income-tax is required to be deducted at the time 
of credit or, as the case may be, at the time of payment at 
the rates in force under the provisions of sections 192, 193, 
194A and 195."; 
(5) in sections 198, 199, 200, 202 and 205, for the words and 
figures "sections 192 to 195", the words, figures and letter "sec-
tions 192 to 194, section 194A and section 195" shall be substituted; 
,(6) for section 203, the foUowing section shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"203. Every person deducting tax in accordance with the Certificate 
provisions of sections 192 to 194, section 194A and section 195 ~':tu~~. 
shall, at the time of credit or payment of the sum, or, as the 
case may be, at the time of issue of a cheque or warrant for 
payment of any dividend to a shareholder, furnish to the 
person to whose account such credit is given or to whom 

Person 
paying 
interest, 
etc .. to 
residents 
without 
deduction 
of tax. to 
furnish prescribed 
return. 
Amend-ment of 
aections 
209 and 
215. 
Amend-
ment of 
First 
Scbedule. 
. such payment is made or the cheque or warrant is issued, 
a certificate to the effect 1.hat tax has been deducted. and 
specifying the amount so deducted. the rate at which 1.he 
tax has been deducted and such other particularli as may be 
prescribed." ; 
(7) in section 204.-
(i) for the words and fiiures "sections 192 to 203 
and section 285". the words. figures and letter "sections 
192 to 194. section 194A, sections 195 to 203 and section 
285" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause .(iii), for the words "in the case of pay-
ment", the words "in the case of credit, or. as the case 
may be, payment" shall be substituted; 
l8) after section 206, the following section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"206A. Any person responsible for paying any in-
come referred to in section 194A shall prepare, and \\;thin 
thirty days from the 31st day of March in each year, 
deliver or cause to be delivered to the Income-tax Officer 
5 
10 
IS 
in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed 20 
manner a return in writing showing-
(a) the name and address of every person who 
has furnished to him an affidavit under the proviso 
to sub-section (l) of section 194Aj 
(b) the amount of the income credited or paid 25 
during the financial year to each such person and 
the time or times at which the same was credited or 
paid, as the case may be; and 
(c) such other particulars as may be prescribed". 
31. In sections 209 and 215 of the Income-tax Act, for the words 30 
and figures "sections 192 to 195", the words, figures and letter "sec-
tions 192 to 194, section 194A and section 195" shall be substituted. 
32. In the Fir:it Schedule to the Income-tax Act, for the words and 
figures "sections 30 to 43", wherever they occur, the words, figures 
and letter usections 30 to 43A" shall be substituted. 3S 

27 
33. The amendments directed in the Third Schedule shall be made Certain 
in the Income-tax Act with effect from the 1st day of April, 1968. ~~t:-to 
Income-
tax Act 
S 
CHAPTER IV 
CF.rHER DIRECT TAXES 
Sf. In the Wealth-tax Act, 1957,-
(a) in section 2, in clause (h)-
(i) in sub-clause (i), the word "and" occurring at the end 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (ii), the word "and" shall be inserted 
10 at the end; 
IS 
(iii) after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall 
be, and shall be deemed always to have been, inserted, 
namely:-
"(iia) a corporation established by or under a Cen-
tral, Provincial or State Act, which is declared by the 
CC:1tral Government, by general Or special order, to be 
a company for the purposes of this Act.". 
(b) in section 8, for the Explanation, the following proviso 
and Explanation shall be substituted, namely:-
20 "Provided that where two or more Income·tax Oftlcers 
have jurisdiction or exercise powers under the Income·tax 
Act in respect of any individual, Hindu undivided family or 
company, they shall have concurrent jurisdiction and per-
form such functions of a Wealth-tax Officer under this Act 
2S in respect of such individual, Hindu undivided family or 
company, as the case may be, as the Commissioner or the 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Wealth-tax authorised 
by him in this behalf may, by general or special order In 
writing, specify, for the distribution aDd allocation of the 
30 work to be performed. 
E;rplanation.-For the purposes of this section, the in-
come-tax Oftlcer or the Income·tax Oftlcers having jurlsdlc-
tlon in relation to a person who is not an assessee within the 
to take 
effect trom 
1st April. 
1968. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 27 of 
1957. 

Power of 
Commis-
sioner respectinjl 
specifted 
areas, cases 
or persons. 
Power to 
transfer 
cases. 
• 
meaning of the Income-tax Act, shall be the Income-tax om· 
eer or Income·tax Oftlcers in respect of the area In which 
that person resldes."; 
(c) for section 8A, the following sections shall be substitut-
ed. namely:-
"8A. (1) The Commissioner may, by general or special 
order In writing, direct that such of the functions assIped 
to the Wealth·tax Officer by or under this Act as are specIft. 
s 
ed In any such order may, in respect of any speclfled area or 
specified cases or classes of cases or specified- persons or 10 
classes of persons, be performed by an Inspector of Wealth· 
tax or any member of the ministerial statt, appointed to work 
under the Commissioner or auy other Wealth-tax authority 
subordinate to him, and specified in such order, subject to 
such conditions. restrictions or limitations as may be IS 
specified therein: 
ProvicJed that the Commissioner shall not, unless he Is 
authorised in this behalf by the Board by general or special 
order in wrltfnlr, make an order under this sub·sectlon In 
relation to the functions of a Wealth·tax Oftlcer mentioned 20 
in the following provisions of this Act. namely, ser.tlons 158, 
16, 1'7, 18. 20, 22, 24. 32. 3'7 and 3'7A. 
(2) For the purposes of any case or person or proceed. 
Ing under this Act In respect of which or whom any order 
under sub-section (1) applies. references In this Act or In 25 
any rule made hereunder to the Wealth-tax Oftlcer shall be 
deemed to Include references to the Inspector of Wealth-tax 
or the member of the ministerial statT specified in such onter. 
R8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained In section 
8. the Commissioner may. after g'iving the assessee a reason- 30 
able opportunity of being heard In the matter. wherever It 
Is possible to do so, and after recording his reasons for doing 
so. transfer any case from any Wealth-tax Oftlrcr or wealth-
tax Oftlcers subordinate to him to any other Wealth·tax om-
cer or Wealth-tax Officer!! also subordinate to him and the 35 
Board mav similarly transfer any case from any Wealth·tax 
Officer or Wealth-tax Oftlcers to any other Wealth-tax Officer 
or Wealth·tax Oftlcers: 
Provided that nothing In this sub-section shall be deemed 
to require any such opportun'lty to be jtlv .. n where the trans- 40 
fer Is from anv W .. ..alth-tax Oftlcer or Wealth-tax Officers 
to any other Wealth-tax Officer or Wealth-tax Oftlcers and 
the offices of all sucb Wealth.tax Officers are situated In the 
same city. loeallty or place: 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
3S 
29 
Provided further that where any case has been trans-
ferred from auy Wealth-tax Of6.cer or Wealth-tax Officers 
to two or more Wealth-tax Officers, the Wealth-tax. Ofiicers 
to whom the case is so transferred shall have concurrent 
jurisdiction over the case aDd shall perform such functions 
in relation to the said case as the Board Or the 
Commissioner (or any Inspecting Assistant COlDlnis-
sioner of Wealth-tax authorised by the Commissioner in thiB 
behalf) may, by general or special order in writing, specify, 
for the distribution and allocation of the work to be perfor-
med. 
(2) The transfer of a case Wlder sub-section .(1) way be 
made at any stage 01 the proceedings, and shall not render 
necessary the re-issue of auy notice already issued by the 
Wealth-tax 08icer or Wealth-tax Officers from whom the 
case Is transferred. 
Explanation.-In this section and 1D. section SA, the word 
"cue", in relation to any per&OIl whose name is speciJied in 
any order made tbereWlder, means all proceedings under 
this Act in respect of auy year which may be pendm&' on the 
date of such order, or which may have been completed on 
or before such date, and includes also all proceeding!; under 
this Act which may be commenced after the date of such 
order in respect of any year.'; 
(d) in section 10, for the wOl1ls "su~j<!ct to sucn orden •. i1 
any, as the Board may mak\! for the distrib .. tion and allocation 
of the work to be performed", the following wurds shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"and shall perform such fWlCtiuns in relation to the said 
area or persons or classes of persons as the Board may, by 
general or special order in writing, specify, for the distribu-
tion and aliocatioo of the work to be performed"; 
(e) in section 11, for the words "they shall perform their 
IlUICtions in accordance with such orders as the Commissioner 
may make for the distribution and allocation of the work to be 
performed", the following words shall be substituted, namely:-
"they shall have concurrent jurisdiction aDd &hall perform 
sueh flUlCtions in respect of the saW areas or persons or 
classes of persons as the Commis.ldoner may, by general or 
speelal order in writing, specify, for the distribution and 
allocation of the ~ork to be performed"; 
75 M of Fin-5. 

lnl!Pector 
ill Wealtb-
tax. 
Wealth-
tax Omcer 
,:ompetent 
~ perform 
any func-
tion or 
tunction., 
Amend-
:DeBt. of 
Act 18 of 
lIN. 
30 
~f) for section HA, the following section shan be substituted. 
IlaJoely:-
"llA. A (;olluni5Sioner may empower any Inspector of 
Income. tax within the meaning of the Income-tax Act to 
work as an Inspect.or . ,Ilrl'~:' :h-ta", under any other Wealth· 5 
tax authority subordinate to him; and when he is so em· 
powered, he shall perform such functions in the execution 
of this Act as are assigned to him by the Commissioner by 
an order, wbetber made under sub-sectlon (1) of section SA 
or otherwise, or by any other Wealtb·tax authority 'under 10 
whom he is appointed to wl{)l'k."; 
(g) after section llA. the following section shall be inserted. 
namely:-
"liB. In respect of any function to be performed by a 
Wealtb-tax Officer under any provision of this Act, in rela, J <; 
tion to any assessee. the Wealth·tax Offte('r referred to there· 
III sball,-
(a) in a case where only one Wealth-tax Officer bas 
jurisdiction over such as<;essee. be sucb Wealtb-tax 
Oflicer; 20 
(b) In a case where two or more Wealth-tax Officers 
have concurrent jurisdiction over sucb assessee, be the 
Wealth-tax Officer empowered to perform sncb funetlon 
by the Board, or, as the ease may be. the Wealth-tax 
Officer to whom such function bas heen assigned by an 25 
order of the Commissioner or of the Inspecting Assistant 
t.:ommlssloner of Wealth-tax authorised by the Commis-
sioner in this behalf.". 
35. In the GUt-tax Act, 1958,-
(a) in section 7, for the ExpLanation. the follOwing proviso 30 
and ExpLanation shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that wbere two or more Income· tax Officers 
bave jurisdiction or exerc"lse powers under the In(~ome-tas 
Act in respect of any person. they shall have concurrent 
judlsdiction and perform such functions of a Gift-tax Otucer 35 
under this Act In respect of such person, as the Commissioner 
or the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax autho· 
rised by him In thts behalf may. by reneral or special order 
In writing, specify, for the distribution and alloeation of tb~ 
work to be performed. 40 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
3~ 
EX(11.aMtion.-For the purposes of this section. the 
Inc01D('·tax omc~r or Income·tax Oftlcers havlnt jurlsdlc· 
tlon In relation to a person who has no income assessable to 
Income·tax under the Income-tax Act. shall be the Income-
tax Officer or Income.tax Officers In respect of the area III 
which that p~rsOIl resides."; 
(b) for s('cti()fl '! A. the following set'tfons shalJ be substituted. 
IlkmeJy:-
Power ot 
'7.\. (1) Thf' Commissioner may. by gen~ral or sPecial c1ommla-. .~ 
order In wriUne-. direct that ~tlch of the functions asslpec1 respecting 
to the Glft·tax Offir.er by or under this Act as are speclfted specified 
In 8.ny such orner may. In respec't of any specified area or c-::::'or 
speclfled cases or classes of cases or speclfted persons or persOD. 
class~ of persons. be performed by an Inspector of Gift. 
tax or any member of tbe ministerial S'td. appointed to 
work under the CommL~!ifoner or any other Gift·tax authority 
subordinate to him. ao<l specified In snch order. subject to 
such conditions. restrictions or Umltatlons as may be 
qleclfled theretn: 
Provided that the Commissioner shan not. unless he III 
authorised fn thfs Mha'f by the Board by 'feDeral or special 
order In writlD~, make an order under this sub-seetlon In 
relation to the functions of 11 Gfft·tax Oftlcer mentioned fJI 
the folJowfnP.' l1rovislo'lls of this Act. namely. section" 15. IS. 
1'7. lSA. 20. 21. 21A. 23. 32. 33 and 36. 
(2) For the purposes of any ca~e or person or proceed· 
In2' nnder tbls Act. In respect of which or whom any order 
under sob·sectlon (n annUes. referen~s In tbls Act 01' In 
Ilny ntle made hereunder to the Gift-tax Otncer shan b .. 
Ifeemed to Include refp1'e11ce'l to the InSl)ect:or of OIft-tn 
01' the member of the minI!IIterial staff s"eetfted In surb order. 
'78. (n NotwlthstandJnc- anythlnr- contafned In IM"Ctlon &':::'w 
'7. the Commissioner may, aft.er dvlnJ!' the assessee a reAson- cues. 
able nnlJOrtunity of heme- ltf'>:lM In the mattf!!'. whel'@ver It 
f~ lJOiIIsfhle to do !lin. antl ltft4'!1' recordlnlZ his reason!ll for "nln, 
!Ul. transfer any ",.,se from any GIft-tllx ~('A"r or Gfft-talf 
Offtce1'!'l !lmboriUnate to hIm to "nv (lther (;flU"", otneP.1' nr 
Glft·tn Ot'ftef'NC "'SO SUMrdlnate tfl hi." 1In!! thp Board 'nl~ 
~mnarly tranoqfer any case from an" G'ft .. h-.r Offtf'.er (I" n1ft_ 
t:.'t omt'4'!n; t.o any nthp.r Gfft-tR'Ii O",('.er nr (;fftt.A'" 0fiIIC'f' ... · 

32 
Provi.ed. that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemel1 
to require aDy such opportunity to be given where the tra.s-
fer is from any Glft·tax Oftlcer or Gift-tax 0ftIce1'l to any 
other GIft·tax Ollcer or Glft·tax Oftlcel'B and the ollees of 
:t 11 such Glft·tax Oftlcers are situated In the same e1ty, loa- 5 
Uty or place: 
Provided further that where any case has been traasfer-
.-ed from any Gift-tax Ofllcer or Gift-tax OftIcers to two or 
more Glft·tax Officers, the Glft·tax Oftlcers to whom the 
case is so transferred shall have concurrent jurisdiction over 10 
the case an. shall perfonn such functions In relation to the 
satd case as the Board or the Commissioner (or 
Rny Inspecttng Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax 
authorised by the Commissioner In this behalf) may, by 
!{eneralor special order In wrltfng, specify, for the cUstrtbu- IS 
tion and allocation of the work to be performed. 
(2) The transfer of a case under sub-section (l) may 
he made at any stage of the proceedings, and shall not render 
necessary the re·lssue of any notice already Issued by the 
mlt·tax Oftlcer or Glft·tax Oftlcers from whom the ease i& 20 
transferred. 
E:rplanation.-In this Sf!Ction and In section '7 A. the word 
"ease". in relation to any person whose name Is specified In 
~nv order made thereunder. means all proceedln~ under 
this Act in resnoot of anv year which may be pemUnl' on 25 
the date of !iluch order. or which mav have heen COJnplf'tefl 
I)" or before such date. and Includes also 1111 nroceedinlrfl 
m1ller this Act which mav l}e Ilommenced after the date of 
<IIuch order in respect of any year.': 
( ~) in section 9. for the words "subjpcf; to sucb ordeMl. If 30 
.. nv. at;; the Board may m3ke for t.he ')J!rtrIbutton and allor,stton of 
thp work to be performel1.". the fonol"1n~ words ~hal1 be suhstl· 
tntf'd. namely:-
"~nrt !'IhalJ petfonn Rueh "'I"~tlo"'II II'. relation to the said a~a 
or ~rsons or clas!liles of Df'rson!ll as thp Roud may. by ~eral 3S 
0 .. special order in wrlttn~, SDP.clfv. for the distribution and 
111ocatton of the work to be performed": 
(,1) 'n section 10. for thp. words "they shall pP.l'fOrm their 
fnndtons In accordance wIth such orders as the CommissJoaer 

33 
may make tor the distribution and allocation of the work to be 
performed", the following words shall be substituted, namely:-
"they shall have concurrent jurisdiction and shall perform 
such functions In respect of the said areas or persons or 
5 classes of penons as the Commissioner may, by general 01' 
special order in writing, specify, for the distribution aDd 
allocation of the work to be performed"; 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
(e) for section 11, the following section shall be substituted. 
namely:-
"11. A Commissioner may empower any Inspector of In-Inapactor 
come-tax within the meaning of the Income-tax Act to work ~ Gift-
as an Inspector of Gift-tax under any other Gift-tax autho-
rity subordinate to him; and whee he is so empowered, he 
shall perform such functions in the execution of this Act aa 
are assigned to him by the Commissioner by an order. 
whether made under sub-section (1) of section '7A or other-
wise, or by any other Gift-tax authority under whom he II 
appointed to work."; 
'(f) section llA shall be re-numbered as section· 118 IUld 
before section llB as so re-numbered. the fo11owlnl' seetlon shall 
be Inserted, namely:-
"llA. In respect of any function to be performed bv a g:lt~ 
Gift-tax Officer under any provision of this Act, In relation competent 
to any assessee, the Gift-tax Officer referred to therein shall,- ~pe~m 
• tion or (a) m a case where only one Glft·tax Oftlcer hal functions, 
jurisdiction over such assessee, be RUch Gift-tax Oftlcer: 
(b) In a case where two or more Glft·tax OfIIcen 
have concurrent jurisdiction over such assessee, be the 
GIft·tax Oftlcer empowered to perform such function 
by the Board. or, as the case may be, the Glft·tax Officer 
to whom such function has been assigned by an order 
Of the Commissioner or of the Inspecting Assistant Cem· 
missioner of Gift-tax authorised by the Commfssionew-
In this behalf.": 
(g) in section 45,-
(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted. 
namely: 
"(da) any company rother than a company to which 
clause '(c) or clause (d) applies] to an Indian company 
in a scheme of amalgamation;": 

iUnend-
",ent of 
Aet70f 
1964. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 32 
of 1934. 
Snec11l 
duUea 01 
eu.toma. 
(ii) the exi~ting Explanation shall be re-numbered as 
Explanation 1 and after Explanation 1 as so re-numbered 
the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
'Explanation 2.-For the purpose of clause (da), the 
tenn "amalgamation" shall have the meaning assigned S 
to it in clause (1A) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act.'. 
38. In the Companies (Proflts) Surtax Act, 1964,-
(a) In section 3, in sab-sectlon (1),-
(i) for the words "and Income-tax Oftlcer", tbe wordJ 
"Income-tax Oftlcer and Inspector of Income-tax" Ihall be 10 
substituted; 
(ii) for the words "same as that he has'" the words 
"same as he has" shall be substituted; 
(b) In section 18,-
(i) for the figures. words and brackets "131 to 138 (both IS 
inclusive)", the figures, letters, words and brackets "118, W. 
129, 130, 130A, 131, 132, 132A, 133 to 136 (both inclusive)" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the figures, words and brackets "287 to 293 (both 
inclusive)", the figures, letters, words and brackets "287, 288.20 
288A, 288B, 289 to 293 (both inclusive)" shall be substituted. 
CHAPTER V 
INDI1tECT TAXES 
37. In the Fir'lt Schedule to the Indian Tariff Act. 1934 (herein-
after referred to a!'l the Tariff Act). in column 3, against each of the 2S 
items Nos. 1. fl. 6(1), 12(3), 13(5), 13(7). 15(3).25(2). 25(6),26. 
26 (1), 46 (2). 53 (1). 64(1): 64 (2). 65 (1), 67 (3), 68 (1). 68 (3). 69, 
69(1), 70(7). 70(8), 72(8), 72(9), 72(29), 72(31) (a). 72(31) (b). 
72 (32) (a). 72 (32) (b)' 76 (2) and 84 (II) (ii). the word "Revenue" 
shall be inserted. 30 
38. (1) In the case of goods chargeable with a duty of eustoms 
which is specified in the First Schedule to the Tariff Act. or in that 
Schedule as amended by a subsequent C~ntral Act. if any. or in that 
Schedule read with any notification of the Central Government for 
the time bein~ in force, there shall be levied and collected as an 3S 
addition to, and in the same manner as. the total amount so charge-
able, a special duty of customs equal to 10 per cent. of such amount: 

Pro'rided that in computing the total amount so chargeable, any 
duty chargeable under section 2A of the Tariff Act or section 39 of 
this Act .hall not be included. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day 
5 of March, 1968, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
1t107. before such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
repealed by a Central Act. 
39. (1) With a view to regulating or bringing greater economy RepllltcP' 
10 in imports, there shall be levied and collected, with effect from such dut~el o! 
date, and at such rate, as may be specified in this behalf by the eus oma 
Central Government by notification in the Otncial Gazette, on all 
or any of the goods mentioned in the First Schedule to the Tarit! 
Act or in that Schedule as amended by a subsequent Central Act, 
IS if any, a regulatory duty of customs not exceeding-
(a) 25 per cent. of the rate, if any, specified ill the said 
First Schedule read with any notification issued under section 
3A or sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Tariff Act; or 
(b) 10 per cent. of the value of the goods as determined in 
20 accordance with the provisions of section 14 of the Customs Act. 
·1962. 1962, 
whichever is higher: 
Provided that different dates and different rates may be spec11ied 
by the Central Government for different kinds of goods. 
25 (2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 15th day 
of May, 1968, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
1897. before such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
repealed by a Central Act. 
19112. 
30 (3) The regulatory duty of customs leviable under this section 
in respect of any goods referred to in sub-section (1) shall be In 
addition to any other duty of customs chargeable on such goods 
under the Customs Act, 1962. 
1162. (4)Tbe provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the rules and 
3S regulations made thereunder, including those relating to refunds 
and exemptions from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in rela-
tion to the levy and collection of the regulatory duty of customs 
leviable under this section in respect of any goods as they apply in 
relation to the levy and collection of the duties of customs on such 
40 goods under that Act or those rules and regulatiolll. 

Amend· 
ment Gt 
A.ct 1 of 
1944 
.. 
(5) Every nottfication issued under sub-section (1) shali, ai 
soon as may be after it is issued, be placed before each House of 
Parliament. 
40. In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred 
to as the Central Excises Act), in the First Schedule,- 5 
(a) in Item No.2, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Eighty-five rupees per quintal" shall be substituted; 
(b) in Item No.4, under "II. Manufactured tobacco-", for 
the entries in the third column against sub-items (1) (0, (1) (ii" 
(1) (iii) and (1) (iv), the entries ''Twenty-one rupees.", 10 
"Twelve rupees and seventy-five paise.", "Four rupees and 
fifty paise." and "One rupee and twenty paise." shall, respec-
tively, be substituted; 
(c) in Item No.6, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Five hundred and fifty rupees per kilolitre at fifteen IS 
degrees of Centigrade thermometer." shall be substituted; 
(d) in Item No. llA, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Twenty per cent. ad valorem." shall be substituted; 
(e) in Item No. 15A, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry ''Thirty per cent. ad valorem." shaU be substituted; 
(f) for Item No. 16A, the following item shall be substi-
tuted, ~ely:-
"I6A-RUBBER PRODUCTS, THE FOLLOW· 
lNG, NAMELY :-
20 
(I) LateX foam spoDle! • TwemylPcr cent. ad ~ 25 
(6) Plates. lhem aDd Itrips ua- Twenty per cent. 1IIl17GloNm. baIdeDed. whether vulc:ariiIcd or 
DOt, IUd whether combined with 
any tutile material or other-
~ 30 
0) PiPma IUd tubing, of unhardened Fifteen per cent. ad otJlor.M. 
I.--,~Wkaniled rubber" 
(if) ~ Tnn""iMUm. conveyor or eJe- Fifteen· per .. cent.:GtI fNIlDNm." j 
fttOr bcltI or belting, of vul- • 
c:a.oiMd rubber 3 S 
(9) in Item No. 18, for the entry in the third column, the 
eatry ''Forty-five rupees per kilogram." shall be substituted; 

(h) in Item No. 18A, for the entries in the third column, 
against sub-items (1) and (2), the entries "Six rupees and fifty 
paise per kilogram." and "One rupee per kilogram." shall, 
respectively, be substituted; 
S (i) in Item No. 22A, for the entries in the third column, 
against sub-items (i) and (ii) , the entries "Three hundred and 
seventy-five rupees per metric tonne." and "One hundred and 
seventy-five rupees per metric tonne." shall, respectively, De 
substituted; 
10 (;) in Item No. 27, for the entries in the third column 
against sub-items (a), (b), (bb), (c) and (d), the entries "Nine 
hundred and fifty rupees per metric tonne.", "One thousand four 
hundred and fifty rupees per metric tonne.", "Two thousand 
rupees per mettic tonne.", "Twenty per cent. ad valorem." and 
IS "Twenty per cent. ad voZerem." shall, respectively, be substituted. 
41. (1) When goods of the description mentioned in this section ~~Ui:lof 
chargeable with a duty of excise under the Central Excises Act (as excise on 
amended by this Act or any subsequent Central Act) read with any ~~~ 
notification for the time being in force issued by the Central Govern- . 
20 ment in relation to the duty so chargeable, are assessed to duty, 
there shall be levied and collected-
(a) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 6, 8, 9, 14D, 
22A, 23A except sub-item (1) thereof, 23B, 28, 29, sub-items (2) 
and (3) of Item No. 31 and Item No. 32 of the First Schedule 
2S to the Central Excises Act, a special duty of excise equal to 
10 per cent. of the total amount so chargeable on such goods; 
(b) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 2, 3 (1), sub-
items I, II (2) and II (3) of Item No.4, Items Nos. 13, 14, 14F, 
15, 13A, 15B, 16, 16A, 17, 18A(2), 21, 22, 23, 23A(1), 27, 
30 30, 31 (1), 33, sub-items (1), (3a) and (4) of Item No. 34 and 
Item No. 37 of that Schedule, a special duty of excise equal to 
20 per cent. of the total amount so chargeable on such goods; 
and 
(c) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 4 II (l), 18, 
'35 18A (1), 18B, 20, 29A, 33A, sub-items (2) and (3) of Item No. 
34 and radiograms comprised in Item No. 37A of that Schedule, 
a special duty of excise equal to 33! per cent. of the totaJ 
amount .0 chargeable on such goodi. 

Re,uls-
torydutiel 
of excise. 
J8 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day 
of March, 1968, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 10 of 1811~ 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
repealed by a Central Act. ... S 
(3) The duties of excise referred to in sub-seetion (1) in respect 
of the goods specified therein shall be in addition to the duties of 
excise chargeable on such goods under the Central Excises Act or 
any other law for the time being in force and such special duties 
shall be levied for purposes at the UBion and the proceeds thereof 10 
shall not be distributed among tll.e States. 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules 
made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemp-
tions from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the 
levy and collection of the duties of excise leviable under this sec- 15 
tion in respect of any goods as they apply in relation to the levy and 
collection of the duties of excise on such goods under that Act or 
those rules. 
42. (1) With a view to regulating or bringing greater economy 
in consumption, there shall be levied and collected, with effect 20 
from such date, and at such rate as may be specified in this behalf 
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, 
on all or any of the goods mentioned in the First Schedule to the 
Central Excises Act as amended by this Act or any subsequent 
Central Act, a regulatory duty of excise which shall not exceed 15 25 
per cent. of the vallie of the goods as determined in accordance with 
the provisiOns of section 4 of the Central Excises Act: 
Provided that different dates and different rates may be specified 
by the Central Government for different kinds of goods. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 15th day 30 
of May, 1968, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
repealed by a Central Act. 
10 ot 1897 
(3) The duties of excise referred to in sub-section (1) in respect 3S 
of the goods specified therein shall be in addition to the duties of 
excise chargeable on such goods under the Central Excises Act or 
any other law for the time being in force and such regulatory duties 
shall be levied for PloU'pOses of the Union and the proceeds thereof 
shall not be· distributed among the States. 
. . 

39 
(4) The proViSiOns of the Central Excises Act and the rules 
made thereunder, includi/ftg those relating to refunds and exemp-
tions from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the 
levy and collection of the regulatory duties of excise leviable 
S under this section in respect of any goods as they apply in relation 
to the levy and collection of the duties of excise on such goods 
under that Act or those rules. 
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as 
soori as may be after it is issued, be placed before each House of 
10 Parliament. 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. In the First Schedule to the Indian POlt Office Act, 1898,- Alnend-ment of 
• • Act80f 
(a) for the sub-heading uR6gt.Stered Newspapers" and entries 1898. 
IS thereunder, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"Registered Newspapers 
For a weight not exceeding one hundred 
grams 
For a weight exceeding one hundred grams 
20 and not exceeding two hundred and fifty 
grams 
For every two hundred and fifty grams, or 
fraction thereof, exceeding two hundred and 
fifty grams 
25 In the case of more than one copy of the same 
issue of a registered newspaper being carried 
in the same packet 
For a weight not exceeding one hundred 
grams 
For every additional one hundred and fifty 
grams, or fraction thereof, in excess of one 
hundred grams: 
5 paise 
10 paise 
5 pame 
5 paise 
5 paise 
3$ 
Provided that such packet shall not be delivered at any 
addressee's residence but shall be given to a recognised agent 
at the Post Oftice."; 

Amend-
ment of 
Act 47 
of 1961. 
Income-
tax. 
40 
(b) for the sub-heading "Parce18" and entries thereunder, 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"Parcels 
For a weight not exceeding four hundred. 
grams 
For every four hundred grams, or fraction 
thereof, exceeding four hundred grams 
65 paise 
65 paise.". 
44. In the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961, for' section 30, 
the following section shall be substituted, namely:-
5 
"30. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax 10 
Act, 1961, the Corporation shall not be liable to pay any tax 
under that Act on any of its income, profits or gains for the 
accounting year during which the Corporation is established and 
for nine accounting years following that year.". 
;~r,:::t 45. NotWithstanding anything contained in any law for the time IS 
menta being in force or any notification issued thereunder, the amend-
~~~e5~ of menls made in section 32 of the Unit Trust of India Act. 1963 by 
19113 by section 10 of the Unit Trust of India (Amendment) Act, 19M shall 
t9~lIllo o~ be deemed to have been made with effect from the 1st day of April, 
given re- 19M. •. ; •. i-' .... ~~ .. •• ,,,: •. " 20 trosJ)eC-
tive etfecl 
Recovery 46. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 68 of the 
01 tax on. A 196'" income Fmance ct, iJ--
voluntarily 
disclosed. (a) any income-tax which is payable by a person on the 
amount of income declared by him under the provisions of sub-
section (1) of that section but has not been paid withJn the 25 
period referred to therein (such tax being hereafte!" in this 
section referred to as the outstanding tax) saaIl be deemed to 
be tax due from the declarant on the date next following the 
expiry of the said period under a notice of demand issued under 
section 156 of the Income-tax Act. and the provisions of Chapter 30 
XV and Chapter XVII-D of, and the Second Schedule and the 
Third Schedule to, that Act shall, I!IO far B! may be, apply 
accordingly, subject to the modification that In section 231 of 
the said Act, references to one year shall be construed as refer-
ences to two years; and 35 
(b) the outstanding tax which is paid at any time after 
the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (1) of the 
said section 68 or is recovered under the provisions of clause 
(a) shall, for the purposes of sub-section (6) of the said sec-
tion 68, be deemed to be tax paid by the declarant under that 40 
section. 
43 of 1961. 
52 of 1963. 
17 of 1966. 
10 01 1985. 

12 of 1967. 47. Section 2 and section 3 of the Finance Act, 1967 are hereby RepeaL 
repealed and shall be deemed never to have been enacted. 
Declaration under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
5 that the provisions of clauses 38, 40 and 41 of this Bill shall have 
immediate effect under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act. 
16 of 1931. 1931. 
10 
, . THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) ,,- _ .. 
PART I 
INCO~TAX AND SURCHARGES ON INCO~TAX 
Paragraph A 
In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or UD-
registered firm or other association of persons or body of individuall, 
15 whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical person re-
ferred to in sub~lause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the In-
come-tax Act, not being a case to which any other Paragraph of this 
Part appIies,-
Rates of income-taz 
20 (I) where the total income does not S per7cent. of the total income; 
exceed RI. 5,000 
(2) Where the total income exceeds Re. 250 plus 10 per cent. of the amount 
Its. 5,000 but does not exceed by which the total income ax::eedI 
RI. 10,000 RI. 5.000; 
2S (3) where the total income exceeds R •. 750 pltu IS pel cent. of the amount by 
RI. 10,000 but does Dot exceed which the total income excecda 
Re. IS,ooo RI. 10,000; 
(4) where the total income exceeds R •. I,SOO plus 20 per cent. of the amount 
Re. 1.5,000 but doea Dot exceed by which the total income exeeed, 
30 R,. 20,000 RI. 1.5,000; 

M Where the 
Ra. 20,000 
Ra. 2,,000 
t.lta1 Income ext:eedI tt •. 2,500 pltu 3b per cent. of the Iftlount 
but cIoes DOt eltCeed by which the total income exceed. 
Re. 20,000; 
(6) where the 
RI. 2,,000 
RI.50,000 
total Income exceed. R.. 4,000 plw 40 per cent. of the amount 
but does not exceed by which the total income exceed. 5 
RI. 2,,000; 
(7) wbere the 
... 3~ 
RI.50,ooo 
total income a:ceeda Re. 6,000 plw ,0 per cent. of the amount 
but doea- DOt aceed by which the total income a:ceedI 
RI. 30,000; 
(I) where the 
RI. ,0,000 
RI. '/OsOOOI 
total incoant aceeds RI. r6,ooo plas 60 per cent. of the amount 10 
but doea nor aeeed by which the total income txc;eeda 
RI. ,0,000; 
C9r where the (total Income [exceedl 
Ra.70,ooo 
RI. 28,000 ",., 6, per cent. of the amount 
by wblcli the total income aceeda 
RI. 70,0001 15 
Provided that for the purposes of this Paragraph, in the case of a 
penon, not being a non-resident--
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
exceeding the following limit, namely:-
(a) Rs. 7,008 in the ease of every Hindu undivided 20 
family which as at the end of the previous year satisfies 
either of the follQlltlling two conditions, namely:-
(1) that it l1aa at least two members entitled to 
claim partition who are not less than eighteen years of 
age; or 2S 
(Z) that it has at leaM two members entitled to 
claim partition who are not lineally descended one from 
the other and who are not lineally descended from any 
othel' living metnber of the family; 
(b) RI. 4,000 in every other case; 
(it) where such person is an Individual or a Hindu undivid-
ed family, the income-tax computed at the rate heteinbefore 
specified shall be reduced by so much of the amount specified 
hereunder, as does not exceed the amount of income-tax so com-
30 
putMt- 35 
(0) RI. 12, 
(6J~. 200 • 
(c) RI. 220 • 
• • 
in the case of an unmarried Individual ; 
• III the case of a married incDVidual .. ho baa 
no chUd maJnly dependent on him 01' • 
Hindu undivided family which hu DO 
minor coparcener ;' 40 
• in the cue or • married iDdividual who 
has one child mainly dependent on him 
or • Hindu undivided family which has 
one minor coparcener snaiftfy ~rted 
from the income of such famUy J 4 S 

52 of 19.83. 
52 of UII3. 
(ti) Re. 240 . in the caae of • married individuii "'bO 
baa more than one ~ mainly dependent 
on him or • HincIu UDdivldecf family 
which baa more than one minor coparcener 
mainly aupportod from dID -.oe of 
S such family ; 
(iii) where the total income is twenty thousand rupees or 
less, the income-tax payable shall not exceed forty per cent. of 
the amount by which the total income exceeds the limit specift-
ed in sub-clause (a) or, as the case may be, sub-clause (b) of 
10 clause (~) of this proviso. 
Surcharges on income-tu 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the pre-
ceding provisions of this Paragraph shall be increased by the aggre-
IS gate of surcharges for purposes of the Union calculated. as specified 
hereunder: -
20 
(a) where-
(i) in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family, the amount of unearned income, not being income by 
way of interest on any security of the Central or State Gov-
ernment or income received in respect of units from the 
Unit Trust of India, established under the Unit Trust of 
India Act, 1963, included in the total income, or 
(it) in any other case, the amount of unearned income 
25 included in the total income, 
exceeds Rs. 15,000, 
a surcharge calculated on the difference between the amount of 
income-tax computed in respect of the income referred to in sub-
clause (i) or, 83 the case may be, sub-clause (ii), if such income had 
30 been the total income and the amount of income-tax computed in 
r~~qt of an inco~ of ~ 15,000 if it bad bectll the toal.ineome, at 
the following rate, namely:-
3S 
(I) where the amount of the difference 20 per cent. of the lIDount ofaucb cWrereuce; 
does not a.r:eed RI. 140500. 
(2) where the amount of the difference RI. 2,900 plIu 25 per cent. of the amount 
exceeds RI. 14,500 by which the difference af01'eBlid exceedI 
RI. 14,SOO; 
(b) where-
(i) in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family, the earned income and income by way of interest on 
any security of the Central or State Government and income 
received in respect of units from the Unit Trust of India, 
established under the Unit Trust of India Act, 1863, included 
in the total 1Dcome, or 

44 
(tt) in· any other case, the earned income included in 
the total income, 
exceeds Ra. 1 lakh, 
a surcharge calculated on the amount of the difference between the 
income-tax computed in respect of the income referred to in su~ S 
clause (i) or, as the case may be, sub-clause (ii), if such income had 
been the total income and the income-tax computed in respect of a 
total income of Rs. 1 la1m, at the following rate, namely:-
(I) where the amount of tho dl1fcrence S per cent. of the amount olauch di1fcrence ; 
does DOt exceed RI. 6,,000 10 
(2) where the amount of the di1ference RI. 3.2S0 plw 10 per cent. of the amount 
exceeds RI. 6,.000 but does DOt by which the(ditference aforesaid exceed. 
eJ:ceed RI. 1.30.000 RI. 6,.000 ; 
(3) where the amount of the dUference RI. "."0 • I, per cent. of the amount 
exceeds RI. 1.30.000 by which the dift'crence aforesaid exceeds IS 
RI. 1.30.000; aod 
(c) a special surcharge calculated at the rate of ten 
per cent. on the aggregate of the following amounts, namely:-
(i) the amount of income-tax computed in accordance 
with the preceding prOvisions of this Paragraph; and 20 
(ii) the aggregate of the amounts of the surcharges 
calculated in accordance with clause (a) and clause (b) of 
this sub-paragraph. 
ParagTaph B 
In the case of every co-operative society,-
Rate. Of income-tax 
(I) where the total inc:ome does not S per cent. of the total inamej 
exceed RI. ,,000 
2S 
(2) where the total income exceeds RI. 250 ,z,u 10 per cent. of the amount by 
RI. ,.000 but does Dot cuoed which the tolIIl income exceeds RI. ,,000; 30 
RI. 10.000 
(3) where the total income exceed. RI. 7,0 ,,,,, IS per cent. of the amount by 
RI. 10,000 but doea not exceed which the total income exceeds RI.IO,ooo; 
RI. 1,,000 
(4) where the total incomI w:eeda RI. 1.,00 fIlau 30IFer cent. of the IIIDOUDt 3S 
RI. 1',000 but doea Dot aceed by which the total iDcome exoDCds 
RI. 20.000 RI. 1,.000 i 
(5) where the total income exceeds RI. 2.500 ,lru 25 per cent. of the amount 
RI. 20,000 but does DOt aceed by which the total income exceeds 
RI. 2,,000 RI. 20.000 ; 40 
(6) where the total iDcomc esceeda RI. 3.7,0 ,lus 41 per cent. of the amount 
RI. 2,,000 by which the total income exceeds 
RI. 2,.000: 

Provided that-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
exceeding Rs. 4,000; and 
(ii) where the total income is twenty thousand rupees or 
5 less, the income-tax payable shall not exceed forty per cent. of 
the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 4,000. 
Surcharges on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of surcharges for pur-
10 poses of the Union calculated as specified hereunder:-
IS 
(a) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000, a surcharge 
calculated at the rate of 6! per cent. of the amount of the differ-
ence between the income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified and the income-tax computed in respect of a total in-
come of Rs. 25,000; and 
(b) a special surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per 
cent. on the aggregate of the following amounts, namely:-
(i) the amount of income-tax computed at the rate 
hereinbefore specified; and 
20 (ii) the amount of the surcharge calculated in accord-
ance with clause (a) of this sub-paragraph. 
Paragraph C 
In the case of every registered firm.-
Rates Of income-tax 
2S (I) where the total income does not 
exceed Rs. 25,000 
Nil; 
(2) where the total income esceeds 
Rs. 25.000 but doe. not escecd 
Re.50.000 
30 (3) where the total income exceeds 
Rs. 50,000 but docs not exceed 
Rs.I,oo,ooo 
(4) where the total Income~exceeds 
Rs. 1,00,000 
6 per cent. of the amount by which 
the total income exceeds Rs. 25.000; 
Rs. 1.500 plus 8 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 50.000; 
RI. 5.500 ~lus 12 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total income exceeds 
RI. 1,00,000. 
3S Surcharges on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of surcharges for pur-

poses of the Union calculated as specified hereunder:-
(a) in the case of a registered finn whose total income in-
cludes income derived from a profession carried on by it and the 
income so included is not less than flfty-one per cent. of such 
total income, a surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per cent. 5 
of the amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified; 
(b) in the case of any other registered firm, a surcharge 
calculated at the rate of twenty per cent. of the amount of 
income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore specifled; and 10 
(c) a special surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per 
cent. on the aggregate of the following amounts, namely:-
(i) the amount of income-tax computed at the rate 
hereinbefore specifled; and 
(ii) the amount of the surcharge calculated in accord- IS 
ance with clause (a), or, as the case may be, clause (b) of 
this sub-paragraph. 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income ., 45 per cent. 
Surcharges on income-tax 
-.. , 
" 
20 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specifled shall be increased by the aggregate of surcharges for pur-
poses of the Union calculated as specifled hereunder: - 25 
~ .... 
: 
r-
'\ 
(a) a 8~eharge calculated at the rate of ten per cent. of the 
amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore speci-
fied; and 
(b) a special surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per 
cent. on the aggregate of the following amounts, namely: - 30 
(i) the amount of income-tax computed at the rate 
hereinbefore specifled; and 
(ii) the amount of the surcharge calculated in accord-
~ce with clause (a) of thi!J sub-paragraph. 

• 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
r 40 
... 
4S 
Paragraph E 
In the case of the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
31 of 19116. under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956,-
31 of 
Rates of income-tu 
(,) on that part of its total income S2' S per cent. ; 
which consists of profits and gainl 
from life insurance business 
(ii) on the balance, if any, of the the rate of Income-tu applicable. in 
total income accordIDce with Parlllraph F of this 
Part, to the total income of a dome~tic 
company which III a company in which 
the public arc lubstantil1ly interested. 
Paragraph F 
In the case of a company, other than the Life Insurance Corpora-
tion of India established under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 
1958.1956,-
Rates of lncome-taz 
I. In the case of a domestic company-
(A) (I) where the company is a 
company in which the public 
arc substantially interestcd,-
(i) in a case where the 
total income does not 
exceed Rs. 25,000 
(ii) in a case where the 
total Income exceeds 
RS.25,000 
(2) where the company is not 
a company In which the 
public are substantially 
Interested,-
(') in the cue of an in· 
dustrial company-
(J) on \10 much of the 
total inc:ome 1\1 
does DOt exceed 
RI. JO,oo,ooo 
(2) on the balance, If 
any. of the total 
income 
(i.) in any other case 
(B) in addition, where the company 
is-
(i) a company in which the 
public are 8ublltantiallv 
UltCrestcd, or 
45 per cent. of the total income; 
SS per cent. of the total income; 
55 per ccnt. ; 
60 per cent. ; 
6S per cent. of the total incomc ; rnd 

(ii) a company as is referred 
. to in clause (iii) of IIUb-
section (z) or clause 
(a) or clause (6) of 8ub-
aection (1) of section 104 
of the ncome-tu Act, 
or 
(iiI) luch a company as is 
exempt from the opera-
tion of section 1004 of the 
said Act by a notification 
issued under the provi-
sions of sub-section (3) 
of that section, 
OD 80 much of the total in- 7. S per cent.: 
come as does Dot exceed the 
relevant amount of distribu-
tions of dividends by the 
company 
10 
IS 
Provided that the income-tax payable by a domestic company, 20 
being a company in which the public are substantially interested, the 
total income of which exceeds Rs. 25,000, shall not exceed the aggre-
gate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been Rs. 25,000 (the income of 25 
Rs. 25,000 for this purpose being computed as if such income 
included income from various sources in the same proportion as 
the total income of the company); and 
(b) 80 per cent. of the amount by which its total income 
exceeds Rs. 25,000. 30 
Ea'Planation I.-In clause (B) , the expression "the relevant 
amount of distributions of dividends" means the aggregate of the 
following amo~nts, namely:-
(a) the amount, if any, by which the "relevant amount of 
distributions of dividends" by the company as computed in 35 
accordance with Explanation 1 to item I of Paragraph F of Part 
I of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1966 exceeds its total 13 of 1966. 
income (reduced by the amount of capital gains, if any, relating 
to capital assets other than short-term capitnl assets included 
therein) assessable for the assessment year commencing on the 40 
1st day of April, 1966; and .,-- .... 
(b) so much of the amount of the dividends, other than 
dividen:is on preference shares, declared or distributed by the 
company during the previous year as exceeds ten per cent. of its 
paid-up equity share capital as on the 1st day of the previous 45 
year. 

Explanation 2.-For the purposes of clause (B), where a part of 
the income of a company is not included in its total income because 
it is agricultural income, the amount declared or distributed as 
dividends (other than dividends on preference shares) shall be 
S deemed to be such proportion thereof as the sum specified in clause 
(a) bears to the sum specified in clause (b), such sums being-
(a) the average amount of the total income of the company 
of the five previous years in which it has been in receipt of tax-
able income immediately preceding the relevant previous year; 
10 and . . ~'.r.IIIj-.t 
t .~. ~\h.oo.i~1 
(b) the average amount of the total profits and gains (ex-
cluding capital receipts) of the company of the five previous 
years referred to in clause (a) reduced by such allowances as 
may be admissible under the Income-tax Act but whic!\ have 
IS not been taken into account by the company in its profit and 
loss accounts for the said five previous years. 
Explanation 3.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that where any dividends were declared by the company before the 
commencement of the previous year and are distributed by it during 
20 that year, the amount of such dividends shall not be included in the 
amount of dividends referred to in clause (b) of Explanation 1. 
30 
35 
II. In the case of a company other than a domestic company-
(i) on sO much of the total income 
as ConSiltl of-
(a) royalties received trom 
an Indian concern in pur-
suaace of an agreement 
made by it with the Indian 
concern after the 31st day 
of March. 1961,. or 
(b) fees for rendering tech-
nical services received from 
an Indian concern in pursuance 
of an lllrecment made by it 
with the Indian concern after 
the 29th day of February, 
1964, 
and where such agreemeDt has, in 
either case, been approved by the 
Central Government 
(ia) on the balance, if any,. of the 
total income 
SO per cent.; 
70 per cent. 
PART II 
Rates for deduction Of tu at source in certain cases 
45 In every case in which under the provisions of sections 193, 1M, 
194A and 195 of the Income-tax Act, tax is to be deducted at the rates 

in loree, deduction shall be made from the income subject to deduc-
tion, at the following rates:-
I. In the case of a person other than I company-
(a) where the penon is resident-
Income-tax 
Rate of 
income-tax 
Rate of 
surcharge 
(I) on income by way of brokerqc or com-
mission. • • • • • • 12·5 per cent. 2' 5 per cent. 
(il) on any other income (excluding interest 
payable on a tax free security) . .]8 per cent. 4 per cent. 
(b) where the person is not resident in India-
10 
(I) on the whole income (excluding interest Income-tax at 25 per cent. and 
payable on a tllX free security) surcharge at 8 per cent. of the IS 
amount of the income 
income-tax and surcharges on 
income-tax in respect of the 
income at the rates prescribed 
in Paragraph A of Part 111 of 20 
this Schedule, if luch income 
had been the total income, 
whichever is higher; 
(il) on the income by way of mterest payable 
on a tax free security. • _. . 12' S per cent. 4 per cent. 25 
2. In the cue of a company-
(4) where the company is a domestic company-
(I) on income by way of hrokerqc or com-
mislion . ] 5 per cent. Nil 
(il) on any other income (excluding interest 30 
payable on a tax free security) . • 22 per cent. fV;/ 
(b) where the company is not a domeRtic com. 
pany-
(I) on the income by way of dividends pay-
able by an Indian company as is referred 
to in the proviso to section BSA of the 
Income-tax Act 
(il) on the income by way of dividends pay-
able by any domestic company other 
than a company referred to in (I) herein-
above . 
(ii.) on the income by way of royalties payable 
by an Indian concern in pursUDce of an 
agreement made by it with the Indian 
concern after the 31St day of March, ]961, 
and '" hleh: has been approved by the Cen-
tral Government 
]4 per cent. 
28 per cent. 
sO per cent. 
3S 
Nil 
40 
Nil 
4S 
Nil 
----- ------

10 
Income-tax 
Rate of 
iDc:omc-tax 
(iv) on the income by way of fees payable 
by an Indian concern for rendering tech-
nIcal lervices in pursuance of an qree-
ment made by it With the Indian concern 
after the 29th day of February, 196,4,· 
and which ha. been approved by the 
Central Government . . . • So per cent. 
(,,) on the income by way of interest payable 
on a tax free security 44 per cent. 
<vI) on Iny other income 70 per cent. 
PART III 
Rate of 
lurcharge 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil. 
IS Rates fOT calculating or charging income-tax in certain COles, 
deductingincome-ta.t: from inco11l.e chargeable under the head 
"Salaries" and computing "advance tax". 
In cases in which income-tax has to be calculated under the first 
proviso to sub-section (5) of section 132 of the Income-tax Act or 
20 charged under sub-section (4) of section 172 or sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 174 or section 175 or sub-section (2) of section 176 or deduc!ed 
under section 192 of the said Act from income ohargeable under the 
head "Salaries" or in which the "advance tax" payable under 
Chapter XVII-C of the said Act has to be computed, at the rate or 
2S rates in force, suCh income-tax or, as the case may be, "advance tax" 
shall be so calculated, charged, deducted or computed at the follow-
ing rate or rates:-
Paragraph A 
In the case of every individual Or Hindu undivided family or un-
30 registered firm or other association of persons or body of individuals, 
whether incorporated or not. Or every artificial juridical person refer-
red to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 of the Income-
tax Act. not being a case to which any other Paragraph of this Part 
applies.-
3S Rates of income-tax 
(J) where the total income does DOt , per cenL of the total income; 
exceed R9. ~,ooo 
(2) where the total income exceeds Re. 2$0 ,,," 10 per cent. of the amount 
R, . .s,ooo hut does not exceed RI. JO,ooo by which the total income. exceeds 
40 R .. 5.000; 

• 
(3) where the total income 
Ra. 10,000 but does not 
RI.15.000 
exceeds R~. 7.50 ph4s 1.5 per cent. of the amount by 
exceed which the total income exceeds 
Re. 10,000; 
(4) .vhere the total income 
Rs. 1.5,000 but doeenot 
RI.20,000 
exceeds Rs. 1,500 plus 20 per cent. of the amount 
exceed by which the total income exceeds 5 
Rs. IS,OOO; 
(5) where the total income exceeds Rs. 2,SOO pltu 30 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total income exceeds 
RI. 20,000; 
RI. 20,000 but does not exceed 
RS.25,000 
(6) where the total income exceeds Rs. 4,000 plus 40 per cent. of the amount 10 
by which the total income exceeds 
RI. 25,000; 
Rs.· 25,000 but docs not exceed 
RI.30,000 
(7) where the total income exceeds 
RI. 30,000 but does not exceed 
Rs. so,ooo 
Rs. 6.000 1'114$ so per cent. of the amount 
~ which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 30,000 ; IS 
(8) where the 
RI. 50,000 
RI.70,ooo 
(9) where the 
RI.70.000 
total income exceeds Rs. 16,000 • 60 per Cent. of the amount 
but does not exceed by whidl the total income exceeds 
Re. 50,000 j 
total .income ellCCeds Rs. 28,000 plus 65 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total income exceeds 20 
Re. 70,000: 
Provided that for the purposes of this Paragraph, in the case of a 
person, not being a non-resident-
. (i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
exceeding the following limit, namely: - 2S 
('1) Rs. 7,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided 
family whioh as at the end of the previous year satisfies 
either of the following two conditions, namely:-
(1) that it has at least two members entitled to 
claim partition who are not less than eighteen years of 30 
age; or 
(2) that it has at least two members entitled to 
claim partitiGn who are not lineally descended one from 
the other and who are not lineally descended from any 
other living member of the family; 3S 
(b) Rs. 4,000 in every other case; 
(ii) where such person is an individual whose total income 
does not exceed Rs. 10,000 and who has, during the previous year, 
incurred any expenditure for the maintenance of anyone or 
more of his parents or grand-parents mainly dependent on him, 40 
the income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore speCified shall 
be reduced by so much of the amount speCified hereunder, as 
does not exceed the amount of income-tax so computed:-
(a) Re. 145 in the cue of an unmarried individual; 
(6) Re. 220 in the cue or a married individual who 4S 
has DO child mafnly dependent on him; 

5 
(c) Rs. 240 
(d) RI. 260 • 
63 
in the CAse of a married individual who 
has one child mainly dependent on bim; 
in the case of a married individual who 
has more than one child mainly dependent 
on him; 
(iii) where such person is an individual not falling under 
clause (ii) or a Hindu undivided family, the income-tax comput-
ed at the rate hereinbefore specified shall be reduced by so 
much of the amount specified hereunder, as does not exceed the 
10 amount of income-tax so computed:-
15 
20 
(a) Rs. us 
(b) Rs. 200 
(c) RI. 220 
(4) Rs. 240 
in the case of an unmarried individual; 
in the CAse of a married individual who 
has no child mainly dependent on him 
or a Hindu undivided family which hu 
no minor coparcener ; 
in the case of a married individual who 
has one child mainly dependent on him 
or a Hindu undivided family which hu 
one minor coparcener mainly supported 
from the income of such family ; 
in the cue of a married individual who 
has more than one child mainly dependent 
on him or a Hindu undivided family 
which has more than one minor co-
parcener mainly supported from the in-
come of such family ; 
(iv) (A) where such person is an individual whose total 
income exceeds Rs 10,000 but does not exceed Rs. 20,000, and 
who has, during the previous Jllear, incurred any expencditure for 
30 the maintenance of anyone or more of his parents or grand-
parents mainly dependent on him, the income-tax payable by 
him in respect of such total income shall not exceed the 
aggregate of-
(1) the income-tax which would have been payable by 
35 the individual if his total income had been Rs. 10,000, and 
40 
(2) 40 per cent. of the amount by which the total 
income of the individual exceeds Rs. 10,000; 
(B) where such person is not an individual whose case falls 
under sub-clause (A) and the total income of such person doe" 
not exceed Rs. 20,000, the income-tax payable thereon shall not 
exceed 40 p~r cent. of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds the limit specified in sub-clause (a) or, as the case may 
be, sub-clause (b) of clause (i) of this proviso. 

Explanation.-For the purposes of clause (ii) and sub-clause (A") 
of clause (iv) of this proviso, a parent or grand-parent of an indivi-
dual shall not be treated as being mainly dependent on such indivi-
dual if the income of the parent or, as the case may be, the grand-
parent from all sources in respect of the previous year relevant to S 
the assessment year exceeds one thousand rupees. 
Surcharges on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the pre-
ceding provisions of this Paragraph shall be increased by the aggre-
gate of surcharges for purposes of the Union calculated as specified 10 
hereunder: -
(a) where-
(i) in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family, the amount of unearned income, not being income by 
way of interest on any security of the Central or State Gov- IS 
ernment or income received in respect of units from the 
Unit Trust of India, established under the Unit Trust of India 
Act, 1963, included in the total income, or 5a of 1963. 
(ii) in any other case, the amount of unearned income 
included in th£: total income, 20 
exceeds Us. 30,000, 
a surcharge calculated on the difference between the amount of 
income-tax computed in respect of the income referred to in sub-
clause (i) or, as the case may be, sub-clause (ii), if such income had 
been the total income and the amount of income-tax computed in 2S 
respect of an income of Rs. 30,000 if it had been the total income, at 
the following rate, namely:-
(I) where the amount of the difference 20 per cent. of the amount of such dift'erence; 
does not exceed Rs. 10.000 
(a) where the amount of the difference RI. a,ooo lIlus as per cent. of the amount 30 
exc:eedl RI. 10,000 by whicb the difference aforesaid ex-
ceeds RI. 10.000; 
(b) where-
(i) in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family, the earned income and income by way of interest on 3S 
any security of the Central or State Government and income 
received in respect of units from the Unit Trust of India, 
established under the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963, included ,a of 1963. 
In the total income, or 

55 
(ii) in any other case, the earned income included in 
the total income, 
exceeds Rs. 1 lakh, 
a surcharge calculated on the amount of the difference between the 
income-tax computed in respect of the income referred to in sub· 
S clause (i) or, as the case may be, su~clause (ii), if such income had 
been the total income and the income-tax computed in respect of a 
total income of Rs. 1 lakh, at the following rate, namely:-
(I) where the amount of the 5 per cent. of the amount of such diflerenc(; 
di1fcrence does not exceed 
10 RI.65.ooo 
(2) where the amount of the Rs. 3,250 plw 10 per cent. of the amount 
difference exceeds RI. 65.000 by which the difference aforesaid exceed, 
but does not exceed RI. 6S,ooo; 
Rs. 1.30.000 
15 (3) where the amount of RI. 9.750 plus IS per cent. of the amount 
the difference exceeds by which the ditference aforesaid C'xceedN 
20 
(I) 
30 
(2) 
35 
(3) 
(4) 
40 (S) 
(6) 
Rs. 1,30,000 Rs. 1,30.000; and 
(c) a special surcharge calculated at the rate of ten 
per cent. on the aggregate of the following amounts, namely:-
(i) the amount of income-tax computed in accordance 
with the preceding provisions of this Paragraph; and 
(ii) the aggregate of the amounts of the sHrchurges 
calculated in accordance with clause (a) and clause (b) of 
this sub-paragraph. 
Paragraph B 
In the ca~e of every co-operative society,-
Rates of income-ta.T 
where the total 
exceed Rs . .5.000 
where the total 
Rs. 5,000 but 
RI. 10.000 
where the total 
Rs. 10.000 but 
RI. 15.000 
where the total 
RI. 15,000 but 
RI.20,ooo 
where the total 
RI. 20.000 but 
R,. 25,000 
where the total 
Rs. 2.5,000 
income does not 
incom exceeds 
does not exceed 
Income exceeds 
does not exceed 
Income exceeds 
does not exceed 
income uceeds 
does not exceed 
income exceeds 
.5 per cent. of !he total Income; 
Rs. 2,0 plw 10 per cent. of the amount by 
which t.be total income exceeds Ra • .5,000; 
Ra. 750 plus 15 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total Income exceed. 
RII.IO,ooo; 
Rs. 1.500 p/w 20 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total income exceeds 
RI. IS,ooo; 
Rs. 2,500 plw 2S per cent. of the a mount 
by which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 20,000; 
RI. 3,7,0 plul 41 per cent. of the amount 
by which the total Income exceed, RR_ 2c_nnn' 

Provided that-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income not 
exceeding Rs. 4,000; and 
(ii) where the total income is twenty thousand rupees or 
less, the income-tax payable shall not exceed forty per cent. of S 
the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 4,000. 
Surcharges on income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of surcharges for pur-
poses of the Union calculated as specified hereunder: - 10 
(a) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000, a surcharge 
calculated at the rate of 6! per cent. of the amount of the differ-
ence between the income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified and the income-tax computed in respect of a total in-
come of Rs. 25,000; and IS 
(b) a special surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per 
cent. on the aggregate of the following amounts, namely:-
(i) the amount of income-tax computed at the rat~ 
hereinbefore specified; and 
(ii) the amount of the surcharge calculated in accord· 20 
ance with clause (a) of this sub-paragraph. 
]Ja.ragra.ph C 
In the case of every registered firm,-
Rates of income-tax 
(1) where the total income docs not I Nil; 
exceed Rs. 25,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds 6 ~r cent. of the amolUlt by which the total 
Rs. 25,000 but does not exceed Income exceeds Rs. 25,000; 
RI. So,coo 
25 
(3) where the total income exceeds RI. 1.500 plw 8 per cent. or the amount 30 
Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed by which the total Income exc:ceda 
RI. 1.00,000 RI. 50,000; 
(4) where the total income exceeds RI. 5.500!'!W 12 pcr~nt. of the amount 
RI. 1,00,000 by which the total income ac:eed. 
RI. 1.00,000. 35 

57 
Su.rcharges on income-tax 
'rhe amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbef(lr~ 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of surcharges for pur-
poses of the Union calculated as specified hereunder:-
S (a) in the case of a registered firm whose total income in· 
cludes income derived from a profession carried on by it and the 
income so included is not less than fifty-one per cent. of such 
total income, a surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per cent. 
of the amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified; 10 
(b) in the ('ase of any other registered firm, a surcharge 
calculated at the rate of twenty per cent. of the amount of 
income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore specified; and 
(c) a special surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per cent. 
IS on the aggregate of the following amounts, namely;-
(i) the amount of income-tax computed at the tate 
hereinbefore specified; and 
(ii) the amount of the surcharge calculated in accord-
ance with clause (a), or, as the case may be, clause (b) of 
this sub-paragraph. 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 45 per cent. 
2S SUTcharges On income-tax 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of surcharges for pur-
poses of the Union calculated as specified hereunder:-
(a) a surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per cent. of the 
30 amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore speci-
fied; and 
(b) a special surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per cent. 
on the aggregate of the following amounts, namely:-
(i) the amount of income-tax computed at the rate 
3S hereinbefore specified; and 
(ii) the amount of the surcharge calculated in accord-
ance with clause (a) of this sub-paragraph. 

58 
Paragraph E 
In the case of the Life InsuranCe Corporation of India established 
ander the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956,-
Rates of income-tax 
(i) on that part of its total income S2' S per cent.; 
which CODiisti of profits and pin_ 
from life· insurance business 
(ii) on the balance, if any. of the total the rate of income-tax applicable ... in accord-
income ance with Paragraph F of uUs Put, to 
the total income of a domestic company 10 
which is a company in which the public 
are substantially interested. 
Paragraph F 
31 ot 1958. 
In the case of a company, other than the Life Insurance Corpora-
tion of India ('stabli5'hed under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, IS 
1956,- 31 ot 1958. 
Rates of income-tax 
l. In the case of a domestic company-
(AXI) where the company is a company 
iD which the public are Bubatan- 20 
dally iDterested,-
(I) in a case where the total 4S per cent. of the total income ; 
income docs Dot exceed 
Rs. So,roo 
(A) in a case where the total 5S per cent. ofthe total income; 
income eXceeds Rs. so,ooo 2S 
(2) where the b~Jaany is not a company in w' the pubUc are 
lubstantilollly interested,-
(I) in the cue of an industrial 
company-
(I) on 10 much of the 55 per cent.; 
total income as 
docs not exceed 
Rs. 10,00,000 
(2) on the balance, if 60 per cent.; 
any, of the tOtal 
income 
(il) in any other cue 
in addition, where tbe company 
iI-
(i) • company in which the 
public; are lubltantially 
lntete8ted~ Of 
65 per cent. of the total inwll·c; 
and 
30 
3S 
4S 

5 
10 
59 
(It) a companf al is retCrrcd 
to in clause (iiI) of tub-
section (3) or c1aUle 
(a) or clause (b) of sub-
section (l) of seetion 104 
of the Income-tilt Act, 
or 
(iiI) IUch a company u it 
exempt from the opera-
tion of section 104 of the 
said Act by a notification 
issued under the provi-
sions of sub-section (J) 
of that aeetio!!. 
on so much of the total in- 7' S per cent. : 
come a8 does not exceed the 
relevant amount of distribu-
tions of dividends by the 
company 
20 Provided that the income-tax payable by a domestic company, 
being a company in which the public are substantially interested, the 
total inconle of which exceeds Rs. 50,000, shall not exceed the aggre-
gate of-
30 
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been Rs. 50,000 (the income of 
R'3. 50,000 for this purpose being computed as if such income 
included income from various sources in the same proportion as 
the total income of the compal'lY); and 
(b) 80 pel' cent. of the amount by which its total income 
exceeds Rs. 50.000. 
Explanation I.-In clause (B), the expression "the relevant 
amount of distributions of dividends" means the aggregate of the 
following amounts, namely:-
(a) the amount, if any, by which the "relevant amount of 
3S distributions of dividends" by the company as computed in 
accordance with Explanation 1 to item I of Paragraph F of 
Part I of the First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1966 exceeds 
its total income (reduced by the amount of capital gains, if any, 
relating to capital assets other than short-term capital assets 
40 included therein) assessable for the assessment year commencing 
on the 1st day of April, 1966; and 
('b) SO much of the amount of the dividends, other than 
dividends on preferrnce shares, declared or distributed by the 
company during the previous year as exceeds ten per cent. of its 

60 
paid-up equity share capital as on the 1st day of the previous 
year. 
Explanation 2.·-For the purposes of clause (B), where a part of 
the income of Ii company is not included in its total income because 
it is agricultural income, the amount declared or distributed as S 
dividends (other than dividends on preference shares) shall be 
deemed to be such proportion thereof as the sum specified in clause 
(a) bears to the sum specified in clause (b), such sums being-
(a) the average amount of the total income of the company 
of the five previous years in which it has been in receipt of tax- 10 
able income immediately preceding the relevant previous year; 
and 
(b) the average amount of the total profits and gains (ex-
cluding capital receipts) of the company of the five previous 
years referred to in clause (a) reduced by such allowances as IS 
may be admissible under the Income-tax Act but which have 
not been taken into account by the company in its profit and 
loss accounts for the said five previous years. 
Explanation 3.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that where any dividendr were declared by the company before the 20 
eommencement of the previous year and are distributed by it during 
that year, the amount of such dividends shall not be included in the 
amount of dividends referred to in clause (b) of Explanation 1. 
II. In the case of a company other than a domestic company·· 
(i) on 80 much of the total income 
IS consists of-
(a) royalties received from 
an ·Indian concern in pur-
luance of an agree ment 
made by it with the Indian 
concern after the 3 ISt day 
of March, 1961, or 
(6) fees for rendering tech-
nical "rvice. received from 
an Indian concern in pur-
lUUICIe of an qreemeDt 
llUlde by it with the 
Indian concern after the 
29th day of February, 
1964. 
and where IUch aareement has, in so per cent. j 
either case, been approved by the 
Celltl'll Government 
{iI) on the balance, if any, of the total 70 per cellt, 
iAcome 
35 
40 

S 
10 
25 
3S 
&1 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
Rates of annuity deposit. 
(0 In the case of any depositor Nn. 
whose tow income docs DOt 
exceed RI. 15,000 
(iI) III th~ Cll': of !"tv d:;"litor ,per ceQt. of the I4J1II184 toeaI ..... I 
whose totll income exceeds 
Rs. 15,000 but docs DOt 
exceed lU. 20)00 J 
Provided that the annuity deposit to be made shall in no calC! 
exceed half the amount by which the total income exceeds RI. l~,OOO. 
(iii) In the c"e or I d:.,:"ltor 71 per ecru. or the adJusttd tottl ~I 
whOle ,o'al in~o:ne exceeds 
R~. 20 000 but doca DOt 
Cllceed Rs. 40,000 
Provided that the annuity deposit to be made shall ill DO cue 
exceed the aggregate of the following sums, namely:-
(a) an amount calculated at five per cent. on 80 much of 
the adjusted total income as does not exceed Rs. 20,000; 
(b) one-half of the amount by which the total income ex-
ceeds Rs. 20,000. 
(iv) In the c'ne or a dep"1ltor 10 p=r CCQt. of.e adjusted total iacoaae: 
whose tnTII income exceeds 
Rs. 40,000 hut docs not 
exceed Rs. 70,000 
Provided that the annuity deposit to be made shall in no cue 
exceed the aggregate of the following sums, namely:-
(a) an amount calculated at seven and a half per cent. on 
so much of the adjusted total income a8 does not exceed 
Re.40,000; 
(b) one-half of the amount by which the' total income ex-
ceeds Rs. 40,000. 
(v) In the C1!C of • dep'lCftor 121 per CCGt. or die ad,utte4 toeaI fDcaIIM I 
w~e totld incon1e exceedl 
RI.70,ooo 
Pr<>vided that the annuity deposit to be made .ball in DO cue 
exceed the aggregate of the following sums, namely:-
(a) an amount calculated at ten per cent. OftIo'lIlUCIa' of the 
adjusted total income as dQC!lnot .. ceed &. 70.,oon; 
(b) &lie-half of the UIlOUllt Dy wJalelt 'the'totaJ fDcome .. 
ceed. Ra. '10,000. 

a 
l:~laftCtio".-In this SehedQle, "total income" means total in-
come computed in the manner laid down in the Income-ta% Act ~ith· 
out making any allowance under section 2800 of that Act. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 33) 
AlnNDMENTs IN THJ: INcolIZ-TA% Act 
1. Section lO.-After clause (28), insert-
"(29) in the case of an authority constituted under any 1a. 
for the time being in force for the marketing of commodities, 
any income derived from the le1ting of god owns or warehouses 10 
for storage, processing or facilitating the marketing of comm~ 
diUa.". 
2. 'Section 32.-
(a) in sub-section (1), after clause (iv), insert-
II (u) in the case of any new bundfn~. the erection of I, 
which is completed after thl! 31st day of March, 1967. where 
the building is owned by an Indian company and used by 
. such ~mpany as a hotel and such hotel is for the time being 
approved in this behalf by the Central Govemment, a sum 
. 'equal to tw~nty-tive per cent. of the actual cost of erection 20 
of the building to the assessee, in .!'e!pect of the previous 
year in which the erection of the bulld!n, II eompleted or, 
if sueh building is first brought into use as It hotel in the 
immediately suceeeding previous year, then in respect of 
that previous year; but any such sum shall not be dedue- 2, 
tible in determininl! the written down value for the pur-. 
poses of clause (U) ."; 
. (b) in su1HectJ.on (2), after "cIau.e (£17)", lnIert "or clauIe 
(17)". . 
.: .a. :S.ctftm-33.- 30 
.... ,";. 
(a) fOr' 'su~aft (I);' iubttltute--; 
~ -:"·7":" (I) ;'(n)" Irfr8peet Of • ne-vf'Shlp :or ilew 'maeblnery 
or plant (other than omce appliaDces or raM traaport 

s 
10 
20 
25 
35 
vehicles) which is owned by the assessee and' is wholly uaed 
for the purposes of the business carried on by him, there 
shall, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of 
this section and of section 34, be allowed a deduction, in 
respect of the previous year in which the ship WI! acquired 
or the machinery or plant was installed or, if the ship, 
machinery or plant is first put to use in the Immediately 
succeeding previous year, then, in respect of that previous 
year, a sum by way of development rebate 81 specified in 
clause (b). 
(b) The sum referred to in clause (a) shall be-
(A) in the case of a ship, forty per cerat. of Ole 
actual cost thereof to the assessee; 
(8) in the case of machinery or plant,-
(i) where the machinery or plant is installed 
for the purposes of business of construction, manu-
facture or production of anyone or more of the 
articles or things specified in the list in the Fifth 
Schedule,-
(a) thirty-five per cent. of the actual' coat 
of the machinery or plant to the assenee, 
where it is installed before the 1st day of April. 
1970, and 
(b) twenty-five per cent. of such cost 
where it is installed after the 31st day of March, 
1970; 
(ii) where the machinery or plant is Installeo 
after the 31st day of Marcp, 1967, by an assessee 
being an Indian company in premises used by it as 
a hotel and such hotel is for the time being approved 
in this behalf by the Central Government-
(a) thirty-five per cent. of the actual cost of 
the machinery or plant to the assessee, where 
it is installed before the lst day of April. 18'10. 
and 
(b) twenty-five per cent. of web 'COlt 
where it is installed after the 31st day of Maret. 
1870: ' 
(Ui) where the machinery or plant fl lDJta11ecl 
after the Slit day of March, 1087, beiD. u .. t 

repraenting expenditure of a capital nature on 
acientlftc research related to the business carried 
on by the assessee,--
(4) thirty-flve per cent. 01 the actual cos, 
01 the machinery or plant to the assessee, 5 
where it is installed before the 1st day of April, 
1970. and 
(b) twenty-five per cent. of such cost, 
where it is installed after the 31st day of 
J4arch, 1970; 10 
(itJ) in any other case.-
(a) twenty per cent. of the actual cost of 
the machinery or plant to the assessee, where 
it is installed before the 1st day of April, 1970, 
and IS 
(b) fifteen per cent. of such cost where it 
is installed after the 31st day of March, 1970."; 
(b) in 8ub-section (2), for "[the total income for this pur-
pose being computed without making any allowance under sub-
section (1) or 8u\)..section (lA) of this section or sub-section 20· 
(1) of secUon S3A]", in both places, substitute-
"[the total income for this purpose being computed 
without making any allowance under sub-section (1) or 
aub-section (lA) of this section or sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 33A or any deduction under Chapter VIA or section 25 
2800]". 
(c) in sub-section (6), add at the end-
"Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall 
not apply in the case of an assessee being an Indian com-
pany, in respect of any machinery or plant installed by it 30 
in premises used by it as a hotel. where the hotel is for the 
time being approved in this behaU by the Central Govern-
ment.". 
4. Section J3A.-In sub-section (2), for "[the total income for 
this purpose being computed after making the allowance under sub- 35 
section (1) or sub-section (lA) or clause (ii) of sub-section (2.) of 
section. 33 but without making any aHawance under sub-section (1) 
of this section]", in both places, substltute-
"[ the total income for this purpOSe being computed alter 
d'edUctltm of ~e allowance under sub-section (l) or sub-section 40 

" 8$ 
(tA) or clause (if) of sub-section (2) of .. etion 33, but with-
out making any deduction under sub-section (1) of this .ection 
or any deduction under Chapter VIA or section 2800]". 
5. Section 35.-In sub-seetion (2) ,-
s CO for clause (i) I substitute-
"(i) in a case where such capital expenditure is In-
curred before the 1st day of April, 1987, one-fifth of the 
capital expenditure incurred in any previous year shall be 
deducted for that previous year; and the, balance of the 
10 expenditure shall be deducted in equal instalments for each 
of the four immediately succeeding previous years; 
(ia) in a case where such capital expenditure is in-
curred after the 31st day of March, 1967, the whole of such 
capital expenditure incurred in any previous year shall be 
IS deducted for that previous year."; 
(ii) in clause (ii), after "an asset representing expendi-
ture of a capital nature", insert "incurred before the 1st day of 
April, 1967"; 
(iii) in clause (v), for "where the asset is used", substitute 
20 "where the asset mentioned in clause (ii) is used". 
6. Section 36.-ln clause (viii) of sub-section (1), for "of the total 
income carried to such reserve account", substitute ·of the total 
income (computed beforC' making any deduction under Chapter VIA) 
carried to such reserve account". 
25 7. Section 41.-1n sub-section (3), after "the total amount of 
the deductions made under clause (i)", insert "or, as the case may 
be, the amount of thE' deduction under clause (ia)". 
8. Sec~ion 43.-For the proviso to clause (1), substitute-
"Provided that where the actual cost of an asset, being a 
30 motor car which is acquired by the assessee after the 31st day 
or March, 1967 and is used otherwise than in a business of 
running it on hire for tourists, exceeds twenty-five thousand 
rup~\~s, the ('xcefiS of the actual cost over such amount shall be 
ignored, and the actual cost thereof shall be taken to be twenty-
35 five thousand rupees.". 
9. Section 66.-Omit "and any amount in respect of which the 
aSsessee is entitled to a deduction from the amount of income-tax on 
his total income with which he is chargeable for any assessment 
year in accordance with, and to the extent provided in .ectiQns 87. 
40 87 A and 88". . 

Oed .. 
tionstobl 
made in 
eomputiD8 
total 
..... 
10. section n.-For sub-section (2), substitute-
'(2) Where in respect of any assessment year the net result 
of the computation under any head of income other than "Capital 
gains" 15 a loss and the assessee has income assessable under the 
head "Capital gains", such loss may. subject to the provisiona , 
of this Chapter, be set ofI·-
(i) against the income, if any, of the assessee assessable 
for that asses!:ment year under any head including income 
assessable under the head "Capital gains" (whether relating 
to short-term capital assets or any other capital assets), or 10 
(ii) if the 8!'1SeSSee so desires, only against his income, 
if any, under the head "Capital gains", in so far as such 
income relates to short-term capital assets, and income under 
any other head. 
(3) Where in respect of any assessment year the net result IS 
of the computation under sections 4B to 55 in respect 'of capital 
gains relating to short-term capital assets is a loss and the 
assessee h3s inC0me assessable under any head of income other 
than "Capital gains", the assessee shall, subject to the provisions 
of this Chapter, be entitled to have such loss set off against the 20 
income aforesaid. '. 
11. Section 72.-1n sub-section (1), after "Capital gains", i.Dsert 
"relating to capital assets other than short-term capital assets". 
12. SecOlon 74.-1n sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1), 
for "as relates to short-term capital assets", substitute "relating to 2, 
ahort-term capital assets as cannot be or is not wholly set off agahllt 
income under any head in accordance with the provisions of section 
71". 
13. For ChapteT VIA, substitut~ 
'CHAPTER VIA 
DEDUCTIONS TO BE MADE IN COMPUTING TOTAL DfCOJQ 
A.-GeneTol 
80A. (I) In computing the total Income of an aueuee, 
there man be allowed from his grosl total income, in accordance 
with and subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the deduct-
tiona apecified in aectiolll 80C to 8OT. 

s 
10 
(2) The aggregate amount of the deductions under this 
Chapter shall not, in any case, exceed the gross tota! income of 
the assessee. 
(3) Where, in computing the total income of a firm, assacta-
tlon of persons or body of individuals, any deduction is admis-
sible under section 80G or section 80H or section SOJ or section 
80K or section 80L or section 80S or section 8OT, no deduction 
under the same section shall be made in computing the t.ltal 
income cf a partner of the firm or, as the case may be, I)f a 
member of the association of persons or body of individuals In 
relation to the share of such partner in the income of the flnn 
or the shar~ of such member in the income of the assodatioD of 
persons or body of individuals. 
80B. In this Chapter-
15 (1) "displaced person" means a penon who, on account 
of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan, 
or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such 
disturbances in any area now fOrming part of East Paki.tan. 
has-
20 (a) In the case of a person having a place of 
residence in the district of Noakhali 01" of Comilla, OD 
or after the 1st day of October, 1946, and 
(b) in the case of a person having a place of resi-
dence in any other area now forming part of East 
25 Pakistan, on or after the lst day of June, 1947, 
left, or been displaced from, his place of residence in such 
area and who has been subsequently residing in India; 
(2) "domestic company" means nn Indian company, or 
any other company which, in respect of its income liable 
30 to tax under this Act, has made the prescribed arrange-
ments for the declaration and payment, within India, of 
the dividends (including dividends on preference shares) 
payable out of such income; 
(3) "earned income" and "unearned income" shall 
3.5 have the meanings respectively assigned to them 10 1he 
Finance Act of the relevant year; 
(4) ··foreign company" means a company wh1ch ia DOt 
a domestic company as defined in clause (Z); 
. (5) ··gross total income" mean. the total. income 
40 computed. in accordance with the pro~ of t.b1a Act. 

before making any deduction under this Chapter or under 
sectlon 2800 and without applying the provisions of section 
64; 
(6) "income", in relation to a handicapped dependant, 
means the aggregate income of such person from all 5 
sources; 
(7) "priority industry" means the business of genera-
tion or distribution of electricity or any other form of power 
or of construction, manufacture or production of anyone 
or more of the articles or things specified in the list in the 10 
Fifth SchedulE' or the business of any hotel where such 
business is carried on by an Indian company and the hotel is 
for the time being approved in this behaU by the Central 
Government; 
(8) "relative", in relation to an individual, means- IS 
(a) the mother, father, husband or wife of the 
individual, or 
(b) a son, daughter, brother, sister, nephew or 
niece of the individual, or 
(e) a grand-son or grand-daughter of the individual, 20 
or 
(d) the spouse of any person referred to in sub-
clause (b); 
(9) "repatriate" means a person of Indian origin who 
was ordinarily residing in a foreign country and who, on 2S 
leaving, or being forced to leave, such country, has-
(a) in the case of a person leaving Mozambique, 
on or after the 25th day of June, 1962, or 
(b) in the case of a person leaving Burma, on or 
after the 1st day of June, 1963, or 30 
(e) in the case of a person leaving Ceylon, on or 
after the 1st day of November, 1964, Or 
(d) in the case of a person leaving any other country, 
on or after such date or dates as may be notified in thl. 
behalf by the Central Government in the OfBcial3S 
Gazette, 
ramed to India with the intention Of permanently 
l'e8lding therein. 

S' 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
19 of 1025. 
30 
3S 
69 
Explanaticm-A person shall be deemed to be of Indian 
origin if he, or either of his parents or any of his grand-
parents, was born in undivided India. 
B.-~eduction8 in respect of certain payments. 
, . J.soc. (1) In computing the total income of ~ assessee there Deduc-
s~ be de.duct~, in accordance with and ~ubject to the provi- ;~~~t of 
Slona of this sectlon, an amount equal to BlXty per cent. of the life insur-
first five thoUS8lld rupees of the aggregate of the sums specified ance 
in sub-section (2) and fifty per. cent. of the balance, if any, of t:::;i~~. 
such aggregate. tions. to , provldent 
(2) The sums refened to in sub-section (1) shall be the fund, etc. 
~ollowing, namely:-
(a) where the assessee is an individual, any sums paid 
in the previous year by the assessee out of his income 
chargeable to tax-
(i) to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the 
life of the assessee or on the life of the wife or husband 
'6f the assessee; or 
(ii) to effect or to keep in force a contract for a 
deferred annuity on the life of the assessee or on the 
life of .the wife or husbaIl;d of the assessee, notwith-
standing that such contract contains a provision for the 
exercise by the insured of an option to receive a cash 
payment in lieu of the payment of the annuity; or 
(iii) as a contribution to any provident fund to 
which the Provident Funds Act, 1925 applies; 
(b) where the assessee is a Hindu undivided family. 
any sums paid in the previous year by the assessee out of 
its income chargeable to tax, to effect or to keep in force an 
insurance on the life of any male member of the family or 
of the wife of any such member. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of sub-clause (i) of 
clause (a) and clause (b) of this sub-section, an insurance 
on the life of any person referred to therein shall include--
(i) a policy of insurance on the life of such person 
securing the payment of a specified sum on the stipu-
lated date of maturity 'of the policy, if such person is 
alive on such date, notwithstanding that the policy of 
insurance provides only for the return of premiums 
paid (with or without any interest thereon) in the 

TO 
&vent of such person dying before the said stipulated 
date; 
(ii) a policy of insurance effected by a person for 
the benefit of a minor (being the assessee, or a male 
member of a Hindu undivided family where such 5 
family is the assessee) with the object of enabling the 
minor, after he has attained majority, to Sec:IU'e an 
insurance on his own life by adopting the policy and on 
his being alive on a date (aft. such adoption) 
specified in the policy in this behalf; 10 
-- -(c) any sum deducted in the previous year from the 
salary payable by or on behalf of the Government to any 
individual being a sum deducted in accordance with the 
conditions of his servree, for the purpose of securing to him 
a deferred annuity or making provision for his wife or IS 
children, in so far as the sum so deducted does not exceed 
one-fifth of the salary; 
(d) if the assessee is an employee participating in a 
recognised provident fund, his own contribUtions to his 
individual account in the fund in the previous year, in 80 20 
far as the aggregate of such contributions does not exceed 
one-fifth of his salary in that previous year or eight 
thousand rupees, whichever is less. 
E:rplanation.-In clause (d) of this sub-section, 
"salary" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause 25 
(h) of rule 2 of Part A of the Fourth Schedule; 
(e) if the assessee is an employee participating in an 
approved superannuation fund, any sum paid in the pre-
vious year by him by way of contribution towards the 
superannuation fund; 30 
(1) whCle the assessee is an individual, any sums 
deposited, in the previous year by the assessee out of his 
income chargeable to tax, in a ten-year account or a fifteen-
year account under the Post Office Savings Bank (Cumula-
tive Time Deposits) Rules, 1959, as amended from time to 35 
time. 
(3) The provisions of clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section 
(2) shall apply only to so much of any premium or other pay-
ment made on a policy other than a contract for a deferred 
annuity as is not in excess of ten per cent. of the actual capital 40 
swn assured. 

s 
10 
IS 
'71 
Ezplanation.-In calculating any such capital sum, no 
account shall be taken-
(i) of the value of any premiums agreed to be returned, 
or 
(ii) of any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over 
and above the sum actually assured, which is to be or may 
be received under the policy by any person. 
(4) The aggregate of the sums referred to in sub-section (2), 
which qualifies for the purposes of computing the deduction 
under sub-section (1), shall not exceed-
(i) in the case of an individual being an author, play-
wright, artist, musician or actor, such percentage of his 
,gross total income, or such amount, as may be prescribed: 
Provided that such individual has effected an insurance 
referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) 
prior to the 1st day of March, 1964 and has paid any sum 
in the previous year to keep in force such insurance; 
(ii) in the case of any other individual [including an 
author, playwright, artist, musician or actor, to whom the 
provisions of clause (i) do not apply], thirty per cent. of hif'l 
gross total income, or fifteen thousand rupees, whichever is 
less; 
(iii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, thirty 
per cent. of its gross total income, or thirty thousand rupees, 
25 whichever is less. 
(S) If the gross total income of the assessee includes ('amed 
income chargeab1e under any head, the deduction under sub-
section (1) shall, to the extent possible, be made in computing 
such earned income and, as to the balance, if any, in computing 
30 any other income; and if there is DO earned income, the deduction 
shall be made in computing any other income under any head 
800. (1) Where an assessee who is resident in India, being Deduc-
an individual or Hindu undivided family, who has, during the ~~~ of 
previous year, incurred out of his or its income chargeable to medical 
35 income-tax, any expenditure for the medical treatment (includ- :-~~~ent, 
ing nursing) of a person who- bandi-
capped 
I . he . di 'd al depen-(a) is a re ative of t In 'VI U , or, as the case may dants. 
be, is a member of the Hindu undivided family and is not 
dependent on any person other than such individual or 
40 Hindu undivided family for his support or maiD~nance, anti 

Deduc-
tien In 
respect of 
payment 
for secur-
\rIll retire. 
r'1ent 
'\Pnul"". -
72 
(b) is suffering from a physical or mental disability 
which is certified by a registered medical practitioner to 
have the effect of reducing considerably such person's capa-
city for normaJ work or engaging in a gainful employment 
(hereinafter in this section referred to as handicapped S 
d~pen~ant) , , 
the assess~e shall, 'in .accordance with and subject to the 
provisions of this section, be aliowed a deduction of the amount 
specified in sub·section (2) in the computaiion of his total income 
in respect of the previous year. 10 
(2) The deduction under sub-section (l)~hal1 be-
(i) in a case where the handicapped dependant has, for 
a period of one hundred and eighty-two days or more during 
the previous year, been admitted in a hospital or '~ nursing 
home or a medical institutiOll or in such other institution as IS 
may be notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette to be an institution for the care of handicapped 
persons, and fees and charges for his medical treatment 
(including nursing) are payable to such hospital or nursing 
home or medical Or other institution, as the case may be, 20 
a ~um of two thousand four hundred rupees, or 
, (ii) in any othe~ case, a sum of six hundred rupees, 
as reduced, in either case, by an amount equal to the income, 
if any. of the handicapped dependant ip! x:espect of the previous 
year: 2S 
Provided that where the assessee has, durin'g tlie previous 
year, incurred expenditure on more than one handicapped..depen-
dant, th~ deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed Ol}ly 
with reference to one such handicapped dependant as may be 
chosen by the assessee. 30 
(3) If the gross total income of the assessee includes earned 
income chargeable under any head, the deduction under sub-
section (1) shall, to the extent possible, be made in computing 
such earnzd incomE' and, as to the balance, if any. in computing 
any other income; and if th~re is no earned income, the deduc- 3S 
tion shall be made in computing any other income under any 
h~d . 
80E. (1) Where, in the case of an assessee, being an indi-
vidual who is a citizen of India and is resident in India, his 
share in the income of a registered firm which rend~rs pro- 40 
fessional service as chartered accountant, solicitor, lawyer, 
architect, 'Or such other professional service as may be notified in 

5 
10 
73 
this behalf by the Central Government in the Official Gazette, is 
chargeable to tax and he has paid out of his income chargeable to 
tax a premium (by whatever name called) in any previous year 
under an annuity contract for the time being approved by the 
Commissioner 8S having for its main object the provision for the 
individual of a life annuity in old age (he'reinafter in this section 
referred to as qualifying premium), then the assessee shall, in 
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this sectIon, be 
allowed a deduction of the amount of the qualifying premium in 
the computation of his total income in respect of the previous 
year: 
Provided that the amount which may be so deducted shall not 
exceed the sum of five thousand rupees, or one-tenth of his 
gross total income, whichever is less: 
IS Provided further that any annuity payable to the individual 
shall be deemed to be his earned income to the extent to which it 
is attributable to the amount in respect of which deduction has 
been allowed under this section and chargeable to tax ac~rdingly. 
(2) Subject to sub-section (3) and any rules made by the 
20 Board in this behalf, the Commissioner shall not approve a 
contract unless he is satisfied that it does not-
(a) provide for the payment during the life of the 
individual of any sums except sums payable by way of an-
nuity to the individual; or 
25 (!)) provide for the annuity payable to the individual 
to commence before he attains the age of fifty-eight or 
after he attains the age of sixty-eight; or 
(c) provide for the payment of any other sums except 
sums payable by way of annuity to the individual's widow 
30 or widower and any sums which, in the event of no annuity 
becoming payable either to the individual or to a widow 
or widower of the individual, are payable to the individual's 
legal representative by way of return of premiums, by way 
of reasonable interest on premiums and by way of bonus out 
35 of profit!'!; or 
Cd) provide for the payment of annuity, if any, pay-
able to a widow or widower of the individual to be of • 
greater annual amount than that paid or payable to the 
individual; or 
40 (e) provide for the payment of any annuity otherwile 
than for the Ufe of the annuItant, 

74 
and that it does include a provIsIon that no annuity payable 
under it shall be capable in whole or in part of surrender, 
commutation or assignment. 
(3) The COmmissioner may, if he thinks fit, and subject 
to any conditions the Board may, by rules, prescribe and sub- 5 
ject to any conditions he thinks proper to impose, approve a 
contract, notwithstanding that the contract provides for one or 
more of the following matters, that is to say,-
(a) for the payment after the individual's death of an 
annuity to a dependant other than the widow or widower 10 
of the individual; 
(b) for the payment to the individual of an annuity 
commencing before he attains the age of fifty-eight, if the 
annuity is payable on his becoming incapable through 
infinnity of mind or body of being actively engaged in his IS 
profession or any profession of a similar nature for which 
he is trained or fitted; 
(c) for the annuity payable to any person to continue 
for a specified tenn (not exceeding ten years), notwith-
standing his death within that tenn; 20 
(d) in the case of an annuity which is to continue for 
such specified term, for the annuity to be assignable by 
will. 
(4) The foregoing provisions of this section shall apply in 
relation to a contribution (by whatever name called) to a fund 2S 
approved by the Commissioner as they apply in relation to any 
premium under an annuity contract so approved, provided the 
fund satisfies also the conditions set out below and any other 
conditions which the Board may, by rules, prescribe, namely:-
(a) the fund shall be a fund estabUshed in India under 30 
an irrevocable trust for the benefit of individuals engaged 
in any profession referred to in sub-section (1); 
(b) the fund shall have for its sole purpose the provi-
sion of annuities for individuals engaged in such profession 3S 
on attaining a specified age or on their becoming incapa-
citated prior to attaining such age, or for the widow, child-
ren or dependants of such persons on their death; 
(c) a11 annuities, pensions and other benefits granted 
from the fund shall be payable only in India. 

(5) The Commissioner may, at any time, after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed 
withdrawal to the persons by and to whom premiums are pay~ 
able under any contract for the time being approved under this 
5 section, or to the trustees of any fund so approved, withdraw 
the approval. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections 
(1) and (4), no deduction under this section shall be allowed 
in the case of any individual-
10 (i) whose gross total income includes unearned income 
of more than ten thousand rupees; or 
(ii) who is entitled to any pension or is participating 
in any pension or superannuation scheme. 
(7) The deduction under this section shall be made in com~ 
15 puting the earned income of the assessee included in his gross 
total income, so, however, that the amount of deduction shall 
not in any case exceed the amount of the income computed 
under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession", 
included in the gross total income. 
20 (8) Any annuity payable under an approved contract 
referred to in l>ub-section (1) or from any fund referred to in 
sub-section (4), to a person other than the individual who pays 
the premium or makes the contribution and any interest on 
premiums or bonus out of profits payable to such person, shall 
25 be deemed to be his unearned income to the extent it is attri~ 
butable to the amount of deduction allowed under sub-section 
(I) and chargeable to tax accordingly. 
(9) Where any payment by way of annuity or otherwise 
is made by a person to whom premiums Or contributions are 
30 payable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1), such person 
shall, subject to any rules made by the Board in this behalf, 
deduct from the total amount so paid during any financial year, 
tax at such rate or rates in force in that year as would be 
applicable to such amount, if it were the total income and shall 
35 pay the amount so deducted to the credit of the Central Gov-
ernment within the prescribed time and in such manner as the 
Board may direct and the prOvisions of section 201 shall, 80 far 
as may be, apply to such person if he does not deduct, or after 
deducting fails to pay, such tax. 
40 (10) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and 
allowed for any assessment year in respect of any payment, 

Deduc-
tion in 
respect of 
educational 
expensea 
in certain 
cases. 
.. IM 
reiief shah not be given i~ respect of it under any other provi. 
sian of this Act for the same or a later assessment year nor (in 
the case of a payment under an annuity contract)- in respect of 
any:dther premium or consideration for an annuity under the 
same contract. S 
(11) (a) The Board may, by notification "in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
section. 
(b) In particular and without prejudice to the genel'8lity 
of the foregoing power, such rules may- 10 
(i) prescribe the statements and other information to 
be submitted along with an application for approval; 
(ii) prescribe the returns, statements, particulars or 
information which the Income-tax Officer may require 
from a person by and to whom premiums Ot contributions IS 
are payable under this section; 
(iii) provide for the assessment by way of penalty of 
any consideration received by an individual for an assign-
ment of, or creation of a charge upon, any annuity or 
other sum receivable by him under any contract or from 20 
any fund approved for the time being under this section; 
and 
(iv) provide for securing such further control over the 
approval granted under this section and administration of 
-funds approved under this section as it may deem requisite. 2S 
80F. (1) Where an individual, being a resident, who is not 
a citizen of India, has expended any sum in the previous year 
out of his income chargeRble to tax for the full time education 
of his child wholly or mainly dependent on him and who is not 
more than twenty-one years of age, at any University, college, 30 
school or other educational institution situate in a country out· 
side India, he shall, in accordance with and subject to the pro-
visions of this section, be allowed a deduction of the amount 
specified in sub-section (2) in the computation of his total 
income. 3S 
(2) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be-
(i) in the case of an individual who has one such child, 
one thousand five hundred rupees; and 
(ii) in the case of an individual who has more than one 
such child, three thousand rupees. 40 

,., 
(3') If the gross total income of the aaseuee includes earD-
ed income chargeable under any head, the deduCtion under sub-
section (1) shall. to the extent possible, be made in computing such 
earned income and, as to the balance, if any, in computing any 
other income; and if there is no earned income, the deduction 
shall be made in computing any other income under any head. 
8OG. (1) In computing the total income of an allellle, Deduo-
there shall be deducted, in accordance with and subject to the t1:~ 01 
provisions of this section, an amount equal to fifty per cent. of ~ODat1OD1 
ro the aggregate of the sums specified in sub-section (2). r~ 
I~ 
ebarttabJe 
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) ahaU be the ~ .. 
following, namely:-
(a) any sums paid by the assessee In the prevtOUI year 
u donations to-
(i) the National Defence Fund set up by the Central, 
Government; or 
(it) the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund refer.-
red to in the Deed of Declaration of Trust adopted by 
the National Committee at its meeting held on the 17th 
day of August, 1964; or 
(iii) the Prime Minister's Drought Relief Fund; G!' 
(it1) any other fund or any inltitution to whteh 
thIs section applies; Or 
(v) the Government or any local authority. to be utl-
~'i Jised for any charitable purpose; 
(b) any sums paid by the assessee in the previoua year 
u donations for the- renovation or repair of any rucb tem-
ple, mosque, gurdwara, church or other place 81 fa notlftecl 
by the Central Government in the Official Gazette to be of 
30 historic, archaeological or artistic importance or to be • 
place of public worship of renown throughout any State or 
States. 
(3) No deduction shall be aDowed under sub-section (1) If 
the aggregate of the sums referred to in sub-section (2) is leis 
3~ than two hundred and fifty rupees. 
(4) 'l'he deduction under sub-section (1) shall !lot be 
allowed in respect of such part of the aggregate of the sums 
referred to in sub-clauses (iv) and (1.1) of C!1ause (II) and m 
clause (b) of sub-section (Z) as exceeds ten per ceJlt. of the 

• 
lI'OII total income (as reduced by any portton thereof on wlrleh 
income-tax is not payable under any provision of tht. Act and 
by any amount in respect of which the assessee is entitled to 
• deduction under any other provision of this Chapter), or two 
hundred thousand rupees, whichever is less: 5 
Provided th~t where such aggregate includes any sums 
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) and such aggregate 
exceeds the limit of two hundred thousand rupees specified in 
this sub-section, then such limit shall be raised to cover 'that 
portion of th~ donation which is equal to the difference between 10 
such aggregate and the said limit, so, however, that the limit 
so raised shall not exceed ten per eent. of the assessee's grosa 
total income as reduced as aforesaid, or five hundred thousand 
rupees, whichever is less. 
(5) This section applies to donations to any institution or J 5 
fund referred to in sub-clause (iv) of clause (a) of sub-section 
(2), only if it is established in India for a charitable purpose 
and if it fulflls the following conditions, n ... mely:-
(i) where the institution or fund derives any income, such 
inc'lme would not be liable to inclusion in its total income 20 
under th,~ provisiOns of sections 11 and 12 or clause (22) of 
section 10; 
(ii) the instrument under which the institution or fund 
is constituted does not, or the rules governing the institution 
or fund do not, contain any provision for the transfer or 25 
application at any time of the whole or any part of the in-
come or assets of the institution or fund for any purpose 
other than a charitable pUl1'0se; 
(iii) the institution or fund is not expressed to be for 
the benefit of any particular religious community or caste; 30 
(fv) the institution or fund maintains regular accounts 
of its receipts and expenditure; and 
(v) the institution or fund is either constituted a8 a 
public charitable trust or is registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860, or under any law corresponding to 3S al ., IUo. 
that Act in force in any part of India or under section 25 of 
the Companies Act, 1956, or is a University established by I of I,S6. 
law, or is any other educational institution recognised by 
the Government or by a University established by law, or 
dUated to any University established by law or is an inlti- 40 
tution finapeed wholly or in part by the Government or • 
loeal authority, 

tzp1a.naUcm 1.-An iDltituUon or fund established for the 
benefit of Scheduled Castes, backward classes, Scheduled Tribel 
or of women and chlldren shall not be deemed to be an institution 
or fund expressed to be for the benefit of a l'eligious community 
S or caste within the meaning of clause (iii) of sub-section (5). 
Explanation 2.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby cUt-
elared that a deduction to which the assessee is entitled in rea-
pect of any donation made to an institution or fund to which sub-
section (5) applies shall not be affected merely by reason of the 
10 fact that subsequent to the donation any part of the income of 
the institution or fund has become chargeable to tax due to nOJl-
compliance with any of the provisions of section 11. 
Explanation 3.-In this section, "charitable purpose" doea 
not include any purpose the whole or substantially the whole of 
IS which is of a religious nature. 
(6) If the gross total income of the assessee includes earDed 
income chargeable under any head, the deduction under Bub-
section (1) shall, to the extent possible, be made in computina 
such earned income and, as to the balance, if any, in computing 
any other income; and if there is no earned income, the deduc-
tion shall be made in computing any other income under any 
bead. 
C.-Deductions in respect of ceTta.in incomu 
80H. (1) Where the gross total income of any assessee inclu- lJeduc> 
25 des any profits and gains derived from any industrial undertak- ~~~!~ cue 
ing to which this section applies, there shall be allowed, in industrial 
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, a ~:k1:~ 
deduction from such profits and gains of an amount equal to ~Tp~oytDl 
fifty per cent. thereof in computing the total income ot the pe~ 
30 assessee, so, however, that the amount of the ded,uction under etc. 
this section shall not, in any case, exceed one hundred thousand 
rupees. 
(2) This section applies to any industrial undertaking which 
fulfils all the following conditions, namely:-
'(i) it is not formed by the splitting up, or reconstruction. 
35 of a business already in existence; 
(ii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new businea of 
a building. machinery or plant previously used for ·any 
PU1'pOI8; 

(iii) it has begun or begins to manufacture or product 
articles in any part of India at any time within a period of 
three years next following the 1st day of April, 1967; 
(iv) it employs, on every working day throughout the 
previous year, fifty or more workers in a manuiacturin. S 
process (whether carried on with or without the aid of 
power); and 
(v) it employs displaced persons or repatriates or 
members of the families of displaced persons or repatriates 
(all such employees being, hereinafter, referred to as rehab i- 10 
litated employees) and the daily average number of rehabi-
litated employees, as certified. by the prescribed authority, 18 
DOt less than sixty per cent. of the daily average number of 
all the persons employed in the undertaking, throughout the 
previous year: I, 
Provided that, in computing the daily average number 
of rehabilitated employees for the purposes of this clause, 
any such employee who had, at the time of his first employ-
ment in the undertaking, completed the age of 40 years shall 
not be taken into account. 20 
Explanation l.-"Member of the family", in relation to 
any person who is a displaced person or repatriate, means 
any member of the family of such person if such member 
was, before his employment in the undertaking, dependent 
OIl such person. 2, 
Explanation 2.-"Daily average number", in relation to 
rehabilitated employees or, as the case may be, all the per-
sons employed in the undertaking, shall be taken to be the 
number arrived at by dividing the aggregate of the number 
of rehabilitated employees or, as the case may be, the tota130 
number of persons employed in the undertaking on each 
working day of a month by the total number of workina daya 
in that month. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall, in relation to an 
Industrial undertaking, apply to the assessment for the assess- 35 
ment year relevant to the previous year in which the under-
taking begina to manufacture or produce articles, and the nine 
UlralMDt yean immediately lucceediDi. 

5 
10 
IS 
25 
it 
sot (1) In the case of a company to which this aection ~u'i;. 
applies, where the gross total income includes any proflts and respect of 
gains attributable to any priority industry, there shall be a~- :~:- f::~ 
lowed, in accordance with and subject to the proVisions of thIS prlor1t~ 
section, a deduction from such profits and gains of an amount l:d~r~~1e 
equal to eight per cent. thereof, in computing the total income of certaiD 
of the company. eompaoiee. 
(2) This section applies to a domestic company, save in a 
case where such company is a company which is referred to in 
section 108 and has a gross total income of tifty thousand rupees 
or less. 
(3) Where a company to which this section applies is 
entitled also to the deduction under section SOH, the deduction 
under sub-section (1) of this section shall be allowed with 
reference to the amount of the profits and gains attributable 
to the priority industry or industries as reduced by the deduc-
tion und~r section 80H in relation to such profits and gains. 
8OJ. (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee in- Deduc-
cludes any profits and gains derived from an industrial under- Uon in 
taking or a ship or the business of a hotel, to which this section,~~~t ~d 
applies, there shall, in accordance with and subject to the pro- aains from 
visions of this section, be allowed, in computing the total in- :::fIlab-
come of the asseuee, a deduction from such profits and gains tred,in, dUd'" a un er-
of- , la'cln.. or 
lhips or 
(i) an amount equal to such profits and gains as re- hotel busl-
duced by thE' aggregate of the dedUctions, if any, admissi- ~~Ilit:: 
ble to the assessee under section 80H and section 801 or ea ... , 
(ii) the amount specified in sub-section (2), 
whichever is less, 80, however, that where the amount referred 
30 to in clause (ii) is equal to the amount referred to in clause 
(t). the amount to be deducted under this section shall be the 
amount referred to in clause (ii). 
40 
(2) The amount referred to in clause (if) of sub-section 
(1) shall be-
(A) in respect of the assessment year relevant to the 
previous year In which the undertaking begins to manu-
facture or produce articles or to operate the cold storag.-. 
plant or plants or the ship is first brought into use or the 
business of the hotel starts functiOning (such assessment 
year being hereafter; in this section, referred to as the 
initial assessment year), the amount calculated at the rate 
of I1x per cent. per annum OD. the capital empIoy.d fD the 

Ii 
undertaking or ship or business of the hotel, as the case mat 
be, computed in the prescribed manner; 
(B) in respect of ea<:h of the four assessment years im-
mediately succeeding the initial assessment year, the aggre-
gate of the following amounts, namely:- S 
(i) the amount calculated at the rate of six per 
cent. per annum on the capital employed in the under-
taking or ship or business of the' hotel, as the caSe may 
be, computed in the prescribed manner; and 
(ii) the Illllount of the defiCiency, 1£ any, in relation 10 
to the assessment year, referred to and computed 'in 
accordance with the Explanation to this sub-section; 
(C) in respect of each of the assessment years imme-
diat~!y succeeding the last one of the assessment year" 
referred to in clause (B), not being an assessment year IS 
subsequent to the seventh assessment year as reckoned 
from the end of the initial assessment year, the amount of 
the deficiency, if any, in relation to such assessment year, 
referred to and computed in accordance with the Explana-
tion to this sub-section. 20 
Exp!anation.-The amount of the deficiency in ''rela-
tion to an assessment year (not being the initial asseSl-
ment year) shall be taken to be the amount, if any. by 
which the sum specified in clause (a) falls short of the 
sum specified in clause (b). such sums being- zs 
(a) the aggregate of the amounts of the profits 
and gains derived 'from the industrial undertaking or 
ship or business of the hotel, as the case may be, included 
in the total income (as computed without applying the 
provisions of section 64 and before malting any deduction 30 
under Chapter VIA or section 2800) of the previous 
years relevant to each of the assessment years (not 
being an assessment year prior to the initial assessment 
year or an assessment year prior to the assessment yeat 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1967) immediately 3S 
preceding the assessment year aforesaid; and 
(b) the aggregate of the amounts calculated at the 
rate of six per cent. per annum on the capital employed 
in the industrial undertaking or ship or businesl of the 
hOtel, as the case may be, computed in the prescribed 40 
lDIJUlerin respect of the prevloUl yean relevant to 

II 
.chof the. assessment years (not being an asaeament 
year prior to the initial assessment year or an UIeI8-
ment year prior to the assessment year commencing on 
the' lst day of April, 1967 or an assessment year subse-
quent to the fourth assessment year as reckoned from 
the end of the initial assessment year) immediately 
preceding the assessment year aforesaid. 
(3) In the case of an assessee being a co-operative soclety,~ 
(i) the provisions of sub-section (2) shall have eff~ 
10 as if in clause (8) thereof, for the words "four assessment 
years", the words "six assessment years" had been substi-
tuted; and 
(il) the provisions of the Explanation to sub-sectton 
(2) shall have effect as if in clause (b) for the words 
I~ "fourth assessment year". the words "sixth auessment 
year" had been substituted. 
(4) This section applies to any industrial undertaklng 
which fulfils all the following conditions, namely:-
(i) it is not formed by the splftting up, or the recon. 
truction, of 8 business already in existence; 
(ii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business 
of a building, machinery or plant previously used for any 
purpose; 
(iii) it manufactures or produces articles, or operates 
2~ one or more cold storage plant or plants, in any part of 
India, and has begun or begins to manufacture or produce 
articles or to operate such plant or plants, at any tfme 
within the period of twenty-three years next fol1owin~ the 
, lst day of April. 1948. or such further period as the C~ntr81 
30 Government may, by notification fn the Otftcfal Gazette. 
specify with reference to any particular industrial under-
taking; ; : ... , ','. I "'~ """"''''f''''''~'OO:'~ 
(iv) in a ('lise where the industrial undertaking manu-
factures or produces artIcles, the undertakinl1, employs ten 
3~ or more workers fn a manufacturing process carried on 
with the aid of power, or employs twenty or more worken 
fn a manufacturing process carried on without the aid of 
power: ~I 1 '''1 
Provided that the condition In clause (i) shall not apply 
,0 in respect of any industrial undertaking which fs formed as 8 
result ot the re-establishment. reconstruction· or revivaJ '" 

• 
the uaesaee of the busineu of any aueb industrial undertak:lq 
as is referred to in section 33B, in the circumstances and within 
the period specifted in that seetion. 
(5) This section applies to any ship, where all the follow-
ing conditions are fulfilled, namely: - 5 
(i) it is owned by an Indian company and is wholly 
used for the purposes of the business carried on.by it; 
(ii) it was not, previous to the date of its acquisition 
by the Indian company, owned and used in Indian terri-
torial waters by a person resident in India; and 10 
(iii) it Is brought into use by the Indian company at 
any time within a period of twenty-three years next fol-
lOwing the 1st day of April, 1948. 
(6) 'rhis section applies to the business of any hotel, where 
all the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: - 15 
(a) the business of the hotel starts functioning on or 
after the 1st day of April, 1961, and is not formed by the 
splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already 
in existence or by the transfer to a new bUsiness of a 
building previously used as a hotel or of any machinery 30 
or plant previously used for any purpose; 
(b) the business of the hotel is owned and carried on 
by a company registered in India with a paid-up capital 
of not less than flve hundred thousand rupees; 
«') the hotel has such number and types of guest 25 
rooms and provides such amenities as may be prescribed, 
having regard to the population and the tourist importance 
of tbe place in which the hotel is located; and 
(d) the hotel is for the time being approved for the 
purposes of this sub-section by the Central Government. 30 
!!.rpIaft4tion.-Where-· 
(4) in the case of an industrial undertaking, any build-
ing, machinery or plant, or any part thereof previously 
used for any purpose, or 
(b) in the case of the business of a hotel, any bufld- 3$ 
ing, or any part thereof, previously used as a botel, or any 
machinerJ or plant, or any part thereof, previously used 
for any purpose. 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
40 
is, in either case, transferred to a new bUliness, and the total 
value of the building, machinery or plant or part so transferred 
does not exceed twenty per cent. of the total value of the build-
ing, machinery or plant used in the business, then, for the 
purposes of clause (ii) of sub-sectton (4) and clause (a) of 
sub-section (6), the condition specified therein shall be' deemed 
to have been complied with and the total value of the build-
ing, machinery or plant or part so transferred shall not be 
taken into account in computing the capital employed in the 
industrial undertaking or the business of the hotel. 
(7) The Central Government may, after makin~ such tn-
quiry as it may think fit, direct, by notificatfon in the Official 
Gazette, that -the exemption conferred by this section shall not 
apply to any class of industrial undertakincts with effect from 
such date as it may specify in the notiftcation. 
80K. Where the gross total income of an assessee, befnJl Dedu ue-. oo~ 
the holder of any share or shares in a company, includes any respect of 
income by way of dividends paid or deemed to have been paid ~:r~tb~t~ 
to him bv the company in respect of such share or shares. able to 
there shall, subject to anv rules that mav be made by the ~~~fI~:ins 
Board in this behalf, be allowed, in computing his total income. from new 
a deduction from such income bv way of dividends of an inddustr1al 
W1 er-amount equal to such part thereof as is attrlbutable to the takin,1 or 
profits and gains derived by the company from an indu!ltrlal h~~~r or 
undertakfnct or ship or the business of a hotel, on which no business. 
tax is payable by the company under this Act for any 8!1;sesS-
ment year commencin,!, prior to the 1st dav of April, 1968. or 
in respect of which the company Is entitled to a deductto,. 
under section 80J. 
BOL. (1) Where, in the case of any assessee, the amount Dedu uc-. on 1n of his income by way of dividends included in hil JlToss total respect of 
income does not exceed five hundred rupees, there shall, in t!v1~~~ 
accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, ca .... 
be deducted, in computing the total income of the assessee, 
the whole of the income by way of divIdends from an Indian 
company or Indian companies included in the gross total in-
come. 
(2) In a case where the assessee is entitled also to the 
deduction under section 80K, in relation to the whole or any 
part of the income by way of dividends referred to in sub-
section (1), the deduction under sub-section (1) shall be al-
lowed in respect of such income as reduced by the deduction 
under section 8OK. 

Deduc-
tion In 
respect of 
certaln 
inter-
corporate 
divtaends. 
Deduction 
in respect 
of divi-
dends 
recelved 
from 
certain 
foreian 
companla 
86 
80M. (1) Where the gross total income of an assessee 
being a company includes any income by way of dividends 
received by it from a domestic company, there shall, in accor-
dance with and subject to the provisions of this section, be 
allowed, in computing the total income of the assessee, a deduc- S 
tion from such income by way of dividends of an amount equal 
to-
(a) where the I8sessee Is -a 
foreign company-
(I) in respect of such 
income by way of 
dividendi recei ... ed 
by it from an Indian 
company which I, 
DOt such a company 
18 i, refened to in 
section 108 and 
which i. mainlr en-
gaged in a pnority 
industry . . 80 per cent. of such income; 
(iJ') in respect of such 
income by way of 
divideDda other than 
the dividends refer-
red to in .ub-clause 
(I) • 60 per cent. of such income; 
(6) where the assessee is a 
domestic company-
in respect of any such 
income by way of 
dividend, 60 per cent. of such income. 
10 
IS 
2S 
30 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, a company 
shall be deemed to be mainly engaged in a priority industry if 
the income attributable to any such industry or industries 
included in its gross total income for the previous year is not 3S 
less than fifty-one per cent. of such gross total income. 
(2) Where a company to which this section applies is entitl-
ed also to the deduction under section 80K or section BOL, the 
deduction under sub-section (1) of this section shall be allowed 
in respect of income by way of dividends referred to therein 40 
as reduced by any such income in relation to which the com-
pany is entitled to a deduction under section 80K or section 
80L. 
SON. Where shares in a foreign company have been allot-
ted to an assessee being an Indian company in consideration 45 
of any patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or pro-
cess, or similar property right, or information concerning in-
dustrial, comm~rcial or scientific knowledge, experience Of. skill 

5 
10 
20 
25 
30 
35 
87 
made available or provided or agreed to be made available or 
provided to the foreign company by the assessee, or in consi-
deration of technical services rendered or agreed to be ren-
dered to the foreign company by the assessee, under an agree-
ment approved by the Central Government in this behalf 
before the 1st day of October of the relevant assessment year, 
and any income by way of dividend on such shares is included 
in the gross total income of the assessee, there shall be allowed 
a deduction from such income of an amount equal to sixty per 
cent. thereof, in computing the total income of the assessee. 
800. Where the gross total income of an assessee being an Dedue-
Indian company includes any income by way of royalty, com- tion iD 
mission, fees or any similar payment received by it from a ~~;oa1~eI~f 
foreign company in consideration for the use of any patent, etc .. recelv-
invention, model, design, secret formula or process, or simi lar ~~rt~lr::n 
property right, or iniormation concermng industrial, commer- forelillnl 
cia! or scientlDc knowledge, expenence or skill made aValJ.ao.le compa es. 
or provided or agreed. to be made available or provided to the 
foreIgn company by the assessee, or in consideration of techni-
cal services rendered or agreed to be rendered to the foreIgn 
company by the assessee, under an agreement approved by the 
8';:!ntl'al Government in this behalf bc10re the 1st day of Octo-
oer ·of the relevant assessment year, there shall be allowed a 
deductiun from such income of an amount equal to sixty per 
cent. thereof, in computing the total income of the assessee. 
BOP. (1) Where, 1Il the case of an assessee being a co-opera- Deduc-
tive society, the gross total income includes any income refer- tiOD in 
red to in sub-section (2), there shall be deducted, in accordance i~~~~! ~~ 
with and subJect to the pruvislOns or thls section, the SIlffiS co-opera-
specified in sub-section (2), in computing the total income of ~~~~etie!l 
the assessee. 
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the 
following, namely:-
(a) in the case of a co-operative society engaged in-
(i) carrylllg on the business of banking or providing 
credit facilities to its members, or 
(ii) a cottage industry, or 
(iii) the marketing of the agricultural produce of 
its members, or 
(iv) the purchase of agricultural implements, seeds, 
live-stock or other articles intended for agriculture for 
the purpose of supplying them to its members, or 

88 
,(v) the processini, without the aid of power, of the 
agricultural produce of its members, 
the whole of the amount of profits and gains of business 
attributable to anyone or more of such activities; 
(b) in the case of a co-operative society, being a pri- 5 
mary society engaged in supplying milk raised by its mem-
bers to a federal milk co-operative society, the whole of 
the amount of profits and gains of such business; 
(c) in the case of a co-operative society engaged in 
activities other than those specified in clause (a) or clause 10 
(b) [either independently of, or in addition to, all or any 
of the activities so specified], so much of its profits and 
gains attributable to such activities as does not exceed fifteen 
thousand rupees; 
(d) in respect of any income by way of interest or IS 
dividends derived by the co-operative society from its in-
vestments with any other co-operative society, the whole 
of such income; 
(e) in respect of any income derived by the co-opera-
tive society from the letting of godowns or warehouses 20 
for storage, processing or facilitating the marketing of com-
modities, the whole of such income; 
(1) in the case of a co-operative society, not being a 
housing society or an urban consumers' society or a society 
carrying on traLsport bUsiness or a society engaeed in the 2S 
performance of any manufacturing operations with the aid 
of power, where the gross total income does not exceed 
twenty thousand rupees, the amount of any income by way 
of interest on securities chargeable under section 18 or any 
income from house property chargeable under section 22. 30 
E:tplanation.-For the purposes of thi& section, an "urban 
consumers' co-operative society" means a society for the benefit 
of the consumers within the limits of a municipal corporation, 
municipality, municipal committee, notified area committee, 
town area or cantonment. 35 
(3) In a case where the assessee is entitled also to the 
deduction under section 80H or section 8OJ, the deduction 
under sub-section (1) of this section, in relation to the SWIll 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
specified in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section 
(2), shall be allowed with reference to the income, if any, as 
referred to in those clauses included in the gross total income 
as reduced by the deductions under section SOH and section bOJ. 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a co-
operative society carrying on insurance business in respect of 
the profits and gains of that business computed in accordance 
with section 44. 
80Q. Where the gross total income of an assessee who is a Declue-
member of a co-operative society includes any \Deome by way of tlon in f 
dividends received by him from the society, the whole of such ~i~¥d~d' 
income shall be allowed as a deduction in computing his total from telo-• operl1 ve 
m.come. society. 
SOR. Where the gross total income of an individual who is Deduc-
a citizen of India includes any remuneration received by him ;~~~ic~ of 
outside India from any University or other educational insti- remunl'ra_ 
tution established outside India or such other association or ~~:lar~om 
body established outside India as may be notified in this behalf foreilln 
b h C G in h om ' I G sources in y t e entral overnment t e Cla azette, for any the case of 
service rendered by him during his stay outside India in his professors, . . teachers capaCIty as a professor, teacher or research worker ill such etc. I 
University, institution, association or body, there shall be 
allowed a deduction from such remuneration of an amount 
equal to fifty per cent. thereof, in computing the total income 
of the individual: 
Provided that where the individual renders continuous 
service outside India in such University, .institution, association 
or body for a period exceeding thirty-six months, no deduction 
under this section shall be allowed in respect of the remunera-
tion for such service relating to any period after the expiry of 
the thirty-six months aforesaid. 
80S. Where the gross total income of an assessee not being Dedue-
. 1 d . b f t· tion in a company mc u es any Income y way 0 compensa Ion or respect of 
other payment which is chargeable as the profits and eains of ~~tit;~~r 
business or profession in accordance with the provisions of lr~~j~~­
clause (ii) of section 28, there shall be allowed, in computing ::~~~n, 
the total income of the assessee, a deduction from such income etc., inrthe case u 
of an amount equal to twenty-five per cent. thereof, so, how- uls,sessehea o ler t an 
ever, that the amount of the deduction under this section shall com:-paruea. 
not, in any case, exceed one hundred thousand rupees. 

Deduc-
tion in 
respect of 
long-term 
capital 
gains in 
the case 
of 
assessees 
other than 
companies. 
SOT. Where the gross total income of an assessee not beinS 
a company includes any income chargeable under the head 
"Capital gains" relating to capital assets other than short-term 
capital assets (such income being, hereinafter, referred to as 
long-term capital gains), there shall be allowed, in computing S 
the total income of the assessee, a deduction from such income 
of an amount equal to,-
(a) in a case where the gross total income does not 
exceed ten thousand rupees or where the long-term capital 
gains do not exceed five thousand rupees, the whole of 10 
such long-term capital gains; 
(b) in any other case, five thousand rupees as increas-
ed by a sum equal to-
(i) forty per cent. of the amount by which the 
long-term capital gains relating to capital assets, being IS 
buildings or lands, or any rights in buildings or lands, 
exceed five thousand rupees; 
(ii) sixty per cent. of the amount by which the 
long-term capital gains relating to any other capital 
assets exceed live thousand rupees: 20 
Provided that in a case where the long-term capital 
gains relate to buildings or lands, or any rights in buildlIlgS 
Or land:i, as well as to other assets, the sum referred to in 
sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) shall be taken to be-
(A) where the amount of the long-term capital 25 
gains relating to the capital assets mentioned in sub-
clause (i) is less than five thousand rupees, sixty 
per cent. of the amount by which the long-term capital 
gains relating to any other capital assets exceed the 
difterence between five thousand rupees 8IlCl the amount 30 
of the long-term capital gains relating to the capital 
assets mentioned in sub-clause (i)j and 
(B) where the amount of the long-term capital gains 
relating to the capital assets mentioned in sub-clause 
(i) is equal to or more than five thousand rupees, sixty 3S 
per cent. of the long-term capital gains relating to any 
other capital assets.'. 
14. Omit sections 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 85A, 85B and 85C. 
15. Chapter VIIl.-
(a) For "REBATES Al'm RELIEFS", substitute "RI:I.Iu IN RESPECT 40 
OF INCOME-TAX"; 
(b) Omit '·A.-Rebate Of income-tax", sectionJ 87, 87A and 
88, and "B.-Relief fOT income-tax". 

91 
16. Sectnon 104.-In the Explanation to sub-section (4), for "in-
cluded in its total income for the relevant previous year", substitute 
"included in its gross total income for the relevant previous year". 
17. Section 109.-
S (a) For "For the purposes of sections 104, 105 and l07A", 
substitute "For the purposes of sections 104, 105 and 107A and this 
section"; 
(b) in clause (i),-
(i) for "total income of a company", substitute "gross 
10 total income of a company"; 
IS 
(ii) for sub-clause (e), substitute-
"(e) any sum with reference to which a deduction 
is allowable to the company under the provisions of 
section BOG;"; 
(iii) for sub-clause (d), substitute-
'(d) losses under the head "Capital gains" relating 
to capital assets other than short-term capital assets;'; 
(iv) in sub-clause (h), for "included in the total income", 
substitute "included in the gross total income"; 
20 (c) in clause (ii), for "total income", substitute "gross tJtal 
income"; 
(d) in clause (Ha), for "total income", in both places, substi-
tute "gross total income"; 
(e) in clause (iii), for "total income", in all places, substitute 
25 "gross total income"; 
(f) after clause (iii), insert-
·(it,) "gros!! total income" means the total income com-
puted in accordance with the provisions of this Act before 
making any deduction under Chapter VIA.'. 
30 18. Chapter XII.-
(a) Omit section 112; 
(b) in section 112A,-
(i) in clause (b), omit "plus"; 
(ii) omit clause (c); 
3S (iii) in Explanation 2, for "sections 112, 114 and 193", 
'substitute "section 193"; 

(c) omit section 114. 
19. Section 197.-For sub-section (3), substitute-
"(3) Where the: principal officer of a company considers that, 
by reason of the provisions of section SOK, the whole or any 
portion of the dividend refer:red to in section 194 will be deduc- S 
tible in computing thli total income of the recipient, he may, 
before paying the dividend to the shareholder or issuing any 
cheque or wanant in respect thereof, I[lake an application. to 
the Income-tax Officer to determine the appropriate proportion 
of the dividend to be deducted under the proviiions of section 10 
SOK; and on such determination by the Income-tax Officer no 
tax shall be deducted on such proportionate amount.". 
20. Section 236.-In Explanation 2,-
(a) for "the total income assessed for that year", substitute 
"the total income (as computed before making any deduction IS 
under Chapter VIA) assessed for that year"; 
(b) in clause (i), for "the said total income", substitute 'Iits 
total income"; 
(c) for clause (iii), substitute-
"(iii) an)' sum with reference to which a deduction is 20 
allowable to the company under the provisions of section 
flOG; and"; 
(d) in clause (a), for "total income", substitute "total 
income (as computed before making any deduction under Chapter 
VIA)". 25 
21. Section 280B.-In clause (1),-
(a) in sub-c1au~e (b)(v), omit "and"; 
(b) after sub-clause (b) (vi), insert-
"(vii) any income arising outside India in a country tb! 
laws of which prohibit or restrict the remittance of money 30 
to India;". 
22. Section 280X.-In the prOViso to sub-section (1),-
(i) in clause (a), for "seventy years", substitute "sixty years"; 
(ii) in clause (b), for "rupees", substitute "rupees; or"; 

93 
(iii) after clause (b), insert-
"(c) the annuity deposit required to be made does not exceed 
one hundred rupees; or 
(d) the deficiency does not exceed an amount equal to ten 
S per cent. of the annuity deposit required to be made or one 
hundred rupees, whichever is higher.". 
23. Section 295.-1n clause (e) of sub-section (2), for "under clause 
(i) of sub-section (3) of section 87 or clause (i) of sub-section (4) of 
section 80A, as the case may be", substitute "under clause (i) of sub-
10 section (4) of section 80C". 
24. Fourth Schedule.-1n rule 7 of Part A, for "section 80A or 
as the case may be, to a deduction from the amount of income-tax 
with which he is chargeable on his total income of an amount of 
income-tax determined in accordance with section 87", substitute 
IS "secticn SOC". 
25. Fifth Schedule.-For "[See sections 33 (1) (iii) (c), 80E and 
85A]", SUbstitute "[See sections 33(1)(b)(B)(i) and 80B(7)]". 

3TATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals 
of the Central Government for the financial year 1967-68 and to 
provide for certain connected matters. Opportunity has been taken 
to simplify and rationalise the provisions of the Income-tax Act and 
other pnactments with respect to direct taxes. The notes on clauses 
explain the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
rhe 25th Ma.y, 1967. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F.4(2.)-B/67, dated the 25th May, 1967 from 
Shri Morarji Desai, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under article 117 (1) and (3) read with 
article 274(1) of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the 
Finance (No.2) Bill, 1967 to the Lok Sabha and also recommends 
to the Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
2. The Bill will be introduced in the Lok Sabha immediately 
after the presentation of the Budget on the 25th May, 1967. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2 prescribes the rates at which income-tax (including sur-
charges, where applicable) is to be charged on income liable to tax 
for the current assessment year 1967-68. It also prescribes the rates 
at which income-tax is to be deducted at source during the current 
financial year on incomes liable to such deduction under the Income-
tax Act, and the rates at which 'advance tax' is to be computed in 
relation to incomes on which such tax is to be paid during the current 
financial year. 
Rates of income-tax for the assessment year 1967-68.-
In respect of incomes of all categories of assessees (corporate as well 
as non-corporate) liable to tax for the current assessment year 1967-
68, the rates of income-tax in clause 2 read with Part I of the First 
Schedule to the Bill are the same as provided in the Finance Act, 
1966, subject to certain modifications. The main modification in the 
rates of income-tax in the Finance Act, 1966, in relation to the cur-
rent assessment year 1967-68, is in respect of the rebates of income-tax 
granted with reference to exports. In consequence of the devaluation 
of the rupee with effect from the 6th June, 1966, the Bill provides that 
these rebates would be available only with reference to exports or 
sales to exporters made before the date of the devaluation, and not in 
relation to exports or sales to exporters made during the post-
devaluation period. 
The Finance Acts of earlier years, up to and inclusive of the Fin-
ance Act of 1966, provided for the levy of tax on 'Salary' incomes at 
the rates prescribed by the Finance Act of the preceding assessment 
year. Such provision was made to secure that in cases where the 
assessee had only salary income and had paid income-tax thereon by 
deduction at source during the relevant financial year at the current 
rates of income-tax, no further demand of tax or a refund of tax 
might be necessitated on applying the higher or lower rates of tax 
prescribed by the Finance Act of the year in which such income fell 
due for assessment. The Bill provides for the levy of t.ax o'n the 
salary as well as non-salary income liable to tax lor the assessment 
year 1967-68, at the same rates of tax. 
Part II of the First Schedule prescribes the rates for deduction of 
tax at source during the financial year 1967-68 from interest on 
securities, other interest, dividends, fees or other remuneration for 
10 

professional services, brokerage and commission, etc. In the case of 
brokerage and commission payments to residents, the tax is to be 
deducted at source at the rate of 15 per cent. In respect of dividends 
paid to a foreign company by a closely-held Indian company mainly 
engaged in a priority industry, the rate of tax to be deducted at 
source is 14 per cent. of the dividend, and in respect of dividends 
paid to a foreign company by any other domestic company, the rate 
is 28 per cent. These rates represent the effective rates of tax, under 
the rate schedule in Part III of the First Schedule, on such inter-
corporate dividends after aHowance of the deduction under the new 
section 80M in Chapter VIA of the Income-tax Act, as sought to be 
replaced with effect from 1st April, 1968 by clause 33 of the Bill read 
with item 13 of the Third Schedule. In respect of all other payments, 
including payments to residents by way of interest other than interest 
on securities, or fees and other remuneration for professional services 
(which, together with brokerage and commission payments, are pro-
posed to be brought within the scope of the provisions for deduction 
of tax at source by section 194A proposed to be inserted in the 
Income-tax Act by clause 30 of the Bill), the rates for deduction of 
tdX at source in the BIll are the same as in Part II of the First 
Schedule to the Finance Act, 1966. 
As a step towards rationalising our tax system, the principle fol-
lowed in the Bill in regard to the rates of taxes is that any changes in 
the rates should apply prospectively only to current incomes which 
are liable to tax in the succeeding assessment year, and not retros-
pectively to incomes which arose in the past year. Part III of the First 
Schedule prescribes the rates for deduction of tax at source from 
'Salaries' and for the computation of 'advance tax' payable during 
the current financial year. These rates are basically the same as are 
applicable for the levy of tax on income liable to tax for the assess-
ment year 1967-68, subject to the under-mentioned provisions for 
granting certain reliefs. 
(a) A resident individual (whether unmarried or married) 
whose total income does not exceed Rs. 10,000 and who incurs any 
expenditure towards maintenance of one or more of his parents 
or grand-parents mainly dependent on him \\;11 be entitled to a 
fixed allowance of Rs. 400 for the year; tax relief will be calcu-
lated on this amount at the rate of 5 per cent. applicable to the 
initial slab of income. 
(b) At, present, unearned incomes (exclusive of interest on 
securities and dividends on units of the Unit Trust of India, in 
the case of individuals and .Hindu undivided families) up to 
Re. 15,000 do not bear the unearned income surcharge. The Bill 

proposes to increase the limit up to which such unearned incomes 
do not bear surcharge from Rs. 15,000 to Rs. 30,000. Unearned 
income in the slab of Rs. 30,001 to 50,000 and in the slab over 
Rs. 50,000 will continue to bear surcharge at the existing rate of 
20 pE'r cent. and 25 per cent" respectively, of the income-tax 
thereon. 
(c) At present, widely-held domestic companies whose total 
income does not exceed Rs. 25,000 are chargeable to tax at the 
concessional rate of 45 per cent. of their total income as against 
55 per cent. in the case of widely-held domestic companies whose 
total income exceeds Rs, 25,000. The Bill proposes to extend the 
concessional rate of 45 per cent. to such companies whose total 
income does not exceed Rs. 50,000. 
Cla'use 3 prescribE'S the rates at which annuity deposits in respect 
of incomes liable to tax for the current assessment year 1967-68 and 
also in relation to current incomes liable to tax for the succeeding 
assessment year 1968-69 will be requirf'd to be made by individuals 
and Hindu undivided families, unregistered firms and associations of 
persons under the provisions of Chapter XXIIA of the Income-tax 
Act. These rates are the same as those under the Finance Act, 1966. 
Clause 4 seeks to make certain amendments to section 2 of the 
Income-tax Act. 
Sub-cla1L.<1e (a) seeks to insert a new clause (lA) in sec-
tion 2 of the Income-tax Act. The new clause defines the term 
·amalgamation'. The propos~d definition is broadly on the 
lines of the existing definition of the term 'amalgamation' 
contained in the Explanation to section 33 (3) of the Income-
tax Act, with certain modifications. The proposed definition 
makes it clear that the term 'amalgamation' means the merger 
of one or more companies with an existing company as well as 
the merger of two or more companies to form a new company. 
One of the conditions laid down in the existing definition, in 
the Explanation to section 33 (3) is that shareholders holding 
not less than nine-tenths in value of the shares in the amalga-
mating company immediately before the amalgamation should be-
come shareholders of the amalgamated company by virtue of 
the amalgamation. This condition had the effect of excluding 
from the scope of the definition a cas. of amalgamation where 
a company A holds more than 10 p"r cent. of the shares In ane-
ther company B, and company B amalgamates with company 
A. The proposed new definition, makes it clear that in compu-
ting the 9/10ths in value of the shares for the purposes of tbis 

prOVISIon, shares held immediately before the amalgamation 
by, or by a nominee for, the amalgamated company or its subsi-
diary will be excluded. Consequently, the specific provision in 
the existing definition in the Explanation to section 33 (3) tha1' 
amalgamation would include the merger of a subsidiary com-
pany in the holding company where the whole of the share 
capital of the subsidiary company is held by the holding com-
pany or its nominee, which has become superfluous, has. been 
omitted in the new definition. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a new clause (37A) in sec-
tion 2 of the Income-tax Act. Clause (37A) defines the expres-
sion 'rate or rates in force' and 'rates in force' in relation to 
an assessment year or financial year for the purposes of calcu-
lating or computing income-tax to be charged, or deducted at 
source or paid as 'advance tax', under the different provisions 
of the Income-tax Act, to mean the rate or rates of income-tax 
specified in this behalf in the Finance Act of the relevant year. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend clause (42A) of section 2 
of the Income-tax Act. The amendment proposed to be made 
by sub-clause (c)(i) is consequential to the amendment of 
section 49 by clause 20 of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (c)(ii) seeks to insert a new sub-clause (c) in 
clause (42A) of section 2. The effect of this new sub-clause 
will be that in determining the period for which the assessee 
has held a capital asset being a share or shares in an Indian 
company which became his property, in a scheme of amalgama-
tion, the period for which the share or shares in the amalgama-
ting company were held by him will also be included. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend clause (27) of section 10 of the Income-
tax Act. The effect of this amendment will be that the exemption 
from tax in respect of income derived from a business of live-stock 
breeding or poultry or dairy farming, which was hitherto available 
in relation to the assessment years 1965-66, 1966-67 and 1967-68, will 
now continue on an indefinite basis. 
Clause 6 seekr, to amend sub-section (2) of section 23 of the 
Income-tax Act. The effect of this amendment will be that the 
annual value of a property which is in the occupation of the owner 
for the purposes of his own residence will be limited to ten per 
cent. of the assessee's other income (i.e., all his income other than 
the income attri~utable to such self-occupied property) as compu-
ted before allowing the deductions under Chapter VIA of the In-
come-tax Act and the deduction for annuity deposit. 

99 
Clause 1 seeks to amend section 29 of the Income-tax Act. This 
amendment is consequential to the proposed insertion of new sec-
tion 43A in the Income-tax Act by clause 17 of the Bill. 
Clause 8 seeks to amend clause (2) of the Explanation to clause 
(iii) of sub-section (1) of section 32 of the Income-tax Act. The 
effect of this amendment will be that the transfer, in a scheme of 
amalgamation, of any capital asset by the amalgamating company 
to the amalgamated company which i!'i an Indian company, will not 
be regarded as a sale for the purpose of section 32(1)(iii) rela-
ting to the grant of a 'terminal allowance', or the provisions of sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 41 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to the levy of a 'balancing charge'. 
Clause 9 seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 33 of the 
Income-tax Act by a new sub-section. The substituted sub-section 
is substantially the same as the existing sub-section, except for a 
few verbal and drafting changes which are consequential to the 
insertion of a new definition of 'amalgamation' in section 2 of the: 
Income-tax Act by clause 4(a) of the Bill. 
Clause 10 seeks to substitute sub-section (5) of section 33A of 
the Income-tax Act by a new sub-section. The substituted sub-
section makes only a few verbal and drafting changes in the exis-
ting provisions of sub-section (5), which are consequential to the 
insertion of a new definition of 'amalgamation' in section 2 of the 
Income-tax Act by clause 4(a) of the Bill. 
Clause 11 seeks to insert a new section 33B in the Income-tax 
Act. The effect of the proposed new section will be that where the 
business of any industrial undertaking (which manufactures or pro-
duces articles) carried on by the assessee in India is discontinued 
in any previous year because of extensive damage to, or destruc-
tion of, any building, machinery, plant or furniture owned by the 
assessee and used for tne purposes of such business, as a direct re-
sult of any of the specified circumstances, and within a period of 
three years from the end of that previous year the business is re-
established, reconstructed or revived by the assessee, he shall be-
come eligibl~ for a deduction by way of 'rehabilitation allow-
ance' of an amount equal to sixty per cent. of the amount of the 
'terminal allowance' due to him under section 32(1)(iii) of the 
Income-tax Act, in respect of the building, machinery, plant or fur-
niture which is so damaged or destroyed. The deduction will be 
allowed in computfni his profits and gains of the previous year in 

100 
which the business is re-established, reconstructed or revived. The 
specified circumstances referred to above are-
(i) flood, typhoon, hurricane, cyclone, earth-quake or other 
convulsion of nature; or 
(ii) riot or civil disturbance; or 
(iii) accidental fire or explosion; or 
(iv) action by an enemy or action taken in combating an 
enemy (whether with or without a declaration of war). 
Clause 12 seeks to substitute the Explanation to' clause (i) of 
sub-section (2) of section 34 by a new Explanation. This amend-
ment is consequential to the amendment proposed to be made in 
section 47 of the Income-tax Act by clause 19 of the Bill. The 
effect of this amendment will be that where a capital asset is trans-
ferred by a company to another company (which is an Indian com-
pany) in a scheme of amalgamation, then, in determining whether 
the aggregate of all deductions in respect of depreciation exceeds 
the actual cost of the capital asset to the assessee, depreciation 
allowed in respect of the transferred asset to the amalgamating 
company will also be taken into account. 
Clause 13 seeks to insert a new sub-section (5) in section 35 of 
the Income-tax Act. The effect of this amendment will be that 
where, in a scheme of amalgamation, the amalgamating company 
sells or otherwise transfers to the amalgamated company (which is 
an Indian company) any asset representing expenditure of a capital 
nature on scientific research, the amalgamating company will not be 
allowed any deduction under section 35(2)(ii) or 35(2)(iii) of the 
Income-tax Act on account of any deficiency ariSing on the transfer. 
The provisions of section 35 will, however, continue to apply to the 
amalgamated company as they would have applied to the amalga-
mating company if the latter had not so sold or otherwise transferred 
the asset. 
Clause 14 seeks to insert a new sub-section (6) in section 35A of 
the Income-tax Act. The effect of this amendment will be that 
where, in a scheme of amalgamation, patent rights or copyrights 
referred to in section 35A are sold or otherwise transferred by the 
amalgamating company to the amalgamated company which is an 
Indian company, the provisions of section 35A (3) relating to the 
grant of 'terminal allowance' and the provisions of section 35A( 4) 
relating to the, 'balancing charge' will not apply to the amalgamating 
company. The provisions of the said section 35A will, however, 
continue to apply to the amalgamated company as they would have 
applied to the amalgamating company if the latter had not sold or 
otherwise transferred the rights. 

101 
Clause 15 seeks to amend clause (ix) of sub-section (I.) of section 
.36 of the Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the 
amendment proposed to be made in section 35 of the Income-tax Act 
by clause 13 of the Bill. 
Clause 16 seeks to amend section 43 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to insert a new Explanation 7 in clause 
(1) of section 43. The effect of this Explanation will be that 
where, in a schem£.· of amalgamation, any capital asset is trans-
ferred by the amalgamating company to the amalgamated com-
pany which is an Indian company, the 'actual cost' of the 
transferred capital asset to the amalgamated company will be 
taken at the same amount as would have been taken in the case 
of the amalgamating company had it continued to hold the 
capital asset for the purposes of its business. 
Sub-clause (ii) seeks to insert a new Explanation 2A in clause 
(6) of section 43. The effect of this Explanation will be that 
where, in a scheme of amalgamation, any capital asset is trans-
ferred by the amalgamating company to the amalgamated 
comp:my which is an Indian company, the 'written down value' 
of the transferred capital asset to the amalgamated company 
will be taken at the same amoun t as would have been taken in 
the case of the amalgamating company had it continued to hold 
the asset for the purposes of its own busine3s. 
Clause 1i' seeks to insert a new section 43A in the Income-tax 
Act. The proposed section 43A, in substance, secures that where an 
assessee had acquIred any capital asset from a country outside Indi, 
for the purposes of his business E>r profession on deferred. payment 
terms or against a foreign loan, before the date of devaluation of the 
rupee, the additional rupee liability incurred by him in meeting the 
instalments of the cost of the asset or of the foreign loan, as the 
case may be, falling due for payment after the date of devaluation, 
will be allowed to be added to the original actual cost of the asset 
for the purpose of calculating the allowance on account of depre-
ciation in computing the profits for the assessment year 1967-68 and 
subsequent assessment years. Similar increase in the original actual 
cost will be allowed to be made in respect of capital assets acquired 
by the assessee to be used in scientific research related to the class 
of business carried on by him or patent rights or copyrights acquired 
from abruact Or any capital asset acquired by a company for the 
purpose of promoting family planning amongst its employees. 
Further, in computing the capital gains arising to the assessee on 
the sale or transfer of a capital asset acquired by him from abroad 

102 
On deferred payment t.erms or against a foreign loan, the additional 
rupee liability incurred by him in repaying the instalments of the 
cost or the foreign loan, as the case may be, after the date of 
devaluation of the rupee, will be added to the original actual cost of 
the asset. The proposed section also secures that where there is a 
dec-rease in the rupee liability of the assessee in respect of assets 
acq!-lired by him from abroad. due to a change in the exchange value 
of the rupee, the original actual cost of the asset, will be corres-
pondingly reduced. 
The additional rupee liability incurred on imported capital assets 
or, as the case may be, any decrease in such liability, 
in the circumstances stated in thfl earlier paragraph will not, how-
ever, be taken into account in computing the actual cost of the 
asset for the purpose of deduction on account of development rebate. 
Clau-se 18 seeks to amend section 44 of the Income-tax Act. This 
amendment is consequential to the proposed insertion of new section 
43A in the Income-tax Act by clause 17 of the Bill. 
Clause 19 seeks to amend section 47 of the Income-tax Act by the 
insertion of two new clauses, namely, clause (vi) and clause (vii). 
The effect of the new clause (vi) will be that no capital gain or loss 
will be computed with reference to the transfer of a capital asset, 
in a scheme of amalgamation, by the amalgamating company to the 
amalgamated company which is an Indian company. Clause (vii) 
similarly seeks to secure that no capital gain or loss will be com-
puted with reference to the transfer, by a shareholder, in a scheme 
of amalgamation, of a share or shares held by him in the amalga-
mating company, in consideration of the allotment to him of any 
share or shares in the amalgamated company which is an Indian 
company. 
Clause 20 seeks to amend section 49 of the Income-tax Act. 
These amendments are consequential to the amendment proposed to 
be made in section 47 of the Income-tax Act by clause 19 of the 
Bill. The amendment made by sub-clause (i)(a) seeks to secure that 
where, in a scheme of amalgamation, any capital asset is trans-
ferred by the amalgamating company to the amalgamated company 
which is an Indian company, the cost of acquisition to the amalga-
mated company of the assets so transferred shall be deemed to be 
. the cost for which these assets were acquired by the amalgamating 
company. 
The amendment made by sub-clause (i)(b) is 0_ 4 consequential 
nature. 
The .amendment made by sub-clause (ii) seeks to secure that 
where the capital asset, being a share or shares in an amalgamated 
company which is an Indian company, became the property of the 

103 
assessee in consideration of the transfer of a share Or shares held 
by him in the amalgamating company, in a scheme of amalgamation, 
the cost of acquisition to him of the shares in the amalgamated 
company shall be taken to be the cost of acquisition to him of the 
share or shares in the amalgamating company. 
Clause 21 seeks to amend section 55 of the Income-tax Act. 
These amendments are consequential to the amendments proposed 
to be made in section 49 by clause 20 of the Bill. 
Clause 22 seeks to amend section 72 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to add a proviso to sub-section (1) of 
section 72. This enables the carry-forward and set oft of any 
loss sustained in the business of an industria1' undertaking 
carried on by the assessee in India, which after its discontinuance 
in the circumstances specified in section 33B (proposed to be 
inserted in the Income-tax Act bv clause 11 of the Bill) is re-
established, reconstructf'd or revived by the assessee within the 
three-year pf'riod referred tl!l in that section. Such loss will be 
carried forward to the aSSf'ssmf'nt year relevant to the previouli 
year in which the business is so re-established. reconstructed or 
revived. and set off a~ainst thc:> profits and ~ajns of the assessee 
from that business or any other business carried on by him in 
that year and so on for a period of seven years next following, 
subject to the condition that the re-established. reconstructed or 
revived business continues to be carried (In by the assessee. 
Sub-clause (i.i) seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 72. 
This amendment is conc;equf'ntial to the amendment proposed 
to be made by sub-clause (i) above. 
Clause 23 seeks to introduce, with effect from 1st April, 1966, a 
new section 80F in Chapter VIA of the Income-tax Act. The eftect 
of the proposed section 80F will be that in the case of a resident in-
dividual, who is a citizen of India. and who receives remuneration 
from any foreign university or other educational institution or such 
other forei~n association or body as may be notified in this behalf by 
the Central Government in the Official Gazette, for renderiIlg 
service outside India as a professor. teacher or research worker in 
such university, institution, association or body, a deduction will be 
allowed in an amount equal to fifty per cent. of such remuneration 
in computing his total income. However, if the individual renders 
continuous service outside India in such university, institution, 
association or body for a period exceeding 36 months, he will not be 
entitled to the above-mentioned deduction in respect of his foreign 
remuneration for such service relating to any period after the expiry 
of the aforesaid 36 months. 

104 
Clause 24 seeks to amend section 84 of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-cZause (a) seeks to substitute, with retrospective effect, 
sub-section (1) of that section. The effect of the substituted 
sub-section will be that the 'tax holiday' under section 84 of the 
Income-tax Act, in the caSe of newly established industrial 
uudertakings and hotels (owned by companies), on the profits 
and gains up to six per cent. per annum of the average capital 
employed in the undertaking or the hotel, will bi extended to 
profits and gains derived by an Indian company from the plying 
of ships. 
Sub-clause (b)(i) seeks to substitute, retrospectively, clause 
(iii) of sub-section (2) of section 84 of the Income-tax Act. The 
effect of the substituted provision will be that an industrial 
undertaking operating a cold storage plant in India will also be 
entitled to the 'tax holiday' under section 84. 
The amendment proposed to be made by sub-clause (b)(ii) 
is consequential to the amendment proposed to be made by 
sub-clause (b)(i). 
Sub-clause (b)(iii) seeks to insert a proviso to sub-section (2) 
of section 84. 'l'he effect of the proviso will be that an industrial 
undertaking which is formed as a result of the re-establishment, 
reconstruction or revival by the assessee of the business of any 
such industrial undertaking as is referred to in the 
proposed section 33B, in the circumstances and 
within the period specified in that section, will not 
be disentitled to the 'tax holiday' under section 84 by 
reason merely of the fact that such undertaking is fonned by 
the splitting up, or reconstruction of a business, which was 
formerly in existence. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 
84 by a new sub-section. The sub-section as substituted omits 
the existing condition that the hotel building should be owned 
by the Indian company in order to be eligible for the 'tax holiday' 
concession. Further, an Indian company running the business 
of a hotel will be eligible for the 'tax holiday' even in a case 
where the hotel premises were, before their transfer to the 
company, used for any purpose other than as premises for run-
ning a hotel. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to insert a new sub-section (3A) in 
section 84. The proposed sub-section lays down various condi-
tions which have to be fulfilled before the profits and gains 
derived by an Indian company from the plying of a ship or ships 

100 
can qualify for the tax concession under this section. These 
conditions are that-
(a) the ship should be owned by an Indian company 
and wholly used by it for the purposes of its business; 
(b) the ship, previous to the date of its acquisition by 
the Indian company, should not have been owned and used 
in Indian territorial waters by a person resident in India; 
and 
(c) the ship should have been brought into use by the 
Indian company at any time within a period of twenty-
three years next folloWing 1st April, 1948. 
The amendment pcoposed to be made by sub-clause (e) is 
consequential to the amendment proposed to be made by sub-
clause (a) of this clause. 
The amendment proposed 'to be made by sub-clause (f) is 
consequential to the amendment proposed to be made by sub-
clause (b)(i) of this clause. 
The amendment proposed to be made by sub-clause (g) is 
of a drafting nature. 
Sub-clause (h) seeks to insert a new sub-section, namely, 
sub-section (9) in section 84. The proposed sub-section seeks 
to provide that in relation to a ship, the provisions of section 84 
shall apply to the assessment for the assessment year relevant 
to the previous year in which the ship is brought into use by the 
Indian company and the four assessment years next following. 
Clause 25 seeks to amend section 85 of the Income-tax Act with 
retrospective effect. This amendment is consequential to the exten-
sion of the 'tax holiday' provisions of section 84 of the Income-tax 
Act to profits and gains derived from the plying of a ship, by clause 
24 of the Bill. The effect of this amendment will be that dividends 
from an Indian company which are attributable to its profits and 
gains derived from the plying of a ship, which are exempt from tax 
under the provisions of section 84, will be exempt from tax in the 
hands of the shareholders. 
Clause 26 seeks to amend section 88 of the Income-tax Act. The 
effect of this amendment will be that donations to the Prime 
Minister's Drought Relief Fund will be eligible for rebate of tax 
without the operation of the ordinary ceiling limit over the quali-
fying amount, applicable to other charitable donations, namely, ten 
per cent. of the total income of the donor or Rs. 2 lakhs, whichever 
is less. 
Clause 27 seeks to make certain amendments in Chapter XIII 
of the Income-tax Act with a view to facilitating the organisation of 
work in the Income-tax Department on functional basis. 

106 
Sub-clause (1) seeks to substitute a new sub-section for the 
existing sub-section (2) of section 121 of the Income-tax Act. 
The new sub-section (2) empowers the Board, by general or 
special order in writing. to distribute and allocate the work on 
functional basis among two or more Commissioners of Income-
tax having concurrent jurisdiction over the same area or the 
same persons or classes of persons or the same incomes or classes 
of income 01' the same cases or classes of cases. 
Sub-clause (2) seeks to substitute a new section for section 
123 of the Income-tax Act. Under section 123 as substituted, it 
will be open to the Commissioner, by general or special order 
in writing, to distribute and allocate the work on functional 
basis among two or more Inspecting Assistant Commissioners 
having concurrent jurisdiction over the same area or the same 
persons or classes of persons or the same incomes or classes of 
income or the same cases -or classes of cases. 
Sub-clause (3) seeks to amend section 124 of the Income-tax 
Act. Sub-clause (3)(i) seeks to substitute new sub-sections for the 
existing sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 124. Under sub-
sections (1) and (2), as substituted, it will be open to the Com-
missioner Or the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner authorised 
by him in this behalf, by general or special order in writing, to 
distribute and allocate the work on functional basis amongst 
two or more Income-tax Officers having concurrent jurisdiction 
over the same area or the same persons or classes of persons or 
the same incomes or classes of income or the same cases or 
classes of cases. The amendment made by sub-clause (3)(it) is 
consequential to the proposed insertion of new section 130A in 
the Income-tax Act by sub-clause (7). 
Sub-clause (4) seeks to substitute a new section for section 
125 of the Income-tax Act. Under section 125, as substituted, it 
will be open to the Commissioner of Income-tax to direct, by 
general or special order, that specific functions vested in the 
Income-tax Oftlcer by or under the Income-tax Act shall be 
performed by an Inspector of Income-tax or any member of the 
ministerial staff subordinate to the Commissioner or other lower 
Income-tax authorities, in respect of any specified area, case or 
class of cases, person or class of persons or class of incomes, 
subject to such conditions, restrictions or limitations as may be 
'specifted by him in the order. However, the Commissioner may 
not assign to the Inspector of Income-tax or any member of the 
ministerial staff certain important functions of the Income-tax 

i07 
Oftlcer such as the function of summoning and examining wit-
nesses, making searches and seizures, making of assessments, 
re-opening of assessments in cases of escapement of income, 
issue of recovery certificates, distress warrants or garnishee 
orders, levy of penalty, etc., unless the Board, by general or 
special order, authorises him to do so. 
Sub-clause (5) seeks to substitute a new section for section 
127 of the Income-tax Act. Under section 127, as substituted, the 
Commissioner or the Board may transfer any case from any 
Income-tax Officer or Income-tax Officers to any other Income-
tax Officer Or Income-tax Officers after following the procedure 
laid down in this behalf under the existing law. The section 
further provides that where any case has been so transferred to 
two or more Income-tax Officers, the Board or the 
Commissioner or any Inspecting Assistant Commissioner 
authorised by him in this behalf, may, by general or special 
order in writing, distribute and allocate the work in such a case 
on functional basis among the Income-tax Officers to whom the 
case has been transferred. 
Sub-clause (6) seeks to substitute a new section for section 
128 of the Income-tax Act. Section 128, as substituted, provides 
that Inspectors of Income-tax shall perform such functions in 
the execution of the Income-tax Act as are assigned to them by 
the Commissioner by an order made under section 125(1) (b) 
[as proposed to be substituteq by sub-clause (4)] or otherwise 
or by any other Income-tax authority under whom they are 
appointed to work. 
Sub-clause (7) seeks to insert a new section 130A at the 
end of Chapter XITI-B of the Income-tax Act. The new section 
130A provides that in a case where two or more Income-ta1 
Officers have concurrent jurisdiction over an assessee, the 
Income-tax Officer to whom a particular function or function. 
have been assigned by the Board or, as the case may be, thl: 
Commissioner or Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, shall be 
the Income-tax Officer empowered to perform such function or 
functions in relation to that assessee. 
Clause 28 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 138 of the 
Income-tax Act. Under sub-section (1), as amended, it will be open 
to the Board or any other Income-tax authority spe'cified by it by a 
general or special order in this behalf to furnish or cause to be fur-
nished information relating to any assessee in respect of any assess-
ment made unde'r the Income-tax Act (or the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922) to any officer, authority or body performing any functions under 
any law relatini to the imposition of any tax, duty or cess or to deal-

lOS 
ings in foreign exchange where the Board or other Income-tax author-
ity considers such information necessary for the purpose of enabling 
the officer, authority or body to perform his or its functions under 
that law. It will also be open to the Central Government to notify 
any officer, authority or body performing functions under any other 
law, and on such notification, the Board or any other Income-tax 
authority may furnish or cause to be furnished similar information 
relating to any assessee to the officer, authority or body so notified. 
Clause 29 seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 172 of the 
Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the proposed 
insertion of new clause (37A) in section 2 of the Income-tax Act by 
clause 4~b) of the Bill. 
CZause 30 seeks to make certain amendments in Chapter XVII 
of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (1) seeks to omit the Explanation to section 193 
of the Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the 
proposed insertion of new clause (37 A) in section 2 of the 
Income-tax Act by clause 4 (b) of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (2) seeks to insert a new section 194A in the 
Income-tax Act. Under the proposed section 194A, every person, 
other than an individual or a Hindu undivided family, who is 
responsible for paying to a resident any income by way of broke-
rage or commission, or fees Or other remuneration for profes-
sional services, or interest, other than 'Interest on securities' 
will be required to deduct therefrom income-tax at the 'rates in 
force'. The deduction of tax will have to be made at the time of 
the credit of such income to the account of, or the payment 
thereof (by whatever mode) to, the person entitled to lIeceive 
s.uch income, whichever is earlier. However, deduction of tax 
will not be required to be made in a case where the person (not 
being a company or a regist~red firm) entitled to receive such 
income furnishes an affidavit (to the person responsible for pay-
ing the income) declanng that hi3 total income for the assess-
ment year next following the financial year in which the income 
is credited or paid will be less than the minimum amount liable 
tt' tax in his case. Further, no deduction of tax will be required 
to be made under the provisions of this section if the income is 
credited or paid before 1st October, 1967 or if the amount of 
income credited or paid <It anyone time does not exceed, in the 
case of income by way of b~okerage Or commission, the sum of 
five hundred rupees, and in any other case, the sum of two 
hundred rUJ?ees. 
Sub-clause (3) seeks to replace section 196 of the Income-tax 
Act by a new section. Under the section as replaced, no deduc-

109 
tion of tax will be required to be made by any person from any 
sums by way of interest on securities or dividends on shares 
or any other income payable to a corporation estab-
lished by or under a Central Act which is, under any law for 
the time being ip force, exempt from income-tax on its income, 
where such corporation is the owner of the securities or shares or 
has full beneficial interest therein. Under the existing section 
196, similar exemption from deduction of tax at source opera-
tes in respect of sums payable to the Government or the Reserv& 
Bank of India. 
Sub-clause (4) seeks to amend section 197 of the Income-tax 
Act. This amendment is consequential to the amendment sought 
to be made bv sub-clause (2t 
Sub-clause (5) seeks to amend sections 198, 199, 200, 202 and 
205 of the Income-tax Act. These amendments are consequential 
to the amendment sought to be made by sub-clause (2). 
Sub-clause (6) seeks to substitute section 20$3 of the Income-
tax Act by a new section. This amendment is consequential to' 
the amendment sought to be made by sub-clause (2), 
Sub-clause (7) seeks to amend section 204 of the Income-tax 
Act. This amendment is consequential to the amendment sought 
to be made by sub-clause (2). 
The effect of the amendments made by sub-clauses (4), (5), 
(6) and (7) will be that the existing provisions of the law relat-
ing to the duties and liabilities of persons responsible for deduct-
ing tax at source from payments by way of interest on se'curities, 
dividends, etc .. as well as the penalties attaching for default in 
these duties and liabilities. will be made applicable mutatis 
mutandis to persons responsible for deducting tax at source from 
payments by way of brokerage or commission, fees or remunera-
tion for professional services or interest other than interest on 
securities, under the new section 194A proposed to be inserted in 
the Income-tax Act by sub-clause (2), 
Sub-clause (8) seeks to insert a new section 206A in the 
Income-tax Act. The proposed section 206A seeks to provide' that 
every person responsible for paying any income referred to in 
,section 194A, sought to be inserted in the Income-tax Act by sub-
clause (2), shall, within thirty days of the end of each financial 
year, furnish in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed 
manner a return showing the name and address of every person 
who has furnished to him an affidavit under the proviso to the 
aforesaid section 194A(1), the amount of the income credited or 

110 
paid during the financial year to each such person, the time or 
times at which the same was paid or credited, and such other 
particulars as may be prescribed. 
Clause 31 seeks to amend sections 209 and 215 of the Income-tax 
Act. These amendments are consequential to the proposed insertion 
()f section 194A in the Income-tax Act by clause 30(2) of the Bill. 
Clattse 3r seeks to amend the First Schedule to the Income-tax 
Act. This amendment is consequential to the proposed insertion of 
new section 43A in the Income-tax Act by clause 17 of the Bill. 
Clause 33 seeks to make some further amendments, specified in 
the Third Schedule, in the Income-tax Act with effect from the 1st 
April, 1968. 
Item 1 of the Third Schedule seeks to insert a new clause (29) 
in section 10 of the Income-tax: Act. The new clause seeks to ex-
i!mpt from tax: an authority constituted under any law for the time 
being in force for the marketing of commodities in respect of any 
income derived by such authority from the letting of godowns or 
warehouses for storage, processing or facilitating the marketing of 
commodities. This provision replaces the existing provision in sec-
tion 83 of the Income-tax Act which, in consequence, is sought to 
be omitted from the Income-tax Act by item 14 of this Schedule. 
Item 2 Of the Third Schedule seeks to amend section 32 of the 
Income-tax Act. 
Clause (a) seeks to insert a new clause (v) in sub-section (1) 
of section 32. The new clause provides for the grant of an 'initial' 
depreciation allowance, in a sum equal to twenty-five per cent. of 
the actual cost of construction of a new building (the erection of 
which is completed after 31st March, 1967) to an Indian company, 
in a case where such building is used by the company as premises 
for running a hotel, and the hotel is for the time being approved 
in this behalf by the Central Government. The deduction will be 
allowed in respect of the previous year in which the erection of the 
building is completed or, if the building is first put to use in the 
immediately succeeding previous year, then, in respect of that pre-
vious year. The 'initial' depreciation will not be deducted in deter-
mining the written down value of the building for the grant of the 
normal depreciation allowance under section 32 (1) (if); the initial 
depreciation will, however, be taken into account for the purposes 
of the other provisions of the Income-tax Act. 
Clause (b) seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 32 of the 
Income-tax: Act. This amendment is consequential to the amend-
ment proposed to be made by clause (a) of this item. 

111 
Item 3 of the Third Schedu.le seeks to amend section 33 of the 
Income-tax Act. 
Clause (a) seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section 33 by 
a new sub-section. The new sub-section (1) omits references to 
certain dates of acquisition of a ship or the installation of any 
machinery or plant, which have no relevance for the assessment 
year 1968-69 and subsequent assessment years; the provisions of 
the substituted sub-section have also been re-drafted so as to make 
them more easily comprehensible. The substantive change in the 
new sub-section consists in the grant of development rebate at the 
higher rates applicable to machinery or plant installed in a 
priority industry, to machinery or plant installed after 31st March, 
1967 by an Indian company in premises used by it as a hotel, where 
the hotel is for the time being approved in this behalf by the Cen-
tral Government, and to machinery or plant installed by any as-
sessee after the aforesaid date, being an asset representing expen-
diture of a capital nature on scientific research related to the busi-
ness carried on by the assessee. The higher rates of development 
rebate in respect of the machinery or plant mentioned above are 
thirty-five per cent. of the actual cost of the machinery or plant to 
the assessee, where it is installed before 1st April, 1970 and twenty-
five per cent. of such cost, where it is installed after 31st March, 
1970. 
Clause (bi seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 33 of the 
Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the proposed 
'Substitution of the existing Chapter VIA of the Income-tax Act by 
.8 new Chapter VIA by item 13. 
Clause (c) seeks to amend sub-section (6) of section 33. The 
-effect of this amendment will be that the prohibition against the 
grant of development rebate in respect of machinery or plant ins-
talled after 31st March, 1965 in any office premises or in any resi-
-dential accommodation, including guest houses, will not operate in 
respect of any machinery or plant installed after 31st March, 1967 
by an Indian company carrying on business as a hotelier in premises 
used by it as a hotel, where the hotel is for the time being approvec:i 
in this behalf by the Central Government. 
Item 4 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend sub-section (2) 
,of section 33A of the Income-tax Act. This amendment is conse-
quential to the substitution of the existing Chapter VIA of the In-
come-tax Act by a new Chapter VIA by item 13. 
Item 5 Of the Third Schedule seeks to make certain amendments 
in sub-section (2) of section 35 of the Income-tax Act. 

112 
Clause (i) seeks to substitute the existing clause (i) of the saidi 
sub-section (2) by two new clauses, namely, clause (i) and clause' 
(ia). Under the new clause (i), capital expenditure on scientific' 
research related to the .class of business carried on by the assessee' 
which is incurred before the 1st April, 1967 will be allowed to be 
deducted over a period of five years, as under the existing law. The-
new clause (ia) provides that where such expenditure is incurred 
after the 31st March, 1967, the whole of such expenditure will be 
allowed as a deduction in the previous year in which such expen-
diture has been incurred. 
The amendments made by clauses (ii) and (iii) are consequential 
to the amendment made by clause (i). 
Item 6 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend clause (viii) of 
sub-section (1) of section 36 of the Income-tax Act. This amend-
ment is consequential to the substitution of the existing Chapter 
VI ~ of the Act by a new Chapter VIA by item 13. 
Item 7 Of the Third Schedule seeks to amend sub-section (3) of 
section 41 of the Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential 
to the amendment proposed to be made in section 35 of the InClJme-
tax Act by item 5. 
Item 8 of th~ Third Schedule seeks to substitute a new proviso 
for the existing proviso to clause (1) of section 43 of the Income-
tax Act. Under the proviso as substituted, the 'actual cost' of a 
. motor car, for the purpose of calculating depreciation allowance, 
will not be limited to Rs. 25,000, as under the existing law, where the 
motor car is acquired after 31st March, 1967, and is used in a business. 
of running it on hire as a tourist-taxi. 
Item 9 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend section 66 of the 
Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the proposed 
omission of sections 87, 87A and 88 of the Act by item 15. 
Item 10 of the Third Schedule seeks to substitute sub-section 
(2) of section 71 of the Income-tax Act by two new sub-sections. 
The effect of the new sub-section (2) will be that any loss sus-
tained by the assessee under any head of income other than 'Capital 
gains', which under the existing provisions of the Act cannot 
be set off against his income chargeable under the head 'Capital 
gains' except if the assessee so desires, will be set off against his 
income relating to capital gains from short-term capital assets. 
The effect of the new sub-section (3) will be that any loss sus- -
tained by the assessee from the transfer of any short-term capital' 
asset, which under the existing provisions of the law cannot be set 

113 
,off against his ordinary income, will be set off against such income. 
'The effed of these two provisions will be that, for the purposes of 
:.:->et off of loss under one head against income under another, capital 
. gains relating to short-term capital assets will be treated on par 
with ordinary income. 
Item 11 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend section 72 of the 
Income-ta"'{ Act. This amendment is consequential to the amend-
-ment proposed to be made in section 71 of the Act by item 10. 
Item 12 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend section 74 of the 
:iIncome-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the amend-
ment proposed to be made in section 71 of the Income-tax Act by 
:item 10. 
Item 13 of the Third Schedule seeks to substitute 8 new Chapter 
for Chapt~r VIA of the Income-tax Act. The new Chapter VIA 
-seeks, linter alia, to replace the existing provisions for grant of full 
·or partial rebate of tax at the average rate of tax or charging of 
tax at a concessional rate on certain items of income or payments, 
-contained in Chapter VII, Chapter VIII and Chapter XII of the 
'Income-tax Act, by provisions for allowing a straight deduction of 
--the whole or a specified percentage of the amount qualifying for 
·the rebate or concessional rate of tax, in computing the total in-
.. come. The provisions of sections 80A to SOE of the existing Chap-
·ter VIA also find a place in the new Chapter with certain modi fica-
• tions. The new Chapter VIA also incorporates certain new provi-
<sions. 
New section 80A lays down certain ~eneral prinCiples which 
· are relevant for the purposes of the deductions to be allowed in 
-computing the total income under new sections BOC to BOT. In 
particular, section BOA(2) limits the aggregate of these deductions 
·to the gross total income of the assessee, i.e., the total income as 
-computed under the provisions of the Income-tax Act before 
·makbg any deduction under Chapter VIA or for annuity deposit 
. under section 2800 of that Act and without applying the 
provisions of section 64 of that Act. Section 80A(3) provides that 
"where a deduction has been allowed under new section 80G or SOH 
or SOJ or SDK or SOL or 80S or 80T in computinli( the total income 
· of a firm, association of persons or body of individuals, no deduction 
under the same section shall be allowed in computing the total 
income of a partner of the firm or a member of the association or 
'body, in relation ·to his share in the income of the firm, association 
-or body. 
New section SOB contains definitions of certain terms used in 
··this Chapter. 

114 
New section aoc, relating to deductions in respect of life insu-
rance premia, contributions to provident fund, etc., corresponds to. 
the existing section aOA of the Income-tax Act, except for certain 
verbal or drafting changes and an increase in the limits of the· 
amount qualifying for the deduction under that section. The new 
limits will be 30 per cent. of the gross total income or Rs. 15,000, 
whichever is less, in the case of an individual, and 30 per cent. of 
the gross total income or Rs. 30,000, whichever is less. in the cas~ 
of a Hindu undivided family. 
New section aOD, relating to deduction in respect of medical 
treatment of handicapped dependants, corresponds to the existing 
section SOB of the Income-tax Act, except for certain verbal or 
drafting changes. 
New section aOE, relating to deduction in respect of payments 
for securing retirement annuities, corresponds to the existing sec-
tion SOC of the Income-tax Act, except for certain verbal or drafting 
changes. 
New section aOF provides for the deduction of a specified amount 
in the computation of the total income in the case of a resident 
individual who is not a citizen of India, where such individual has 
incurred out of his income chargeable to tax any expenditure on the 
full time education of a child of 21 years or under, dependent on 
him, in a university, college or school or other educational institu-
tion outside India. The specified amounts are Rs. 1,500 for each 
such child subject to a maximum amount of Rs. 3,000 in respect of 
two or more such children. This provision replaces the existing 
provision in section 87 A of the Income-tax Act which, in conse-
quence, is sought to be omitted by item 15. 
New section 80G seeks to replace the existing section 88 of the 
Income-tax Act. The new· section provides for a straight deduc-
tion of 50 per cent. of the qualiiying amount of donations in com-
puting the total income of all categories of tax payers. In other 
respects, the provisions of the new section correspond to the pro-
visions of the existing section 88 (as sought to be amended by clause 
26 of the Bill), which, in consequence, is sought to be omitted by 
item 15. 
New section SOH provides that in computing the total income of 
any assessee whose 'gross total income' includes any profits and gains 
derived from a new industrial undertaking which satisfies all the 
conditions laid down in that section, a deduction will be allowed of 
a sum equal to fifty per cent. of the amount of such profits and gains, 
subject to a monetary ceiling over the deduction, of Rs. llakh. This 

115 
deduction will be allowed in respect of the assessment year relevant 
to the previous year in which the undertaking begins to manufac-
ture or produce articles, and the nine assessment years immediately 
succeeding. The deduction under this section will be available in 
respect of the profits and gains of a new industrial undertaking 
which fulfils all the following conditions, namely:-
(i) it is not formed by the splitting up or reconstruction 
of a business already in existence; 
(ii) it is not formed by the transfer to a new business of 
a building, machinery or plant previously used for any pur-
pose; 
(iii) it has begun or begins to manufacture or produce 
articles in any part of India at any time within the period of 
three years next following the 1st April, 1967; 
(iv) it employs, on every working day throughout the 
previous year, fifty or more workers in a manufacturing process 
(whether carried on with or without the aid of power); 
(v) it employs displaced persons or repatriates or members 
of the families of displaced persons or repatriates, and the daily 
average number of such employees, as certified by the pres-
cribed authority, is not less than sixty per cent. of the daily 
average of all the persons employed in the undertaking through-
out the previous year. In computing the daily average number 
of employees who are displaced persons or repatriates or mem-
bers of the families of displaced persons Or repatriates, any 
such employee who had completed the age of forty years at 
the time of his first employment in the undertaking will not 
be taken into account. 
The expressions 'displaced person' and 'repatriate' have been 
defined in clause (1) and clause (9), respectively, of new section 
80B. 
The expression 'member of the family' in this section means 
any member of the family of a person who, before his employment 
in th~ undertaking, was dependent on such person. 
New section 801 relating to deduction in respect of profits and 
gains from priority industries in the case of certain companies se~ks 
to replace the existing section 80E of the Income-tax Act. The only 
change of a substantive character which has been made in the new 
section consists in the extension of the concession available under 
the existing section 80E to profits and gains derived from the 

116 
business of a hotel carried on by an Indian company in a case where 
such hotel is for the time being approved in this behalf by the 
Central Government. 
New section 80J seeks to replace section 84 of the Income-tax Act 
as proposed to be amended by clause 24 of the Bill. Under section 
80J, where the gross total income of an assessee includes any profits 
and gains from an industrial undertaking or ship or the business of 
a hotd to which this section applies, the profits and gains of :;uch 
industrial undertaking or ship or the business of the hotel up to 6 
per cent. per annum of the capital employed therein will be allowed 
as a straight deduction in computing the total income of the assessee. 
Under the provisions of section 84, such income qualifies for a rebate 
of tax at the average rate of tax applicable to the total income of 
the assessee. 
Section 80J further provides for the carry-forward of any defi-
ciency in the 'tax holiday' benefit from the assessment year 1967-68 
onwards to the subsequent assessment years for being allowed as a 
straight deduction in computing the total income of the assessee 
for such subsequent assessment years. Such carry-forward is to be 
allowed up to the eighth assessment year commencing with the 
assessment year in which the industrial undertaking started pro-
ducing articles or operating a cold storage plant or the ship was 
brought into use by the Indian company for the purpose of its 
business or, as the case may be, the business of the hotel started 
functioning. The 'deficiency' in the 'tax holiday' benefit is the 
amount by which the profits and gains derived from the industrial 
undertaking or ship or business of the hotel in each year falls short 
of six per cent. of the capital employed in the business. While the 
earry-forward and allowance of deficiency is, as stated above, 
permissible up to the 8th assessment year from the year of commence-
ment of the business. the deduction on account of profits and gains 
up to 6 per cent. of the capital employed is to be allowed, as under 
the present law, for a total period of 7 years from the year of 
commencement of the business in the case of a co-operative society, 
or 5 years in the case of any other assessee. 
In other respects, the provisions of section 80J are, in substance, 
the same as those of section 84, as proposed to be amended by 
clause 24 of the Bill. 
Where the industrial undertaking which is entitled to the 
deduction on account of 'tax holiday' under section 80J is 
entitled also to the deduction under sec.tion SOH or 
section 801, the deductions under sections 80H and 801 will first 
be allowed from the profits of the industrial undertakitlg 

117 
and the deduction under section 80J will be allowed with reference 
to the balance of such profits remaining after the deductions under 
sections 80H and 801. 
Section 84 is, in consequence, proposed to be omitted by item 14. 
Ne·,v section 80K seeks to replace the existing section 85 of the 
Income-tax Act, whereunder dividends attributable to the 'tax 
holiday' profits of a company qualify for rebate of tax in the hands 
of the shareholder of the company. Instead of the rebate of tax 
allowed on such dividends under section 85 of the Income-tax Act, 
new section 80K provides that the entire amount of such dividends 
included in the 'gross total income' of the shareholder will be allowed 
as a deduction in computing his total income. Section 85 of the 
Income-tax Act is, in consequence, proposed to be omitted by item 14. 
New section 80L provides that where in the case of any assessee, 
the income by way of dividends included in his gross total in ('orne 
does not exceed five hundred rupees, the entire amount of the 
income by way of dividends from an Indian company or companies 
will be allowed as a deduction in computing his total income. 
New section 80M seeks to replace section 85A of the Income-tax 
Act relating to grant of a partial rebate of tax on inter-corporate 
dividends i!l the hands of the company receiving the dividends. 
Under section 80M, where the gross total income of a company 
includes income by way of dividends received by it from a domestic 
company, a specified percentage of such dividends will be allowed 
as a straight deduction in computing its total income. In the case 
of a foreign company receiving dividends from a closely-held Indian 
company which is mainly engaged in a priority industry, the deduc-
tion will be of an amount equal to 80 per cent. of such dividends, 
and 60 per cent. in respect of dividends received by it from any 
other domestic company or companies. In the case of a domestic 
CompEmy, the deduction will be an amount equal to 60 per c(.nt. 
of the dividends received by it from any other dOmestic company or 
companies. 
Where the company receIVIng the inter-corporate dividends is 
entitled also to the deduction under section 80K (relating to 
dividends attributable to 'tax holiday' profits of the company paying 
the dividends) or under section 80L (relating to deduction of divi-
dE:nds from Indian companies in cases where the total amount of 
dividends does not exceed Rs. 500), the deduction under section 80M 
will be allowed with reference to the amount of the dividends as 
reduced by the deductions under sections 80K and 80L. 

118 
Section 85A of the Income-tax Act is, in consequence, proposed to. 
be omitted by item 14. 
New section BON seeks to replace section 85B of the Income-tax 
Act relating to grant of a partial rebate of tax on dividends received 
by an Indian company from a foreign company on shares in the 
foreign company allotted to it in consideration for the supply of 
technical know-how or technical services under approved agree-
ments. Under section 80N, 60 per cent. of such dividends will be 
allOWed as a straight deduction in computing the total income of 
the Indian company. 
Section 85B of the Income-tax Act is, in consequence, sought t~ 
be omitted by item 14. 
New section 800 seeks to replace section 85C of the Income-tax 
Act relating to grant of a partial rebate of tax on income by way 
of royalties, commission or fees received by an Indian company from 
a foreign company in consideration for the supply of technical know-
how or technical services under approved agreements. Under section 
800, 60 per cent. of such income will be allowed as a straight 
deduction in computing the total income of the Indian company. 
Section 85C of the Income-tax Act is, in consequence, sought to 
be omitted by item 14. 
New section BOP seeks to replace section 81 of the Income-tax Act 
relating to the grant of a rebate of tax on certain categories of 
incomes of co-operative societies. Under section 80P, the amount of 
income which at present qualifies for rebate of tax will be allowed 
as a straight deduction in computing the total income of the co-
operative society. The details of the income qualifying for this 
concession as well as the conditions under which it so qualifies, 
under the new section BOP remain the same as under the existing 
section 81. 
Section 81 of the Income-tax Act is, in consequence, sought to be 
omitted by item 14. 
New section BOQ seeks to replace section 82 of the Income-tax 
Act relating to grant of rebate of tax to a member of a co-operative 
society in respect of dividends received by him from the society. 
Under section BOQ, the whole of such dividends will be allowed as 
a straight deduction in computing the total income of the member 
of the co-operative society. 
Section 82 of the Income-tax Act is, in consequence, sought to be-
omitted by item 14. 

l19 
New section 80R replaces section 80F proposed to be inserted in 
the Income-tax Act, by clause 23 of the Bill. The provisions of 
section 80F, as explained in the note on clause 23, remain unchanged. 
New section 80S seeks to replace section 112 of the Income-tax 
Act relating to the charging of tax at a concessional rate on income 
by way of compensation for the termination of a managing agency, 
etc., in the case of non-corporate assessees. Under section 80S, 25-
per cent of such income will be allowed as a straight deduction in 
computing the total income of such assessee, subject to a ceiling. 
limit of Rs. 1 lakh over the amount of the deduction. 
Section 112 of the Income-tax Act is, in consequence, sought to-
be omitted by item 18. 
New section 80T seeks to replace section 114 of the Income-tax 
Act relating to the charging of tax at a concessional rate on income 
chargeable under the head 'Capital gains' in the case of non-
corporate assessees. Under section BOT, a straight deduction will 
be allowed of a specified proportion of the long-term capital gains 
(i.e. capital gains relating to capital assets other than short-term 
capital assets) included in the gross total income of the assessee in 
computing his total income. The amount of the deduction will be 
Rs. 5,000 plus 40 per cent. of the amount by which the long-term 
capital gains exceed Rs. 5,000, where they relate to buildings or 
lands or any rights in buildings or lands. The deduction will be 
Rs. 5,000 plus 60 per cent. of the amount by which the long-term 
capital gains exceed Rs. 5,000, where these relate to any other 
assets. In a case where the capital gains relate to both categories 
of capital assets, namely, buildings or lands or any rights therein 
as well as any other capital assets, the initial amount of Rs. 5.000 
will be deducte.:i in the first instance from the long-term capital 
gains relating to buildings or lands or rights therein; and where 
such long-term capital gains are less than Rs. 5,000, the balance will 
be deducted from the long-term capital gains relating to other 
capital assets, before applying the percentage of 60 to the latter. 
In a case where the gross total income including the long-term 
capital gains does not exceed Rs. 10,000, or where the long-term 
capital gains do not exceed Rs. 5,000, the whole of the long-term 
capital gains will be allowed as a straight deduction in computing 
the total income. The provision for charging a minimum tax at 
the rate of 15 per cent. of the long-term capital gains in excess of 
Rs. 5,000, which exists under the present law, will no longer be 
operative. 
Capital gains relating to shoTt-term capital assets, which under 
~he existing section 114, are subjected to tax at the average rate of 

120 
-- tax applicable to the aggregate of the ordinary income and the short-
term capital gains. will henceforth be treated on par with ordinary 
income. 
Section 114 of the Income-tax Act is, in consequence, sought to 
be omitted by item 18. 
Item 14 of the Third Schedule seeks to omit sections 81, 82, 83, 
84, 85, 85A, 85B and 85C of the Income-tax Act. These amendments 
are consequential to the new provisions proposed to be made in 
'Chapter VIA of the Act by item 13. ' 
Item 15 of the Third Schedule seeks to make certain amendments 
to Chapter Vln of the Income-tax Act. These amendments are 
consequential to the new provisions proposed to be made in Chapter 
, VIA by itE:m 13. 
Item 16 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend section 104 of the 
Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the substi· 
- tution of the existing Chapter VIA of the Act by a new Chapter by 
item 13. 
Item 17 of the Third Schedule seeks to make certain amendments 
in section 109 of the Income-tax Act. These amendments are either 
of a drafting nature or are consequential to the substitution of the 
, existing Chapter VIA of the Act by a new Chapter by item 13. 
Item 18 of the Third Schedule seeks to make certain ame:1dmen-ts 
, in Chapter XII of the Income-tax Act. 
Clause (a) seeks to omit section 112 of the Income-tax Act. This 
__ amendment is consequential to the replacement of the existing 
section 112 by section 80S in the new Chapter VIA proposed to be 
substituted for the existing Chapter VIA by item 13. 
Clause (b) seeks to amend section 112A of the Income-tax Act. 
"These amendments are consequential to the amendments proposed 
to be made by clause (a) and clause (c). 
Clause (c) seeks to omit section 114 of the Income-tax Act. This 
amendment is consequential to the replacement of the existing 
section 114 of the Income-tax Act by section 80T in the new Chapter 
-'VIA, proposed under item 13. 
Item 19 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend sub-section (3) of 
section 197. This amendment is consequential to the replacement of 
,the existing sections 84 and 85 of the Income-tax Act by sections 
::80J and 80K, respectively, in the new Chapter VIA, under item 13, 

121 
Item 20 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend section 236 of the 4 
Income-ta..< Act. The amendment proposed to be made by clauses (a)" 
lind (c) are consequential to the substitution of the existing Chapter 
VIA of the Act by a new Chapter by item 13. 
The amendment proposed to be made by clause (b) is conse-
quential to the replacement of the existing section 88 of the Income-
tax Act by the proposed section 80G in new Chapter VIA, under 
item 13. 
Item 21 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend the definition of 
'adjusted total income' in section 280B(I) of the Income-tax Act. 
Under the amended definition, no annuity deposit will be required 
to be made in respect of the depositor's income arising in a foreign 
country the laws of which prohibit or restrict the remittanCe of 
money to India. Thii; provision will apply for the purpose of com-
puting the annuity deposit to be made during the financial year 
1967-68 in relation to income assessable for the assessment year 
1968-69, and for the following years. 
Hem 22 of tho! Third Schedule seeks to amend section 280X of 
the Income-tax Act to secure that the penal tax for failure to make 
the annuity deposit will not be chargeable in a case where (a) the 
depositor is more than sixty years of age on the last day of the 
relevant previous year, as against seventy years under the present 
Jaw: (b) the annuity deposit required to be made does not exceed 
Rs. 100; or (c) the deficiency in the deposit actually made is not 
more than ten per cent. of the deposit required to be made, or one' 
hundred rupees, whichever is higher. These provisions will apply 
in relation to annuity deposit to be made during the financial year 
1967-68 in l'espe~t of income assessable fOr the assessment year 
1968-69. 
Item 23 of the Third Schedu.le seeks to amend section 295 of the 
Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the omission 
of section 87 of the Act by item 15 and the replacement of section 
80A by section 80C in the new Chapter VIA by item 13. 
Item 24 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend rule 7 of Part A 
of the Fourth Schedule to the Income-tax Act. This amendment is 
consequential to the replacemen~ of section BOA by new section BOC 
by item 13, and the omission of section 87 by item 15. 
Item 25 of the Third Schedule seeks to amend the Fifth Schedule 
to the Income-tax Act. The amendment is consequential to the pro-
posed amendment of section 33(1) of the Income-tax Act by item 3, 
and the insertion of a definition of 'priority industry' in the new 
section BOB(7) of the proposed Chapter VIA under item 13. 
Clause 34 seeks to make certain amendments in the Wealth-tax 
Act, 1957. 

122 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert, retrospectively, a new &ub-
-clause (Ha) in clause (h) of section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act. 'I.'he 
·effect of the new sub-clause (iia) is to empower the Central Gov-
ernment to declare, by general or special order, any corporation 
·established by or under a Central, State or Provincial Act as a 
'company' for the purposes of the Wealth-tax Act. The object 
.of the proposed amendment is to secure that any statutory cor-
poration which is declared by the Central Government to be a 
company will be subjected to wealth-tax for assessment years 
.up to and including the assessment year 1959-60 at the lower rate 
·of wealth-tax applicable to companies, and exempted from 
wealth-tax for subsequent assessment years, in the same manner 
as compa.nies formed and registered under the Companies Act, 
1956. 
Sub-clauses (b) to (g) seek to amend certain provisions of 
"the Wealth-tax Act relating to jurisdiction of Wealth-tax authori-
ties, to bring these in line with the provisions of the Income-tax 
Act relating to jurisdiction of Income-tax authorities as proposed 
to be amended by clause 27 of the Bill, with a view to facilitating 
the organisation of work in relation to wealth-tax assessments on 
functional basis. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to insert a proviso in section 8 of the 
Wealth-tax Act. Under the proviso, it will be open to the Com-
missioner of Wealth-tax or the Inspecting Assistant Commission-
er of Wealth-ta,~ authorised by him in this behalf, by general or 
1;pecial order in writi.ng, to distribute and allocate the work on 
:functional basis among two or more Wealth-tax Officers having 
concurrent jurisdiction in respect of any individual, Hindu un-
divided family or company. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to insert two new sections 8A and 8B in 
replacement of the existing section 8A of the Wealth-tax Act. 
Under new section 8A, it will be open to the Commissioner of 
Wealth-tax to direct, by genera' or special order, that specific 
functions vested in the Wealth-tax Officer by or under the 
Wealth-tax Act shall be performed by an Inspector of Wealth-
-tax or any member of the ministerial staff subordinate to the 
Commissioner or other lower Wealth-tax authOrities, in respect 
of any specified area or cases or classes of cases or persons or 
.classes of persons, subject to such conditions, restrictions or 
limitations as may be specified by him in the order. However, 
the Commissioner may not assign to the Inspector of Wealth-tax 

123 
or any member of the ministerial staff certain important func-
tions of the Wealth-tax Officer such as making of assessments, re-
opening of assessments in cases of escapement of wealth, levy of 
penalty, etc. unless the Board, by general or special order in 
writing, authorises him to do so. 
The new section 8B authorises the Commissioner or the 
Board to transfer any case from any Wealth-tax Officer or 
:Wealth-tax Officers to any other Wealth-tax Officer or Wealth-
tax Officers aUer following the procedure laid down in this 
behalf under the existing law. The section further provides that 
where any such case has been transferred to two or more 
Wealth-tax Officers, the Board or the Commissioner or the 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner authorised by him in this 
behalf may, by general or special order in writing, distribute 
and allocate the work in such case on functional basis among 
the Wealth-tax Officers to whom the case has been transferred. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to amend section 10 of the Wealth-tax 
Act. Under section 10, as amended, it will be' open to the Board 
to distribute and allocate the work on functional basis to two or 
more Commissioners of Wealth-tax having concurrent jurisdic-
tion over the same area or persons or classes of persons. 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to amend section 11 of the Wealth-tax 
Act. Under section 11, as amended, it will be open to the Com-
missioner of Wealth-tax, by general or special order in writing, to 
distribute and allocate the work on functional basis among two 
or more Inspecting Assistant Commissioners of Wealth-tax 
having concurrent jurisdiction over the same area or persons or 
<:lasses of persons. 
Sub-clause <f) seeks to substitute a new section for section 
11A of the Wealth-tax Act. The new section 11A provides that 
an Inspector of Wealth-tax shall perform such functions in the 
€xecution of the Wealth-tax Act as are assigned to him by the 
Commissioner by an order made under section BA(1) [as pro-
posed to be inserted by sub-clause (c)] or otherwise or by any 
.other Wealth-tax authority under whom he is appOinted to work. 
Su"'-clause (g) seeks to insert a new section 11B after sec-
tion 11A of the Wealth-tax Act. The new section 11B provides, 
in substance, that in a case where two or more Wealth-tax Offi-
'cers have concurrent jurisdiction over an assessee, the Wealth-
'tax Officer t~ whom a particular function or functions have been 

124 
assigned by the Board or, as the case may be, the Commissioner 
or the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Wealth-tax shall be 
the ,Wealth-tax Officer empowered to perform such function or 
functions in relation to that assessee. 
Clause 35 seeks to make certain amendments in th.e Gift-tax 
Act, 1958. 
Sub-clauses (a) to (f) seek to amend the provisions in the 
Gift-tax Act relating to jurisdiction of Gift-tax Officers, with a 
vit:w to bringing them in line with the provisions in the Income-
tax Act in the matter relating to jurisdiction of Income-tax 
authorities as proposed to be amended by clause 27 of the Bill, 
for the purpose of facilitating the organisation of work under 
the Gift-tax Act on functional basis. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to insert a proviso in section 7 of the 
Gift-tax Act. Under the proviso, it will be open to the Commis-
sioner of Gift-tax or the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of 
Gift-tax authorised by him in this behalf, by general or special 
order in writing, to distribute and allocate the work on func-
tional basis amongst two or more Gift-tax Officers having .concur-
rent jurisdiction over the same person. 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to substitute two new sections 7A and 
7B in replacement of the existing section 7A of the Gift-tax Act. 
Under the new section 7A, it will be open to the Commissioner of 
Gift-tax to direct, by general or special ox;der, that specific func-
tions vested in the Gift-tax Officer by or under the Gift-tax Act 
shall be performed by an Inspector of Gift-tax or any member of 
the ministerial staff subordinate to the Commissioner or other 
lower Gift-tax authorities, in respect of any specified area or 
cases or class of cases or persons or class of persons, subject to 
such conditions, restrictions or limitations as may be specified by 
him in the order. However, the Commissioner may not assign 
to the Inspector of Gift-tax or any member of the ministerial 
staff certain important functions of the Gift-tax Officer such as· 
making of assessments. reopening of assessments in cases of 
escapement, levy of penalty, etc., unless the Board, by general 
or special order, authorises him to do so. 
'the new section 7B authorises the Commissioner or the 
Board to transfer any case from any Gift-tax Officer or Gift-tax 
Officers to any other Gift-tax Officer or Gift-tax Officers after 
following the procedure laid down in this behalf under the 
existing law. The section further provides that where any case-

125 
has beeh so trahsferred to two or more Gift-tax Officers, th~ 
Board or the Commissioner or any Inspecting Assistant Com-
missioner of Gift-tax authorised by him in this behalf may, by 
general or special order in writing, distribute and allocate the 
work in such case on functional basis among the Gift-tax Offi-
cers to whom the case has been transferred. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to amend section 9 of the Gift-tax Act. 
Under section 9, as amended, it will be open to the Board to 
distribute and allocate the work on functional basis amongst two 
or more Commissioners of Gift-tax having concurrent jurisdic-
tion over the same area or persons or classes of persons. 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to amend section 10 (!If the Gift-tax Act. 
Under section 10, as amended, it will be open to the Commis-
sioner, by general or special order in writing, to distribute and 
allocate the work on functional basis among two or more Ins-
pecting Assistant Commissioners of Gift-tax having concurrent 
jurisdiction over the same area or persons or classes of persons. 
Sub-clause (p) seeks to substitute a new section 11 for the 
existing section 11 of the Gift-tax Act. Section 11, as substi-
tuted. provid('s that any Inspector of Gift-tax shall perform 
such functions in the execution of the Gift-tax Act as are Ilssign-
ed to him by the Commissioner by an order made under new 
section 7 A(1) [proposed to be inserted by sub-clause (b)] or 
otherwise or by any other Gift-tax authority under whom he is 
appointed to work. 
Sub-clause (1) seeks to re-number the existing section llA 
as section 11B and to insert a new section 11A in the Gift-tax 
Act. The new section 11A provides, in substance, that in a case 
where two or more Gift-tax Officers have concurrent jurisdic-
tion over an assessee, the Gift-tax Officer to whom a particular 
function or functions have been assigned by the Board or, as the 
case may be, the Commissioner or the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner of Gift-tax, shall be the Gift-tax Officer empower-
ed to perform such function or functions in relation to that 
assessee. 
Sub-clause (g, seeks to amend section 45 of the Gift-tax Act 
by inserting a new clause (da) in that section. The effect of this 
amendment will be that no gift-tax will be chargeable on the 
transfer of assets, in a scheme of amalgamation, by a closely-
held company to any Indian company. For the purpo~es of this 
provision, the term 'amalgamation' shall have the same mean-
Ing as in clause (lA) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, pro-
posed to be inserted by clause 4"(a) of the Bill. 

126 
Clause 36 seekR to make certain nmendments in the Companies 
(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to amend section 3(1) of the said Act 
so as to include an Inspector of Income-tax in the category of 
Income-tax authorities authorised to perform functions under 
the said Act. 
Sub-cZause (b) !leeks to amend section 18 of the Companies 
(Profits) Surtax Act which seeks to apply, for the purposes of 
that Act, certain provisions of the Income-tax Act. Under the 
amended section 18, the provisions of the' Income-tax Act relat-
ing to jurisdiction of Income-tax authorities, as proposed to be 
amended by clause 27 of the Bill, as well as the provisions of 
that Act relating to rounding off of income and tax, will be 
made applicable for the purposes of the Companies (Profits) 
Surtax Act. 
Clause 37 seeks to indicate the nature of duty against specified 
items of the First Schedule 'to the Indian Tariff Act, 1934. 
Clause 38 seeks to levy up to the 31st March. 1968 a special duty 
of customs. 
Clause 39 seeks to provide for levy of regulat.ory duties of customs 
up to the 15th May, 1968, on a flexible basis within the spedfted 
ceiling rates, for regulating or bringing greater economy in imports. 
Clause 40-
Sub-clause (a) seeks to raise the rate of duty on coffee; 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to raise the rates of duty on cigars and 
cheroots; 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to raise the rate of duty on motor 
spirit; 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to raise the rate of duty on petroleum 
products, not otherwise specified; 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to raise the rate of duty on artificial 
or synthetic resins and plastic materials, and articles thereof; 
Sub-clause (f) seeks to levy excise duty on rubber piping, 
tubing and belting; 
S7lb-clause (g) seeks to raise the rate of duty on rayon and 
s}nthetic fibres and yam; 
Sub-clause (h) seeks to raise the rates of duty on eotton 
twist, yarn and thread, all sorts; 

127 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to raise the rates of duty on jute 
manufactures; 
Sub-clause (j) seeks to raise the rates of duty on aluminium 
in various forms. 
Clause 41 s(>eks to continue up to the 31st March, 1968 the existing 
special duties of excise. 
Clau.,e 4:1 seeks to provide for levy of regulatory duties of excise 
up to the 15th May, 1968. on a flexible basis witiJin the specified 
ceiling rate, for regulating or bringing greater economy in 
consumption. 
Clause 43 seeks to amend the First Schedule to the Indian Post 
Office Act, 1898 with a view to increasing the postage rates for 
Registered Newspapers and Parcels. 
Clause 44 seeks to substitute a new section for the existing section 
30 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961. The effect of this 
amendment will be that the Deposit Insurance Corporation will be 
exempted from tax on its income for a further period of five account-
jn~ years from its accounting year commencing on the 1st January, 
1967. 
Clause 45 seeks to give retrospective effect to certain amendments 
made in the Unit Trus! of India Act, 1963 by the Unit Trust of India 
(Amendmen t) Act. 1966. The effect of this provision will be that 
the Unit Trust will not be liable to surtax on its income and, IJke-
wise. institutions contributing to the initial capital of the Trust will 
not be liable to surtax on the income derived by them from the Trust, 
for the assessment years 1964-65, onwards. 
Clause 46 seeks to make a provision for resolvinR certain dffB-
culties arising in the operation of the voluntary disclosure scheme 
under section 68 of the Finance Act, 1965. 
Sub-clause (a) seeks to secure that where the whole or a 
part of the tax due from a declarant under section 68 of the 
Finance Act, 1965 has not been paid by him within the specified 
period of six months from the date of the declaration, the tax 
so outstanding will be treated as tax due from the declarant 
under the provisions or the Income-tax Act on the date follow-
ing the expiry of the said period, and all the provisions of that 
Act relating to collection and recovery of taxes will apply 
accordingly. The time-limit for the purpose of initiating pro-
ceedings for the recovp.ry of the outstanding tax will be extended 
In such cases by one year beyond the existing time-limit. 

128 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to provide that where the tax due 
under section 68 of the Finance Act, 1965 has been paid by the 
declarant in full after the expiry of the above-mentioned six-
month period or has been recovered from him under the provi-
sions of sub-clause (a) mentioned above, the tax so paid or re-
covered shall be deemed to be 'tax paid' for the purpose of sec~ 
tion 68 of the Finance Act, 1965, and, accordingly, the declar~.t 
will be entitled to immunity from being assessed to tax, on the 
income declared by him, under the provisions of the Income-tax 
Act. 
Clau.::;e 47 seeks to repeal sections 2 and 3 of the Finance Act, li)6~ 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
INCOME-TAX AND OTHER DIRECT TAXES 
The provisions contained in clauses 27, 34, 35 and 36 of the Fin-
ance (No.2) Bill, 1967 are designed to facilitate reorganisation of 
the work in the Income-tax Department on the functional basis 
with a view to speeding up assessments and expediting collection 
of revenue and ge'ncrally increasing the efficiency of the Depart-
ment. It is proposed to introduce the functional system of working, 
during the financial year 1967-68, in Income-tax ranges accounting for 
50-60 per cent. of the total income-tax revenue. While the re-organi-
sation is not, for the present, expected to entail any increase in the 
strength of officers and staff in the field offices, it is considered 
necessary to set up a small unit at headquarters for aSSisting the 
field officers in the introduction of the functional system of working. 
This unit will also devise schemes for introducing simplified pro-
cedures in other Income-tax Offices and will further function as a 
planning cell for the Department. Some expenditure will also be 
incurred on the hiring of office buildings where necessary, and also 
on acquiring furniture, including steel almirahs a.nd racks, for cen-
tralised record rooms in the Income-tax ranges organised on the 
functional system. 
The expenditure on the setting up of the unit at headquarters 
as stated above and on hiring of office buildings, acquiring furniture, 
etc., for the field offices for the financial year 1967-68 is estimated 
at R~ 2,30,000 as indicated hereinbelow. 
b, 
I. Of/Iun-
CammI .. 1oDen of IDCIOIDe-IU 
A .. lttaol CommiteioDcn 
Secdoa 0 ... 
II.StII/J-
SteIIOptlpben • 
AlIIawlt 
Lower Di'l'llioa Clerk 
2 
2 
4 
1 
Rio 
2 x 29.700 
2 x 19.350 
1 x 6,606 
4 x 40420 
1 x 40420 
1 x ,.,50 ---------------- --.-- --------.- --- ----. ---- .. __ ..... _ ... 
129 
RI. 
13.a60 
3.31, 
1.91' 

130 
----------------
------ _ .. ------.----
III. InddllUlll "~rua-
Incidental espenses iDcludlna Clan IV 
.taft' . 
IV. lIi,.in, oj bUlUin" 
8. Nott-rICIIm", Bxp,qitllr, 
Furniture including Iteel almirohl and 
racka . 
AnDual Cost durin, 
ClDolumCDts 1967-68 
(for 9 month.) 
R •• 
30 ,000 
0,000 
1.77.0 18 
50,000 
TOTAL . 2,21,018 
O)r .. y RI. 2,30,000 
.---_.- ----- - --------_.- -----_. .-". 

l!ii 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2(4)(d), clause 24, clause 25, clause 30(6), clause 30(8) and 
clause 33 read with item 13 of the Third Schedule empower the 
Boar~ to make rules in relation to the matters specified therein. 
The matters in respect of which such rules may be made include, 
inter alia. the computation of the amount of any profits and gains 
derived by an assessee from the export of any goods or merchandise 
out of India in respect of which he may claim deduction fro.m tax, 
the computation of capital for the purposes of the 'tax holiday' 
concession, the particulars to be furnished in the certificate given by 
the person responsible for deducting tax at source from brokerage, 
commission, etc., the form of return to be filed by any such person 
who does not deduct tax at source from brokerage, commission, 
etc., and the authority for the purpose of certifying the percentage 
of displaced persons and repatriates employed in an industrial 
undertaking for the purposes of the deduction under the proposed 
section 80H under item 13 of the Third Schedule, etc. The matters 
in respect 01 which rules may be made are those of procedure and 
detail. Therefore, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Centr a I 
Govm'nment for the financial year 1967-68. 
(Shri M orarji Desai. 
Deputy Prime Minister 
and Minister of Finance.) 