t· 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
Bill No. 61 of 1876. 
THE BANKING AND PUBLIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1976 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948, the State 
Bank Pi India. Act, 1955, the Industrial Development Bank of India 
'i Act, l~ and the Rte;gional Ru'ral Banks Act, 1976. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-seventh Y~ar of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
• I ~.'~ ). ' 
S 11 • This Act may be called the Banking and Public Financial Insbtu- Short title. 
tions Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976. 
2. Any reference in sections 3(i), 4(ii), 5 (i) and 6(i) of this Act to, Construc-
the chairman or, as the case may be, vice-chairman or managing director tion of 
. shall be construed as including a reference to the person holding office references. 
10· a8 such at the commencement o,f this Act. 
.• , 
CHAPTER II 
AM!:NDMENTS TO TIfE INDUSTRIAL FmANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1948 
3. In the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948,-
(i) in section lOA, after suh-section (2), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted. namely:--
"(214:) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
. (2); the Central GOV«l\ment shall have the. right to· tenn1nate 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 15 of 
1948 
Jj 

Amend-
mentof 
Aet23 Of 
18U. 
(" 
.' . 
I 
2 
cne term of office of the Chairman at any. time before 
the expiry of. the term specified in SUlb-section (Z)by giving him 
notice of not less than three months in writing or three months' 
salary and allowances in lieu of such notice; and the Chair-
man shall also have the right to relinquish his office at any S 
time before the expiry of the tenn specified in sub-section (2) 
by giving to the Central Government notice of. not less than 
three months in writing."; 
(ii) in section 13, to sub-section (1). the following proviso shall 
be added. namely:- 10 
"Provided that no person shall be removed from his oftice, 
under this sub-section, unleo:;s he has been given an opportunity 
of showing cause against his rem'lval.". 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955 
4. In the State Bank of India Act, 1955,-
(i) in section 19, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) in clause (a), the words "and after cQt1sideration, of the 
recom.mendations made by the Central Board in that behalf" shall 
be omitted; 20 
(b) in clause (b), for the words "by the Central Board with 
the approval of the Central Government", the words "by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank" shall 
be substituted; 
(if) in section 20.-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "The chairman and the 
vice-chairman", the words ''The chairman, vice-chairman and 
each managing director" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely: _ 30 
"(lA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub--sec-
tion (1), the Central Government shall ha"e the right 
to terminate the term of offtce of the chairman, viCEH:hair-
man or a managing director, as the case may be, at any time 
before the expiry of the tenn fixed under sub-section (1) by 3S 
. giving him notice of not less than three months in writing 
or three months' salary and allowances in lieu of such notice: 
and the chainnan, vice-chaiI1Jlan or a managing director, a. 
the case may be, shall also have the rjght to refinquish his 
oftlce at any time before the expiry of the term s~ fixed 40 
by giving to the Central Government notice of not less than 
three months in writing."; 
(e) sub-section (Z) shall be omitted; 
(tit) in section 23, in clause (b), for the word8 "chairman and 
.tee-ebairman"; the words "ehairman, vi~ aN a man'IID, .5 
cUnctor" Ihall be IUmtitu.ted; 

. ."". :.t.. . 
(it» in section 24.,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "the chairman or the 
vice-chairman", the words "the chairman, vice-chairman or • 
managing director" shall be substituted; 
.5 (b) sub-section (2) shJ.ll be omitted; 
(c) in sub. section (6), the words, brackets and figure "or 
sub-section (2)" shall be omitted; . 
(v) in section 25, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:-
10 "(1) If the chairman, vice-chainnan or a managing director 
is rendered incapable of dischargling his duties by reajson of 
infirmity or otherwise or is absent on leave or otherwise in 
circumstances not involving the vacation of his oftice, the Cen-
tral Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, 
15 , appoint another person to officiate in the vacancy."; 
(vi) in section 27, in sub-section (2),-
01 ••• , ••• 
(a) for the words "as may be detemlined by the Central ":'" , 
Board with the approval of the Central Government:", the words <,: .• 
"as may be detennined by the Central Government." shall be 
20 substituted; 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted; 
(vii) in section 28, in sub-section (2) ,-
(a) for the words "as may be determined by the Central 
Board with the approval of the Central Government:", the wordl 
"as may be determined by the Central Government." shall be 
substituted; 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted; 
('Viii) in section 29, in sub-section (2) ,-
(P) for the words "as may be determined by the Central 
Board with the approval of the Central Government:", the worda • 
"as may be determined by the Central Government." shall be 
substituted; 
(b) the proviso shall be omitted. 
CHAPTER IV 
3.5 AMENDMENTS TO TH& INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA Ac:r, 1964 
5. In the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 in section Amend .. 
. 6,- mental 
Act 1801 
(i) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 111M. 
.~. ,~-. 
4S 
inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Notwiths~ding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), the Central Government shall have the right to 
terminate the term of office of the chairman or managing direc-
'tor, as the case may be, at any time before the expiry of the 
~temi specified under sub-8ecti~ (2) by giving him notice of not 
less than three months in writing or three .months'.alary and 

Amend-
ment of 
Act 21 ot 
19'76. 
allowances in lieu of such notice; and the chairman or managing 
~'~I as ,the case may be, shall also have the right to relin-
q~ his o1Ilce at any tin;le before the expiry of the term) ~cified 
unde!r sub-section (2) by giving to the Central GOf,t;rJlment 
notice of not less than three months in writing."; 5 
(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sectiQll shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3A) The Central Government may, at any time, remove 
the chairman or the managing director, as the case may be. from 
office: ' 
Provided that no person" shall be removed from his office, 
under this sub·section. ~ril~s he has' beeh given an opportunity 
of showing cause against his removal.... ' , 
CHAPTER V 
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1976 
6. In the RegiQllal Rural Banks Act, 1976, in section 11,-
(i) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
10 
IS 
"(lA) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(1), the Central Government shall have the right to 20 
terminate the term of office of the Chairman at any time before 
the expiry of the period specified under sub-section (2) by giving 
him notice of not less than three months in writing or three 
months' salary and allowances in lieu of such ~otice; and the 
Chairman shall also have the right ~ relinquish hiS office at 25 
any time before the expiry of the period so specified by giving 
to the Central Government notice of not less than three months 
in writing."; 
(ii) for SUb-section (4), the following sub-section shall be sub-
,·"lUtuted, namely:- 30 
"(.) 'The Central Government may,at any time, remove the 
Chairman from office: 
Provided that no person shall be removed fr~ his office, 
under this sub.section, unless he has been given, an opportunity 
of showing cause against his fen10Val.". 3S 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It ie, proposed to· bring about a measure ot uniformity in the proce-
dure for appointment, fixation of the terms and conditions of service 
. including removal from, or termination of, service of the chairman, 
vice-chairman, and managing directors of the State Bank of India, chair-
nien of the Regional Rural Banks, chairman of the Industrial Finance 
Corporation of' India and chairman and managing director 'of the IndWl'" 
trial Development Bank of India i~ the relevant enactments regulating 
the said institutions. Thes~ Executives will also have the option to relin-
quish office by giving the Central Goverllment a notice of three months. 
It is r.,Jroposed to make the amendments' applicable to the existing incum-
bents of these offices also. 
2·. Opportunity has also been taken to streamline some other provi-
sions of these Statutes. 
NEW :DELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
The 21st May, 1976. 
5 

Removal 
of Direc-
tor from 
ofllce. 
Composi-
tion of the 
Central 
Board. 
Termot 
office of 
chairman, 
managinl 
director, 
etc. 
Vacation 
ofo1Dce 
ofdirec-
tors, etc. 
Removal 
from 
oftlce of 
directors, 
etc. 
ANNEXURE 
. Ex'l'BAC'r ftOM 'l'B& lNDusTIUAL FINANCE COIIPOBATION ACT, UNa 
(15 01' 1948) 
• • • • • 
13. (1) The Central Government may after consultation with the 
Development Bank at any time remove the Chairman from oftlce. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955 
(23 01' 1955) 
• • • • • 
19. (1) The Central Board shall consist of the following, namely:-
(a) a chairman and a vice-chairman to be appointed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank and 
after consideration, of the recommendations mac\e by the CeDval 
Board in that behalf; 
(b) not more than two managing directors, if any, appointed by 
the Central Board with the approval of the Central Government; 
• • • • • 
ZOo (1) The chairman and the vice-chairman shall hold office for such 
term, not exceeding five years, as the Central Government may fix when 
appointing them and shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(2' A managing director shall hold office for such term, not exceed-
ing five years. as the Central Board may fix when appointing him, and 
shall be eligible for reappointment. 
• • • • • 
23. If a director of the Central Board or a member of a Local Board 
')r a Local Committee-
• • • • 
(b) resigns his office by giving notice in writing under his hanrl, 
in the case of the chairman and vice-chairman, to the Central Govern-
ment and in the case of other directors or members of Local Boards or 
Committees, to the Central Board, and the resignation is accepted; or 
• • • • • 
24. (1) The Central Government may, after consulting the Reserve 
Bank, remove from office the chairman or the vice-chairman. 
(2) The Central Board may, with the approval of the Central Gov-
ernment, remove from office a managing director. 
• • • • • 
(6) No person shall be removed from his office under sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section' (3) unless he has been given an 
opportunity of showing cause against his removal. 
6 

'I 
25. (1) If the chairman, vice-chairman or a managing director is C8Iual 
rendered. incapable of discharging his duties by reason of infirmity or vacancie'. 
otherwise or is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances not in-
volving the vacation of his office, the Central Government maY, in the 
case of the chairman or vice-chairman, in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank and after considering the recommendations of the Central Board, 
and the Central Board may, in the case of a managing director, with 
the approval of the Central Government, appoint another person to 
ofBciate in the vacancy. 
• • • • .. 
~. (1) • • ... • • 
1 (2) The chairman shall receive such salary, fees, allowances and 
~rquisites as may be determined by the Central Board with the &pproval 
of the Central Government: 
Provided that in respect of the first chairman, the Central Govern· 
ment may determine his salary, fees, allowances and perquisites. 
28. (1) ... ... ... • • 
(2) The vice-chairman shall receive such salary, fees, allowances and 
perquisites as may be determined by the Central Board With the approval 
of the Central Government: 
Provided that in respect of the first vice-chairman, the Central Gov-
ernment may cietermine his salary, fees, allowances, and perqUisites . 
... ... ... ... • 
29. (1) • • • • ... 
(2) A managing director shall receive such salary and allowances 
as may be determined by the Central Board with the approval of the 
Central Government: 
Provided that in respect of the first managing director or directors, 
the Central Government may determine the salary and allowances pay-
able to him or them. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE REcIONAL RURAL BANKS Act, 1976 
(21 OF 1976) 
• • • • • 
11. (1) • ... ... • ... 
(4) The Chairman shall hold office during the ple.,ure oi the Central 
Government. 
• • • • • 
Powers 
and 
remunera-
tion ot 
chairman. 
Powe1'8 
and 
remunera-
tion of 
vice-
chairman. 
Powers 
and 
remunera-
tion ot 
managing 
director. 
Chairman. 

LOK SABHA 
• 
BILL 
further toamemi the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948, the ,State 
Bank of India Act, 1955, the Industrial De\'eIopment Batik of India 
Act, 1964, and the Regional Rural Banks Act; lit'1V • 
• • 
(Shrl PraMb Kumar Mukherjee, 
Mh",iBter of Revenue anI;! Bankinp.) 
~ . 
I 