As nmtOOUC!:D IN Lox SABRA ON 
• BIll No. 61 of 1989 
THE CUSTOMS (AMENDMENT) BILL. 1989 
A 
BILL 
further to amend tM CUBtOfll8 Act, 1962. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Customs (Amendment) Act, 1989. Short 
52 of 1982. Z. In section 123 of the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as 
5 the principal Act), in sub-section (2), for the words ", diamonds, manu-
factures of gold or diamonds", the words "and manufactures thereof" 
shall be substituted. 
3. In section 135 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1). in clause (i), 
in the proviso, for the words "one year", the words "three years" shall 
10 be substituted. 
title. 
Amend... 
ment of 
section 
12S. it 
Amend. 
ment uf 
section 
135. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It is proposed to amend the Customs Act. 1962 with a view to giving 
some relief to small and medium artisans. generally illiterate, engaged 
in the cutting and polishing of rough diamonds and manufactures of 
diamonds; and curbing the smuggling of high valued and sensitive items 
like gold, manufactures of gold, watches. etc. At present, under the pro-
visions of section 123. the burden of proving that the ICdiamonds" and 
"manufactures of diamonds" are not smuggled is on the person from 
whom such goods are recovered. It has been noticed that no seizures 
of significant nature in relation to these goods have been made in the 
recent years. Further, "diamonds" and "manufactures of diamonds" have 
emerged as a major component of our exports earning substantial foreign 
exchange for the country. Since the provisions of section 123 may cause 
unnecessary harrassment to the small and medium artisans and in view 
of the fact that no significant seizures have been made in relation to such 
goocts. it is proposed to omit the said items from the purview of section 
123. 
2. It is also proposed to amend section 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 
to increase the quantum of minimum punishment from one year to three 
years in relation to smuggling of gold. manufactures of gold, watches, 
etc., so as to curb the smuggling of these items into India. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects . 
... '~~.,.\ .... , ... " .... ~.- ....... " 
NEW Dam; / !', AJIT KUMAR PANJA. 
The 3rd August, 1989 . 
. ~ , 
I'll" ' 
ii' 
'. 

• 
123. (1) • 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CUSTOMS AcT, 1962 
(52 OF 1962) 
• • • 
• • • 
• 
• 
(2) This section shall apply to gold, diamonds, manufactures of gold 
or diamonds" watches, and any other class Ilf goods which the Central 
Government may by notification in the Official Gazette specify, 
• • • • • 
135. (1) Without prejudice to any action that may be taken under 
this Act, if any person-
(a) is in relation to any goods in any way knowingly concerned 
in any fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of any duty charge-
able thereon or of any prohibitiQn for the time being imposed under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force with respect to 
such goods, or 
(b) acquires possesJjion of or is in any way concerned in carrying, 
removing, depositing, harbouring. keeping, concealing, selling or 
purchasing or in any other manner dealing with any goods which he 
knows or has reason to believe are liable to confiscation under section 
111, ! 
he shall be punishable,-
(i) in the case of an offence relating to any of the goods to which 
section 123 applies and the market price whereof exceeds one lakh of 
rupees, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years and with fine: : 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to 
the contrary to be recorded in the judgment of the court, such im-
prisonment shall not be for less than one year; 
• • • • • 
3 
Burden 
of proof 
in cer. 
tain 
cases, 
Evasion 
of duty 
or pro-
hibitions, 

LOK SABHA 
... 
BILL 
further to amend the Customs Act, 1962. 
(Shri A;it Pan;a. 
Minil'te7' of State in the 
Department of Revenue in 
the Ministry of Finance.) 