As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
• 1 B DEC 1961 
Bill No. 61 of 1,61 
TIlE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU JUDICIAL 
COMMISSIONER'S COURT (DECLARA-
TION AS HIGH COURT) BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
to declMe the Ju.d.ici.al Commissioner's Court ten- Goa, Daman :and 
Diu to be a High Court fen- certain purposes of the Constitution. 
~ it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
'. 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Goa, Daman and Diu Judi- Short title 
cia! Commissioner's Court (Declaration as High Court) Act, 1963. and com-
menee-
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the date of ment. 
commencement of the Goa, Daman and Diu (Judicial Commissioner's 
Court) Regulation, 1963. 
Z. In this Act, "article" means an article of the Constitution. Detl.nition. 
3. The Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the Union territory Declara-
10 of Goa, Daman and Diu (hereinafter referred to as the Judicial Com- tion of 
misSloner's Court) is hereby declared to be a High Court for the GoaD ' 
aman 
purposes of articles 132, 133 and 134. and Diu 
Judicial 
Commis-
sioner'. 
Courta. 
HIgh Court 
for 
certain 
purposes. 

Appeals 
to the 
Supreme 
Court not 
to be 
barred on 
account of 
judgment, 
etc., being 
of a single 
judge. 
Appeals to 
lie to the 
Supreme 
Court 
from 
judgment, 
decree, 
etc., 
whether 
passed or 
made 
before or 
after the 
commence-
mentor 
this Act. 
4. An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court under the provisions 
of article 133 from any judiment, decree or final order of the Judicial 
Commissioner's Court notwithstanding that such judgment, decree 
or final order is that of a single Judge. 
• 
5. Subject to any rules made under article 145 or any other law 5 
as to the time within which appeals to the Supreme Court are to be 
entered, an appeal shan lie to that Court from a judgment, decree 
or final order of the Judicial Commissioner's Court, under the pro-
visions of article 132 or article 133, or from a judgment,ftnal order 
or sentence of sueh Court under the provisions of article 134 whe- J 0 
ther such judgment, decree, final order or sentence, as the case may 
be, was passed or made before or after the commencement of this 
Act. 
Exceptions 45. The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI of the Constitution 
and modi- shall in their application to the Judicial CoIDIIUssioner's Court have 
fications effect subject to the fo1.lowing exceptions and hlodiflcations, name-subject to 
which the ly: ~ 
provisions 
of Chapter 
VofPart 
VI of the 
Constitu-
tionapply 
to the 
Judicial 
Comaaia-
sioner'. 
Court. 
(4) the provisions of articles 216, 217, 218, 220, 221, 222, 
223, 224, 224A, 225, 230 and 231 shall not apply; 
(b) references--
(i) in article 219, in the P1"OvilO to eIaUle (3) of article 
227 and in article 229 to the Governor shall be construed as 
references to the admjnistrator of the Union territory of 
Goa, Daman and Diu; • 
(ii) in articles 219 and 229 to the State (except ill the loS 
expression "the State Public Service Commission") shall be 
construed as references to the Union territory of Goa, 
Daman and Diu; 
(c) the reference to the State Public Service Commission 
in the proviso to clause (1) of article 229 shall be construed as a 
reference to the Union Public Service Commission. 30 

5 
10 
, 
3 
7. Any person aggrieved- Appeals to 
.ie to the 
(a) "by any judgment, decree, order or sentence of the Tri- Supreme 
bunal de Relacao passed or made before the 20th December, ~ourt 
96 . ~ 
1 1, against which an appeal would he to a superior court in jud,ment, 
Portugal in accordance with law ;but could not be preferred by decree, 
reason of Goa, Da.man and Diu "beCOming part of the territory etc., passed 
of India, or against which an appeal having been preferred to a or ~ade by 
superior court in Portugal in accordance with law had not been ~rlbunal 
disposed of before t~e said date: or ~lacao. 
(b) by any judgment, decree, order or sentence of the Tri-
bunal de Relacao passed or made on or after the 20th December, 
1961, 
may, within ninety days from the date of passing of this Act, 
prefer an appeal from such judgment, decree, order or sentence to 
IS the Supreme Court as if such judgment, decree, order or sentence 
had been passed or made by the Judicial Commissioner's Court. 
8. Section 7 of the Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) 
1962, is hereby repealed. 
Act, Repeal of 
section 7 
of Article 1 
Of 1982. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the Goa, Daman and Diu (Judicial Commissioner's Court) 
Regulation, 1963, a Court of Judicial Commissioner has been con-
stituted for the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu. It is the 
highest Court gf Appeal replacing the existing Court of Appeal 
(Tribunal de Relacao) in that territory. Article 241-(1) of the 
Constitution provides that Parliament may by law declare any court 
in a Union territory to be a High Court for all or any of the pur-
poses of the Constitution. In the a'bsence of such a declaration, the 
Judicial CommissiGner's Court will not be competent to exercise the 
powers of a High Court and no appeal will He to the Supreme 
Court. The Bill accordingly seeks to declare the Judicial Com-
missioner's Court for Goa, Daman and Diu to be a High Court for 
certain purposes and to apply thereto provisions of Chapter V of 
Part VI of the Constitution with certain eKceptions and modifica-
tions. 
2. Provision has also been made for appeals to the Supreme 
Court against judgments, decrees and orders Of the Tribunal de 
Relacao: 
(a) passed before 20th December, 1961, in respect of which 
appeals lay to the superior courts in Portugal, and 
(b) paSSEd on or after 20th December, 1961, in respect of 
which appeals could not be preferred in the absence of necessary 
provisions. 
3. Constitution of the Judicial Commissioner's Court has ren-
dered superfluous the provisions of section 7 of the Goa, Daman and 
Diu (Administration) Act, 1962, enabling the Central Government 
to extend the jurisdiction of the High Court at Bombay to the Union 
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu. Section 7 of the said Act is, 
therefore, being repealed. 
NEW DBl.m; JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 
The 12th December, 1963. 
.. 

ANNEXURE 
ErrucT I'ROM THE GoAJ DAMAN AND DIu (ADMINISTRATION) Act, 
1962 
(1 OF 1962) 
... ... ... ... • ... 
7. A3 from such date as the Central- Government may, by notifi- E~' s on,of 
cation in the Official Gazette, specify, the jurisdiction of the High ~:nJ~flsdlC-
Court at Bombay shall extend to Goa, Daman and Diu. Bombay 
High Court Ie 
Goa, Daman 
and Diu . 
• 
s 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BIlL 
to declare the Judicial Commissioner's Court for Goa, 
Daman and Diu to be a High Court for certain purposes 
of the Constitution. • 
(Shri JlJfJHJharlal Nehru, 
Prime Minister.) 