Bm No. 61 of ItSt 
THE PUBLIC DEBT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 19S9 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
ON 27111 AUGUST, 1959) 

s 
10 
20 
THE PUBLIC DEBT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 19S9 
(As INTIlODt1Cm IN Lox SAlIBA) 
A 
BILL 
further to CMnenti. th~ Publie .Debt, Act, 190M: 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India al follows:-
1, (1) This Aet may ~ called the Public Debt 
Act, 195st; 
(Amendment) Short title: 
and COIIl-
(2) It shall come into io.rce on such date- u the Central Go\'ern-
meAt may, by nott1ication in the Official Gazette, appoiBt~ 
mCDCemltDt. 
2. After section 9 of the Public Debt Act, 1944 (hereinafter refer- IJ1Iertion at' 
red to as the principal Act), the following sections shall be inserted, :e;, ;ti:nDJ 
namely: - 9C in N:11i 
of 1944. 
"9A. NotwithstaacUng allything contained. in sectioll lA, the Applic .... 
proviliions uf sections 9B and 9C and the'power to make rules in °9f8 ~ti°tn8 
, Y'I:J e c. 
rela tion to any of the matters refel'l'eci' to in sections 9B and 9C 
shall apply only to such classes of Government securities- created 
and issued by the Central QQvernment, whether before or after 
the commencement of the Public Debt (Amendment) Act, 1959, 
as that Gov«nment may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, 
specify, and in relation to such classes of securities the provision~ 
of sections 7 and 9 shall have effect subject to the provisiQns con-
tained'in sections 9B and gc, 
9B. (1) NotWithstanding any thine, contained in. any law for NOJJlinations 
the time being in force or in any diaposition. whether testa- ~_.holdc" of "",Vcrnm:nl 
mentary or otherwise. in respect of a Government security, securities. 

r., ... t 011 
~.tb er 
a.Glder. 
where 8 nomination made in the prescribed manner purports to 
confer on any person the right to receive payment of the amount 
for the time being due on the security on the death of the holder 
thereof, the nominee shall. on the death of the holder of the 
security, become entitled to the security and to payment thereon , 
to the exclusion of all other persons, unless the nomination i. 
\'\lried or cancelled in the prescribed manner. 
(2) Any nomination referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
become void if the nominee predeceases, or where there are two 
or more nominees all the nominees predecease, the holder of 10 
the security making the nomination. 
(3) A transfer of a Government security made in the pree-
cribed manner shall automatically cancel a nomination previous-
ly Druade: . . 
Provided that where a Government security is held by 01' IS 
on behalf of any person as a pledge or by way of security for any 
purpose, such holding shall not have the effect of cancelling • 
nomination, but the right of the nominee shall be subject to the 
right of the person so holding it. 
(4) Where the nominee is a minor it shall be lawful for the» 
holder of a security to appoint in the prescribed manner any 
person to receive the amount for the time being due on the 
security in the event of his death during the minority of the 
nominee, and, where any such appointment has been made, the 
Government security shall, after the death of the holder and zJ 
during the minority of the nomine~. be deemed to be vested in 
that person as representing the minor. 
9C. (1) If a person dies and he is at the time of hi:: death the 
holder of a Government security and there is in force at the time 
of his death a nomination in favour of any person, the amount 3' 
for the time being due on the security shall be paid to ·th. 
nominee. 
(2) Where the nominee is a minor. the amount for the time 
heine due on the Government security shall be paid-
(a) in any case where a person has been appointed to J5 
receive it under sub-section (4) of section 9B, to that 
person; and 
(b) where therf' ·i, no such person, to the luardian of 
the minor for the usC! of the minor. 

(3) Where the amount due for the time being on a Govern-
ment security is payable to two or more nominees and either or 
any of them is deud, the title to the security shall vest in the 
survivor or survivors of those nominees and the amount for the 
S time being due thereon shall be paid accordingly. 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to 
require any person to accept payment of the amount due on I 
Government security before it has reached lnaturity or otherwise 
than in accordance with the terms of the security. 
10 (5) Any payment made in accordance with the provisions 
of this section of the amount due for the time being on a Gov-
ernment security shall be a full discharge in respect of the 
security: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section or in section 
15 9B shall affect any right or claim which any person may have 
against the person to whom any payment is made under thi9 
section.". 
3. In section 28 of the principal Act, ia sub-section (2), after AlactwSmnt 
clause (0). the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: _ of lectiOll ~ 
20 .. (p) the form in which and the persons in whose favour 
nomin3tions may be made, under section 9B, the manner in which 
and the conditions and restrictions subject to which such nomi-
nations may be made. the registration, variation or cancellation 
of such nominations and the fees that may be levied for such 
2S registration, variation or cancellation; 
(q) the manner in which any person may be appointed for 
the purposes of sub-section (4) of section 9B.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Ten-Year Treasury Savings Deposit Certificates and 150-Year 
Annuity Certificates which are sold and discharged throu,h the 
Reserve Bank of India. are governed by the provisions of the Public 
~bt Act. 1944. Section 7 of that Act provides that if the face value 
of the Government securities belonging to a deceased holder exceeds 
Rs. 5,000 the executors or administrators of the deceased holder and 
the holder of a succession certificate shall be the only persona who 
may be recognised by the Reserve Bank as having any· title. to 
these securities. 
2. Suggestions have been made from time to time that as the 
production of legal proof of succession involves cWl8ideraba .way 
and expense. the holders of Ten-Year Treasury Savings Depesit 
Certificates and 15-Year Annuity Certificates may be allowed th. 
right to nominate a person or pers(}ns to whom the amount due on 
the certificates could be paid in the event of the death of the hoicwrs 
without the production of sllccession certificate or other proof 01 
title. This Bill accordingly seeks to allow the facility of nomination 
to holders of the aforementioned certificates. 
l\40RARJI R. DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
TM 18th August, 1959. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Public Debt Act, 1944. 
The President ha.t;, in pursuance of clause (I) of article II 7 of the 
Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha, the 
introduction of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shr; Morari, Desai, Mm;Jter of Finance) 
GIPND-L.S. I-T811 LS-U-8-59-5D6. 