1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE BAN ON POLYTHENE BAGS BILL, 2017
By
SHRI VISHNU DAYAL RAM, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for ban on manufacture and use of polythene bags and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Ban on  Polythene Bags Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No.  61 of  2017
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) “polythene” means material which contains as an essential ingredient a high polymer
such as polyethylene terephthalate, high density polymers, Vinyl, low density polyethylene,
polypropylene, polystyrene resigns or multi-material like acrylonitrile butadiene styrene,
polyphenylene oxide, polycarbonate, Polybutylene terephthalate;
(b) “Polythene bag” means any item or product which is made of polythene and used
for storing food, liquid or any consumable or such other product as the Central Government
may, by notification in Official, Gazette, specify; and
(c) "prescribe" means prescribed by rule made under this Act.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
person shall use, manufacture sell or trade in any polythene bag.
4. Whoever violates the provision of this Act shall be punished with a fine which shall
not be less than rupees three lakh.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
2
Definitions.
Prohibition on
polythene
bags.
Penalty.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Use of polythene bags is harmful not only to the environment but also to the mankind
as a whole. Polythene bags are being used in large quantities. This is affecting the global
environment which results in depletion of our natural resources and destruction of the whole
eco-system.
Hence, it is high time to ban the manufacture and use of polythene bags.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VISHNU DAYAL RAM
February 27, 2017.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for ban on manufacture and use of polythene bags and for matters
connected therewith on incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5286LS(S3)—27-03-2017.