As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

2 9 APR 2005

Bill No. 61 of 2005
LT

| STATE OF UTTARANCHAL (REGULARISATION AND
CONVERSION OF THE PRE-1980 SETTLEMENTS ON FOREST LANDS
INTO REVENUE LANDS) BILL, 2005

By |

SHRI K.C. SINGH “Basa”, M.P.

A

BILL

10 provide for conversion into revenue lands of all such forest lands which situate in the
State of Uttaranchal forming part of reserved forest or protected forest and which
had settlements prior to the 24th day of October, 1980; Jor regularisation ©
of all such encroachments and settlements and Jor matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the F ifty

1. (1) This Act may
fthe Pre-1980 Settlem

-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:

be called the State of Uttaranchai (Regularisation and Conversion
ents on Forest Lands into Revenue Lands) Act, 2005.

(2) It shall come into force on such
the Official Gazette, appoint.

Short title and_
commencement.

date as the Central Government may, by notification



Regularisation
of
settlements in
forest lands.

Constitution
of Committee
of Experts.

Functions of
the |
Committee of
Experts.

2

2. (1) With effect from such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in
Official Gazette appoint, any settlement or encroachment, made prior to the 24th day of
October, 1980, on any land declared as a reserved forest or protected forest, which is situated
in the State of Uttaranchal, shall be deemed to have been regularized and any such reserved
or protected forest land shall also be deemed to have been converted into a revenue land:

Provided that the date of notification shall not be later than one year from the date on
which the President assents to the State of Uttaranchal (Regularisation and Conversion of
the Pre-1980 Settlements on Forest Lands into Revenue Lands) Act, 2005.

(2) Any notification or order issued by the Central Government or the Government of
the State of Uttar Pradesh before the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 came into force
or the Government of the State of Uttaranchal declaring a land to be a reserved or protected —
forest and which is deemed to have been converted into a revenue land by the notification
issued by the Central Government under sub-section (/) shall, to the extent, it is repugnant
to the provisions of the said sub-section, have no effect from the date of issue of the said
notification.

(3) The notification issued by the Central Government under sub-section (/) shall
have effect notwithstanding—

(i) the pendency of any suit filed by any person or body of persons in any court
before or after the issue of the said notification disputing a claim to a right in or over
any land or portion of such land which is deemed to have been converted into revenue
land under the said sub-section;

(ii) any judgment, decree or order of any court or tribunal to the contrary; and

(iii) anything contained to the contrary in the Indian Forest Act, 1927 and the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

3. For the purpose of section 2, the Central Government shall, in consultation with
the Government of the State of Uttaranchal, within one month from the date of assent to the
State of Uttaranchal (Regularisation and Conversion of the Pre-1980 Settlements on Forest
Lands into Revenue Lands) Act, 2005 constitute a Committee of Experts consisting of
officials of the Department of Revenue, Finance and Tribal Welfare of the State of
Uttaranchal and such other experts from such vocations, as it may deem fit.

4. (1) The Committee of Experts constituted under section 3 shall,—

(i) identify the lands which form part of the reserved or protected forest in the
State of Uttaranchal which had settlements or encroachments prior to the 24th day
October, 1980;

(7) prepare a list of persons making claims to a right in or over any such land or
portion thereof; and

(iii) decide upon claims to a right in or over any such land or portion thereof in
cases of dispute:

Provided that a suit may be initiated against the decision of the Committee of-
experts by the affected person or body of persons in the court of appropriate jurisdiction:
within one month from the date of decision of the Committee.

Explanation: For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the pendency
of any suit brought under clause (77) shall not affect the conversion of any reserved
or protected forest land into revenue land by notification issued under sub-section (/)
of section 2.

(2) The Committee of Experts shall, within ten months of the date of its constitution,
submit its report to the Central Government.


हि

3 secti 0

a

ay

Ud

क्री

3

5. The Central Government shall, before issuing the notification referred to in sub-

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi
out of the purposes of this Act.

1 (/) of section 2, give due consideration to the report of the Committee of Experts.

cial Gazette, make rules to

Central
Government
to consider
report of the
Committée.

Power to
make rules.

ee



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The total geographical area of the State of Uttaranchal is about 53485 sq. km., out of
which 34661 sq. km., 1.2., about 65 per cent area forms forest wealth of the State. Encroachment
on forest land is an offence under the provisions of the Indian Forest Act, 1927. With the
enactment of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, all cases of regularization of such
encroachments are required to be forwarded by the State Government for approval by the
Central Government. It is undisputable that exploitation of forest land for agricultural and
other use is one of the main causes of encroachment which has resulted in decline of forest
resources. However, it would not be prudent to evict encroachments from such forest land
which is forest land only on records without much forest wealth and where settlements exist
for more than two three decades. The Government of India liave also, as a one time
dispensation, issued guidelines on 18th September, 1990 for regularization of pre-1980 eligible
encroachments on forest lands keeping view the fact that various State Governments had
taken a decision to regularize certain categories of encroachment but could not implement
the decision as Forest (Conservation) Act came into effect. This relaxation is not applicable
to encroachments that took place after 24th October, 1980. One of the guidelines issued by
the Government provides that all the pre-1980 encroachments shall not be eligible for
regularization. Only certain categories of pre-1980 encroachment can be regularized. The
State of Uttaranchal has been created only recently. Therefore, it is necessary that the
Government of the State of Uttaranchal be given opportunity to submit its proposal of
regularization ofall pre-1980 encroachments for approval to the Central Government. However,
with the restraint imposed by the Supreme Court on the Central Government with regard to
regularization of encroachment in the country by their order dated 23rd November, 2001 in IA
No. 703 in WP No. 202/95, the process of regularization of encroachment in the country has
come to a halt. Accordingly, the State Governments are required to get all ineligible pre-1980
and all post-1980 encroachments removed from the forest lands. As the State of Uttaranchal
was not formed in the year 1990 i.e. when the guidelines were issued by the Central Government
for regularization of pre-1980 encroachment, it is judicious that the Government of Uttaranchal
must be given an opportunity to regularize its pre-1980 encroachments on forest lands
notwithstanding the orders of the Supreme Court which have been made almost at the time
of creation of the State of Uttaranchal. The Union Minister of Environment and Forests in his
reply to Starred Question No. 284, dated 16 October, 2004, submitted before the House that
whatever the observation of the Court, the Government is committed and that the forest
village should be converted into revenue villages. The Minister also informed that the
Government has filed an affidavit before the Supreme Court to protect the tribals and that the
entire jurisdiction of the Ministry is not ousted.

As the matter regarding regularization of encroachments is likely to be delayed due to
its pendency in the Court of Law, it is necessary that a law should be enacted to provide for
regularization of all pre-1980 encroachments on forest lands in the State of Uttaranchal and
their conversion into revenue land so that the people living on such land may become
eligible for all such benefits as are available to people living on revenue land. Such a law will
not affect the process of conservation of forest as all such encroachments have regular
schools, roads, electricity, water facility and other things.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; K.C. SINGH “BABA”
March 28, 2005. |



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Committee of Experts
to identify the encroached reserved forest lands in the State of Uttaranchal. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that

a sum of approximately rupees fifty lakh is likely to be involved as a non-recurring expenditure
_ per annum.

No recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to the matters of detail only. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. |



LOK SABHA

A
BILL 2
to provide for conversion into revenue lands of a!l such forest lands which situate in the
State of Uttaranchal forming part of reserved forest or protected forest and which had _
settlements prior to the 24th day of October, 1980; for regularisation of all such
encroachments and settlements and for matiers connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

(Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—142LS(S-1)}—1 9.04.2005.