 Bill No. 61 of 2023
THE GOVERNMENT SERV ANTS (REGULATION OF
SERVICES) BILL, 2023
By
SHRI OMPRAKASH B HUPALSINH RAJENIMBALKAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to make provisions to deal with misconduct of Government servants
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government Servants (Regulation
of Services) Act, 2023.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “appointing authority”, in relation to a Government servant, means–
(i) the President or the authority empowered by the President to make
appointments to the service of which the Government servant is for the
time being a member or to the grade of the Service in which the
Government servant is for the time being included, or
(ii) the authority empowered to make appointments to the post which
the Government servant for the time being holds, or
(iii) the authority which appointed the Government servant to such
Service, grade or post, as the case may be, or
(iv) where the Government servant having been a permanent member
of any other Service or having substantively held any other permanent
post, has been in continuous employment of the Government, the authority
which appointed him to that Service or to any grade in that Service or to
that post,
(b) “disciplinary authority” means the authority competent under
section 5 to impose any of the penalties specified under section 4 on a
Government servant;
(c) “Government servant” means a person who–
(i) is a member of a Service or holds a civil post under the Union;
(ii) is a member of a Service or holds a civil post under a Central
Government and whose services are temporarily placed at the disposal of
the State Government;
(iii) is in the service of the Central Government and whose services
are temporarily placed at the disposal of the local or other authority;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under the Act.
3.  (1) The Central Government shall evaluate the functioning of every
Government servant through feedback from the citizens in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Central Government
shall establish unitary feedback system in each of its department.
4. The Central Government may, for good and sufficient reasons and as
hereinafter provided, impose the following penalties on a Government servant,
namely:–
(a) minor penalties including,–
(i) censure; or
(ii) withholding of his promotion; or
(iii) recovery from his pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss
caused by him to the Government by negligence or breach of orders; or
(iv) reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay by one stage
for a period not exceeding three years, without cumulative effect and not
adversely affecting his pension; or
(v) withholding of increments of pay;
5
Definitions.
10
15
Evaluation of
Government
servants.
Penalties.
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) major penalties including,–
(i) save as provided for in sub-clause (iv) of clause (a), reduction to a
lower stage in the time-scale of pay for a specified period, with further
directions as to whether or not the Government servant may earn
increments of pay during the period of such reduction and whether on the
expiry of such period:
Provided that  the reduction may or may not have the effect of
postponing the future increments of his pay;
(ii) reduction to lower time-scale of pay, grade, post or service for a
period to be specified in the order of penalty, which shall be a bar to the
promotion of the Government servant during such specified period to the
time-scale of pay, grade, post or service from which he was reduced, with
direction as to whether or not, on promotion on the expiry of the said
specified period;
(iii) the period of reduction to time-scale of pay, grade, post or service
shall operate to postpone future increments of his pay;
(iv) compulsory retirement;
(v) removal from service which shall not be a disqualification for
future employment under the Government;
(vi) dismissal from service which shall ordinarily be a disqualification
for future employment under the Government:
Provided that, in every case in which the charge of possession of
assets disproportionate to known-sources of income or the charge of
acceptance from any person of any gratification, other than legal
remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing to do any
official act is established, the penalty mentioned in sub-clauses (v) or
(vi) of clause (b) shall be imposed:
Provided further that where a Government servant delays performing
an official act requested by any citizen under his jurisdiction by
giving illogical and unnecessary reasons, the penalty mentioned in
sub-clauses (i), (ii), or (iii) of clause (b) shall be imposed:
Provided also that in any exceptional case and for special reasons
recorded in writing, any other penalty may be imposed.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the following shall
not amount to a penalty, namely:–
(i) withholding of increments of pay of a Government servant for his
failure to pass any departmental examination in accordance with the rules
or orders governing the Service to which he belongs or post which he
holds or the terms of his appointment;
(ii) stoppage of a Government servant at the efficiency bar in the
timescale of pay on the ground of his unfitness to cross the bar;
(iii) non-promotion of a Government servant, whether in a substantive
or officiating capacity, after consideration of his case, to a Service, grade
or post for promotion to which he is eligible;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(iv) reversion of a Government servant officiating in a higher Service,
grade, or post to a lower Service, grade or post, on the ground that he is
considered to be unsuitable for such higher Service, grade or post or on
any administrative ground unconnected with his conduct;
(v) reversion of a Government servant, appointed on probation to
any other Service, grade or post, to his permanent Service, grade or post
during or at the end of the period of probation in accordance with the
terms of his appointment or the rules and orders governing such probation;
(vi) repatriation of a Government servant whose services had been
borrowed from a State Government or an authority under the control of
a State Government, at the disposal of the State Government or the
authority from which the services of such Government servant had been
borrowed; and
(vii) compulsory retirement of a Government servant in accordance
with the provisions relating to his superannuation or retirement.
5. (1) The President may, through the appointing authority or by
any other authority empowered in this behalf by a general or special order, impose
any of the penalties specified in section 4 on any Government servant who is,–
(a) a member of a Central Civil Service other than the General Central
Service;
(b) a person appointed to a Central Civil Service included in the
General Central Service,
(2) The power to impose any of the penalties specified in section 4 may
also be exercised, in the case of a member of a Central Civil Services,
Group ‘C’ (other than the Central Secretariat Clerical Service), or a Central
Civil Service, Group ‘D’,–
(a) if he is serving in a Ministry or Department of the Government of
India, by the Secretary to the Government of India in that Ministry or
Department; or
(b) if he is serving in any office, by the head of that office, except
where the head of that office is lower in rank than the authority competent
to impose the penalty under section 4.
6. (1) No order imposing any of the penalties specified in section 4 shall
be made except after an enquiry held, as far as may be, in the manner provided
by the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1850, where such inquiry is held under
that Act.
(2) Whenever the disciplinary authority is of the opinion that there are
grounds for inquiring into the truth of any imputation of misconduct or
misbehaviour against a Government servant, it may itself inquire into, or
appoint under this rule or under the provisions of the Public Servants
(Inquiries) Act, 1850, as the case may be, an authority to inquire into the truth
thereof:
Provided that where there is a complaint of sexual harassment within
the meaning of rule 3 C of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964,
the Complaints Committee established in each Ministry or Department or
Disciplinary
Authorities.
Procedure for
imposing
major
penalties. 37 of 1850
37 of 1850
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
Office for inquiring into such complaints, shall be deemed to be the inquiring
authority appointed by the disciplinary authority for the purpose of these
rules and the Complaints Committee shall hold, if separate procedure has not
been prescribed for the Complaints Committee for holding the inquiry into
the complaints of sexual harassment, the inquiry as far as practicable in
accordance with the procedure laid down in those rules.
7.  The provisions of this Act shall be  in addition to and not in derogation
of any other law for the time being in force.
8.  If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order, make such provisions or give such
directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it
to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order or direction shall be made or given after
the expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act.
9. (1)  The Central Government may, by notification and in consultation
with the Chief Justice of India, make rules for carrying out the provisions of
this Act.
(2)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after
it is  made,  before each House of Parliament, while it is in  session for a total
period of thirty  days  which may be comprised in  one session or in two
successive sessions, and,  if before the  expiry  of the session in which it is so
laid  or the session  immediately  following, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the  rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made,  the  rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect,  as the case may be, so, however, that any such  modification or
annulment shall be  without prejudice to the validity  of anything previously
done under that rule.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Bureaucrats are an essential component of government machinery.
They work in government for the improvement of society and to help their
fellow citizens. However, they are frequently found to be misbehaving and
refusing to cooperate with the people they are obligated to serve. Many
individuals frequently complain about how government employees waste
their time. Even if we now have a number of rules in place to govern the
behaviour of government officials, yet a robust legislation regulating the
conduct of erring officials to benefit individuals and the country as a whole
is urgently required.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;             OMPRAKASH BHUP ALSINH RAJENIMBALKAR
February 13, 2023.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall
establish unitary feedback system in each of its department for having
feedback on the functioning of every government servant. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand
crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also
likely to be involved.
7

8
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  As the rules will relate to matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to make provisions to deal with misconduct of Government servants
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Omprakash Bhupalsinh Rajenimbalkar, M.P .)