THE INDIAN TRUSTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall  come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  For section 20 of the Indian Trusts  Act, 1882, (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), the following section  shall be substituted, namely:—
“20. Where the trust-property consists of money and cannot be applied
immediately or at an early date to the purposes of the trust, the trustee is bound
(subject to any direction contained in the instrument of trust) to invest the money on
any security or class of securities expressly authorised by the instrument of trust, or
by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette:
Provided that, where there is a person competent to contract and entitled in
possession to receive the income of the trust-property for his life, or for any greater
estate, no investment on any security or class of securities mentioned above shall be
made without his consent in writing:
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Substitution of
new section
for section 20.
2 of 1882.
Investment of
trust-money.
Bill No. 61 of  2009
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10
15

2
Provided further that no such consent shall be required where such investment
is made in the securities of the Government.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the securities, both the principal
whereof and the interest whereon shall have been fully and unconditionally guaranteed
by the Central Government or the State Government, shall be deemed to be securities
of such Government.”.
3.  In section 20A of the Principal Act, in the proviso,—
(i)  the words, brackets and letters “clauses (c) and (d) of ” shall be omitted;
(ii) for the words “said clauses”, the words “said section” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of  Section
20A.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) provides the law relating to Private Trusts and
Trustees. Section 20 of the Act states where the trust property consists of money and cannot
be applied immediately or at an early date to the purposes of the trust, the trustee is bound,
subject to any direction contained in the instrument of trust, to invest the money in securities
enumerated in clauses ( a) to (f) of the said section. Clause ( a) of section 20 provides for
investing the trust money in promissory notes, debentures, stock and other securities of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and clause ( b) for bonds, debentures, and
annuities charged or secured by Parliament of the United Kingdom. The Law Commission of
India, in its 17th Report has, inter alia, recommended for amendment of section 20 and for
deletion of the provisions for the securities which have become obsolete.
2. The Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009 seeks to amend section 20 and empowers
the Government to notify a class of securities, for the purposes of investing trust money and
it does away with the requirement of case to case approval by the Government of “any
security” and provides to the trustees greater autonomy and flexibility to take decisions on
investment of trust money based on their assessment of the risk return tradeoff and the
relevent provisions of the trust deed. It would be consistent with the current economic
environment and the present shift from a merit based regulatory regime to a disclosure based
regulatory regime.
3. The Bill seeks to enable the Central Government to notifiy a class of securities for the
purposes of investment of trust money by the trustees in such securities and it deletes
reference to the outdated and obsolete securities from the Act.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PRANAB  MUKHERJEE.
The 21st  July, 2009.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE  INDIAN TRUSTS  ACT, 1882
(2 OF 1882)
* * * * *
20.  Where the trust-property consists of money and cannot be applied immediately or
at an early date to the purposes of the trust, the trustee is bound (subject to any direction
contained in the instrument of trust) to invest the money on the following securities, and on
no others:—
(a) in promissory notes, debentures, stock or other securities of any State
Government or of  the Central Government, or of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland:
Provided that securities, both the principal whereof and the interest whereon
shall have been fully and unconditionally guaranteed by any such Government, shall
be deemed, for the purposes of this clause, to be securities of such Government;
(b) in bonds, debentures and annuities charged or secured by the Parliament of
the United Kingdom before the fifteenth day of August, 1947 on the revenues of India
or of the Governor-General in Council or of any Province:
Provided that, after the fifteenth day of February, 1916, no money shall be invested
in any such annuity being a terminable annuity unless a sinking fund has been
established in connection with such annuity; but nothing in this proviso shall apply to
investments made before the date aforesaid;
(bb) in India three and a half per cent., stock, India three per cent., stock, India
two and a half per cent. stock or any other capital stock which before the 15th day of
August, 1947, was issued by the Secretary of State for India in Council under the
authority of an Act of Parliament of the United Kindom and charged on the revenues
of India or which was issued by the Secretary of State on behalf of the Governor-
General in Council under the provisions of Part XIII of the Government of  India Act,
1935;
(c) in stock or debentures of, or shares in, Railway or other Companies the
interest whereon shall have been guaranteed by the Secretary of State for India in
Council or by the Central Government or in debentures of the Bombay Provincial
Co-operative Bank, Limited, the interest whereon shall have been guaranteed, by the
Secretary of State for India in Council or the State Government of Bombay;
(d) in debentures or other securities for money issued, under the authority of
any Central Act or Provincial Act or State Act, by or on behalf of any municipal body,
port trust or city improvement trust in any presidency-town or in Rangoon Town, or by
or on behalf of the trustees of the port of Karachi:
Provided that after the 31st day of March, 1948, no money shall be invested in
any securities issued by or on behalf of a municipal body, port trust or city improvement
trust in Rangoon Town, or by or on behalf of the trustees of the port of Karachi;
(e) on a first mortgage of immovable property situate in any part of the territories
to which this Act extends: Provided that the property is not a leasehold for a term of
years and that the value of the property exceeds by one-third, or, if consisting of
buildings, exceeds by one-half, the mortgage-money;
(ee) in units issued by the Unit Trust of India under any unit scheme  made under
section 21 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963; or
4
Investment of
trust-money.
52 of 1963.

5
(f) on any other security expressly authorised by the instrument of trust, or by
the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, or by any rule which the
High Court may from time to time prescribe in this behalf:
Provided that, where there is a person competent to contract and entitled in
possession to receive the income of the trust-property for his life, or for any greater
estate, no investment on any security mentioned or referred to in clauses (d), (e) and (f)
shall be made without his consent in writing.
* * * * *
20A.  (1) A trustee may invest in any of the securities mentioned or referred to in
section 20, notwithstanding that the same may be redeemable and that the price exceeds the
redemption value:
Provided that a trustee may not purchase at a price exceeding its redemption value any
security mentioned or referred to in clauses ( c) and (d) of section 20 which is liable to be
redeemed within fifteen years of the date of purchase  at par  or at some other fixed rate, or
purchase any such security as is mentioned or referred to in the said clauses which is liable
to be redemmed at par or at some other fixed rate at a price exceeding fifteen per centum
above par or such other fixed rate.
* * * * *
Power to
purchase
redeemable
stock at a
premium.

LOKLOK SABHA   SA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.
————
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance)
GMGIPMRND—3439LS(S-5)—29.07.2009.