THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR
CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
By
DR. MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 61 of 2011
TO BE INTRODUCED IN  LOK SABHA

2
2. For Chapter IV of the Maintenance and Walfare of Parents and Senior Citizens
Act, 2007, the following Chapter shall be substituted, namely:—
"CHAPTER IV
 PROVISIONS  FOR  MEDICAL  CARE  AND  OTHER  FACILITIES  FOR  SENIOR  CITIZENS
20. The State Government shall ensure that,—
(i) the Government hospitals or hospitals funded fully or partially by the
Government shall provide free periodical health check-up and other health care facilities
for all senior citizens as far as possible;
(ii) separate queues be arranged for senior citizens;
(iii) facility for treatment of chronic, terminal and degenerative diseases is
expanded for senior citizens;
(iv) research activities for chronic elderly diseases and ageing is expanded;
(v) there are earmarked facilities for geriatric patients in every district hospital
duly headed by a medical officer with experience in geriatric care.
20A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time
being in force, the Central Government shall provide,—
(i) subsistence allowance of rupees one thousand per month to every destitute
senior citizen;
(ii) travel facilities by road, rail and air at concessional rates to every senior
citizen; and
(iii) such other facilities to senior citizens, as the Central Government may think
necessary:
Provided that the Central Government may revise the rate of subsistence
allowance referred to in clause (i) above, from time to time, on the basis of such
criteria as it may think fit for the purpose.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, 'destitute senior citizen' means
any person who has completed the age of sixty years and has no living relative or
property to maintain himself.”.
Substitution of
new Chapter
for Chapter IV .
Medical
support for
senior
citizens.
Other
facilities for
senior
citizens.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The increasing influence of western culture in our country has resulted in senior
citizens being neglected. This is totally against our Indian culture and philosophy. With the
increase in life expectancy, the number of destitute senior citizens is increasing regularly.
This problem is more pronounced in the urban areas. In cities, thousands of senior citizens
are living alone as they have no one to care for them. The senior citizens who are destitute
have neither any income nor any relatives to support them. It is the duty of the State to
provide them with security both personal and financial for their welfare. It is inhuman and
immoral to neglect our senior citizens. They must be provided complete financial security
including 'Roti, Kapra and Makaan'.
The Bill seeks to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens
Act, 2007 with a view to provide for payment of subsistence allowance and other facilities to
destitute senior citizens.
New Delhi; MAHENDRASINH P. CHAUHAN
August 1, 2011.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide subsistence
allowance to every destitute senior citizen. It also provides for certain facilities to senior
citizens. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one
thousand five hundred crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens
Act, 2007.
————
(Dr. Mahendrasinh P . Chauhan, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1349LS(S3)—25-08-2011