AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 61 of  2022
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
 SHRI. N.K. PREMACHANDRAN,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution  (Amendment) Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
  2.  After article 338B of the Constitution, the following article shall be
inserted, namely:–
   “338C. (1) There shall be a Commission for the Economically Weaker
Section to be known as the National Commission for the Economically Weaker
Section.
5
Insertion of
new article
338C.
Short title and
commencement.
10
National
Commission for
Economically
Weaker section.

(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be
such as the President may by rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5)  It shall be the duty of the Commission–
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
provided for the Economically Weaker Section under this Constitution
or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of
the Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of
rights and safeguards of the Economically Weaker Section;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic
development of the Economically Weaker Section and to evaluate the
progress of their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that
should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation
of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and
socio-economic development of the Economically Weaker Section; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare
and development and advancement of the Economically Weaker Section
as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, by rule specify.
(6)  The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House
of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to
be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded
to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the
State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken
on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non
recommendations.
(8)  The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in sub-
clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub clause (b) of clause (5),
have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any
part of India and examining him on oath;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2

(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or
office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9)  The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission
on all major policy matters affecting Economically Weaker Section.”.
5
3

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, the economically weaker sections of citizens have largely remained
excluded from attending the higher educational institutions and public employment
on account of their financial incapacity to compete with the persons who are
economically more privileged.
The directive principles of State policy contained in article 46 of the Constitution
provides that the State shall promote with special care the educational and economic
interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all
forms of exploitation.
Vide the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, clause (5) was inserted
in article 15 of the Constitution which enables the State to make special provision for
the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens, or
for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, in relation to their admission in
higher educational institutions. Similarly, clause (4) of article 16 of the Constitution
enables the State to make special provision for the reservation of appointment or
posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which in the opinion of the State,
is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
However, economically weaker sections of citizens were not eligible for the
benefit of reservation. With a view to fulfil the mandate of article 46 and to ensure
that economically weaker sections of citizens get a fair chance of receiving higher
education and participation in employment in the services of the State, it was
decided to amend the Constitution of India.
Accordingly, the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019
provides for reservation for the economically weaker section of society in higher
educational institutions, including private institutions, whether aided or unaided by
the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in article 30 of
the constitution and also provides for reservation for them in posts in initial
appointment in services under the State. To ensure welfare and overall development
of economically weaker sections and effective implementation of the Constitution
(One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019, it is necessary to constitute a
Commission for the Economically Weaker Sections.
 Hence this Bill.
     NEW DELHI;                                                           N.K. PREMACHANDRAN
    January 25, 2022.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for setting up of a National Commission for
Economically Weaker Sections. It also provides for appointment of Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and Members of the Commission. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty crore will be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees thirty crore  is  likely to be involved.
5

LOK SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
(Shri N.K. Premachandran, M.P .)