1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) BILL, 2014
BY
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of surrogacy and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —
1. (1) This Act may be called the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "assisted reproductive technology" means techniques that attempt to
obtain a pregnancy by handling or manipulating the sperm or the oocyte outside
the human body, and transferring the gamete or the embryo into the reproductive
tract;
Bill No. 61 of  2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) "assisted reproductive technology clinic" means any premises used
for procedures related to assisted reproductive technology;
(c) "child" means a child born through the use of assisted reproductive
technology;
(d) "couple" means two persons living together and having a sexual
relationship that is legal in India;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "surrogacy" means an arrangement in which a woman agrees to a
pregnancy, achieved through assisted reproductive technology, in which neither
of the gametes belong to her or her husband, with the intention to carry it and
hand over the child to the person or persons for whom she is acting as a
surrogate; and
(g) "surrogacy agreement" means a contract between the person availing
the assisted reproductive technology and the surrogate mother.
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State
Governments, establish a Board to be known as the National Board for Regulation of
Surrogacy (hereinafter referred to as the National Board) to exercise such powers
and discharge such functions and duties conferred or imposed on the Board  by or
under this Act.
(2) The National Board shall consist of—
(i) the Secretary to the Government of India, in-charge of
the Department of Health Research;
(ii) one person each representing,—
(a) the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare; and
(b) the Indian Council of Medical Research.
(iii) ten women representatives who shall have special
knowledge or practical experience in the field of assisted
reproduction, gynaecology, embryology, andrology, bioethics,
mammalian reproduction, medical genetics, social science, law
or human rights, to be nominated by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The National Board shall meet as and when necessary, and at such place as
the Chairperson of the National Board may think fit.
(4) The National Board shall establish its offices in every district.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(6) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of officers
and staff, as is necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board.
4. The National Board shall—
(i) lay minimum requirements related to staff and physical infrastructure
for various categories of assisted reproductive clinics;
(ii) lay regulation in respect of permissible assisted reproductive
technology procedure;
(iii) lay regulation in respect of selection of patients for assisted
reproductive technology procedure;
(iv) encourage and promote research in the field of assisted reproductive
technology;
Establishment
of National
Board for
Regulation of
Surrogacy.
Functions of
National Board.
Chairperson,
ex-officio;
Members; and
Members
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(v) issue guidelines for counselling and providing patients with all
necessary information and advice on various aspects of surrogacy and assisted
reproductive technology procedures;
(vi) maintain national database in respect of infertility;
(vii) prescribe proforma for obtaining information from donor of gametes
and surrogate mothers, consent forms for various procedure, and contracts or
agreements between parties involved in surrogacy; and
(viii) frame policies, from time to time, on surrogacy and assisted
reproductive technology procedures.
5. (1) Every assisted reproductive technology clinic shall, within such period
and in such form and manner as may be prescribed, apply for registration to the office
of the National Board established in the district.
(2) The National Board may, subject to such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed, register any assisted reproductive technology clinic on the basis of the
techniques, procedures and assisted reproductive technology practiced, including
surrogacy procedures, at such clinic.
(3) The surrogacy procedures referred to in sub-section (2) includes—
(a) infertility treatment, including Intra-Uterine Insemination (IUI), Artificial
Insemination with Husband's semen (AIH), and Artificial Insemination using
Donor Semen (AID), involving the use of donated or collected gametes;
(b) infertility treatment involving the use and creation of embryos outside
the human body;
(c) processing or storage of embryos; and
(d) research.
(4) No assisted reproductive technology clinic performing any of the functions
under sub-section (2) or any other advanced diagnostic, therapeutic or research
functions, shall practice any aspect of such diagnosis, therapy or research without
obtaining a Registration Certificate from the office of the National Board.
(5) Every assisted reproductive technology clinic registered under this Act
shall be deemed to have satisfied the provisions of the Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal
Diagnostic Techniques Act, 1994, and shall not be required to seek a separate
registration under that Act.
(6) Every assisted reproductive technology clinic shall forward every month to
the office of the National Board in the district the details of services provided to every
patient for surrogacy purpose, in such form, as may be prescribed.
6. Any couple who intends to seek surrogacy through the use of assisted
reproductive technology shall—
(i) inform the office of the National Board in the district about assisted
reproductive technology clinic where he intends to seek surrogacy through the
use of assisted reproductive technology;
(ii) declare about the woman who has agreed to act as a surrogate mother
or potential surrogate mother;
(iii) enter into an agreement with the woman who has agreed to act as a
surrogate mother and who is otherwise eligible to enter into an agreement for
the purpose of surrogacy;
Assisted
reproductive
technology
clinics to apply
for registration
to the National
Board.
Procedure
regarding
persons seeking
use of assisted
reproductive
technology.
57 of 1994.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(iv) bear all expenditure incurred on medical tests and treatment, food,
health insurance, compensation and other requirements of the surrogate mother
from the date of agreement, during the period of pregnancy and after delivery
as per medical advice and till the child is ready to be delivered as per medical
advice, to the biological parents.
7. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, and subject to the
surrogacy agreement, every woman seeking to or agreeing to act as a surrogate mother,—
(i) may also receive monetary compensation from the couple for agreeing
to act as surrogate mother;
(ii) shall be medically tested for all communicable diseases including
sexually transmitted disease; and
(iii) shall be declared medically fit to act as a surrogate mother by the
assisted reproductive technology clinic where she intends to take medical
treatment for the purpose on the date she enters into an agreement to act as a
surrogate mother.
(2) All expenditure to be incurred on medical tests under sub-section (1) shall
be borne by the couple seeking surrogacy through the use of assisted reproductive
technology.
8. Any married woman, who intends to act as a surrogate mother for a couple,
shall be eligible to enter into an agreement for surrogacy, if she has—
(i) attained the age of 21 years but is not above the age of 35 years;
(ii) procreated not less than two children from her marriage; and
(iii) obtained consent of her spouse for acting as a surrogate mother.
9. No woman shall act as a surrogate for more than four live births in her life,
including her own children.
10.  A surrogate mother shall, in respect of all medical treatments or procedures
in relation to the concerned child, register at the hospital or such medical facility in
her own name, clearly declare herself to be a surrogate mother and provide name or
names and addresses of the persons, as the case may be, for whom she is acting as a
surrogate.
11.  A surrogate mother shall relinquish all parental rights over the child.
12.  A child born to a woman through surrogacy may, upon reaching the age of
eighteen years, ask for any information, excluding personal identification about his/
her genetic parent or parents or surrogate mother.
13.  Any foreign couple, not resident of India, seeking surrogacy in India shall—
(i) appoint a local guardian who shall be legally responsible for taking
care of the surrogate during and after pregnancy of such woman;
(ii) pay premium for insurance cover to the surrogate mother and the
child she delivers until the time the child is handed over to the commissioning
Provisions of
surrogacy
agreement and
medical tests of
woman seeking
to act as a
surrogate
mother.
Eligibility
conditions for
women to be
surrogate
mother.
No woman to
act a surrogate
for more than
four live births
in her life.
Surrogate
mother to
register at the
hospital.
Surrogate
mother to
relinquish all
parental rights
over the child.
Right of child to
seek information
excluding
personal
information
about his genetic
parent or parents
or surrogate
mother.
Procedure
regarding
foreign couples
seeking
surrogacy in
India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

5
parents or any other person as per agreement and till the surrogate mother is
free of all health complications arising out of surrogacy.
(iii) produce a letter from either the embassy of the country in India or
from the Foreign Ministry of that country clearly stating—
(a) the country of foreign couple permits surrogacy, and
(b) the child born through surrogacy in India will be permitted entry
in the country as a biological child of the commissioning couple.
14. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of
any other law for the time being in force.
15.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In recent years, the cases of child births through the use of advanced medical
technologies in surrogacy have been increasing. Not only common people but also
celebrities are taking recourse to assisted reproductive technologies to become
parents. As the cost in our country is lower in comparison to other countries, even
foreign couples are coming to India for this purpose. In view of ever larger number of
people taking recourse to this new technology, a number of legal issues have arisen
which needs urgent attention. Accordingly regulation of surrogacy is the need of the
hour.
The primary concern in surrogacy cases is the plight of women who agree to act
as surrogate mother. Mostly, such women are poor and belong to marginalized sections
of society who easily agree to act as surrogate mother for monetary reasons. To
protect such women and also to address certain legal and ethical issues concerning
surrogacy, it is proposed to regulate functioning of such clinics to ensure that the
services provided are ethical and the medical, social and legal rights of all concerned
are protected.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
June 27, 2014.
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a National Board for Regulation
of Surrogacy. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about
rupees one thousand crore per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.
7

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.
8

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of surrogacy and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
—————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1310LS(S3)—23-07-2014.