1
THE LIFE INSURANCE AGENTS WELFARE BILL, 2016
By
DR. A. SAMPATH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Life Insurance Agents Fund for the Welfare of life
insurance agents and for matter connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Life Insurance Agents Welfare Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 61 of  2016
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "establishment" means a company or corporation engaged in life insurance;
(b) "Fund" means the Life Insurance Agents Welfare Fund constituted under
section 3;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) the expression "Life Insurance Agent" shall have the same meaning as is
assigned to "insurance agent" under the Insurance Act, 1938 and includes advisor,
sales promoter, sales executive, intermediaries either employed or engaged in any
establishment for hire or reward to do any work relating to promotion of sale or business
of life insurance, or both, but does not include any such person engaged in a supervisory
capacity.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the Life Insurance Agents Welfare Fund for the welfare of the life
insurance agents.
(2) The Fund shall consist of contributions from Central Government, the Life
Insurance Corporation or companies engaged in life insurance and the insurance agents
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board consisting of—
(a) the Union Minister of Finance—Chairperson, ex-officio;
(b) two persons representing the Insurance—member;
Regulatory and Development Authority
(c) one representative from—member; and
Life Insurance Corporation of India
(d) two persons representing the life insurance agents—member
to be nominated by the Central Government.
4. The Fund shall be utilized for—
(i) payment of compensation to the next of kin of a life insurance agent in case
of death;
(ii) payment of old age pension to a life insurance agent after he has attained the
age of sixty years and undertaken minimum ten years of continuous work as an
agent;
(iii) payment of family pension to the dependents of the deceased life insurance
agent;
(iv) payment of premium for the medical insurance of the insurance agents;
and
(v) such other purposes as the Board may deem necessary for the welfare of life
insurance agents.
5. It shall be the responsibility of the Life Insurance Corporation or an establishment,
as the case may be, to issue a licence to every life insurance agent working as an agent
under it in such form as may be prescribed.
6. It shall be the responsibility of the Life Insurance Corporation or an establishment,
as the case may be, to create and maintain an online portal of the life insurance agents
containing such particulars as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Constitution
of Life
Insurance
Agents
Welfare Fund.
Utilization of
Fund.
Licence to life
insurance
agents.
Online portal
of the life
insurance
agents.
4 of 1938.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. The provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947, the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, the Payment of
Bonus Act, 1965 and the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, as in force for the time being, shall
apply to, or in relation to, life insurance agents as they apply to workmen or employees, as
the case may be, within the meaning of those Act.
8. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by an insurance company or
corporation and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary
or other officer of the company/corporation, such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this section, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
9. (1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of
First Class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
(2) No courts shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act, except upon a complaint
in writing is made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been
committed.
10. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any award, agreement,
settlement or contract of service, whether made before or after the coming into force of this
Act:
Provided that where under any such law, award, agreement, settlement, or contract or
service, a life insurance agent is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more
favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act, the life insurance
agent shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter,
notwithstanding that he is entitled to receive benefits in respect of other matters under this
Act.
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a life insurance agent
from entering into an agreement with his employer for granting him rights or privileges in
respect to any matter which are more favourable to him than those to which he would be
entitled under this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
8 of 1923
14 of 1947
11 of 1948
53 of 1961
21 of 1965 and
39 of 1972.
Application of
certain Acts to
life insurance
agents.
Offences by
life insurance
companies or
corporation.
Cognizance of
offence.
Power to
make rules.
Effect of laws
and
agreements
inconsistent
with this Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In Insurance Laws (Amendment) Act, 2015 has made fundamental changes in the
functioning of the insurance companies. The life insurance agents play a major role in
procuring business and in the growth of the Insurance Sector. More than two million people
are engaged as life insurance agents in the industry. Majority of them have opted this
profession as full time job. The work requires a lot of time, energy and dedication. The
competition amongst insurance companies for business has tremendously increased after
the opening up of this sector to private players both at national and international levels.
Their contribution to insurance sector is immense in creating assets and increasing
profit of the companies, at the same time providing benefits of insurance to the general
public. In the absence of any welfare scheme by the Government for social security, these
agents live in pathetic conditions. A portion of profit earned by the insurance companies
through hard work of such agents needs to be devoted for the welfare of insurance agents
and their life has to be secured. It is the responsibility of the Government in a welfare State to
provide proper medical care, old age pension, family pension, etc., to every citizen of the
country.
Insurance agents in general and Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) agents in
particular are a self-employed group and earn their livelihood through the commission paid
by LIC. They are responsible for the growth of LIC from inception till today and there is no
doubt that LIC has been playing a pivotal role in the Indian economy. There are at present
11,63,604 LIC agents all over India and the Government is relieved of the burden of providing
employment for them. However, the amendment to Agent's Regulations, 1972 of LIC has
resulted in termination of 21,11,265 agents over the last six years and the number will increase
if this method continues. The move of LIC to do away with the agents will certainly affect the
business of LIC. LIC agents are a specialized group who are trained in canvassing insurance
business and they may not be fit for any other job. Moreover, the Government will not be in
a position to give them alternate jobs once they are terminated from LIC.
Even today, 96.22% of the business of LIC is brought by agents. The rest of the 3.78%
of the insurance business is brought by nine public sector banks, four private sector banks,
ten regional rural banks, thirty-three co-operative banks, one foreign bank, one hundred and
eight corporate agents and two hundred and forty eight brokers. The present market share of
LIC is 84.4% for which the agents are mainly responsible. The agents are a good source of
publicity as by the time one policy is finalized, an agent would have met at least ten persons
and discussed with them. This way, the Agents carry messages of insurance to every person
in the country. The expenditure on publicity is in no way comparable if LIC takes up alternative
source for publicity.
In fact, there are only 1,44,854 agents with five year's service who earn more than
rupees two lakhs per year. Those with ten year's service who earn between rupees one lakh
to two lakhs per year comes to 2,46,740 and those who earn less than rupees one lakh per
year comes to 6,27,783.
From a capital of rupees five crores in 1956, LIC has grown to be a Corporation of
rupees one hundred crore. The assets have grown to rupees 20,31,116.08 crore and life fund
to rupees 18,24,194.95 crore in 2015. Thus, LIC is the premier global insurance company. The
agents are mainly responsible for this enviable achievement of LIC over the years. This

5
agency system has been taken as a global model. Other companies have taken up this
system all over the world.
Therefore, a suitable legislation is urgently required to provide for general welfare of
persons working as agents in the insurance sector particularly in LIC.
Hence this Bill.
NEW D ELHI; A. SAMPATH
February 11, 2016.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Life Insurance Agents Welfare Fund
and a Board to administer the Fund. Clause 7 provides that Workmen's Compensation Act,
1923, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Maternity Benefit
Act, 1961, the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 and the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, shall apply
to life insurance agents. As such, the benefits available under this Acts would be available to
life insurance agents. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one
hundred crore per annum will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 11of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of a Life Insurance Agents Fund for the Welfare of life
insurance agents and for matter connected therewith.
————
(Dr. A. Sampath, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4325LS(S3)—03-03-2016.