     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 61 of 2021
THE VICTIMS OF FLOODS CAUSED BY HEA VY RAINS,
CYCLONES AND OTHER REASONS (REHABILITA TION
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2021
By
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and rehabilitation of victims of floods which
may be caused by heavy rains, cloudbursts, cyclones, breached bunds
of dams, reservoirs and other reasons by making various
provisions through a statutory board at national level
which may also suggest measures to be taken by the
Central and the State Governments to control
floods and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Floods caused by Heavy Rains,
Cyclones and Other Reasons (Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title, extent
and commence-
ment.5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State, and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) “Board” means the National Board for Rehabilitation and Welfare of Flood
Victims established under section 3; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within a
period of sixty days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification
in the Official Gazette, establish for the purposes of this Act a Board to be known
as the National Board for Rehabilitation and Welfare of Flood Victims for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose
of properties, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the
said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Board shall be at Deogarh in the State of
Jharkhand and its regional offices shall be located in the capital of each State
and Union territory.
(4) The Board shall consist of:—
(i)  a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson and six other members to be
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(ii)  not more than one representative from the each State and Union territory
to be nominated by the respective State Government and Union territory
Administration.
(5) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of
officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Board.
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other
members, officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(7) The Board shall comply with such directions as may, from time to
time, be given to it by the Central Government.
(8) The Board shall meet at such place and observe such rules of procedure
in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings in the manner as may be
prescribed.
4. (1) The Board shall discharge such functions as may be necessary for the
protection and rehabilitation of victims of floods caused by heavy rains, cloudbursts,
cyclones, breached bunds of dams and reservoirs.
   (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in
sub-section (1), the Board may also provide for:—
2
Definitions.
Functions of
the Board.
Establishment
of Board
5
20
25
40
10
15
30
35

(a) making a detailed study and analysis of floods caused in the past in the
different regions and areas of the country and identify areas in every State and Union
territory which are prone to floods;
(b) making provision for accelerated water drainage system in the residential
areas prone to floods in particular which are near the rivers or the sea, as the case
may be;
(c) suggesting policy with regard to construction of houses and commercial
establishments near the rivers and beaches;
(d) making provision for providing permanent shelters capable of withstanding
the severity and intensity of flood waters to the inhabitants of identified floodprone
areas;
(e) steps to be taken for plantation of trees and shurbs as afforestation measure
in and around floodprone areas and in particular near the rivers and hilly areas where
landslides are caused by floods or heavy rain to mitigate the gravity of floods and
cloudbursts;
(f) installing flood forecasting systems to alert the persons of floodprone areas;
(g) making provision of food, drinking water and other necessities in flood-
affected areas during floods in such manner as may be prescribed;
(h) making provision for boats and other rescue materials for the rescue of
persons in flooded areas;
(i) making recommendations to the Central Government for minimizing the
loss of lives and properties in flood affected and flood prone areas;
(j) keeping perpetual surveillance, carrying out inspections and monitoring
rescue operations during the floods.
5. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the
recommendations of the Board.
6. Notwithstanding anything in this Act or any other law for the time being in
force, the Central Government shall pay compensation of,—
 (i)   rupees ten lakh to the nearest kin of a person who has lost his life in flood;
 (ii)  rupee five lakh in case of a serious injury to a person affected by flood.
7. (1) The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time, as may be
prescribed, its annual report, giving a true and full account of its activities during the
previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid before
each House of Parliament.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
Parliament by law in this behalf provide to the Board requisite funds every year
for the effective implementation of this Act.
3
Appropriate
Government to
implement
recommen-
dations of the Board.
Compensation
in case of
death or
serious injury
during flood.
Annual Report.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

.
4
9. This Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force dealing with the subject matter of this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In several parts of our vast nation floods are a regular phenomenon cause by
mother nature fury every year. Even this year floods have wreaked havoc in various
States such as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Assam and Odisha. It has not spared even desert
States such as Gujarat and Rajasthan. Bihar, Assam and eastern Uttar Pradesh which
face the fury of floods every year caused by rivers emanating from Nepal and China.
Apart from the fury of mother nature humans too have contributed immensely in the
matter. Pollutted environment, unplanned and uncontrolled development in the cities
particularly those which are near the rivers and sea, ruthless destruction of jungles,
rampant use of plastic, toxic gases, chemicals, etc. lead to disruption in the weather
cycle in the country frequently culminating in the fury of floods. The floods devastate
quite a large number of villages, cities and damage properties, crops, roads and kill
human being and livestock. The agricultural land also undergoes severe soil erosion.
Due to these floods country suffers huge losses in terms of human lives, livestock,
properties, crops, etc. thereby increasing the financial burden of the Governments of
the day. At the same time persons become homeless and get displaced and face
innumerable problems including safety of their lives.
Though the Central Government and State Governments and their agencies do
their level best to provide relief to the victims of floods and their kins by making
temporary arrangements of shelter, food etc. for them, it is felt that there still is need
to have a permanent statutory body to suggest measures to control floods. As such a
National Board needs to be established to exclusively deal with natural calamity of
floods in the country.
Hence this Bill.
    NEW DELHI;                      NISHIKANT DUBEY
January 15, 2021
5

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Board for
Rehabilitation and Welfare of Flood Victims. Clause 8 makes it obligatory for the
Central Government to provide requisite funds for effective implementation of the
provisions of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India.  However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the
amount but it is estimated that an amount of one thousand crores rupees may involve
as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of five hundred crore rupees may also
involve for creating assets.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is therefore of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the protection and rehabilitation of victims of floods which may be
caused by heavy rains, cloudbursts, cyclones, breached bunds of dams,
reservoirs and other reasons by making various provisions through
a statutory board at national level which may also suggest
 measures to be taken by the Central and the State
 Governments to control floods and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Dr . Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)