AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 61 of 2000.

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Dr. (Cot.) Duan Ram छह, MP.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title.

2. After article 3711, the following article shall be inserted, namely:— Insertion of
article

“371J. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, the
President shall, within three months from coming into force of this Constitution _Provisi
(Amendment) Act, 2000, by an order, provide for the establishment of a separate . With respect

Development Board with respect to the State of Himachal pees Kroner

Pradesh,


2

(2) The Development Board established under clause (1) shall consist of _

( the Chairman of the Union Planning Commission;

(ii) the Union Finance Minister;

ii) the Chief Minister of Himachal Pradesh;

(iv) the Finance Minister of Himachal Pradesh; ‘ 5

() the Chairman of the Planning Board of Himachal Pradesh; and

(vi) Members of Parliament representing Himachal Pradesh.

(3) The Chairman of the Union Planning Commission shall act as the Chairman of
the Development Board.

(4) It shall be the responsibility ofthe Development Boatd to draw up and execute 10
Plans, schemes and projects in the State of Himachal Pradesh for,

(i) providing adequate infrastructure facilities like drinking water. roads,
sanitation and communication facilities;

(ii) development of tribal areas with special attention to basic facilities;

(iii) generating adequate employment opportunities; 15
(iv) special development of hilly and inaccessible areas:

(ऐ providing adequate rail transport facilities;

(vi) providing for generating adequate electricity;

(vii) improvement and romotion of tourism; and

(ii) taking such steps as it may deem necessary for overall development of 20
the State.

(6) The Development Board shall submit an annual report to the Union every year, |
(7) The Union shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.

Himachal Pradesh consists of small and big hills. It is a backward State and awfully
lacks basic facilities. There are many tribal areas which have not yet seen civilisation,
There is no adequate infrastructure facilities such as roads, electricity, rail, communication
etc. in the State. With the existing funds in the State, it will not be Possible to create
infrastructure facilities and employment opportunities,

Therefore, it is proposed that the Central Government should make available adequate
funds for development of the State. A special provision in the Constitution will hasten this
Process. It is accordingly proposed to amend the constitution.

New Det; DHANIRAM SHANDIL
March 14, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

‘The Bill provides for making available adequate funds for the | of
Himachal Pradesh. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the _
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees two thousand crore may be involved.

A non-recuring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore may also be
involved. This expenditure will be involved for some years till adequate facilities have

been created in the State.


_ LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Dr (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil, M.P)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—4550LS—31-03-2000,