·15 of 1953 S 
10 
IS 
• 
Bill No. 6201 1983 
THE COIR INDUSTRY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1963 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Coir Industry Act. 1953. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Coir Industry (Amendment) Act, Shoz1 
1963. tiu .. 
2. For the long title to the Coir Industry Act, 1953 (hereinafter Amend-
referred to as the principal Act), the following long title shall be ment of 
substituted, namely: _ the 10111 title. 
"An Act to provide for the establishment of a Board for the 
development of the Coir Industry and for that purpose to levy 
a customs duty on coir fibre, COif yam and coir products exported 
from India and for matters connected therewith.". 
3. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after Amend. 
clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- ment of 
section 10. 
(ff) setting up or assisting in the setting up of factories 
for the production of eoir products with the aid of power;" 
.t. After section 14 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be inserted, namely:-
section . InsertIon 
of new 
section 
ItA. 
ClIM. The Central Government may, after due .ppropria- Grantaby 
tin made by ParUament by law in this behaH, pay to the Board theCentra& 
f th "_6_1 Govem. by way of grants, lueh sums ~ money as e _IS", Govern- ment to 
.. ent IIUI)' eonsider nee81S817. • tne Board. 
t., ' 
~: " 
'. 
' .. ~ 
,1', 
.,1 

Substitu· 
tion of 
new ac· 
tion for 
HCUQI1l'f. 
~te 
and Audlt 
5. In section 15 of the principal Act, in lub-section (1), after 
clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted;-namely:-
"(c) any sum of money that may be paid by way of grant. 
under section 14A. ... 
I. For section 17 of the principal Act, the foUowinl section shall , 
be substituted, namely:-
"17. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other 
reiew:nt records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, 
iDeluding the prOfIt and loss acoount and, th&: balance') s1aMt in 
such fonn as may be prescribed by the Central Government 10 
in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shan be audited by the Com 
ph'Oller and Auditor-General of Iildla at such intervals as may 
be prescribed . by him and any expenditure ineurred 1D CODn~ I, 
tiOl1' with such audit shall be payable by the, Board tQ th~ Comp-
troller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The-Comptroller and Auditor-General of'India- amt any 
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of' ttte~ 
accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges 30 
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General has in connection with the audit of G.ov-
emment accounts, and in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, a~counts, connected vouchers 
and other documents and papers and to inSj)8Ct any of the offices 35 
of the Board. 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certifted by the'Comptroller' 
and Auditor-General of India ~r any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf together with the audit report. tliereon shall 
be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Gov .. 30' 
emmmt shall cause the same- to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.". 
A!Dend~ '1. In section 26 of the principal Act, for sub-seetion (3), the 
mat.- of. following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "' 
..u.s. .. 
II (B) , Every rulema<ie' by the ClmtratGfMlnm:leDt 'U!1tertbll 3$ 
seetian' shall be-laid as 101m as' may be after' ~t Ii made-, belere 
each HO\lSe of ParliJment whilett t8'ln'l9IIioft~ft»ra~total;pM'tod 

3· 
of thirty .days .which may. be comprised. in one session or ill two 
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the ses-
«on tnwhich . it is 80 laid or the·successive MlSions afo1'tl881d, 
'both Houses agree in making .any modification in the rule .or 
both H01IIIeS agree that the rule should not.be .made, the . .rule 
shall 'thereafter have eftect only iii such ·modifted-form or.be of 
no· effect, as the ·case may be; so, however, that any.such modi-
ftaation 'or 1lDJ1ulment ·shall be without prejudice to . the ,valldfty 
·ofanything previously done under that rule.". 

STATEMENT Or' OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Coir Industry Act, 1963 (No. 45 of 1953) came into force from 
the 9th February, 1954, providing for the control by the Union of 
the Coir Industry and for that purpose to establish a Coir Board and 
levy a customs duty on coir fibre, coir yarn and coir products ex-
ported from India. Section 14 of the Act restricts payments to the 
Board to not more than the net proceeds of the customs duty. It 
has been found from experience that the net proceeds .are not ade-
quate for meeting the expenses of the Board and the cost of the 
various measures undertaken !by it for the development of the coil 
industry. It is, therefore, considered necessary to provide ad-
ditional monies to the Board to finance its activities. It is also neces- . 
sary to provide that such additional monies are also credited to the 
Coir Fund to which the net proceeds of the customs duty are credited 
and from which the expenses of the Board are met. There is no 
specific provision in the Act authorising the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any person appointed by him to audit the. 
accounts of the Board. Although the accounts of the Board are 
audited by the Accountant-General, Kerala on behalf of the Com-
ptroller and Auditor-General, this has to be specifically provided for 
in section 17 of the Act. In pursuance of the Government's decision 
to partially mechanise the coir matting sector, the Coir Board pro-
poses to set up a factory for manufacture of coir matting by mech-
anised process and to enable the Coir Board to undertake such pro-
duction activities, provision has to be specifically made for the pur-
pose in the functions of the Board. 
The present Bill is intended to give effect to the above objects. 
MANUBHAI SHAH. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 11th DecembeT, 1963. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
(COW of letter No. 57 (2)-J It C/58, dated the 17th December, 1963 
from Shri Ma.nubha.i Sha.h, Mini8teT of Internati.on4l Tra.de to the 
Secreta:rll, Lok Sa.bha.) 
The President having been informed of the Coir Industry (Amend-
ment) Bill, 1963, recommends, under article 117 (1) and (3) of the 
Constitution of India, the introduction and cQl'HIideration of the Bill In 
the Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Coir Board to undertake the 
establishment of mechanised factories for the manufacture of coir 
products. The Board haa a proposal for the establishment of one 
such factory for the manufacture of coir matting and the scheme is 
expected to cost about Rs. 10 lakhs. 
2. Clause " of the Bill provides for grants to be made by the 
Central Government to the Board, since it has been found from ex-
perience that the funds available to the Board are not adequate to 
meet its expenses. These additional grants by the Central Govern-
ment are intended to ensure that the activities of the Coir Board do 
not receive a set-back. The exact amount which may be paid by 
way of grants will vary from year to year, depending upon the level 
of the actual proceeds of the customs duty and the necessary amount 
required by the Board to meet its expenses, taking into account 
the proposed enlarged scope of its activities. It is, therefore, not 
possible to determine the exact amount that is likely to be incurred 
in this behalf. No such expenditure will, however, be incurred 
without d1lle appro~riation made by Parliament by law in this behaH. 

ExftAcm, FROM' TIlE Com INDt71'l'RY Aer, 1_ 
(45 OF 1853). 
An Act 'to provide for the control by the Union of :theCoir In-
'dumy ;aDd for' that pu1'p08e to establish a Coir 'Boud 'and lwy 
a' customs duty on'coir ftbre, coir yam and coir products '!U-
ported -from lDdia . 
• • • • • 
AccOWlts n. (1) The Board shall cause accounts to be kept of all money. 
and Audit. received and expended by it . 
Power of 
Central 
Govern. 
mentto 
make 
rul •. 
. (2) The accounts &hall be audited every year by .audUorsBp-
pointed in this behaH by the Central Government .and such auditors 
shall :ditlaUow 'every item, . which .in their .opinion is not ,auihori&ed 
by this Act or any rule made or direction iSlUed thereunder. . 
(3) The Board may, within three months from the date of com-
munication to it of the disallowance of any item, as aforesaid, ap-
peal against such disallowance k> the Central Government whose 
decision shall be final. 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or by any other person appointed by him 
in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be for-
warded annually to the Central Government, and that Government 
shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament . 
• • • • • 
26. (1) • • • • 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall as soon as they are made 
be laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BIll 
further to amend the Coir Industry Act, 1953. 
(Shri Manubhai Shah, 
Minister of Internationa 
Tratk.) 