8m No. 6:1 of 1962 
THE CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE AND 
MATRIMONIAL CAUSES BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoK ~AWIA 
ON 22ND JUNE, 1962) 

THE CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE AND MA'1'RIMONIAi. cAUSES 
BILL, 1962 
CLAUSES 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
CONDITIONS FOR CHRISTIAN MAlUUAGB 
3. Marriages between Christians to be solemnized accordiD, 
to Act. 
4. Conditions of marriage. 
5. Consent of guardian in marriage. 
CHAPTER III 
SOLEMNIZATION OF CHRISTIAN MAJOUAG18 
A.-Persons authorised to solemnize marriage. 
6. Who may solemnize marriages. 
7. Recognised Churches. 
8. Grant of licences to Ministers of Church to sOlemntze 
marriages. 
9. Marriage Registrars in India. 
10. Marriage Registrars outside India. 
B.-Marriages before Ministers of recognised Churches 
11. Solemnization of marriages by Ministers of recognised 
Churches. 
C.-Marriages before licensed Ministers and Marriage Registrars 
12. Notice of intended marriage to licensed Ministers, etc., end 
Marriage Notice Book. 
13. Procedure to be followed by licensed Minister on receipt of 
notice. 
14. Procedure to be followed by Marriaae Registrars on receipt 
of notice. 
lOii (B) LS-l. 

CLA".. 
15. Issue of certificate of notice. 
16. Obj.ection to certificate. 
17. Application to distrid court against decision on objection. 
18. Procedure on receipt of objection by Marriage Registrar 
abroad. 
19. Certificate not to be issued and marriage not to be solemnized 
in certain cases. 
20. Solemnization of marriage by licensed Minister. 
21. Solemnization of marriage by Marriage Registrar. 
22. Certi1lcate void: if marriage not solemnized within three 
months. 
D.-Regtsmotion. 01 marriage. 
23. Certificate of marriage and registration. 
CHAPTER IV 
RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS 
24. Restitution. 
CHAPTER V 
JUDICIAL SEPARATION 
25. Judioilll separation. 
26. Eftect of judicial separation on duty to cohabit. 
CJiAPTER VI 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE 
27. Void marriages. 
28. Voidable marriages. 
29. Legitimacy of children of certain void and voidable 
marriages. 
CHAPTER VII 
DJ.voacs 
A.-Grouncb of divO'rce· 
10; Grounds of divorce. 
1-1. Diwree after decree for judiCial separation. 
32. No petition for divorce to be presented within three yean 
oJ mudage. 
B.-Re-mm-riage after dworce 
... Re-marda,e of divorced persons. 

CLAUBJaI 
Ut 
CHAPTER VIn 
JURISDICTION AND PRotEDUU 
34. Relief to be given to Christians only. 
35. Jurisdiction of Indian Courts. 
36. Court to which petition to be made. 
37. Contents and verification of petitions. 
38. Application of Code of Civil Procedure. 
39. Duty of Court before passing decree. 
40. Adulterer or adulteress to be a co-respondent. 
41. Relief to respondent in case of opposition to petition for 
divorce on certain grounds. 
42. Decree nisi for divorce. 
43. Damages from adulterer or adulteress. 
44. Maintenance pendente lite and expenses of proceedings. 
45. Permanent alimony and maintenance. 
46. Disposal of property. 
47. Custody of children. 
48. Proceedings may be in camera and may not be pubUahed. 
49. Appeals from decrees and orders. 
50. Enforcement of decrees and orders. 
CHAPTER IX 
PENALTIES 
51. Punishment of bigamy. 
52. Punishment for contravention of certain other eondftlolll 
for marriage. 
53. Penalty for false oath. declaration, notice or eertlft.rete for 
procuring marriage. 
54. False personation by person objecting to marriage. 
55. Solemnizing marriage without due authority. 
56. Penalty for not deciding objections within prescribed 
period or refusal to solemnize marriage. 
57. Penalty for wrongful action of Marriage Registrar or Minis. 
ter, etc. 
58. Destroying or falsifying Marriage Certificate Books. 
59. Penalty for publishing proc~ings held in camera. 
60. Limitation for prosecutiolls. 

CLAus .. 
tv 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
61. Liability for frivolous objections. 
62. Savings regarding irregularities. 
83. Correction of errors. 
64. Solemnization of marriages by Ministers of Church in 
places sanctioned by custom or usage. 
85. Marriage Registrars to be deemed to be public servants. 
18. Inspection of Marriage Notice Book. 
87. Inspection of Marriage Certificate Book. 
68. Certified copy to be evidence. 
69. Language of notices and declarations. 
70. MInisters of recognised Churches not compelled to solemnize 
marriages contrary to the rules of the Church. 
'71. Powers of Marriage Registrars in respect of inquiries. 
72. Power to make rules. 
73. Rules by the High Court. 
74. Savings regarding marriages solemnized before the Act. 
75. Savings for other marriages. 
76. Repeal. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.-P,lOHIBITED RELATIONSHIP. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.-FoRM OF NOTICE OF INTENDED 
MARRIAGE. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.-FoRM OF CERTIFICATE OF NOTICE. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.-Dr.cLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE 
BRIDEGROOM-BRIDE. 
THE FIFTH SC.HEDULE.-FoRM OF CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAG& 
--

• 
8m No. 62 of 1962. 
THE CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE AND MATRIMONIAL 
CAUSES BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to amend and codify the law relating to marriage and matrimoniai 
causes among Christians. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Christian Marriage and Matri- Shorttitle. 
monial Causes Act, 1962. . := 
(2) It extends to the Whole of India except the State of Jammu menl. 
and Kashmir, and applies also to Christians domiciled in the terri-
tories to which this Act extends who are outside the said terri-
10 tories. 
IS 
(3) Section 7 shall come into force at once, and the remaining 
provisions of this Act shall come into force on such date as the 
Cent~al Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoInt. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Christian" means Ea person professing the 
religion; 
Christian 
(b) "church building" includes any chapel or other build-
ing generally used for public Christian worship; 
Definitions, 

2 
(c) "desertion" means the withdrawal by one spouse, with· 
out reasonable cause and without the consent or against the wish 
of the other spouse, from cohabitation with the other spouse 
with the intention of bringing cohabitation permanently to an 
end; and its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall S 
be construed accordingly; 
(d) "diplomatic officer" means an ambassador, envoy, minis-
ter, charge d' aifaires, high commissioner, commissioner or other 
diplomatic representative, or a counsellor or secretary of an 
embassy, legation or high commission; 10 
(e) "district", in relation to a Marriage Registrar, means 
the area for which he is appointed as such under this Act; 
(1) "district court" means, in any area for which there is a 
city civil court, that court, and. in any other area, the principal 
civil court of original jurisdiction, and includes any other civil IS 
court which may be specified by the State Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in 
respect of the matters dealt with in this Act; 
(g) "India" means the territories to which this Act ex. 
~~; ~ 
(h) "licensed Minister" means a Minister of Church licensed 
under section 8 to solemnize marriages under this Act; 
(i) "Marriage Registrar" means a Marriage Registrar ap-
pointed under section 9 or section 10; 
(;) "Minister of a recognised Church" means a Minister of 25 
any Church which is a recognised CJ;u1rch within the meaning 
of this Act; 
(k) "minor" means a person who has not completed the age 
of eighteen years; 
(1) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 30 
Act; 
(m) "prohibited relationship"-a man and any of the persons 
mentioned in Part I of the First Schedule, and a woman and any 
of the persons mentioned in Part II of the said Schedule, are 
within prohibited relationship; 35 
Explanation..-"Relationship" includes,-
(a) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by 
full blood; 
(b) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate; 
and all terms of relationship in this Act shall be construed 40 
accordingly; 
• 

5 
10 
·t 
<'R> "recGfIJ111ec:\ Church" means-
(a) the Church of Rome, that is to say, the Church; 
which regards the Pope of Rome as its spiritual head; 
(b) the Church of India, Burma and Ceylon; 
(c) the Church of Scotland as by law established; 
(d) any other Church declared to be a recogn.is,~d 
Churcl;t ~der section 7; 
(0) "Registrar-General" means-
(i) a Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages 
appointed under the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registra-
tion Act, 1886, and 
(ii) in relation to any territories to which that Act does 
not extend, an officer performing the functions of a Regis-
trar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages under any 
corresponding law in force in those territories; 
(p) "rule", in any expression denoting rules of any Church. 
includes a rite, ceremony or custom of that Church. 
CHAPTER II 
CONDITIONS FOR CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE 
20 3. Every marriage between persons both of whom are Christians MarrIaJet 
shall be solemnizea in accordance with the provisions of this Act, ~.I 
unless the same is solemnized under the provisions of the Special to be lolell'-
Marriage Act, 1954. :, ~~­
Act. 
4. A marriage may be solemnized between any two Christians if <fnditi~n. 
25 the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: _ 0 mama~e. 
(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the 
marriage; 
<ii) the parties are not within prohibited relationship, 
unless the custom governing each of them permits of a marriage 
30 between the two; 
(iii) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic at the time of the 
. marriage; 
(tv) the brid#poom has completed the age of eighteen years 
and the bride the age of fifteen years at the time of the 
35 marriage; 

CoaleDtof 
prdlanin 
mar.ricc. 
• 
(v) where the bride has not completed the age of eighteen 
years, the consent in writing of her guardien in marriage or the 
permission of thp. district court under sub-section (4) of 
section 5, has been obtained for the marriage; and 
(vi) where the marriage is solemnized outside India, both S 
parties are domiciled in India. 
5. (1) Whenever the consent of a guardian in marriage is neces-
sary for a bride under this Act, the persons entitled to give such 
consent shall be the following in the order specified hereunder, 
namely:- 10 
• (a) the father; 
(b) the mother; 
(c) the paternal ~andfather; 
(d) the paternal grandmothtT:r; 
(e) the brother by full blood; as between brothers, the elder IS 
being preferred; 
(f) the brother by half blood; as between brothers by halt 
blood, the elder being preferred: 
Provided that the bride is living with him and is being 
brought up by him; 20 
(g) the paternal uncle by full blood; ~ between paternal 
uncles, the elder being preferred; 
(h) the maternal grandfather; , 
(i) the maternal grandmother; 
(j) the maternal uncle by full blood; as between maternal 2S 
uncles, the elder being preferred: 
Provided that the bride is living with him and is being 
brought up by him. 
(2) No person shall be entitled to act as 6 guardian in marriage 
under sub-section (1) unless such person has himself completed. the 30 
age of twenty-one years. 
(3) Where any person entitled to be the guardian in marrfnge 
under sub-sectiOB (1) refuses, or is for ~y cause unable or unfit, to 
act as such, the person next in order shall be entitled tn be the 
lUardlan. 

, 
(f> Where no INch person as is referred to In aub-secttOD. d, 
.. Uving and willing and able and fit to act as guardian In marrla.., 
or where any guardian in ~rriage, without just cause, withholct. 
his consent to the marriage, the permission of the district court shall 
s be necessary for the marriage of the bride . 
. (5) The permission of the district court for the marriage of U. 
bride under sub-section (4) may be applied for by a petition madie 
by the parties to the intended marriage. 
(6) Where such a petition is made. the district court shail 
10 examine the allegations of the petition in Q summary manner aDd 
shall decide the matter after giving a reasonable opportunity to dut 
parties to be heard. 
(7) The decision of the district court granting or refusing pit-
mission under sub-section (4) shall be final. 
IS (8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where any person has been appointed or declared by a court to be 
the guardian of the person of the bride, he alone shall be entitled to 
act as guardian in marriage. 
(9) Nothing in this section shall affect the jurisdiction of a court 
20 to prohibit by injunction an intended marriage if, in the interests of 
the bride for whose marriage consent is required, the court thinb it 
necessary to do so. 
CHAPTER III 
SOLEMNIZATION or CHRISTIAN MARRIAGES 
A.-Persons authOTised to solemnize marriage. 
e. Marriages may be solemnized under this Ac~ Who ... , IOlcmn:. 
(a) by any Minister of a recognised Church; awrilp'. 
(b) by any Minister of Church licensed under section 8 to 
solemnize marriages; 
30 (c) by, or in the . presence of, a Marriage Registrar appoint-
ed under section 9 or section 10. 
7. (1) For the purpose of advising the Central Government as res- ~ 
peets Churches to be declared as recognised Churches within the 
meaning of sub-clause (d) of clause (n) of section 2, the Central Gov-
35 ernment shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Com-
mittee consisting of such number of Christians, not exceeding five, 
as the Central Government may think fit to appoint, and it shall be 
the duty of the Committee to examine applications by Churches for 
being declared to be recognised Churches and to make recommeDda-
40 tions to the Central Government thereon. 
10511 (B) LS-2 

• 
(2) In making any recommendation to the Central Government 
under sub-section (1), the Committee shall have regard to the 
following, among other metters, namely:-
(i) whether the Church is properly organised; 
(ii) whether the Church is registered under any lAw for 5 
the time being in force relating to the registration of socleU. 
in general or religious societies in particular; 
(iii) whether the Church has well-established rules for the 
solemnization of marriages; 
(iv) whether the Church has proper places of worship; 10 
(v) whether, according to the rules of the Church, clergy-
men are ordinerily ordained to solemnize marriages; 
(vi) whether the strength or standing of the Church is suell 
as to justify recognition being accorded thereto. 
(3) The Central Government, after taking into consideration the JS 
recommendations made by the Committee under this section, ma7. 
by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any Church to be • 
recognised Church for the purposes of this Act, and eny such notift· 
cation may also declare a group of Churches belonging to any orga-
nisation or denomination to be recognised Churches. 20 
urllDt of 8. The State Government may, by notification in the Oftlclal 
lMi~cetl to f Gazette, grant licences to Ministers of Church to solemnize marriage. 11-.11 erl 0 
Church to within the whole or eny part of the State. 
lolc:rnnize 
marriages. 
Marri~ie 9. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
llea.iltran in Gazette, appoint any person to be a Marriage Registrar for any 25 
1Dclia. district. 
(2) Where there are more Marriage Registrars than one in any 
district, the Stnte Government shall appoint one of them to be the 
Senior Marriage Registrar. • 
(3) Where there is only one Marriage Registrar in a district, and 30 
such Registrar is absent from the district or is ill or his otftce is tem-
porarily vacant, any person authorised in this behalf by the State 
Government, by general oz' speciel order, shall act as, and be, the 
Marriage Registrar of the district during such absence, illness or 
temporary vacancy. 3S 
Mani... 10. For the purposes of this Act in its application to Christiana 
=~1::!l .. domiciled in India who arp. outside India, the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gpzette,-
(a) in the case of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, appoint 
such officers of the Central Government as it may think fit to be 40 
the Marriage Registrar. lor the State or any pert thereof; and 

, 
(b) in the cue of any other country, place or area, appoint 
IUCh diplomatic or consular officers as it may think fit to be the 
Marriage Registrars for the country, pIece or area. 
B.-Marriages before Ministers of recognised Churches 
5 11. (1) Marriages may be solemnized under this Act by any ~oIemfi •• 
Minister of a recognized Church according to the rules of the Church ~_ a::-
of which he is a Minister and in the presence of at least two wit- Miniltc,rlct°C recognle 
nesses. CburcAc" 
(2) No such marriage shall be solemnized-
10 (a) if the Minister has reason to believe that the solemni-
zation of the intended marriage would be contrary to the provi-
sions of section 4; or 
(b) if any other lawful impediment be shown to the satis-
faction of the Minister why such marriage should nl)f; be 
IS solemnized; or 
(c) unless a solemn declaration has been made before the 
Minister in the form specified in the Fourth Schedule-
(i) by the bridegroom, and 
(ii) by the bride, or, if she is a minor for whose mar-
20 riage the consent of the guardian is required under this Act, 
by the guardian on behalf of the bride. 
C.-Marriages be/Me licensed Ministers and Marriage Registrar . ., 
12. (1) When a marriage is intended to be solemnized qy a Notice .f 
licensed Minister or by or in the presence of a Marriage Registrar, inte~ed 
2S the parties to the rrmrriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the n::::r te 
form specified in the Second Schedule- Ministcrs,cS etc., an 
30 
(a) to the licensed Minister whom they desire to solemnize ~ti:seBooL 
the marriage, or 
(b) to the Marriage Registrar of the district in which at 
least one of the parties to the marriage has renided for a period 
of thirty days immediately preceding the date on which such 
notice is given. 
(2) Where the bride M; a minor for whose marriage the consent 
of the guardian is required under this Act, the notice to be given 
3S under sub-section (1) shall be signed on behalf of the bride by the 
guardian. 
(3) The licensed Minister or the Marriage Registrar, as the case 
~a1 b" shall keep all I\otices ,iven under sub-section (1) with th' 

I 
records of his oOlce and shall also forthwith enter a true copy 01 
every such notice in a book prescribed for that purpose, to be called 
the Marriage Notice Book. 
t:=J9 13. Where a notice under section 12 is given to a licensed Minister, 
n,,::-naed he shall proceed as follows: - , 
te&' on 
receipt of 
QOtklC. 
(a) If the parties intending marriage desire it to be solem-
Il1zed in a partioular church building, and if the licensed Minister 
be entitled to officiate therein, he shall cause the notice to be 
published by affixing a copy thereof to some conspicuous part of 
such church building; 10 
(b) if he is not entitled to oft\ciate as a Minister in such 
church building, he sha1l, notwithstanding anything contained in 
IUb-section (3) of section 12, at his option, either return the 
notice to the person who delivered it to him, or deliver it to some 
other licensed Minister entitled to oftlciate therein, who shall IS 
thereupon act as if the notice were given by the parties to him 
under section 12j 
(c) if it is intended that the marriage shall be solemnized in 
a private building, the licensed Minister, on receiving the notice 
under section 12, sha1l forward a copy thereof to the Marriaae 20 
Registrar of the district, who shall cause it to be published by 
aftlxing it to some c(mSpiCUoUB place in his own cftlcej 
(d) if the bride intending marriage is a minor, the licensed 
Minister, on receiving the notice under section 12 shall, unless 
within twenty-four hours after its receipt h~ returns the same 25 
under clause (b), send by post or otherwise a copy of such notice 
to the Marriage Registrar of the district, or, if there be more 
than one Marriage Registrar of the district, to the Senior Marri-
age Registrar, and the Marriage Registrar or Senior Marriage 
Registrar, as. the case may be, on receiving any such copy, shall 30 
aftlx it to some conspicuous place in his own oftice, and the latter 
eall further cause a copy of the said notice to be sent to each of 
the other Marriage Registrars in the same district, who shall 
likewise publish the same in the manner above directed. 
Procedure to 1" Where the notice under section 12 is given to a Marriage Regls- 35 
~ "MoDc.weci trar, he shall proceed as follows:-,.,. artille 
.e"ltIa~ ctn (a) the Marriage Registrar shall cause the notice to be pub-. 
~:-.:. of limed by aftixing a copy thereof to some conspicuous place In his 
own ofBce; 
(b) if the bride is a minor, the Marriage Registrar shall, 40. 
within twenty-four hours after receiving the notice under sec-
... ~ .-d, by post or otherwise, • c;Dp)' of 1be notice to eaoIa 

• -
of the other Marriage Registrars, if any, in the same district, who 
.hall atftx the copy to some conspicuous place in his own ofllce: 
(c) jf either of the parties intending marriage is not perma-
nently residing within the local limits of the district of the 
S Marriage Registrar, the Marriage Registrar shall alsu cause a 
copy of such notice to be transmitted to the Marriage Registrar 
of the district within whose limits such party is permanently 
residing, and that Marriage Registrar shan thereupon causJ! a 
copy .thereof to be affixed to some conspicuous place in his own 
10 office. 
15. (1) Any licensed Minister or Marriage Registrar consenting or J ... of 
intending to solemnize any marriage under this Act shaU, on being ce~te of 
required so to do by or on behalf of either of the persons by whom the DO ceo 
notice was given, issue under his hand a certificate of notice in the 
IS form specified in the Third Schedule. . 
2<:' 
(2) No such certificate shall be issued-
(a) until the expiration of seven days from the date of pub-
lication of the notice or where the bride is a minor, until the 
expiration of twenty-one days from the said date; and 
(b) unless a solemn declaration has been made before the 
licensed Minister or the Marriage Registrar, as the case may be, 
in the form specified in the Fourth Schedule-
(i) by the bridegroom, and 
(ii) by the bride, or, if she is a minor for whose 
marriage the consent of the guardian is required under this 
Act, by the guardian on behalf of the bride. 
11. (1) Any person may, before the expiration of seven days from Objectlo1\ te 
the date on which any notice has been published under section 13 or c:ertitlcate. 
section 14, make an objection in writing to the marriage on the 
30 ground that it would contravene one or more of the conditions speci-
fted in section 4. 
(2) If an objection is made under sub-section (1), the licensed 
Minister or the Marriage Registrar shall not issue the certificate 
under section 15 unless he has inquired into the matter of the objec-
35 tion and is satisfied that it ought not to prevent the issue of the cer-
tiftcate or the objection is withdrawn by the person making it. 
(3) The licensed. Ministef or the Marriage Registrar shall not take 
more than thirty days from the date of the objection for the purpose 
of Jnqu;ring into the matter of the objection and ardvins at a elect. 
"'doD. 

10 
Applicat;ion 11. (1) If the licensed Minister or the Marriage Registrar faila 
to district t . t . . b" t . t d d . it1-: court qainst 0 a,rnve a a declSlon on an 0 lecbon 0 an In en e marriage w ,.n 
di,rllC!l' OD the period specified in sub-section (3) of section 16, or upholds such 
o ec:uon. an objection a~d refuses to issue the certificate of notice of marriage, 
either party to the intended maniage may, within a period of twenty- S 
one days from the date of such refusal, apply by petition to' the 
district court. 
(2) The district. court may examine the allegations of the peti-
tion in a summary manner, and shall decide the matter after giving 
a reasonable opportunity to the parties to be heard.' 10 
(3) The decision of the district court on such petition shall be 
final, and the licensed Minister or the Marriage Registrar shall act 
in conformity with the decision. 
Prooedare OD 18. Where an objection is made under section 18 to a Marriage 
:::e~on :: Registrar outside India in respect of an intended marriage outside IS 
Marriqe India, and the Marriage Registrar, after making such inquiry Into 
:=-r the matter as he thinks fit, entertains a doubt in respect thereof. he 
shall not solemnize the marriage but shall transmit the record to 
the Central Government with such statement respectine the matter 
as he thinks fit to make. and the Central Government. after makinlZ 20 
such inquiry into the matter and after obtaining such advice as it 
thinks fit, shall give its decision thereon in writing to the Marriage 
Registrar, who shall act in conformity with the decision of the 
Central Government. 
Certilc:ate 19. No licensed Minister or Marriage Registrar shall issue a cer- 25 
b~~c~o ~t!t tificate of notice in respect of any marriage or solemnize any mar-
DI.·liqe Dot riage under this Act-
to be IOlem-
D'zed in cer- (a) if he has reason to believe that the solemnization of the 
ta.a "... intended marriage would be contrary to the provisions of sec-
tion 4; or 30 
(b) if any other lawful impediment be shown to his l!1.ltls-
faction why such certificate should not be issued or such 
marriage should not be solemnized. 
Solemniza. ZOo Mter the issue of the certificate of notice by the licensed 
don ~f r i- Minister, the marriage may be solemnized between the persons 35 
:= Jm:~~: therein described by the licensed Minister according to such form 
or ceremony as obtains in the Church to which the licensed Minister 
belongs and in the presence of at'least two witnesses. 
~oJemruzfa. 21. (1) Mter the issue of the certificate of notice by the Marriage tlon 0 marriqe b, Registrar, the marriage may be solemnized between the persons 40 
~~=, therein descrfbecl by or In the presen~e of ~he Marria.e Rectatzv 

accordinJ to such form or ceremony as the parties think fit to adopt 
and in the presence of at least two witnessel: 
Provided that the marriage shall not be complete and binding 
on the parties unless each party says to the other in the presence of 
S the Marriage Registrar and the witnesses and in any language 
understood by the partie&-
"1, (A.B.) take thee (C.D.) to be my lawful wife (or hus-
band)". 
(2) The marriage may be IOlemnized-
10 (a) at the office of the Marriage Registrar; or 
(b) at such other place in his district and within a reason-
able distance from his office, as the parties may desire, and upon 
such conditions and the payment of such additional fees as may 
be prescribed. 
IS 22. If a marriage is not solemnized within three months after the Cerfftcat. 
date· of the certificate issued by the licensed Minister or the Mar- :':r;!,e 
riage Registrar under section 15, such certificate and all proceedings, Dot so.em-
if any, thereon shall be void, and no person shall proceed to sOlem-~:! w,thia 
nize the said marriage until a new notice has been given and the cer- montJu. 
zo tificate thereof issued in the manner provided in this Chapter. 
D.-Registration of marriages 
23. (1) When the marriage has been solemnized, the Minister of Certificate of 
a recognised Church or the licensed Minister or the Marriage ;~::.::.:I 
Registrar, as the case may be, shall enter a certificate thereof in the 
25 form specified in the Fifth Schedule in a book to be kept by him for 
that purpose and to be called the Marriage Certificate Book, and 
such certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage and 
the witnesses. 
(2) On a certitlcate being entered in the Marriage Certificate 
30 Book by the l\linister of a recognised Church or the licensed Minis-
ter or the Marriage Registrar, the certificate shan be deemed to be 
conclusive evidence of the fact that a marriage under this Act hal 
been solemnized. . 
(3) Every Minister of a recognised Church, licensed Minister or 
3S Marriage Registrar in a State shall send to the Registrar-General of 
that State, at such intervals and in such form as may be prescribed, 
a true copy of all entries made by him in the Marriage Certificate 
Book since the last of luch intervals. 

ReatitutiOD. 
JucHc'.1 
.. puatiOD. 
l' 
CHAPTER IV 
REsTITUTION OF CON.1UGAL IlIGHD 
M. (1) When either the husband or the wife haa, without rea-
sonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the other 
party may apply by petition to the district court for restitution of 5 
conjugal rights. 
(2) Nothing shall be pleaded in answer to such petition which 
would not be a ground for judicial separation or for nullity of 
marriage or for divorce. 
(3) The court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statement. 10 
made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why a decree 
of restitution of conjugal rights should not be granted, may decree 
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly. 
CHAPTER V 
JUDICIAL SEPARATION IS 
25. Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or after 
the commencement of this Act. may present a pe~itiOD praying for a 
decree for judicial separation on any of the grounds specified in 
section 30. 
~ect r Z6. (1) Where a decree for judicial separation has been passed. it 20 
~':.t~': o~ shall no longer be obligatory for the petitioner to cohabit with the 
duty t!3 respondent. cohabit. 
(2) The court may, on the application by petition of either party 
and on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such 
petition, rescind the decree where the parties have expressed a desire 25 
to come together and to resume cohabitation or where ~or any other 
reason the court considers it just and reasonable to rescmd the 
decree. 
CHAPTER VI 
NULLITY OF l\4AJUUAGJ: 30 
Void marri· 27. Any marriage solemnized. whether before or after the com-
.... mencement of this Act, shall be null and void and may, on a petition 
presented for the purpose, be so declared by a decree of nullity, if 
it contravenes the condition specified in clause (i) or clause (ii) of 
section 4. 3S 
=-::.. ZS. (1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the com-
mencement of this Act, shall be voidable and may be annulled by 
a decree of nullity on any of the following grounds, namely:-
(a) that the marriage is in contravention of the condition 
specified in clause (iii) of section 4; or 40 
(b) that the respondent was impotent at the time of the 
marriage and continued to be so till the institution of the pro-
eeedJn,; or 

:5 
1J 
(e) that the CODJellt of the petitioner, or where ,the.consent 
. ef the guanlian in marriage of the petitioner is required. JlDder 
clause C,,) of section ·4, the consent of, 8uch . IUBrdian"was. ·OD-
tained by force or fraud; or 
(d) that the respondent was at the time of the marrial. 
pregnant by some person other than the petitioner. 
(2) Any marriage solemnized after the commencement of this 
. Act shall be voidable and may be annulled by a decree of nullity 
. on any of the· followmg: grounds, namely:-
10 (a) that the marriage is in contravention of the condition 
: specified in clause (iv) of section 4; or 
(b) that the marriage of the petItioner. being the wife, is 
in contravention of the condition specified in clause (e) of 
,section 4. 
IS (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sUb-section (1), '110 
20 
30 
I 
•• 1 
35 
petition for annulling a marriage-
(a) on the ground specified in clause (e) ofsub-lectlon 
(1) shall be entertained, if-
(i) the petition is presented more than one year after 
the force had ceased to operate or, as the case maybe,. the 
fraud had been discovered; or 
ai) the petitioner has, with his or her full consent, 
lived with the other party to the marriage as husband or 
wife after the force had ceased to operate or, as the case 
may be, the fraud had been discovered; 
(b) on the ground specified in clause (d) of sub-sedlon 
(1) shall be entertained, unless the court is satisfied-
(i) that the petitioner was at the time of the marriage 
Ignorant of the fads aUeged; 
(ii) that the proceedings have been instituted, in the 
case of a marriage solemnized before· the commencement of 
this Act, within one year of such commencement and, in the 
case of a marriage solemnized after such commencement, 
within one year from the date of the marriage; and 
(iii) that marital intercourse with the consent of tbe 
petitioner has not taken place since the discovery by the 
petitioner of the existence of the grounds for 8 decree. 
10159 (B) L8--8. 

!ttI{:::: 
eCcertaia 
void and 
wid.bl. 
..m .... 
a_Dd. of 
diy.roe. 
14 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in lUb-lection (2), no 
petition for annulling a marriage under that lub-section shall be 
entertained if the petition is presented more than one year after the 
petitioner has completed the age of eighteen years. 
21. (1) Where a marriage is null and void under section 27 by 
reason of the contravention of the condition specified in clause (i) or S 
clause (ii) of section 4, any child begotten Or conceived before the 
marriage is declared to be null and void, who would have been the 
legitimate child of the parties to the marriage if the marriage had 
been valiEl, shall be deemed to be their legitimate child notwithstand- 10 
ing that the marriage i. null and void. 
(2) Where a marriage is annulled by a decree of nullity under 
Mction 28, any child begotten or conceived before the decree is made, 
who would have been the legitimate child of the parties to the 
marriage if the marriage had been dissolved instead of having been IS 
annulled by a decree of nullity, shall be deemed to be their legiti-
mate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity. 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as COD-
ferring upon any child 9f a marriage which is void or which is annul-
led by a decree of nullity any rights in or to the property of any 20 
person other than the parents in any case where, but for the passing 
of this Act, such child would have been incapable of possessing or 
acquiring any such rights by reason of his not being the legitimate 
child of his parents. 
CHAPTER VII 
DIVORCE 
A.-Grounds of divorce 
30. (1) Any marriage, solemnized whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, may, on a petition presented either by 
the husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce on the 30 
ground that the respondent-
(i) has, since the solemnization of the marriage, committed 
adultery; or 
(ii) has ceased to be a Christian by conversion to another 
religion; or 
.... (m) has been incurably of unsound mind for a continuous 35 
period of not les8 than three years immediately preceding the 
preIIeIltation of the petition: or 

11 
tlv) hal, for a period of not les8 than three years imiii. 
tii.tely preceding the presentation of the petition, been suffer .. 
. ing from a virulent and iIicurabie fOrin of leprosy; or 
(v) has, for a period of not less than three years imDie. 
s diately preceding the preseritation of the petition, been suffer-
ing from venerf'al disease iri a communicable fonn; or 
(vi) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of 
seven years or more by those persons who would naturally have 
heard of the respondent if the respondent had been alive; or 
10 (vii) has wilfully refused to consummate the marriage, 8J1cl 
the marriap:e has not therefore been consummated; or 
(viii) has failed to comply with a decree for restitution of 
conjugal rights for a period of two years or upwards after the 
passing of the decree against the respondent; or 
IS (iJ:) has deserted the petitioner for a period of at least three 
years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition; 
or 
(:r:) has, since the solemnization of the marriage, treated 
the petitioner with cruelty. 
20 (2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her 
marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground that the husband 
has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, 
sodomy or bestiality. 
31. Where in respect of any marriage, solemnized whether be- Divorce 
25 fore or after the commencement of this Act, a decree for judicial rer decree 
separation has been passed, and there has been no resumption of .:rJ~4:.1 
eohabitation as between the parties to the marriage for a period of 
two years or upwards after the passing of the decree, either party 
may, by an application in the proceeding in which the decree was 
30 passed, pray for a dissolution of the marriage by a decree of 
divarce; and the court may, on being satisfied of the truth of the state-
ments made in such application, pass a decree accordingly. 
32. (1) NotWithstanding anything contained in this Act, it shall No pctidoa 
not be competent for any court to entertain any petition for disso- for divorce 
~$ lution of a marriage by a decree of divorce under section 30, unless =d~~ 
at the date of the presentation of the petition three years have r mJ:tI 
elapsed since the date of the marriage: ... 
Provided that the court may grant leave to present a petition 
balor. the said three years have elapsed if the court thinks A' 

.. matriaae 
of divorceO. 
pcnoal. 
JuriadlctJoa 
etID4l8ia 
-..b; 
• 
'to do so on the ground that the case Is oire 6f exctij,ilorihl ;h~ip 
to the petitioner or of exceptional depraVity on the ~part of the 
respondent; btitany slichle~V'e '~Y, ih ;tlte !intere,ts of justice, be 
-revo~ed by the court at any time before~a~ec;.ee nisi of divorce is 
. passed, and where the leave is so ;revoked, the court may dismiss 5 
'the petition withoutprejudke to 'any petition which may' be 
brought after the eXpiration of the said three years upon the same 
I.or substantially the same facts as those alleged in support of the 
'petition so dismissed. 
(2) In disposing of any application under this section for l~lc' 
to present a petition for divorce before the expiration of three YW8 
from the date of 1he marriage, the court shall have regard to.' the 
interests of any children of the marriage and to the question _ wh .. 
ther there is a reasonable probability of a reconciliation between 
the parties before the expiration of the said three years. 15 ; 
B.-Re-m,«rriage after divorce 
33. Where a decree of divorce has been madA' ~lute under see- . 
tion 42 or a decree of divorce has been pas~ Wlder section 31, and 
the time for appealing has expired witJW4t allY appeal having been : 
presented or an appeal has been pres~ted but has been dismissed 10; • 
and the decree of dismissal has become final, but not sooner, either 
party to the marriage may marry again. 
CHAPTER VIII 
Jt1RlSDICTION AND PROC.EJ)IJ1lE '.-- . 
:w. Nothing contained in this Act shall authorise any court to 25 
grant any relief under Chapters IV to VII, except where-
(4) both the parties to the marriage are Christians at the 
time of the presentation of the petition; or 
(b) both the parties to the marriage were Christians at 
the time of the marriage, and at least one of the parties is a 3C 
Christian at the time of the presentation of the petition, or 
(c) the marriage was solemnized under any enactment re-
pealed hereby, and at least one of the parties is a Christian at 
the time of the presentation of the petition. 
35. Nothing contained in this Act shall authorise any court-
(a) to make any decree of dissolution of marriage, except 
where-
(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India 
at the time of the presentation of the petition; or 

· . It 
(ii) the petitioner, being the wife, was domiciled in 
India immediately before the marriage and has been resid-
ing in India for a period of not less than three years imme-
diately preceding the presentation of the petition; 
S (b) to make any decree of nullity of marriage, except 
where-
(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India 
at the time of the presentation of the petition; or 
(ii) the marriage was solemnized under this Act or 
10 under any enactment repealed hereby, and the petitioner 
is either domiciled or residing in India at the time of the 
presentation of the petition; 
(c) to grant any other relief under Chapters IV to VII, 
except where the petitioner is residing in India at the time of 
I S the presentation of the petition. 
31. (1) Every petition under sub-section (5) of section 5 shall be COlIn 
presented to the district court within the local limits of whose ordi- == t. 
nary civil jurisdictioh the bride resides. be mad •• 
(2) Every petition under section 17 shall be presented to the dis-
20 trict court within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction the licensed Minister discharges his functions or the 
oftlce of the Marriage Registrar is situate, as the case may be. 
(3) Every petition under Chapters IV to VII shall be presented 
to the district court within the local limits of wboae oJ:Ginary original 
25 civil jurisdiction-
(4) the respondent is residing at the time of the presenta-
tion of the petition, or 
(b) the marriage was solemnized, or 
(c) the husband and wife last resided together, or 
30 (d) the petitioner is residiI?-g at the time of the presenta-
tion of the petition, provided the respondent is, at that time, 
residing outside India. 
37. (1) Every petition presented under Chapters IV to VII shall Cant 
state as distinctly as the nature of the case permits the facts on .~d :~ .. 
3S which the claim to Irelief is founded and shall also state that there U~t~ i 11 ' petl IODI. 
S no co USlon between the petitioner and the other party to the 
marriage. 
(2) The statements contained in every petition under Chapters 
]V to VII shall be verified by the petitioner or some other competent 

Applicatioli 
of Code of 
Civil Pro-
c:edua. 
iii 
person in the inanner required by law for the verification of plaintii 
and may, at the hearing, be referred to as evidence. 
38. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and to 
such rules as the High Court may make in this behalf, all proceed-
ings under this Act shall be regulated, as far as may be, by the Code S 
of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
Duty of 31. (1) In any proceeding under Chapters IV to vn, whether 
;!~fore defended or not, if the court is satisfied that-
decree. (a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists and the 
petitioner is not in any way taking· advantage of his or her own 10 
wrong or disability for the purpose of such relief, and 
(b) where the ground of the petition is adultery, the peti-
tioner haa not in any manner been accessory to or connived at 
or condoned the adultery, or where the ground of the petition 
is cruelty, the petitioner has not in any manner condoned the IS 
cruelty, and 
(c) the petition is not presented or prosecuted in collusion 
with the respondent, and 
(do) there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay 
in instituting the proceeding, and . 20 
(e) there is no other legal ground why relief should not be 
granted, 
then, and in such a case, but not otherwise, the court shall decree 
such relief accordingly. ' 
(2) Before proceeding to grant any relief under Chapters IV to 25 
VII, it shall be -the duty of the court in the first instance, in every 
case where it is possible 10 to do consistently with the nature and 
circumstances of the case, to make every endeavour to bdng about 
a reconciliation between the parties. 
(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about such lO 
reconciliation, the court may, if the parties so desire or if it. thinks 
it just and proper so to do, adjourn the proceeding and refer the 
matter to any person named by the parties in this behalf or to any 
person nominated by the court if the parties fail to name any person, 
with directions to report to the court as to whether a reconciliation 35 
can be, and has been, eftected, and shall, in disposing of the prd-
ceeding, have due regard to the report. 
Adulterer er 40. (1) On a petition for divorce or judiCial separation presented 
adult8rell on the ground of adultery the petitioner shall make the alleged 
:'=t. adulterer or adultere.. a co-respondent, unin. the petitioner 11 40 

II , 
excuted by the court from so doin, on any of the followln, grOUlldl. 
namely:-
(a) that the respondent is leading the life of a prostitute, 
and that the petitioner knows of no person with whom tbe 
S adultery has been' committed: 
(b) that the name of the alleged adulterer or adulteress is 
unknown to the petitioner although the petitioner has made du·. 
p.fforts to discover it; 
(c) that the alleged a.dulterer or adulteress is dead; 
10 (d) any other ground which the court may regard as suftl-
cient in the circumstances of the case. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shaU, so far as may be, 
apply in relation to the answer of a respondent praying for divorce 
or judicial separation on the ground of adultery, as they apply in 
15 relation to a petition for divorce or judicial separation presented on 
tflat ground. 
U. If, in any proceeding for divorce Ql' judicial separation, the Rolief to .re.· 
respondent opposes the relief sought on the ground of the =deD~r 
petitioner's adultery, cruelty or desertion, the court may elve the ~poai~i~D 
20 respondent the same relief to which he or she would have been f~r~\~o':e 
entitled if he or she had presented a petition seeking su~h relief. on certain 
ground •• 
42. (1) Every decree for divorce under section 30 shall, in the Die,.. Nisi 
first instance, be a deCTee nisi, not to be made absolute until after for divorce. 
the expiration of six months from the pronouncing thereof, unless 
25 the court Axes a shorter time. 
(Z) After the pronouncing of the deCTee nisi and before the 
decree Is made absolute, any person may, by an application made in 
accordanee with such rules as may be made by the High Court in 
that behalf, show caUSe why the decree should not be made absolute 
30 by reason of the decree having been obtained by collusion or by 
reason of material facts not having been brought before the court. 
and in any such case the court may make the decree absolute, 
reverse the deCTee nisi, require further inquiry or otherwise deal 
with the case as the court thinks fit. 
35 (3) Where a decree niri has been obtained and no application for 
the decree to be made absolute has been made within six months 
from the pronouncement of the decree nisi by the party who obtain-
ed the decree, then, at any time within three months from the 
expiration of the said six months, the party against whom the decree 
40 nili hal been granted shall be at liberty to apply to the court and 
the court, on such application, may make the decree absolute, 

• 
rnenethe Acree nili, require further iDquiry or otherwise Pal 
with the case as the court thinks ftt. 
Dama,c. 41. (1) A husband or wife may, on a petition for divorce or for 
!d:i judieial separation, claim damages from.anyperson on the Mlound 
adUI~:. •. or of adultery with the wife or husband of the petitioner. S 
(2) The court may direct in what manner the damages recovered 
on any such petition are to be paid or applied, and may direct the 
whole or any part of the damages to be settled for the beneftt of the 
children, if any, of the marriage, or as a provision for the mainten- 10 
~anee of the wife, or husband. 
MaiDtcna~ce 44. Where in any proceeding under Chapters IV to VII it appears 
:t'~~ to the,court 1Ihat either the wife or the hU8band,.as .the case may be, 
.of proceed- has no inciependentincomesufticient for her or his aupport and the 
ID,.. neeeaury,upenses of the proceeding, it maY,on .the application of 
the wife or the husband, order the respondent to pay to the peti- IS 
tioner the expenses of the proceeding, and monthly .during .the 
proceeding such sum, as, having regard to the petitioner's own 
income and' the income of the respondent, may seem to the court to 
be reasonable. 
PeIIIIaIlCllt .:45. (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under Chapters IV to 2.0 
.1~y ·and VII may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent 
IIWIltcAaac:c. thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by either the wife 
or the 'hulband, as the case may be. order that the respondent shall, 
while the applicant remains unmarried, pay to the applicant for her 
or his maintenance and support such gross sum or luch monthly 2S 
or periodical sum for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant 
as. ·having·regard ·to the respondent's own income and other pro-
'perty, if any, the income .and other property cf .the applicant and 
the eon duct of ,the parties, may seem to the court to ,be just"and any 
'Iuch payment 'May ;be . secured, if nec8llary. by ,a 'chuge on .. the 30 
immovable 'property of the respondent. 
(Z) If the court is satisfied that there is a change tn the circum-
stances of either party at any time after it has made an order under 
sub-section (1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify 
or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may deem 35 
just. 
(3) If the court is satisfled that the party in whose favour an 
order has been made under this section has remarried, or, if such 
party is the wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party 
is the husband, that he has had sexual intercourse with -any· womua 40 
outside wedlock, it shall rescind the order. 

II 
046. (1) In any proceeding· under Chapter VI or Chapter VII, the Dispoul cf 
court may make such provisions in the decree as it deems just and property. 
proper with respect to any property presented, at or about the time 
of the marriage, which may celong jointly to both the husband and 
S the wife. 
(2) In any case in which the court pronounces a decree for 
divorce or nullity of marriage, the court may inquire into the 
existence of ante-nuptial or post-nuptial settlements made on the 
parties whose marriage is the subject of the decree, and may make 
10 such orders, with reference to the application of the whole or any 
part of the property so settled (whether the settlement is for the 
benefit of the children of the marriage or of the parties to the 
marriage or both), as the court thinks fit. 
(3) The court shall not make any order under sub-section (2) 
IS for the benefit of -the parents or either of them at the expense of the 
children; 
47. In any proceeding under Chapters IV to VII, the court may, ~~~~Y of 
from time to time, pass such interim orders and make such provisions D. 
in the decree as it may deem just and proper with respect to the 
2:;: custody, maintenance and education of minor children, consistently 
with their wishes, wherever possible, and may, after the decree, 
upon application by petition for the purpose, make, from time to 
time, all .such orders and provisions with rE-spect to the custody, 
maintenance and education of such children as might have been made 
25 by such decree or interim orders in case the proceeding for obtain-
ing such decree were still pending, and the court may also from time 
to time revoke, suspend or vary any such orders and provisions 
previously made. 
48. A proceeding under this Act shall be conducted in camera if Proc:eediop 
30 either party so desires or if the court so thinks fit to do, and it shall :ay be :::. 
not be lawful for any person to print or publish any matter in rela- m::'~ be 
tion to such proceeding except with the previous permission of the published. 
court. 
49. All decrees and orders made by the court in any proceeding Appeals 
35 under this Act shall be appealable as decrees of the court made in fm: drree8 
the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction and such appeal shall lie an or era. 
to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of the 
court given in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction: 
PrOvided that there shall be no appeal on the subject of costs only. 
40 50. All decrees and orders made by the court in any proceeding Enforcement 
under this Act shall be enforced in the like manner as the decrees ~d ~~ 
and orders of the court made in the exercise of its original civil 
jurisdiction for the time being are enforced. 
1059 . (B) LS-4, 

22 
CHAPTER IX 
P&NALTUS 
Punishment &1. Every person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act 
of bipmy. and who, during the lifetime of his or her wife or husband, contracts 
any other marriage shall be subject to the penalties provided in 5 
section 494 and section 495 of the Indian Penal Code for the offence .. , .r 116~. 
of marrying again during the lifetime of the husband or wife, and 
the marriage so contracted shall be void. 
PunishmeDt 52. Every person who procures a marriage of himself or herself 
~~~ to be solemnized under this Act in contravention of the conditlOD8 10 
=l~::er specified in clauses (ii) , (iv) and (v) of section" shall be punish-
for muriaae. able-
Penalty for 
false oath, 
declaration, 
notice or 
certificate for 
~ mamaae· 
PallO pers0-
nation by 
penon ob-
jectiq to 
marriqe. 
(a) in the case of a contravention of the condition speciftr 
in clause (ii) of section 4, with simple imprisonment which may 
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one 15 
thousand rupees, or with both, 
(b) in the case of a contravention of the condition Bpecifted 
in clause (iv) of section 4, with simple imprisonment which 
may extend to fifteen days, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both, and 
(c) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified 
in clause (v) of section 4, with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees. 
20 
53. Whoever, for the purpose of procuring a marriage or licence 
of marriage, intentionally,- 25 
(a) where an oath or declaration is required by thil Act, 
or by any Church according to the rules of which a marriap 1& 
intended to be solemnized, makes a false oath or declaration, 01' 
(b) where a notice or certificate is required by this Act, 
signs a false notice or certificate, 30 
lhall be punishable with imprisonment for a tenn which may extend 
to three years and shall also be liable to fine. 
54. Whoever makes an objection to the issue, by a licensed Mini&-
ter or a Marriage Registrar, of a certificate, by falsely represent-
ing himself to be a person whose consent to the marriage is required 35 
by law, knowing or believing such representation to be faIle, or not 
having reason to believe it to be true, shall be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence described in section 205 of the Indian Penal Code an~ 
allan be punishable accordin,ly. 4' .el"'. 

II. Whoever, not being authorised by section 6 to solemnize Sol~nizinl 
marriages. solemnizes or professes to solemnize under this Act a :c!~ due 
marriage between persons who are Christians, shall be punishable authority. 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and 
S shall allD be liable to fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. 
II. (1) Whoever, being a licensed Minister or a Marriage penaJty ~.r 
Regiatrar, in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (3) of ~~~ctfo~~DJ 
section 16. wilfully or without just cause takes more than thirty within'b d 
days from the date of any objection to an intended marriage for the =~ ~r 
10 pUrpole of inquiring into the matter of the objection and arriving ~ to 
at a decision, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five :.ria:' 
hundred rupee!. 
(2) Whoever, bein, a licensed Minister or a Marriage Registrar, 
refuses, without just cause, to solemnize a marriage under this Act, 
15 shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or with both. 
20 
ST. Whoever, being authorized under this Act to solemnize a Penalty for 
marriage, knowingly and wilfully- ::r:f::J 
Marriaae 
(4) solemnizes such marriage- Repltrar or 
Minister. 
(i) without publishing a notice regarding such marriage etc. 
as required by any provision of this Act, or 
(ii) in contravention of any other provision contained. 
in this Act. or 
%5 (b) issues any certificate in contravention of any provision 
eontained in this Act, 
shan be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five hun-
dred rupees, or with both. 
30 51. Whoever, by himself or another, wilfully destroys or injures Destroying 
any Marriage Certificate Book. or any part thereof or any authenti- er fal~ifyi11l 
cated extract therefrom, or falsely makes or counterfeits any part of ~~~e 
such book, or wilfully inserts any false entry in any such book Boob. 
or authenticated extract, shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
35 a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees . 
•. Any person who prints or publishes any matter in contra- Pon~!:h.for 
ventfon of the provisions contained in section 48 shall be punishable gu~~ 
with flne which may extend to one thousand rupees. hold in e_a. 

Limitation 
f or Prose-
cutions. 
24 
60. No prosecution for any oftence punishable under section 52, 
section 53, section 54, section 55, section 56,· section 57, secti(,U158 01' 
section 59 shall be instituted after the expiry of two years from· the 
date on which the offence is committed. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
s 
L~ability for 61. (1) Where any person makes an objection against the issue 
frivoioul f t·ft t f t' f . d th Ma' R' tr objectiODI. 0 any cer I ca e 0 no Ice 0 marriage an e rrlage egls ar 
under section 16, or the district court under sub-section (4) of sec-
tion 5 or under section 17, declares that the objection is not reason·, 10 
able and has not been made in good faith, the Marriage Registrar 
Savill" re-
prdina ir-
reBUI_riliel. 
or the district court, as the case may be, may, after giving such 
person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, award, by way of 
compensation, costs, not exceeding one thousand rupees, to the parties 
to the intended marriage. IS 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Marriage Registrar 
or the district court under sub-section (1) may, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of the order, appeal to the district court 
or the High Court, as the case may be. 
(3) Subject to any order passed on appeal under sub-section (2), 20 
the order of the Marriage Registrar or the district court under sub-
section (1 ) shall be final. 
(4) Any order of costs made under sub-section (1) may be exe-
cuted in the same manner as a decree passed by the district court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the otftee 'of tile Marriage 2S 
Registrar is situate. 
62. Whenever any marriage has been solemnized between two 
Christians under this Act in accordance with the provisions· of this 
Act, it shall not be void merely on account of any irregularity in 
respect of any of the following matters, namely: - 30 
(i) any statement made in regard to the dwelling .. place of 
the persons married: 
(ii) the notice of the marriage; 
(iii) the certificate of the notice of the marriage or transla-
tion thereof; . 3S 
(iv) the registration of the marriage. 
Correction 63. (1) Any person authorised to solemnize a marriage. up~.r 
of errora. this Act, who discovers any error in the form or substance of any 
entry in the Marriage Certificate Book may, within one month next 
after the discovery of such error, in the presence of the penons 40 

of 1860. 
• 
(aarried, or, in case of their death or absence, in the presence of two 
other witnesses, correct the error by entry in the margin, without 
any alteration of the original entry and shall sign the marginal entry 
and add thereto the date of such correction. 
S (2) Every correction made under this section shall be attested by 
the witnesses in whose presence it was made. 
(3) Where a copy of any entry has already been sent under sub-
section (3) of section 23 to t.he Registrar-General. such person shall 
make and send in like manner a separate certificate of the original 
10 erroneous entry and of the marginal corrections therein made. 
IS 
64. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a mar- ~olcmniza­
riage under this Act may be solemnized by a Minister of a recog- ~~~~b~ar-
nised Church or a licensed Minister- Miniaten of Church 
(a) in a church building, or in pJa~s 
sanctIoned 
(b) in any other place agreed upon between the parties to by CUltom 
the marriage, if solemnization at such place is in accordance or usage. 
with the custom or usage applicable to the community to which 
the parties to the marriage belong. 
IS. Every Marriage Registrar shall be deemed to be a public ~r~iqe 
20 servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. toe~ITe::n_ 
cd to be 
public ser-
vantl. 
66. The Marriage Notice Book shall be open for inspection at all I~~cti.on 
reMOnable times, without fee, by any person desirous of inspecting NotiC:n agc 
the same. Book. 
17. (1) Th. Marriage Certificate Book kept under this Act shall !f~e:~f:ge 
25 at all reasonable times be open for inspection and shall ,be admissible Cortiticate 
as evidence of the statements therein contained. Book: 
(2) Certified extracts from the Marriage Certificate Book shall, on 
applieation, be given by the person who solemnized the marriage or 
other penon having the custody for the time being of the Marriage 
30 Certificate Book, to any person who applies for the same. 
(3) Inspection of the Marriage Certificate Book under sub-section 
(1) and the grant of certified extracts therefrom under sub-section 
(2) shall be-
(a) without fee, if applied for by the parties to the marriage 
3~ at or about the time of the marriage, 
.(b) subject to the payment of the prescribed fees. in other 
cases. 
88; Every certified copy, purporting to be signed by the person Certified 
entrusted under this Act with the custody of any Marriage Certificate ~~L:c~e 

Laoauaac 
of notic:es 
and. dec:l.· 
ntioo&. 
Book, of an entry of a marriage in such Book. shall be received in 
evidence without production or proof of the original. 
69. (1) Any notice to be given or declaration to be made by any 
person in respect of an intended marriage under this ACt may be 
given or made in a language commonly in use in the State or the part J 
of State in which the notice is given or declaration made; or in Eng-
lish. 
(2) Every person solemnizing a marriage under this Act shall 
satisfy himself that the parties to the marriage have understood the 
contents of the notice given and the declaration made by each of them, 10 
and (where a certificate of notice of marriage is required to be issued 
under this Act) of the certificate of notice of marriage issued for the 
marriage. 
~:istc~lCd 70. No Minister of a recognised Church shall be compelled to 
Chu:s solemnize any marriage, the solemnization of which would be con- I, 
:C'11~~ trary to the rules of the Church of which he is a Minister. 
lolemnizc 
marriages 
contrary to 
the rules of 
the Church. 
Powerl of 
Marriagc 
Rcgistrars 
inreapec:t 
of inquirics. 
Powcrto 
III8ke Nlea. 
71. For the purpose of any inquiry under this Act, the Marrtale 
Registrar shall have all the powers vested in a civil court under the· 
Code of Civil Procedure. 1908, when trying a suit in respect of the ~ or 1901. 
following matters, namely:- 20 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses 
and examining them on oath; 
(b) discovery and inspection; 
(c) compelling the production of documents; 
(d) reception of evidence on aftldavits; and 25 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses: 
and any proceeding before the Marriage Registrar shall be deemed to 
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 of the 
Indian Penal Code. 4' or I'" 
Explananon.-For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of any 30 
person to give evidence, the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Mar-
riage Registrar shall be the local limits of his district. 
72. (1) The Central Government may. by notiftcation in the 
Ofticial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the" 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(a) the duties and powers of Marriage Registrars and the 
areas in which they may exercise jurilKiicti()ll; 

I~ 
{.~ 
t: 
"' 
" 
\ 
S 
10 
IS 
(b) the manner in which a Marriage Registrar may hold 
inquiries under this Act, and the procedure therefor; 
(c) the form and manner in which any books required by 
or under this Act shall be maintained; 
(d) the fees that may be levied for the performance of any 
duty imposed upon any person under this Act; 
(e) the conditions under which licences to solemnize mar-
riages may be issued by the State Government, and the circums-
tances under which they may be revoked; 
(f> the surrender of such licences on the expiry thereof by 
revocation or otherwise; 
(9) the procedure to be followed by the Committee consti-
tuted under section 7; 
(h) the form in which, and the intervals within which, 
copies of entries 1n the Marriage Certificate Book shall be sent 
to the Registrar-General; 
(i) any other matter which may be, or requires to be, pres-
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
20 may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days, which may b,' comprised 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
25 Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that Gny such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 
30 73. The High Court may, by notification in the Official Gazette, Rul b 
make such rules consistent with the provisions contained in this Act the;~ 
as it may consider expedient for the purpose of regulating the proce- Court. 
dure to be followed in petitions under sub-section (5) of section 5 or 
under section 17, and for the purpose of carrying into effect the provi-
3S sions of Chapters IV to VII. 
7.. A marriage solemnized before the commencement of this Act, Savin s 
which is otherwise valid, shall not be det"medto be invalid merely relar~inl 
by reason of any provision contained in this Act. :t:f:S 
before the 
75. Nothing in this Act shall affect the ,provisions of the Special Act. 
... " Marriage Act, 1954, or apply to any marlage solemnized under that SthavinlS tOI 
- 0 er Act marrJ .. _ 
.• !C& 

. . .. 28 
76. (1) The Indian Divorce Act, 1869, the Indian Christian Mar-
riage Act, 1872. the Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 
1926, the Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1940, the Indian 
Divorce Act, 1945, and any enactment corresponding to the Indian 
Christian Marriage Act, 1872, in force in the territories which, imme-
diately before the first day of November, 1956, were comprised in the 
States of Travancore-Cochin and Manipur, are hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal-
(a) all marriages duly solemnized under the Indian Chris-
4 of 1889. 
15 of 1872. 
16 & 17 
Geo.5.c. 
40.3&4 
Geo. 8. c. 
5 35.9&10 
Geo. 6, c.B. 
tian Marriage Act, 1872, or any such corresponding enactment, 10 15 of 1872. 
shall be deemed to have been solemnized under this Act; .~.I"I sr''6 
\ , (b) all suits and proceedings in causes and matters matri-
monial which, when this Act comes into force, are pending in any 
court under the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, or under the Indian and 4 of 1869. ,'" 
Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1926, or under the Indian and '5 ~e~. ~'7 c. 
Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1940, or under the Indian 40.3&4 
Christian Marriage Act, 1872, or any such corresponding enact- ~~~·56::. 
ment, shall be dealt with and decided by such court as if this 1872. 
Act had not been passed. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall be without prejudice 20 
to the provisions contained in section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 10 of 1897. 
1897, which shall also apply to the repeal of the Indian and Colonial 16 & 17 
Divorce Jurisdiction Act, HI26, the Indian and Colonial Divorce ~~~:4c . 
.Jurisdiction Act, 1940. the lndian Divorce Act, 1945. and any such Geo 6, C. 
cOrresponalnJE enactment. 25 ~ ~ ~ • 
. ; 
! 

5 
10 
.1. Mother. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 2(m)] 
PROHIBITED RELATIONSHIP 
PART I 
2. Father's widow (step-mother). 
3. Mother's mother. 
4. Mother's father's widow (step grand-mother). 
5. Father's mother. 
6. Father's father's widow (step grand-mother). 
7. Daughter. 
S. Son's widow. 
9. Daughter's daughter. 
10. Daughter's son's widow. 
IS 11. Son's daughter. 
12. Son's son's widow. 
13. Sister. 
14. Wife's daughter (step-daughter). 
15. Wife's mother. 
20 16. Wife's son's daughter (step-son's daughter). 
17. Wife's daughter's daughter (step-daugnter's daughter). 
18. Wife's father's mother. 
19. Wife's mother's mother. 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this Part, the exprelsiOJl 
25 ·widow" includes a divorc~d wife. 
PARTn 
20. Father. 
21. Mother's husband (step-father). 
22. Father's father. 
30 23. Father's mother's husband (step grand-father). 
24. Mother's father. 
25. Mother's mother's husband (step grand-father). 
28. Son. ' 
27. Daughter's husband. 
35 28. Son's son. 
29. Son's daughter's husband. 
30. Daughter's son. 
31. Daughter's daughter's husband. 
32. Brother. 
33. Husband's father. 
34. Husband's son (step-son). 
21 
1~9(B) LS-a. 

30 
35. Husband's son's son (step-son'. lIOn). 
36. Husband's daughter's son (step-ciaughter'. IOn). 
37. Husband's father's father. 
38. Husband's mother's father. 
Explanation.-For the purposes eyf this }Jart, the expression S 
"husband" includes a divorced husband. 
To 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 12 (1)] 
FORM OF NOTICE OF INTENDED MARRIAGE 
The [Licensed Minister]-
[Marriage Registrar]- for ...... ' .. . 
10 
We hereby give you notice that a marriage under the Christian 
Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Act, 1962, is intended to be 
solemnized between us within three calendar months from the date IS 
hereof. I 
Name ICoDditiOD Occupa-
dOD 
A.BI. Unmarried 
Widower 
Divorcee 
CD. Unmarried 
Widow 
Divorcee 
Date of Inwetliog PennaneDt 
birth I place dwelliDI place, if 
present 
dwelling 
place Dot 
penoaDODt 
Lenatll of 
rClid"eoco 
Church, 
chapel or 
place or 
worsblp In 20 
whi~mar-
ria. i. to 
be IOlemnl-
sed (if the 
man· ... i, 25 
to be 10 
aolemoilld) 
30 
Witness our hands, this ..................................... . 
day of .................. " 19 ................ . 
(Sd.) A.B. 
(Sd.) C.D. 
NqJ'E.-In the case of a minor bride for whose marriage the coDHllt 
of her guardian is required, the guardian should sign an 
her behalf. . 
j .•• 
35 

i1 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section 15 (1)] 
FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF NOTICB 
I, ...... do· hereby certify that, on the ...... day of ...... , notice 
5 was duly entered in my Marriage Notice Book of the marriage 
intended between the parties therein named and described, delivered 
under the hand of both the parties, that is to say,-
Name Condition 
10 
IS 
A.B. Unmarried 
20 Widower 
Divorcee 
c.n. Unmarried 
Widow. 
'Divorcee 
Occupa- Date of Dwell-
tion binh ina place 
I 
Pennanent ~of\ a. .. ch, dweUinf rcsi cnce chapel or 
place, i place of 
present worship in 
dwc:llina which mar-
place not riaF i8 to 
permanent be lolemni-
2lCId (i r the 
lDUriaac is 
to be 80 
solemnized) 
25 and that the declaration required by section· ................ of the 
Christian Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Act, 1962, -has been 
duly made by the said ........... . 
Date of notice entered ............... . 
Date of certificate given ........... . 
30 Witness my hand, this ................ day of ............... .. 
19 ...... . 
(Sd.) 
This certificate will be void' unless the marriage is solemnized on 
or before the ............ day of .......... 19 ........ . 
3S Licensed Ministert 
Marriage Registrart 
*To be filled up. 
t8Uib off wbat i. inapplicable 
--' 
• 

• 
32 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE 
[See sections 11 (2) (c) and 15 (2) (b) J . 
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM 
t, A.B., hereby declare as fo~lows:-
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower or I) S 
divorcee, as the case may be). 
2. I have completed ........ years of age . 
3. I am not related to C.D. (the bride) within the prohibited 
relationship. 
4. I am a Christian. 
5. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, 
I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine. 
(Sd.) A. B. (the Bridegroom). 
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE 
10 
I, C.D., hereby declare as follows:- IS 
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widow or a 
divorcee, as the case may be). 
2. I have completed ...... years of age. 
3. I am not related to A.B. (the bridegroom) within the 
~rohibited relationship. 20 
4. I am a Christian. 
I. Consent of my guardian in marriage, Shri ............ hal 
been obtained to my proposed marriage with A.B.· 
.Strike off if not applicable. If in lieu af guardian'. consent, pennission of the 
diltric:t COUrt hal boeD obtaiDOCl. ltate 10. pving full particulars relatina thereto. 

t. I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is fatee, 
I am liable to imprisonment and also to fine . • 
(Sd.) C.D. (the Bride): 
NOTE.-In the case of a minor bride for whose marriage the 
S consent of her guardian is required, the guardian should 
sign on her behalf. 
Signed in our presence by the above-named A.B. and C.D. So 
far as we are aware there is no lawful impediment to the marriage. 
(Sd.) G.H. 
10 (Sd.) I.J. } Two witnesses. 
(Countersigned) E.F. 
Minister of a recognised Church-
Licensed Minister-
Marriage Registrar-
- .-
IS Dated the day of 19 . 
-Strike otr what is inapplicable. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 23 (1)] 
FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE 
20 I. E.F., hereby certify that on the ........ day of ........... . 
19 ........ A.B. and C.D." appeared before me and that the declara-
tion required by sectiont ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. of the Christian 
Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Act, 1962, was duly made, 3nd 
t~at a marriage under that Act was solemnized between them in my 
--Herein live particulars of the partie.. 
tTo be entezed. 

presence and in the presence of two witnesses who have signed 
hereunder. 
DAted the 
(Sci) G.H. 
(Sci.) I.J. 
dau of 
·Strike off what i. inapplicable. 
• (Sd.) E.F. 
Minister of a recognised Church· 
Licensed Minister· S 
Marriage Registrar· 
(Sci.) A.B. 
Bridegroom. 
(Sci.) C.D. 
Bride. 10 
L Two witn8B1e •. 
f 
18 • 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill seeks to amend and codify the law relating to marriage 
and matrimonial causes amongst Christians in India on the lines 
recommended by the Law Commission in its Fifteenth and Twenty-
second Reports. The Commission dealt with the subject in its 
Fifteenth Report and thereafter a Bill giving effect to the recom-
mendations in that Report was circulated by the Commission for 
public opinion and the Twenty-second Report contains its final 
recommendations on the subject. 
2. The notes on clauses explain the salient provisions of the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 15th June, 1962. 
ASOKE K. SEN. 

Not .. on clauses 
Clause I.-The territorial operation of the Act will secure that 
it applies to all marriages solemnized within India (except the Shte 
of Jammu and Kashmir) while in its extra-territoriel operation it 
will also apply to Christians domiciled in India who are outside the 
said territories. 
Clause 1 (3) provides for section 7 coming into force at once 80 
that, if it is necessary to do so, the requisite machinery may be set up 
in advanc~ for the recognition of churches, the ministers of which 
would autometically be entitled to sclemnize marriages. 
Clause 2.-The definition of "Church building" is new and has been 
included in order to avoid confusion between the church as denoting 
the organization and the church as denoting the place of worship. 
"desertion".-An intention on the part of the deserting spouse 
to forsake or abandon the other spouse is an essential ingredient of 
desertion and the definition of "desertion" contained in the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955, and the Special Marriage Act, 1954, has been 
suitably revised in order to bring out all the ingredients of deser-
tion more clearly. Factual separation has been brought out by thE' 
words "withdrawal by one spouse from cohabitation with the other 
spouse". 
44minor".-The definition of "minor" in the Christian Marrfoage 
Act, 1872, has been modified by substituting the age of 18 years for 
the age of 21 years in conformity with the general law. The excep-
tion in the case of widowers and widows has been omitted since 
even widowers and widows, if minor, should be subject to the 
special provisions applicable to minors. 
"recognised Church".-Ministers of recognised churches would 
automatically be entitled to solemnize marriages·, and this exprrssion 
is defined to include the Churches specified in the existi ~ g Act, 
namely, the Church of Rome, the Church of India, Burma and Ceylon 
and the Church of Scotland and also to include any other church 
which may hereafter be recognised under clause 7. 
Clause 3.-In conformity with other similar laws on the subject 
of marriage the scope of the Bill is limited to cases where both the 

37 
parties are Christians. MarriaJles solemnized under the Special 
MarriaJ;!e Act, 1954, have necessarily to be excluded from the scope 
of this law. It is not' necessary to expressly provide that marriages 
solemnized otherwise than in accordance with the prqvisions of this 
Act shall be void. 
Clause 4 lays down the conditions for a valid Christian .marriage. 
It is to a large extent based on the correspondinf! provisions in the-
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and the Special Marriage Act, 1954. The 
lists of prohibited relationships are, however, made as short as 
possible so that the need for dispensation from any extraneous source 
does not arise. The necessary exception in favour of custom, as in 
the Hindu Marriage Act; 1955, has also been made.. Care has, how-
ever, been taken to ensure that no Minister of a recognised Church 
is required to solemnize a marriage which is contrary to the rules of 
his Church (Clause 70). 
Clause 5.-This clause is intended to be a complete code relat-
ing to guardians in marriage. Although based on the corresponding 
provision in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, it makes important 
departures therefrom. The list of guardians is made as comprehen-
sive as possible and the procedure for obtaining the consent of the 
district court, wherever necessary. is also laid down. 
Clauses 6, 7, 8 and 9.-Marriages under the new law can be 
solemnized in three modes, (1) by or before the Marriage Registrar 
(which is a civil marrmge), (2) by ministers of recognized churches, 
and (3) by ministers licensed by the State-the two latter being 
sacramental marriages. Churches referred to in section 3 of the 
Christian Marriage Act, 1872, namely, the Church of Rome, the Church 
of India, Burma and Ceylon and the Church of Scotland will auto-
m3tically become reccgnised churches under this law while the pro-
vi!lfon contained in this clause will enable new churches which nre 
in the process of formation or have been formed in the mean time 
and which satisfy the prescribed condition!; to obtain recognition. 
A Committee of Christians rappointed by the Central Government 
under clause 7 will recommend to the Central Government which 
churches should be recognised for the purpose. Other ministers of 
church will be licensed under clause 8. 
Clause 10.-Since the new Act wi1l apply to persons domidled 
outside India, it is necessary to provide for the appointment of Mar-
riage Registrars outside India. . 
Clause ll.-Since the proposed conditions of marriage will apply 
to all marriages solemnized under the Act, sub-clause (2) seeks to 
1059 (B) 1.S-6. 

38 
Impose a specific obligation' cn all persons solemnizing marriall!es 
under the Act to see that the conditions for marriage are fulfilled: 
that there is no lawful impediment to the marriage; and that the 
parties make a declaration to that effect. 
Clauses 12 to 22.-These clauses deal with the procedure to be 
followecl by licensed MinistE'rs and Marriage Registranl and are 
nodelled on the previsions in that behalf contained in the existing 
Act and the Special Marriage Act, 1954. Wherever necessarY, the 
lime limits prescribed for some specific action to be inken hat:; been 
~nlarged. In clause 20 it is provided that the licensed Minister in 
601emnizing marriages should follow the rules ef the church to which 
he belongs instead- of the matter being left to his choice as at present. 
Clause 23.-The provisions regarding registration of marriAges 
which occupy 13 sections in the existing Act have been put here in 
a simplified and brief form. A uniform procedure has been applied 
to all marriages under the Act. This provision is modelled on the 
corresponding provision in the Special Marriage Act, 1954. 
Clause 24.-This clause reproduces the existing provision fer 
restitution of conjugal rights in the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, with 
suitable changes in the light of similar provisions in the Hindu Mar-
riage Act, 1955, and the Special Marriage Act, 1954. 
Clause 25.-The reference to divorce a mensa et thoro has been 
omitted as unnecessary and the grounds for judicial separation are 
the same as the grounds for divorce. As Roman Catholics do not 
recognise divorce and as there are considerable sections of Protes-
tants who are also averse to divorce and as the legal systems ba6ed 
Dn the canonical law generally provide only for judicial sepamtlon, 
the Bill seeks to continue this relief although the grounds are the 
<tame as for divorce. 
Clause 26.-This clause follows similar provisions in the Hindu 
Marriagp. Act, 1955, and the Special Mgrriage Act, 1954. Although 
clause 31 l'I11ows either party to a decree for judicial separation to 
apply for divorce after the expiry of the prescribed period, +his 
clause d~s not put the respondent on the same footing 98 the peti-
tioner in a decree for judicial separation as regards the obUgation to 
",,.habit. 
The only justification for setting aside a decree for judicial sp.pa-
ration would be a chan~e in the circumstances. Sub-c1aul'e (2) 
~a8 been suitably modified for this purpose. 
Clause 27.·-Deals with void marri'lges and ..follow~ section 11 of 
the Hindu M~rrfage Act, 195~, except for the omission of tbe words 

';on a petition presented by either party thereto" as a void marriale 
can be impugned by other parties also. 
ClauSe 28 deals with voidable marriages and is patterned on sec-
tion 12 c·f the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Sub-claUSe (2), however, 
is new. It-provides that a marriage is voidable if the 'parties to the 
marriage are below age nr if the guardiwl's consent for'\he marriage 
of the minor girl has not been obtained. This provision will, how-
ever, apply only to marriages solemnized after this Bill becomes 
law. It is WhO provided that no such marriage can be avoided after 
the expiry of OllC year from the date on which the petitioner has 
completed the age of 18 years. 
Clause 29.-Section 21 of the Indian DivorCe Act, 1869, is confined 
to two cases of nullity, namely, where thc former spouse was living 
and insanity; and it is' only in such cases that children may be 
regarded as legitimate in certain circumstances. Clause 29 on the 
other hand is modelled on similar provisions in the Hindu Marria,e 
Act, 1955, and the Special Marriage Act, 1954, and prOVides for the 
children being legitimate ill all cases irrespective of good faith of the 
parties, etc. Such children are also given a right of succession in 
ff'gard to the property of either parent. 
Cla'U.~e 30.-The existing grounds for divorce have been enlarged. 
Incidentally, wilful refusal to consummate a marriage should be 
treated as a fault arising after the marriage as is sought to be done 
in this clause, and not as a fault existing at the time of the marriage 
so as to make it voidable as section 25 cf the ~pecia1 Marriage Act, 
1954, purports to do. 
Clall.Se 31 is new. A proceeding for judicial separation is consi-
dered a waste of time by some persons while others hold the view 
that it should be retained for the purpose of preserving the s8I1ctity of 
marriage. See also the notes under clause 25. While retaining 
the provision respecting judicial separation, this clause, by way of 
compromise, provides that no separate proceeding need be initiated 
for divorce if p\irtjes to a decree for judicial separation haVe not 
come together for more than two years after the divorce. A mere 
application in the same suit is sufficient and such an application may 
be made by either party to the marriage. 
CLause 32 follows similar provisions in the Special Marriage Act, 
1954 and the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, with sOme modifications. It 
is now provided that leave granted may be revoked by the court iD 
the interests of justice, while in the other Acts it can be revoked 
only in the case of misaPPl"ehension or concealment as to the natur~ 

40 
of the case. Further, instead of the complicated procedure provid-
ed in the other two Acts laS to the order to be passed when. leave u 
revoked, a simple pro\'ision is being marle that the court will dismiss 
the petition without prejudice to any other petition which' ma, b~ 
brought after th~ expiry of the three year period. 
ClausE: 33.-';'lt is now provided that the parties to a decree for 
divorce may re~marry once the decree hus become final. There is no 
waiting period after the decree has become final as in the existing 
Act. 
Clause 34.-The existing provision in the Indian Divorce Act, 
1869, authorises the court to grant relief under the Act where either 
the petitioner or the respondent professes the Christian religion at 
the time of the petition. It is more logical in the new scheme of 
things to provide that the parties must have been Christians at the 
time of the marriage, or that the parties must have been Christians 
at the time of the marriage and at least one of the parties is a 
Christian at the time of the petition, or both the parties ar::! Christians 
at the time of the petition, and this is wOOt clause 34 d:>es. The 
rights of persons married under the existing Act are, huwever, pro-
tected. 
Clause 35.- While generally following the language of section 2 
of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, this clause introduces a new provi-
sion under which a decree may also be passed in favour of a peti-
tioner who, being the wife, was domiciled in India before marriage 
and has been residing in India for a period of not less than three 
years preceding the petition, the object being to give relief to Indian 
women marrying persons with foreign domicile. The scope of the 
clause has been further enlarged to provide for decrees of nullity 
being passed in cases where both parties to the marriage are domi-
ciled in India or at least the petitioner is domiciled in India. 
Clause 36.-Subject to the restrictions contained in clause 35, this 
clause seeks to define the district court which will have jurisdiction 
in respect of petitions under the proposed law. The clause has been 
so framed as to ensure that the question which district court will 
exercise jurisdiction is answered for all situations. 
CZause 39.-While following the language of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955, and the Special Marriag(~ Act, 1954, a new provision II 
included whereby private persons may be associated with the court 
for the purpose of effecting a reconciliation between the parties. 
Clause 40.-This follows section 11 of the Indian Divorce Act, 
18159, with the addition of the words "or adulteress" to cover cases 

41 
where the wife sues the husband for divorce on the ground of adul-
tery. The court is also being given a disc ration to excuse non-com· 
pliance with this clause on any other ground as in the U.K. Act 
The scope of the provision has been extended to cover petitions for 
judicial Reparation where the ground is adultery. 
Clause 42.-This clause provides for a decree nisi to be pro-
nounced in the first instance, to be followed by a decree absolute. It 
is also provided that where the petitioner (decree-holder) does not 
apply within six months to get the decree made absolute, it is open 
to the respondent to move the court in that behalf within a specified 
period. 
Clause 43.-While following the corresponding proviSions in the 
Indian Divorce Act, 1869, the following changes have been made:-
(1) The right to claim damages has been given to the wife 
~~ i 
(2) the provision for a mere claim for damage apart from 
divorce has been omitted as being repugnant to modern ide~s. 
Clauses 44 to 50.-'rhese to a large extent follow the correspond-
ing provisions in the Special Marriage Act, 1954, and the Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955. Wherever necessary, the language has been 
slightly modified in order to make the provision simpler or to . get 
over a few minor difficulties in construction which had been experi· 
enced in the working of the two Acts, as, for example, in clause 49. 
Clause 5l.-Although the Indian Pen~ Code punishes the offence 
of bigamy, this clause is being included in order to make it clear 
that a person married under this Act who contracts a second marriage 
under any other system of law would be equally guilty of the offence 
of bigamy. It follows section 44 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954. 
Clause 52 provides for penalties in respect of the contravention 
of any of the other conditions laid down for a Christian marriage, 
and follows section 18 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. 
Clauses 53 to 60.-The penalties provided in the existing Act are 
rationalised and brought together in a convenient form. Many of 
these provisions are modelled on the coresponding provisions in the 
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and the Special Marriage Act, 1954. 
Clauses 61 to 63.-Reproduce the corresponding provisions in the 
Christian Marriage Act, 1872, with suitable modifications. 
Clause 64 is new. It appears that, in practice, marriages are 
solemnized at places other than churches. Therefore, this . practice 

· . 42 
Is sought to be given statutory recognition, provlatd it is sanctioned 
by custom or usage prevalent ift the community. 
Clause 67 provides for the free inspection of the Marriage Certifi-
cate Book and for the free supply of certified extracts therefrom If 
such inspection or supply is asked for by the parties to the marriage 
at or about the time of the marriage. This provision will also apply 
III relation to ministers of churches. 
Clause 70 is intended to protect ministers of churches in cases 
where by the rules of the chu!'ch they are prohibited from solemniz-
ing a particular marriage. 
Clause 74.-Since the grounds which render a marriage void 
under the new law are not co-extensive with those given in section 
19 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, it is necessary to ensure that a 
marriage performed before this new law comes into force is not ren-
dered void by the new provision. Hence this clause. 
Clause 75 repeals all existing laws, whether passed by any legis-
lature in India or by the U.K. legislature in their application to India, 
and contains the necessary saving provisions. By reason of section 
17 of the Indian Ind~pendence Act, 1947, the two British Acts have 
1l1ready ceased to apply to India for all practical purposes. 
The First Schedule.-The list of prohibited relationships has been 
framld on the basis of the English Marriage Act, 1949 and the 
Special Marriage Act, 1954; but. certain items like sister's son, sister's 
r1au2hter. brother's son, brother's daughter, etc., have ,been omitted, 
liS in some communities s1,lch marriages are sai~ to be common and 
have tn fact been allowed to be solemnized. by papal dispensation. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
r.lause 9 of the Bill relate!'! to the appointment of Marriage Regis-
trars by the State Government whioh, in respect of the Union Terri-
tories, would be the Central Government. Ordinarily, existing Gov-
• pmment officer~ wili be appointed as Marriage Registrars and this 
has been the practice under the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872, 
which the present Bill seeks to replace. However, the possi.bility of 
Ii new officer hp.ing appointed exclusively for the purpose, in excep-
tional circumstances, r.annot hp. ruled out and in that contingency 
some expenditure may be involved frem thf! Consolidated Fund of 
India. The expenditure if! of a remote and contingent character 
and therefore it is not possible to give any indication thereof at 
thil:l stage. 
• 
r 
43 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause .72 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The matters in res-
pect of which such rules may be made relate, inter alia, to the duties 
and powers of Marriage Registrars, their territorial jurisdiction, the 
manner in which they may hold enquiries and the procedure to be 
folIc-wed' in such enquiries, the fees for the performance of various 
duties under the Act, the conditions under which licences to solemn-
lse marriages may be issued by the State Government, the surrender 
of such licences and other matters of procedure, form or detail, and 
8S such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
44 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend and codifY the law relating to marriage and matrimonial 
causes among Cluistians. 
(Shr; ASORe K. Sen, 
Minister of LarD.) 