CLAusa 
To 8& INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA 
BiD No. 'lOr 1"5 
THE PATENTS BIll., 1955 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPl'ER I 
PRI!I.IM DlAJn" 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions and interpretation. 
CHAPTERD 
INVENTIONS NOT PATENTABLE 
3. What are not inventions. 
4. Inventions relating to atomic energy not patentable. 
5. Inventions where substances are not patentable but methocb 
or processes may be. 
CHAPTER III 
ApPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS 
6. Persons entitled to apply for patents. 
7. Form of application. 
8. Information and undertaking regarding foreig:t applications. 
9. Provisional and complete specift~atfons. 
10. Contents of specfficatiOftL 
11. Priority dates of claims of a comple~e specldcation. 
CHAPTER IV 
EXAMINATION or APPLICATIONS 
12. Exam!nation of application. 
13. Search for anticipation by previous publication and by prior 
claim, i t 
(0 
1261(B) LS-l. 

(ii) 
CLAvaa 
14. Consideration of report of examiner by Controller. . 
15. Power of Controller to refuse or require amended applica-
. tions in certain cases. 
16. Power of Controller to make orders respecting division· of 
application. I 
17. Power of Controller to make orders respecting dating of 
application. 
18. Powers of Controller in cases of anticipation. 
19. Power of Controller in cases of anticipation. 
20. Powers of Controller to make orders regarding substitution 
of applicants, etc. 
21. Time for putting application in order for acceptance. 
22. Acceptance of complete specification. 
23. Advertisement of acceptance of complete specification. 
24. Effect of acceptance of complete specification. 
CHAPI'ER V 
OpPOsmoN TO GRANT OF PATENT 
25. Opposition. to grant of patent. 
26. In cases of 'Obtaining' Controller may treat application al 
applica~ion of opponent. 
27. Refusal of patent without opposition. 
28. Mention of inventor as such in patent. 
CHAPTER VI . 
ANTICIPAT'IOlf . 
29. Anticipation by preVious publication. 
30. Anticipation by previous communication to Govemmenl 
31. Anticipation by public display, etc. 
32. AntiCipation by public working. 
33. Anticipation by use end publication after provisional sped-
ftcation. 
34. No antiCipation if circumstances are only as . described III 
aections 29, 30, 31 ~d 32. 

PROVISIONS J'OR SECRECY OF CERTAIN INVENTIONS 
35. Secrecy directions relating to inventions relevant for defence 
purposes. ! ! 
36. Secrecy directions to be periodically reviewed. 
37. Consequences of secrecy directions. 
38=-Revocation of secrecy directions and extension of time. 
39. Residents not to apply for patents outside . India without 
prior permission. 
40. Liability for contravention of section 35 or section 39. 
41. F'inality of orders of Controller and CentMl Govemiilent. 
42. Savings respecting disclosure to Government. 
CHAPTER VIII 
UBANT A1I1D SEALING OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONJ'l:llRKl) nnm'DY 
43. Grant and sealing of patent. 
44. Amendment· of patent granted to deceased applicant. 
45. Date of patent. 
46. Form, extent and effect of patent. 
47. Rights of patentees. 
48. Patent rights not infringed when used for certain purposes. 
49. Patent rights not infringed when used on foreign vessels, 
etc., temporarily or accidentally in India. 
60. Rights of co-owners of patents. 
51. Power of Controller to give directions to co-owners. 
52. Grant of. patent to true and first inventor where it has been 
obtain~d by another. in fraud of him. 
53. Term of patent. 

(Iv) 
CLAvs .. 
CHAPTER ·IX 
-
PATF.NTS 0 .. ADDlTIOR 
54. Patents of addition. 
55. Term of patents of addition. 
56. Validity of patents of addition. 
CHAPTER X 
AMENDMENT 0 .. SPECIFICATIONS 
57. Amea~t of specification before Controller. 
58. Amendment of specification before High Court. 
59. Supplementary provisions as to amendment of specificatioa. 
CHAPTER XI 
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS 
60.' Applications for restoration of lapsed patents. 
61. Procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of 
lapsed patents. 
62. Rights of patentees of lapsed patents which have been 
-l'e.atored.. 
CHAPTER XII 
St1RRENDER AND REVOCATION OF PATENTS 
63. Surrender of patents. 
64. Revocation of patents. 
65. Revocation of patent or amendment of complete speciftcatiOll 
on directions from Central Government in cases relating 
to atomic energy. 
te. Revocation of patent :in public imerest. 
CliAPTERXW 
67. Register of patents aDd .particulars ·to -be 'entered therein. 
68. Assignments, etc., not to be valid unless ·in writing and 
reatstered. 
19. ae,:atratiGn of assignments, transmissions, etc. 
10. Power of reJistered II'Bntee or proprietor to deal witll 
patent. 

CLAuas 
71. Rectification of regi&;ter by High CoU1'l 
72. Register to be open for inspection. 
CHAPTER XIV 
PATENT OFFICE AND ESTABLISHMENT 
73. Controller and other officers. 
74. Patent office and its branches. 
75. RestrIctions on employees of patent office as to : ight or 
interest in patents. 
76. Officers and employees not to furnish information, etc. 
CHAPTER XV 
POWERS OF CON'l'ROLLF.R GENBllALLY 
77. Controller to have certain powers of a civil court. 
78. Power of Controller to correct clerical errors, etc. 
79. Evidence how to be g~ve'll and powers of ControPer in 
respect th ereof. 
80. Exercise of discretionary powers by Controller. 
S1. D:sposal by Controller of applications for extension of time. 
CHAPTER XVI 
WORKING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCES, LICENCES OF RIGHT AND 
REVOCATION 
82 Definitions of "patented articles" and C&patentee". 
83. General principles applicable to working of patented inven-
'tiona. I 
84. Compulsory licences. 
85. Matters to be taken into account in ,~tiDg compulsory 
licences. 
86. Endorsement of patent with the words "Licences of right". 
87. Certain patents deemed to be endJl'sed with the words 
"Licences of right". 

(vi) 
88. meet of endorsement of patent with the words flL1cencea 
of right". 
89. Revocation of patents by the Controller for non-workinJ. 
90. \Vhen reesonable requirements of the public deemed not 
satisfied. 
91. Power of Controller to adjourn applications for compulsory 
licences, etc., in certain cases. 
92. Procedure for dealing with ap~tions under sections 84, 
86 and 89. 
93. Powers of Controller in granting compulsory licences. 
94. General purposes for granting compulsory licences. 
95. Terms and conditions of compulsory licences. 
96. Licensing of related patents. 
97. Special provision for compulsory licences on notific:attOll 
by Central Government. 
98. Order for licence to operate as a deed between parties con-
cerned. 
CHAPTER XVII 
USE OF INVENTIONS FOR l'URPOSlS OF GOVERNMENI AND ACQUISITION OF 
INVENTIONS BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
99. Aieaning of Use of invention for purposes of Government. 
100. Power of Central Government to use inventions for plUl-
poses of Government. 
101. Rights of third parties in respect of use of invention for 
purposes of Government. 
102. Acquisition of inventions and patents by the Central 
Government. 
103. Reference to High Court of disputes as to use for purposes 
of Government. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
SUITS CONCERNING INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTB 
104. Jurisdiction~ 
105. Power of court to make declaration as to non-infringement. 

(vii) 
~'L.~t1Sa 
106. Power of Court to grant relief in cases of groundless threats 
of infringement proceedings. 
107. Defences in suits for infringement. 
108. Reliefs in suits for infringement. 
109. Right of· exclusive licensee to take proceedings against 
infringement. 
110. Right of licensee ll.t\fJPx. section 84 to take proceedinp 
against infringement. 
111. Restriction on power of court to grant damages or account 
of profits for infringement. 
112. Restriction on power of court to grant injunction in certain 
cases. 
113. Certificate of validity of specification and costs in subse-
quent suits for infringement thereof. 
114. Relief for infringement of partially valid speciftcatioD. 
115. Scientific advisers. 
CHAPTER XIX 
lU5. Appeals. 
117. Procedure for hearing of appeals. 
CHAPI'ER XX 
PENALTIES 
118. Contravention of secrecy provisions relating to certain 
inventions. 
119. Falsification of entries in register, etc. 
120. Unauthorised claim of patent rights. 
121. Wrongful use of words 'patent offtce'. 
122. Refusal or failure to supply infonnation. 
123. Practice by non-registered patent agents. 
124~ otfenc;:e~ by companies. 

"- -., .' , 
.PA~.~ 
125. Retister of patent ~ 
, .. ~ ~ for relis~OD._patent ..,eDts. 
127. Rights 01 patent agents. ' "'. .,,:' J .' 
. "'. 
l, .U 
. , 
"'~ "m. "SUbsdtiptlon aftd ftriftcation' at certaJ.n 'dOCWDents by .. ~ 
patent agents. . ' 
i29. Kestrfctfom on' prac~i~ as pate~ _·.~~s. 
130. Removal from register of patent agents and restoration. 
"'4 • 
. . 
131.. Power of Controller to refuse to deal with cettain agents. 
" .I 
- ..... Sa~" ia ".,.t af,.other peQQD& autbDriled ~ IC~ .. 
.. _t.. '" ' ... ~~ . . 
CHAPTER XXII 
IJCTJ:RNATIONAL AUANGDftR IS 
133. ~oti1ication as to ~~eDt.jop ,.cp~tries. 
• ".I 
134. Notification as to countries not providing for reciprocity. 
13~. CODvention applications. 
138. Special provisions relating to convention app1ti:Bflorl&' 
137. Multiple priorities. 
l38. Supplementary pr~ilft1S -.,. "bl- convention applications. 
139. Other provisions of Af~!<? ~p9.ly to c:>nvention applications. 
CHAPTER XXllI ... - ' . . . 
MrscEl.LANJ:otrS 
140. Avoidance of eertaiD restrictive CGDditions. 
141. Determination 01.: .certain contracts., 
142. Fees. 
• .' "'\r" 
143. Restrictionw: 1ipaa 'publication of ~atiODl.· ,.. ".' 
l44. Reports of a;""dners to be eonftdeg.tial. 
~ r •. 
145. Publication of patented invaUoal.. . ,. 

CUl1II8 
----146. Power of Controller to call for information from patentees. 
147. Evidence. of entries, document., etc. 
148. Declaration by infant, lunatic, etc. 
149. Service of notices, etc., by ~t. 
130. Security for costs. 
151. Transmisaion of orders of courts to Controller. 
152. Tl1IiI1i1U.tsaion of copies of speciftcations, etc., and inspection 
thereof. 
153. Information relating to patents. 
154. Loss or destruction of patent. 
155. Reports of Controller to be placed before Parliament. 
156. Patent to bind Government. 
157. Right of Government to sell or use forfeited artiel. 
158. Power of High Courts to make rules. 
159. Power of Central Government to make ruI-. 
160. Rules to be placed before Parliament. 
16l. Special provisions with respect to certain applications 
deemed to have been refused under Act 2 of 1911. 
162. Repeal of Act 2 of 1911 in 10 far as it relat. to patents 
, and savings. 
163. Amendment of Act· 43 of 1958. 
THE SCHEDULE . 
. 1261 (B) LS-2. 

s 
Bill No. 6a of It!s 
THE PATENTS BILL, 1965 
BILL 
to amend and consolidate the law Telatin.g to patents. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
~ of India as follows: _. . . 
CHAPTER I 
1. (1) This Act may be called th:~ .Patents.Act, 1965.. !bort 
title. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. eztent 
. and com-
(3) It· shall. come into force on such date as the Central Gonm- mence-
meat may, by Dotiftcation in the Ofticial Gazette, appomt. . "'. 

2 
DdDi- Z. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherWise requires,-
. !nO:-__ ._ ... ___ . __ . (4) . "al8ignee" includes the legal representative of a deceased 
interpre.. assignee, end references to the assignee of any person include 
taUDD. references to the assignee of th~ legal representative or assignee S 
of that person: 
(b) "Controller" means the Controller General of Patents, 
Designs and Trade Marks referred to in section 73; 
(c) "convention application" means an application for a 
patent made by virtue of section 135; 
(d) "convention-country" means a country notified as such 10 
under sub-section (7) of section 133; 
(e) Udistrict court" has the meaning assigned to that ex- a at 1801. 
pression by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; 
(f) "exclusive licence" means a licence from a patentee 
which confers on the licensee, or on the licensee and persons IS 
authorised by him, to the exclusion of all other persons (includ-
ing the patentee), any right in respect of the patented invention, 
and uexclusive licensee" shall be construed accordingly; 
(g) ufood" means any substance intended for the use of, or 
capable of being used by .. babies, invalids or convalescents as an 20 
article of food or drink, which the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; 
(h) "Government undertaking" means any industrial 
undertaking carried on-
(i) by a department of the Government, or 25 
(ii) by a corporation established by a Central, Provin-
cial or State Act. which is owned or controlled by the Gov-
ernment, or 
(iii) by a Government company as defined in section 617 30 1 of I". 
. of the Companies Act, 1956, 
and includes the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 
any University established by law in India and 3ny other 
institutfon for scientific or technical education which is ftnanced 
wholly or for the major part by the Government; 
(I) ''HIgh 'Court" means-
(i) in relation to the Union territory of Delhi and the 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, the High Court of 
Punjab; . 
3S 

--- -.... 
.~. _.', ".:(iQ. ~ rela'km..tQ.the UpiOD tJwitory.of MNUpur and 
the Union territory of Tripura, the High Court of Assam; 
: :--~. :., (iii)-' !p' lelationto the Unicm temtory 01. tile Andaman 
~NICdbar IslaDds, the High CoU1't at Caleutta;" i; 
5 (iv) in 'relation t~ the Union territory of the Laceadive, 
(I.';~ -Mmicoy ana Amlndtvi Island,·ta. HigbCQUft .. Kerala; 
(v) in relation to the Union territory of Goa, Daman 
and. ~ and the l,Inlo~ ~tory of Dadra IijlP N: ... ar Havell, 
the High Court of Bombay; . 
IO-~t:- J-'),: :". , .(~t ~. relati~m to the Union tenitory .?f ~ondiehe1T1, 
the High Court of Madms; and ' 
(vii) in relation to any other State, the High Court for 
. tllat a.te; 
(;) "invention" means any new and useful-
(i) art, process, method or manner of manufacture; 
:- -,., 00'" maeJrme,' appmrtus tIt". otJter· article; or 
(iii) substance produced by manufiaetJll'e, 
~nd includes any new and usefu'l improvement of any of them, 
4ind an alleged invention: 
20 .,Jc) "lepl mepreseutative" meaDS a·person who in la" r~ 
30 
sent.1i the estate of a deceased person; 
(1) "medicine or drug" includes--
(i) all medicines for internal or external use of human 
beings :or animals, 
. "." (u) .. all substances intended to be used for ,or in the 
.. diagnoSis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of diseases in 
'human beings or animals, 
(iii) all substances intended to be used for or in f.he 
maintenanct: of public health, or the prevention or control 
of any epidemic di!o:lease among human beings or animals, 
(iv) all chemical substances, to the extent to·which they 
are used as intermediates in the preparation or manuf:.cture 
of any of·the medicines or substances above referred to, 
but does not include insecticide, germicide, fungicide ~r any 
other substance intended to be used tor the protection or preser-
. vatioll' .l)f :p18l11s;' " . 

(m) '~teDtI' means a patent granted UDder this Act; 
(n) "patented article" and "patented proce." mean respec-
tively an article or process in respect of which • patent II In 
force; . . 
• 
- (0) "patentee" means the person for the- time bema entered 5 
011 the register as the grantee or proprietor of the patent; 
(P) "patent agent" means a penon for the ~e being real»-
tered under this Act as a patent agent; 
(q) "patent of addition" means a patent eranted m accord-
ance with section 54; . 10 
(,.) "patent oftlce" means the patent oftlc:e established 
under section 74; 
(_) "person" includes the Government; 
(t)lf'petson-illtaested"'ineluties a penon engaged in, or in 
promoting, research in the same field as that to which the 15 
invention relates'; 
(u) "prescribed" means, in relation to proceedings before a 
'High Court, prescribed by rules made by the IDgh Court, and 
in other cases, Pn!Scribed by rules made under this' Act; 
(v) "prescribed manner" includes the payment of the pres-
'bed f 20 en ee; 
(w) "priority date" has the meaning assigned to it by secUon 
11; 
(z) "register" means the register of patenta referred to in 25 
section 67; I 
(y) ·"true and first inventor" does not include either the 1lrst 
-, importer of an invention into India, or a person to whom an 
invention is first communicated from outside India. 
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, any 
reference- 30 
(a) . to the Controller shall be construed as including a 
reference to any officer discharging the functions of the Con-
troller in pursuanee of sub-section (2) of section 73; , 
(b) to the patent offtce shall be construed as including a' 
reference to any branch oftice of the patent oft\ce. 35 

.. ' 
f. ,,' ... t.. 
WI;, 
I" 
.->,,~.1 ;JI~ 
3. The followlng"are not inventions within the meaning of this W'hItit,1 
Aet\-' '.,'" ,,' ue_-,,4l 
in.., ,,'~:. 
, ,(4) an invention which is frivolous or which cla,irna l'DY- tio~. [\ :.J 
thing' obviously contrary to Wen established natura1laws; i 
10 
. .. :'1 
(b) an invention the primary or intended \lie of which 
would be contrary to law or morality or Injurious to public 
health; 
; (c). the ~e disc~ery of a scientific principle or the for-
mulatiOn of an abstract theory; 
(d) the mere discovery of any new property or new u.e f~ 
a known substance or of the mere new use of a known process, 
maeblne or apparatus; 
.. .. ," , 
f "I!"~~'!; 
" : iJ,il 
. ',~ 
IS . (e) a claim to 'a substance obtained by a mere admixture 
re.uttb1g OIUy In the aggregation of the propertieS of the compo-
rients~ber:eof or a process for p~cing streh substance; 
(f) the mere arrangement or re-arrangement or duplication 
of known devices each functioning independently of one another 
~ in a known way~ . 
30 
" .. ", J(g} a 'method or proeess of testing applicable during, the 
process of manufacture for rendering the machine, apparatus 
or other equipment more efficient or for the improvement or 
restontion of the existing machine, apparatus or other eqUip-
• . - . II • 
ment or for the improvement or control of manufacture; 
(h) a method of agriculture or horticulture; 
.(i) any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative, prophy-
lactic or other treatment of man or. any process for III simiIar 
treatment of animab or pIants to render them free of dliea~ 
or to increa.se their' economic value or that of their products. . , , 
; 11; 
, '· • ..qll 
,:~lj' 
.t. No patent shan be granted in respect of an invention relating Inventions 
to' atomic' energy fallingwithiil sub-section (1) of section 20 of the relfltiq to 
Atomic 'Energy Act, 1962. '" atomic 
.". _ r' ~I' enen ~ 
patent-
_le. 

6 
S: In the case of inventi~ 
(4)' claiming ~bstances intended for use, or capable of ... - .. 
ina used, as food or: as 'm~cme or drug, or 
tb-) nlRtfa, to, , •• a •• I}¥epued Ql" p~ py, • .u-
cal processes (including alloys, optical glass, semf..conductqrt S 
and inter-metallic compounds), 
--!.i; I r ~. , . 
':" no pat~,shau'be,ar~ iItr~t of cl~'fOl" ~ ,~ 
F·...:k . th~lves, but clai~ for the methods or processes of mlllltdaeture 
. ,W;'." sblJ .e pat.ta.... " I 
il""" . " , 
~'-::_ I" ••• ,'/' I., • 
l:
~<~. ".~~' '. . 
' .. 
,,·;1 
& 
IJD';" 
ti' 
~ .. ~ .. 
~, 
N,.i<'·. 
,.j" ,~ 
~ .. 
~. 
:i'aimot 
N)pliea-
rtfan. 
Ij; •• 
~n~:1~ . 
• · ..... ih;; 
-....c .. -.r ........ " ., 
~ ~'f.'i-"j.·' 
CHAPTER III 
1': 'i'. 
ApPLICATIONS roR PATDrl'S 
I. (1) Subject to the provisioDS QOntained ,in,section 134, an 
aPflication for a patent for an invention may be made by" 'any of 
.. ~,pedlolu, that·is to sa,,- ,', 
10 
'. " F ';r p "~r '" --::-"""--'~'-'''''''--~.'''I"_''~'~ 
.. , . (at 'by any person "cr~'to'obe the·..bu...and ·ftnt in- IS 
ventor of the invention; 
',,, _':' :(,Il) p~:aqy geraon being U1e assignee of the pt:rson clajm-
iDI to be ~ w.ue ~ &It inventor .in ~, pf the 'riah.~ to 
make 8Uch anapplicaUoa; '. , 
(c) by the legal representative of any deceased person ao 
,who tmmediately before his death' 'wasentftled :to make such 
an application. . 
. ,) 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) may be made by any' 
~ 'tie 'feI'SOD8refernd to therein.eHhe!- alone « joiDtl, ,with any' 
Oflier' jJetson:. 2 S 
'·(i':j~ •. :'(1)' 'Every ~~lication for' a patent lhaD 'be'for ODe fIlvention 
only and .ihall be made in ttle prescribed 'form and ftled in . the 
patent oftlce." ' . . 
(2) Where the applieation is made by virtue of an assignment 
_C>t;~e . .right to apply for a patent for ,the invention, there shall be 30 
flMmf8be~ ,~witb UJe application or ,nthin -suehperiOd as may be 
PreDibed after' the 1Uing' of' theapplic8tfon~ ,- . . , . . 
'(4) an afticlavit .by the .person claiIning to be the true and 
first inventor or his legal representative stating tbat he 
. aBSems· >te -th~ rmaki~ of the app¥ca~ion; and , 35 
.:(b): an :aIldavit signed. byth&'applicantaett1Dg ~ the 
facts relied on tQ support the application. .. 
(3) Every a.pplication under this section shall state that the 
applicant is in possession of the invention and shall llame the owner 
.. , 

1 
claiming to be the true and first inventor; and where the person so 
claiming is not the applicant or one of the applicants, the applica-
tion shall contain a declaration that the applicant believes'- the-
person so named to be the true and first inventor. 
S (4) Every such application shall 'be accompanied by a provision-
al or a complete specification. 
8. (1) Where an a,pplicant for a patent under this Act is pro- Wonna. 
secuting either alone or jointly with any othp.l" person an appli- tlon and 
cation for a patent in any country outside India in respect of the :r-
IO same or substantially the same invention, or where to his know- re~. 
l~e . such an application is being prosecuted by some person in, 
through whom he claims or by some person deriving title from him, foreip 
IS 
20 
he shall file along with his application- appUca-
(a) a statement setting out the name of the country tl~ 
where the application is being prosecuted, the serial number 
and date of tiling of the application and such other particulars 
as may be prescribed; and 
(b) an undertaking that, up to the date of the acceptance 
of his complete specification filed in India, he would keep the 
Controller informed in writing, from time to time, of de~ of 
the nature referred to in clause (a) in respect of every other 
application relating to the same or substantially the same in-
vention, if any, filed in any country outside India subsequently 
to the tiling of the statement referred to in the aforesaid clause, 
within eight weeks from the date of the matter coming to his 
lmowledge: ' 
(2) The Controller may also require' the applicant to furnish, u 
far as may be available to the applicant, details' relating to the 
objections, if any, taken to any such application as is referred to 
]0 in sub-section (1) on the ground that the invention is laeking in 
novelty or patentability, the amendments effected in the'spedftea-
tions, the claims allowed in respect thereof and such other parti-
culars as he may require. 
9." (1) Where an application for a patent (not being a convention !7~~-
35 application) is accompanied by a provisional specification, a complete ancl 
specification shall be filed within twelve months from the date of eomph!te 
filing of the application, and if the complete specification is not so ~ 
filed the application shall be deemed to be abandoned: cations. 
Provided that the complete specification may be filed at any 
40 time after twelve months but within fifteen months from the date 
aforesaid, if e request to that effect is made to the Controller and 
the prescribed fee is paid on or before the date on which tAe com-
plete specification filed. .: .. ! :; 
1261 (B)LS-3. 

C"r- , 
Contents 
ofspecl-
ftcations. 
8 
~Z) Where two or more applications in the name of the same 
applicant are accompanied by provisional specifications in· respect 
of inventions which are cognate or of which one is a modification 
of another and the Controller is of opinion thAt the whole of such 
inventions are such as to constitute a single invention and may , 
properly be included in one patent, he may allow one complete 
specification to be filed in respect of all such prcviaional ~pecifi.ca· 
tions. 
(3) Where an application for a patent (not being a Convention 
application is accompanied by a specification purpo~ing ~o be a com- (0 
plete specification, the Controller may, if the applicant so requests at 
any time before the acceptance of the application, direct that such 
specification shall be treated for the purposes of this Act as a provi-
sional specification and proceed with the application accordingly. 
(4) Where a complete specification has been filed in pursuance (5 
of an application for a patent accompanied by $\ provisional specifi-
cation or by a specification treated by virtue of :1 direction under 
sub-.section (3)" as a provisional specification, the Controller may, 
if the applicant so requests at any time before the acceptance of 
the application, cancel the provisional specification and post-date 20 
the application to the date of filing of the compl~te specification. 
10. (1) Every specification, whether proviSional or complete, shall 
describe the invention and shall begin with a title sufficiently 
Indicating the subject-matter to which the invention relates. 
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf und~l' zS 
tl1is Act, drawings may, and shall, if the Controller so requires, be 
IUpplied for the purposes of any specification, whether complete sr 
provisional; and any drawings so supplied shall, unl~ss the Control .. 
1er' otherwise dire'Cts,· be "deemed to form part of the speciftcation, 
ail~ references"' in this Act to a specification shall be construed 30 
acCardingly: 
(3) If in any particular case the Controller considers that an 
application should be further supplemented by a model or sample 
of anything lllustrating the invention or alleged to constitute an 
invention, such model or sample as he may require shall be furnished 35 
before the acceptance of the application, but such model or· sample 
.. shall not be deemed to form part of the specification. 
( 4) Every complete specification shall-
(4) fully and particularly descri.be the invention and its 
operation or use and the method 'by which it is to be performed; 40 
(b) disclose the best method of performing the invention 
which is lmown to the applicant and for which he is entitled 
to claim protection; and 

.. 
9 
(c) end with a claim or claims deftnin·g the scope of the 
___ , _____ invention for which protection is claimed. 
(5) The claim or claims of a complete specification shall relate 
to a single invention, shall be clear and succinct and shall be fairly 
S based on the matter disclosed in the specification. 
(6) A declaration as to th~ inventorship of the invention shall, in 
such cases as may be prescribed, be furnished in the prescribed form 
with the complete specification or within such period as may be 
prescribed after the filing of that specification . 
. to (7) Subject to the foregoing provisions 'of this section, a complete 
specification filed after a provisional specification may include claims 
in respect of developments of, or additions to, the invention wllich 
was described in the provisional specification, being developments or 
additions in respect of which the applicant would be entitled under 
I S the provisions of section 6 to make a separate application for a 
patent. 
11. (1) There shall be a priority date for each claim of a complete, Priorit 
"fi t" 1 Specl ca Ion. dates of 
(2) Each claim of a complete specification shall indicate the date ~~ 
20 which the applicant considers to b~ the priority date of that claim. complete 
(3) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of a = 
single application accompanied by-
(a) a provisional specification; or 
(b) a speCification which is treated by virtue of a direc-
25 tion under sub-section (3) of section 9 as a provisional sp'E!Ciftca-
tion; 
and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in the specifica-
tion referred to in clause (a) or clause (b), the priority date of that 
claim shall be the date of the filing of the relevant specification. 
(4) Where the complete specification is filed or proceeded with 
30 in pursuance of two or more applications accompanied by such 
specifications as are mentioned in sub-section (3) and the claim is 
fairly based on the matter disclosed-
(a) iI! one of those specifications, the priority date of that 
claim shall be the date of filing of the application accompanied 
35 by that specification; 
(b) partly in one and partly in another, the priority date of 
that claim shan be the date of the filing of the application ac-
companied by the specification of the later dAte. 

($) Where the complete specification has been flIed in pursuance 
------of a further application ~e by virtue of sub-section (1) of section 
Examl. 
nation •. 
ofappll-
cation. 
18 and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in any of 
the earlier specifications, provisional or complete, as the case may S 
be, the priority date of that claim shan be the date of the ftllng of 
that speciftcation in which the matter was ftrst disclosed. 
(6), Where, under the foregoing provisions of this section, any 
claim of a complete speciftcation would, but for the provisions of 
this sub-section, have two or more priority dates, the priority date 
of that claim shan be the earlier or earliest of those dates. 10 
(1) In any case to which sub-sections (3), (4) (5) and (6) do 
not apply, the priority date of a claim shall, subject to the prOvisions 
of section 137, be the· date of filing of the complete specification. 
(8) The reference to the date of the filing of the application or 
of the complete specification in this section shall in cases where 15 
there has been a post-dating under sub-section, (2) or sub-section 
(3) of section 16, be a reference to the date as so post-dated. 
(9) A claim in a complete specification of a patent shall not be 
invalid by reason only of-
(a) the publication or use of the invention so far as claim- 20 
ed in that claim on or after the priority date of such claim; or 
(b) the grant of another patent which claims the invention, 
so far as claimed in the first mentioned claim, in a claim of the 
same or a later priority date. 
CHAPTER IV 
EXAMINATION OF .APPLICATIONS 
25 
12. When the complete specification has been filed in respect of 
an application for ... a patent, the application and the specification 
relating thereto shall be referred ,by the Controller to an examiner 
for making a report to him in respect of the following matters, 30 
namely,-
(a) whether the application and the specification relating 
thereto are in accordance with the requirements of this Act 
and of any rules made thereunder; 
(b) whether there is any lawful ground of objection to the 35 
grant of the patent under this Act in pursuance of the appli-
cation; 

.. 
II 
(c) the result of investigations made under section 13; 
(d) whether the priority date oreach claim as indicated by 
the applicant is the priority date of that clain1 as determined by 
this Act; and 
5 (e) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
13. (1) The examiner to whom an application for a patent is re- Search 
ferred under section 12 shall make investigation for the purpose of for 
asceriaiDing whether the invention so far as claimed in any claim an~ci­
of the ~mplete speciftcation- . ~tion 
10 (a) has been anticipated by publication before the date of 
filing of the applicant's complete specification in any specifica-
tion filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in 
India and dated on or after the lst day of January, 1912; 
(b) is claimed in any claim or any other complete specifi-
15 cation pub!ished on or after the date of &ling of the applicant's 
complete specification, being a specification filed in pursuance 
of an applicatiOIl for a patent made in India and dated before 
or claiming the priority date earlier than that date. 
(2) The examiner shall, in addition, make such investigation as 
20 the Controler may direct for the purpose of ascertaining whether 
the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specifi-
cation, has been anticipated by publication in India or elsewhere in 
any document other than. those mentioned in sub-section (1) before 
the date of filing of the applicant's complete specification. 
2S (3) Where a complete specification is amended under the provi-
sions of this Act before it has been accepted, the amended specifica-
tion shall be examined and investigated in like manner as the origi-
nal specification. 
(4) . The examination and investigations required under section 
30 12 and tJli.s section shall not be deemed in any way to warrant the. 
validity of any patent, and no liability . shall be incurred by the 
Central Government or any officer thereof by reason of, or in con-
nection with, any such examination or investigation or any report 
or other proceedings consequent thereon. 
previous 
publica-
tion and 
by prior 
elaim. 
35 14. Where, in respect of an application for a patent, the report of Conside-
the examiner received by the Controller is adverse to the applicant raUon of 
or requires any amendment of the application or of the specificatIon reDO~ or 
to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act or of the rules bexaDlC mer . y OD-
made thereunder, the ControUer, before proceeding to dispose of the troller. 

Po .. 
olean-
troller 
to refuse 
or require 
amenel. 
ed 
applies. 
tionsm 
certain 
eaSeL 
Power 
olean. 
troller 
to~ake 
orders 
respect-
ingdivf-
sion of 
applles-
tion. 
12 
application in accordance with the provisions hereinafter appearing, 
shall communicate the gist of the objections- to the applicant .. and --
shall, if so required by th~ applicant within the prescribed time, 
give him an opportunity of being heard. 
15. (1) Where the Controller is satisfied that the application 01' S 
any specification filed in pursuance thereof does not comply with 
the requirements of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, the 
Controller may either--
(4) r~use to proceed with the application; or 
(b) require the application, specification or drawings to be 10 
amended to his satisfaction before he proceeds with the appli. 
cation. 
(2) If it appears to the 'Controller that-
(4) the application claiming to be a convention application 
was filed in contravention of the provisions of Chapter XXII; IS 
or 
(b) the invention claimed in the specification is not an in· 
ven.tion within the meaning of, or is not patentable under, this 
Act· , 
he shall refuse the application. 
(3) If it appears to the Controller that any invention in respect 
20 
of which an application for a patent is made might be used in any 
manner contrary to law, he may refuse the application, unless Lhe 
specification is amended' by the insertion of such dis-claimer in res-
pect of that use of the invention, or such other reference to the file- 25 
gality thereof, as the Controller thinks fit. . 
16. (1) A person who has made an application for a patent under 
this Act may, at any time before the acceptance of the complete 
specification, if he so desires, or with a view to remedy the objection 
raised by the ·Controller on the ground that the claims of the com- 30 
plete specification relate to more than one invention, file a further 
application in respect of an invention disclosed in the provisional 
or complete specification already filed in respect of the first mention-
ed application. 
(2) The further application under sub-section (1) shall be ae- 35 
companied by a complete specification, but such complete specifica-
tion shall not include any matter not in substance disclosed In the 
complete specification filed in pursuance of the first mentioned 
application. 

13 
(3) The Controller may require such amendment of the complete 
specification filed in pursuance of eIther the orfginalor-thefurther 
appUcation as may be necessary to ensure that neither of the said 
complete specifications includes a claim for any matter claimed in 
5 the other. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Act, the further appli-
cation and t~e complete specification accompanying it shall be deem-
ed to have been filed on the date on whiC'h the complete specifica-
tion in pursuance of the first mentioned application had been filed, 
[0 and the-: further application shall, subject to the determination of 
the priority date under sub-section (5) of section 11, be proceeded 
with as a substantive application. 
17. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 9, at any time after Power 
the filing of an application and before acceptance of the complete ,JfCon-
15 specification under this Act, the Controller may, at the request of the .:o:e 
applicant made in the prescribed manner, direct that the application ordeI'l 
shall be post-dated to such date as may be specified in the request, respect-
and proceed with the application accordingly: ing 
datin, 
Provid~d that no application shall be post-dated under this sub- of appli-
20 section to a date later than six months from the date on which it was cation. 
actually made or would, but for the provisions of this su:b-section, be 
deemed to have been made. 
(2) Where an application or specification (including drawings) Is 
amended in pursuance of the directions of the Controller under sub-
25 section (1) of section 15, the application or specification shall, if the 
Controller so directs, be deemed to have been made on the date on 
~ which the requirement is complied with or where the application or 
specificatibn is returned to the applicant, on the date on which It is 
re-fUed after complying with the requirement. 
30 18. (1) Where it appears to the Controller that the Invention so 
far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification has been an-
ticipated in the manner referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2) of section 13. he may refuse to accept the com-
plete specification unless the applicant-
35 (a) shows to the satisfaction of the Controller that the 
priority date of the claim of his complete specification is not later 
than the date on which the relevant document was published; or 
(b) amends his complete specification to the satisfaction of . 
. the Coptrollef. . 
Powers 
of Con-
tro~ler 
In cases 
of anti-
dpation. 

Powers 
of Con-
troller in 
caSe of 
potential 
infrlnge-
m-ent. 
14 
(2) ~f it appears to the Controller that the invention is claimed 
In a claim of any other complete specification referred to in clause -
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 13, he may, subject to the provi-
sions . hereinafter contained, direct that a reference to that other 
specification shall be inserted by way of notice to the public in the 5 
applicant's complete specification unless within such time as may be 
prescribed,~ • ! 
(a) the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the Controller 
that the priority date of his claim is not later than the pri('\rity 
date of the claim of the said -ethu'speciftcation; or 
(b) the complete specification is amended to the satisfaction 
of the Controller; f 
(3) If it appears to the Controller, 6S a result of an investigation 
under section 13 or otherwise,-
10 
(a) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the I, 
applicant's complete specification has been claimed in any other 
complete specification referred to in clause (a) of sub-section 
(1) of section 13; and 
(b) that such other complete specification was published OD 
or after the priority date of the applicant's claim; 20 
then, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the Controller that the 
priorjty date of the applicant's claim is not later than the priority 
date of the claim of that specification, the provisiOns of sub-sectioD 
(2) shall apply thereto in the same manner as they apply to a speci-
fication' published on or after the date of filing' of the applic~~'s 25 
complete speCitlcation. 
( 4) Any or4er of the Controller,..l1nder sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) directing the insertion of a reference to another complete 
speCification shall be of no effect unless and until the other patent is 
granted~ I 
19. (1) If, in consequence of the investigations required by the 
foregoing provisions of this Act or of proceedings under section 25, it 
appears to the Controller that an invention in respect of which an 
application for a patent has been made cannot be performed without 
substantial risk of infringement of a claim of any other patent, he 3S 
lIlay direct that a reference to that other patent shall be inserted in 

the applicant's complete specification by way of notice to ~ publlc, 
unless. within such time as may·be prescribed- ------.--.--- .. ---.. -.---... 
(4) the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the Conkoller 
that there are reasonable grounds for contestint the validity C)f 
~ the said claim of the other patent; or 
(b) the complete specification is amended to the satilfactiOD 
of the Controller~ 
(2) Where, after a reference to another patent has been inserted 
in a complete specification in pursuaD:~e of a direction under sub-
10 section (1)- -
1$ 
(4) that other patent is revoked or otherwise cease. tq be 
in force; or 
.(b) the specification of that other patent is amended by the 
deletion of the relevant claim; or 
(c) it is found, in proceedings before the court or the COD-
troller, that the relevant claim of that other patent is invalid or 
is not infringed by any working of the applicant's invention; 
the Controller may, on the application of the applicant, delete the 
reference to that other patent. 
20. ZOo (1) If the Controller is satisfied, on a claIm made in the pres- POWVI 
cribed manner at any time before a patent has been granted, that b) ot Con .. 
virtue of ~ny assignment or agreement in writing made by the appli. troller 
cant or one of the applicants for the patent or by operation of law, ::::-
the claimant would, if the patent were then granted, be entitled relardlDa 
25 thereto or to the interest of the applicant therein, or to an undivided lubstltu-
, .. share of the paten~ or of that interest, the Controller may, subject ttanef 
. to the provisions of this section, direct that the application shall :::!: 
proceed in the name of the claimant or in the names of the claimants etc. 
and the applicant or the other joint applicant or applicants,. accord-
30 ingly as the case may require. 
(2) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of 
any assignment or agreement made by ODe of two or more joint 
applicants for a patent except with the conspnt of the other joint 
applicant or applicants. 
35 (3) No such Clirection as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of 
any assignment o~ agreement tor the assignme!1t of the benefit of 
an invention unless-
(4) the invention is identifted therein by reference to the 
number of the application for the patent; or 
1281 (B) LS '" 

" 
(b) there is produced to the Controller an acknowledllllent 
by the person by whom the assignment or agreement was made 
that the assignment or agreement relates to the invention in 
- ~espect of which that. application is made; or 
(c) the rights of the claimant in respect of the invention 5 
have been finally established by the decision of a court; or 
(d) the Controller gives directions for enabling the appli-
cation to proceed or for regulating the manner in which it 
should be proceeded with,...under sub-section (5). 
(4) Where one of two or more joint applicants for a patent dies 10 
at any time before the patent has been granted, the Controller ·may, 
upon a request in that behalf made by the survivor or survivors, 
and with the consent of the legal representative of the deceased, 
direct that the application shall proceed in the name of the survivor 
or survivors alone. I~ .. 
(5) If any dispute arises between joint applicants for a patent 
whether or in what manner the application should· be proceeded 
with, . the Controller may, wpon application made to him in the 
prescribed manner by any of th. parties, and after giving to all 
parties concerned an opportunity to be heard, give such directions 30 
as he thinks fit for enabling the application to proceed in the name 
of one or more of the parties alone or for regulating the manner 
'in which it should be proceeded with, or for both those purposes, 
as the case may require. 
..... 
Timtifar 21. (1) An application for a patent shall be de~med to have been 
put~, abandoned unless within fifteen months from the date on which as 
~:l~;.,.· .. the first statement of objections to the application or complete· 
order specification is forwarded by the Controller to the applicant or 
for within such longer period as may be allowed under the lollowing 
accep- provisions of this section the applicant has complied with all the 
tance. req':lirements imposed on him by or under this Act, whether in con- 30 
nection with the complete specification or otherwise in relation 
to the application. 
,. Erplanation.-Where the application .or any specification or, in 
~~ c::ase of a convention application, any document filed as part of 35 ~ 
the application has been returned to the applicant by the Controller 
in the course of the proceedings, the applicant shall not be. deemed 
to' nave 'complied with such requirements unless and until he has 
re-fUed It. - . 

"17 .. f'" 
(2) The period allowed by sub-section (1) shall be extended 'by 
the Controller to such period not exceeding eighteen months from 
the date on which the objections referred to in sub-section (1) are . 
forwarded to the applicant, if the applicant makes an application la 
• S this behalf in the prescribed manner before the expiration of the 
period so specified. 
. (3) If, at the expiration of the period allowed under the fore-
going provisions of this section, aD appeal to the High Court. 'fa 
pending in respect of the application (or, in the case of an applica-
10 tion for a patent of addition, either in respect of that application 
.... 1.:. ·or. in respect of the application for the paten't for the main'inven-
tion or' the prescri.bed time within which such an appeal could be , 
. filed in the High Court (apart from any future extension of time 
'granted by t~e Court for filing the appeal) has not expired, then-
, I, (a) where such appeal is pending, or is brought within-tIle 
afC!resaid period of fifteen or eighteen months, as the case' may 
be, or before the expiration of any extension of that time grant-
ed by the High Court (in the case of a first extension) on an 
application made within that time or (in the case of a subse-
2,0 quent extension) on an application made before the expiration 
ot' the last previous extension, the said period of fifteen or 
eighteen months, as the case may be, for complying with the 
requirements of the ControIIer shall be extended until sUch 
date as the High Court may determine; 
~S (b) where no such appeal is pending or is so. brought, the 
said period of fifteen or eighteen months, as the case may· be, 
• .1 
for complying with the requirements of the Controller shall 
, ' . , .. continue until the end of. the time ·aforesaid. or, if. any exien-
siOD' 'of that time. is granted by the High Court. as ·aforesaid, 
.: , .. : 'until .. the expiration. of the extension· Or. last .extensiQD so 
30 granted. ' ,. . .. ..... ,. . ",. ~:_ . 
:·t 
· .. 
• .1 
.~ 
: " 
." ... ~! 
" ...... 
.' .') 
.~ 
.... . . 
.,. : , 
.... ~. '.") 
· • .!' 
• ~ :' J. ~. _ • • ".. • " .... • .. • •• ., • .' • • •• ... ...... • ,-' 
... :ZZt, ~~bje.ct .to·, tb~ .pr~~io!ls. of .~~etion ~~, ~l)~. eQ~pJ~te speci- Aceep-
fication filed fri' purStianee of an aPPlication' for -.~ jlaten~ :.may be tanca 
.. . accepted by the Control~er at any. ~e after the-~pp~icant' nas com- of 
. .. pIi~·~itl:i tli~· ~e~wreinents :.riien.ti~n~ }~ '~~~-~~ti~)D ~~) of that com~:~ 
3S 'section, and, if not so aceepted within. t~«;!~. p~tri~d ,~.,I~o~ed under:: 
that section for compliance with those requirelilents, .. shall be 
'atcepted as··soon' as may' be' there~te~: ' '.' 
. " 
Provided that the applicant may make 'an appJieation to the Con-
40 ~o~er in· the, prescribed, manner requesting him· to postpone accep-
. tance until such date (not being later than .eighteen months from 
. . -' ~ ,. -. '. . ... ' . .. . -,... .' . 

18 
, -the 4a~ on which the objections refelTed to in sub-section (2) of 
....ction21 are ,forwarded to ,the applicant) as maybe specified 
,m the ap~lication, and, if such application is made~ the C~ntroner ,_ 
may ,postpone acceptance accordingly. 
Advert!-. 13. On the acceptance of a 'eomplete 8peclftca~ton,the Cont~r , 
met of shall give notice thereof to the applicant and shall ,advertise In the 
acc:ep- Omcial Gazette the fact that the specification has been accepted, 
=:l:~and thereupon the application and the specification with the 
ipecl6_ drawings (if any) filed ,in pursuance thereof shall be open to public 
cation. inspection. ' 10 
. 
Uect .. ~- M. ,On' and from the date ofedvertisement of the aeceptamce of 
of accep- a eomplete speclftcation and until the date of sealing of a patent in 
tance of 1'9Spec:t 'thereof, the applicant shall have the like 'privileges and rights 
complete as 1£ a patent for the invention had been seaI'ed on the c:tatA! of 
=:- edvertisement of ,acceptance of the complete specification: IS 
Opposi-
tion to 
lI'ant of 
patent. 
Provided that the applicant shall not be entitled to institute any 
,proceedings for infringement until the patent has been sealed. 
CHAPI'ER V 
OPPOSITION TO GRANT OF PATENT 
as. ,(1) At 'any time withln four months from the date of advenise- 20 
'1Ileat Gfthe acceptance of a complete specification under this Act 
(0l' within such further period not exceeding one month in the 
aggregate as the Controller may allow on application made to him 
_ in the prescribed manner before the expiry of the four months 
'llfor9aid) any person interested may give notice to the Controller 2S 
'uf'dppositfOn to the -grant of the patent on 'any of the following 
'tn>unas,' n'iDnely: - . 
, '(a) thllt the applieant ,tor tim patent ar the pel'SOn 'under 
.' ar thrnugn l~om neclaims. 'wrongfuTIy 'obtained the ~ntioD 
'-t:Jr' 'atry "tmtftlerebf from ''him Or from II 'pet"lOD of 'whom' he Is 30 
the legal representative; . . -
{b) that the jnvention so far as claimed in any. claim of the 
~mpWte' specification .has ~"pUbDShed before fteptto~ 
elate' elanned-
(i) in any ~catian flIed in pursuance of an· .~- 3S 
cation .for a patent .made in India on or after the 1st day of 
38Duary., 1912; or 
(ii) in India or.el8ewhere, In any ,other ·doeumeDt, JaOt 
being a document of the class described in sub-section (Z) 
1M' ~..-reetlon:(3) 'of Sf!'e'tton 29; 40 
(c-) that the 'inVe!ition 'so far as 'claimed in -any 'Claim of the 
complete'speclftcation is claimed in -a claim -of a 'C'ompfete speci. 

11 
1icatit»n publiShed 'OD or after the priority 'date of the applicant·. 
~laim .and filed in pursuance of an application for a patent in 
lnciia, being a claim of ·which the priority date is earlier than 
tmt of the applicant's claim; 
.( d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the 
complete specification was used in India· before !the priority 
date of that claim. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, an invention 
relating to a process for which a patent is claimed shall be deem-
10 ed to have been used in India before the priority date of the claim 
if .a ,product made by th~QCeS8 had already been imported 
into India before that date; 
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in my claim of the 
-complete specification is 'obvious and clearly does not involve 
IS any inventive step, having regard to thematu!! published as 
mentioned in clause (b) or having regard to what was used 
in India before the priority date of the applicant's claim: 
'(f) that the subject of any claim, of the complete speclftca-
tion is not an invention within the meaning of this Act, or is not 
20 patents·ble under this Act; 
30 
(,g) that the complete specification do~s not sufficiently and 
clearly describe the invention iIF the method by which it is to 
be performed; 
(h) that the applicant has failed to disclose to the Control-
'ler the infonnation required by section 8 or has furnished the in-
formation which 'in any material particular was false to' hi~ 
'tnawleclg~; 
(i) that in the case of.a convention appIicat,ion, ,tbe appUea-
tlon was not made within twelve months from the da~ :of ~ 
, ..BrSt application for protection for the in'V'entian made~ .. i:Oll-
wntion country QY the applicant 4r.a ~n· from whom· 'lie 
derives tit1~; 
but, Ql..DO,.:otIher .grQQJ1d. 
- . 1(2) Whel"'! ~ wch' netice of 'opposition is duly given, the Con-
35 h~ ~iIl ntttify, 'the ~pplk:ant and shallglve to the applicant, and 
the'bpponeitt an 'Opportunity to be heard before deciding the case, 
, (3). The grant of a patent shan not be refused on the ground 
stated In clause (c) of lub..section(l) Uno patent' has ·been' gnmted 
in rPursuanOe of the JlIPPlieation mentioned' in that clause· and for 
40 the purpose of .any inquiry under ~lause ,(d) or clause (~) 'of that 
~uJ>.sectloJ1, ,no account &baU. be .taken of .aDY ·aaciVt use. 

In cases 
of 
"Obtain-
lng" Con-
troller 
may 
treat 
appUea-
tionu 
applica-
tion of 
opponent. 
Betusal 
of patent 
without 
opposi-
tiaa. 
20 
"-'18.(1) Where in any opposition prOceeding under this Ae~ 
(a) the Controller finds that the invention, so far as ~laimed 
hi any claim -of the complete specification, was obtained from 
the opponent in the manner set out in clause (a) of sub-section 
'. (1) of section 25 and refuses the application on that ground, he .5 
may, on request by such opponent made in the prescribed man-
ner, dire<:t that the application shall proceed' in the mmie of the 
opponent as if the application and the specification had been 
filed. by ~e opponent on the date on which they were act1,lally 
filed' 10 " , 
(b) the Controller finds that a.aparl"of an invention described 
in the complete specification was so obtained from the opponent 
and passes an order requiring that the specification be amended 
by the exclusion of that part of the invention, the opponent may, 
'subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), file an application is 
in accordance with the prOvisions of this Act accompanied by a, 
complete speciftcation for the grant of a patent for the inven-
tion so excluded from the applicant's specification, and the Con-
troller may treat such application and specification as having 
been filed, for the purposes of this Act relating to the pri~ty a~ 
dates of claims of the complete specification, on the date on 
which the corresponding document was or was deemed. to have 
'-been filed by the earlier applicant, bIft for all other purposes 
the application of the opponent shall be proceeded with as an 
application for a patent under this Act. 2S 
(2) Where an opponent bas" before the date of the order of the 
Controller requiring the amendment of a complete speciftcation 
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), ftled an application for 
a'-patent for an mvention whicn'includes the whole or a part of the 
Invention held to have been obtained from him' and' sUch appUcation 30 
is' pending, the Controller mey treat such application and '~1ica- '.~ 
tion -in, so tar' as 'they relate to the inv'entiem' he~4' to ~av~' ~een 
obtained from him, as having been filed, for the purposes of' this 
Act, relating to the priority dates of claift1.s of ·the' comple'te' !'perl1!ea~ 
tion., on the date on which the. corresponding d'ocument was or 'was 35 
d~ed to 'h~~ ,b~n ftJe.d by the. earlier appliCant, but for all' other - ~ 
purposes the applicatiop of the opponent shall be proceeded with .' 
as an' application for a patent under this Act. . ' .. .. . ~ 
. 27. If at any time after the acceptance of the complete specfflca- 4 
tion -flIed in pursuance of an application for a patent and before'the 0 
grant of. a patent' thereon it comes to the notice of the Controller 
otherwise than in consequence of proceedings in opposition ·to the 

11 
grant under section 25, that the invention, so far as claimed in an1 
--cfaun--of the - -complete specification, has been published in India 01' 
any, other country before the priority date of the claim-
-, 
(a) in any specification filed in pursuance of an application 
for a patent made in India and dated on or after the 1st day of 
January, 1912; . 
(b) -in any other document in India or elsewhere not being 
a document of the class described in sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) of section 29; 
'10 the Controller may refuse to grant the patent unless, within such 
time as may, be prescribed, the complete specification is amended to 
his satisfaetion. 
28. (1) If the Controller is satisfied, upon a request or claim made Mention 
in accordance with the provisions of this section,- ' of in-. ventOla . IS (a) that the person in respect of or by whom the request or web in 
claim is made is the inventor of an invention in respect of which patent. 
application for a patent has been made, or of a substantial part 
of that invention; and 
(b) that the application for -*he patent is a direct, conse:-
20 quence of his being the inventor; 
the Controller shall, subject to the provisions of this section, cause 
him to be mentioned as inventor in any patent granted in pursuance 
of the application in the complete specification and in the register 
: of patents: 
2S Provided that the mention of any person as inventor under this 
section ,shall not confer or derogate from any rights under the 
patent. 
(2) A request that any person shall be mentioned as aforesaid 
may be made" in the prescribed ma"fmer by the applicant for the 
30 patent or (where the person alleged to be the inventor is not the 
applicant or one of the applicants) by the applicant and that person. 
(3) If any person [other than a person in respect of whom a re-
quest in relation to the application in question has been made under 
sub-section (2)] desires to be mentioned as aforesaid, he may make 
35 a claim in the prescribed manner in that behalf. . 
, " (4) A request or cl~im under the foregoing provisions of this 
~ - section shall be made not later ~han two months after the date of ad-
vertisement of acceptance of the complete specification -or withm 

22 
sueh. further period (not exceeding one month) as the Controller 
-- --------may, on an application made to him in that behalf before the ex-
piration of the said period of two months and subject to the pay-
~ent of the prescribed fee, allow. 
Anticipa-
tion by 
previous 
pubUca-
tion. 
(5) No request or claim under the foregoing provisions of this s 
section shalI be entertained if it appears to the Controller that the 
request or claim is based upon facts which, if proved in the case of 
an opposition under the provisions of clause (4) of sub-section (1) 
of section 25 by the person in respect of or by whom the request or 
claim is made, would have entitled him -teftleiief under that section. 10 
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), where a claim is 
made under sub-section (3), the Controller shall give notice of the 
claim to every applicant for the patent (not being the claimant) and 
to any other persoll whom the Controller may consider to be interest-
ed; and before deciding upon any request or claim made under sub- IS 
section (2) or sub-section (3), the Controller shall, if required, hear 
the person in respect of or by whom the request or claim is made, 
and, in the case of a claim under sub-section (3), any person to 
whom notice of the claim has been given as aforesaid. 
(7) Where any person has been mentioned as inventor in pursu- 20 
ance of this section, any other person who alleges that he ought not to 
have been so mentioned may at any time ,apply to the Controller 
for a certificate to that effect, and the Controller may, after hearing, 
if required', any person whom he may consider to be interested, issue 
such a certificate, and if he does so, he shall rectify the specification 25 
and the register accordingly. 
CHAPTER VI 
ANTICIPATION 
29. (1) An invention claimed in a complete specification shaD not 
lae deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that the inven- 30 
tion was published in a specification filed in pursuance of an appli-
~ation for a patent made in India and dated before the 1st day of 
January, 1912. 
(2) Subject as hereinafter provided, an invention claimed in a 
complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated 3' 
~y reason only that the invention was published before the priority 

2j 
date of. thl! relevant c1atm of the specitlcatiOD, If the patentee or tba 
applicant for the patent proves-7- ,', 
---- ---:- ~-(~) that' the matt~ published was obtained from him, or 
(where he is not himself the true and first inventor) from any 
, person from whom he derives tiUe, and was published without 
his consent or the consent of any such person; and 
(b) where the patentee or the applicant for the patent or 
any person from whom he derives tiUe learned of the publica-
tion before the date of the application for the patent, or, in the 
10 - 11 case of a convention application, before the date of the app -
cation for protection in a conventiorl';country, that the applica-
tion or the application in the convention country, as the case 
may be, was made as soon as reasonably practicable there-
after: t. 
, . 
15 Provided that this sub-iJection shall not apply if the invention 
was before the priority date of the claim commercially worked in 
India, otherwise than for the purpose of reasonable trial, either by 
the patentee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whom 
he derives title or by any other person with the consent of the paten-
20 tee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he 
derives pUe.. I -
(3) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of an 
applicatioD for a patent made by a person being the true and first 
inventor or deriving tiUe from him, an invention claimed in that 
Z5 specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reasoD 
only of any other application for a patent in respect of the same 
invention made in contravention of the rights of that person, or bY' 
reason only that after the date of filing of that other application 
the invention was used or published, without the consent of that 
30 person, by the applicant in respect of that other applicatiQn, or. 
by ~y other person in consequence of any disclosure of any lnvm-
tion by that applicant 
30. An invention -claimed in a complete speciftcation shall Dot .Antlclpa-
be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of the communi:" lion by 
3S cation of the invention to the Government or to any person autho- previous 
rised by the Government to investigate the invention or Its merits or communL 
f bin d . 'cation to o anyt g one, in consequence of such a commumcation, for the Govern;" 
purpose of the investigation. ment. 
aL An invention claimed in a complete specification IhaU not AnUc1pa-
40 be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of- tion by 
. (a) the display of the invention with the consent of the true =~' 
and fir~t Inventor at an industrial or other exhibition to which.. '" 
1261 (B) LS-5.' . .. 

· . 
~tbeprOvision8 of.thiS aection have been ~_rbrlb .. t!eDuai,'·· 
.... - Government by notification in the -Oftletat' Gaiette, or ~.' -ute . 
thei"ebf 'With his' eOJ2Sent 'for-the l'urpaII! 1)f abeh 'ID' ed1bitlon 
in the place wher. it fa held; 'or 
·(b}the·publlc.ucm.;of.any.ducriptiDa of·the _veIlUc!D·fAD , 
coD8equence of the display or use of the invention at aD1 RCh 
8IlUbidon as afor~ or 
(c) .the. use·:cal -the . .mV8lltiGD, rafter- it abuJ"',=diIpl J bd 
or .used. at any such ·exhibition -as 1Af000esaid:.aDd '.; chuiIl" r,6e 
.PQiod Gf the. exllibitioD, by. 8DJ""9fAOIIl. witboat ,tb,e ..... ~ .JO 
the·.f:I:ue and dlrat my_tor; ·or·. 
(cI) the desCription of theinventioii in 'a paper read b)<the 
true and first inventor before a learned lOCiety or pub1",,_ 
with-bis COIII_t'. lthe1wap.ctltQDM.ol __ a:,~ J' 
if the application for the patent is made by.the·Uue.aD4lrst;;JAva.,..r, 
tor or -a person derivingtit1e kom. .hiJD. Dot laterthan-aix-lDOlltba ..... 
after the opening of the exhibition or the l"eadin'or .puWicatioll of .. 
the paper, as. the case may be. 
D. An invention claimed in a complete specf1ieation ~ • 'not .. 
be .deemed to ·have been' anticipated bj ·realOD ·cml7 that,'at' tbV.2.'i 
~ within ·one year before tbepriQrity .date ·':of··the t nl8na'~.: 
claim· of ·the apec:i1icaticm,. the iDv"~ . will 'pubUCly-i JNOI'bd '-S .. ~:; 
Indi. 
(cz)bytbe patentee' 'Or .. ppltclm~ "for:-th.~p._t~·~ 'aDJ' '. 
penoa . from whom he' ~erives title;: 'or ... . . 2, 
(b) by any otherpersoa with tbe.coDl8Dt.ef,the.,. ... ·~": 
or applicant for the ·patent or any per8OA ... .-from. •. 'wbe!n.,rhe; ... -:: 
derives ti.tle~ , 
If the working was effected for the pUrpose of reuoD4ble 'tri,al bnt, 
and··if.Jt was rf'eaSoDably Decesaaqr, having "l'ept'd 'to ·.tb.: .nature~· 30 
the IDveIltkJn, ·that the· worJdDg. tor.·.chat pup-.:ab0Uld ,·tie;~~·~ 
m puaJic:,," 
~. 33~' '(1) Wh'ere a complete apeciflc:ation fa mad ,or proceeded ~~ ~II 
... ~·.·.·in pursuance of an application which was acc:ompallied. Jj)Y a prov£.. '. 
pubUca- lional specificat~on or where a complete specification ftledaloac 3, 
tioIrltber "with 'an application Is treated by' :virtue of a direc~ioD under .lIb-. 
provI.\ ': .. Jection (3) of section 9 as a provisional specification, then, not-
=:~I 'J! ~ttbstanding anythibg contain~ in this ~c:t, :~e'.:~~ii~~~ .. ~~a11 
.... noC .retuse:to·p-antth6 Pltent~ and the'JNl~t Wllnot &e~ 

.. ,- .. ' 
..... , 
n,.CE;.iDalrtdated •• bJI,RallJJl aDlyr .. that; mY' matter'~ .dnarf~ fa the 
,~\pnIId8ImIalt .tpl"Maation .. 0 •. ~ the . .JPedflcation. treated _. aforesaid 
.l~·_ ai".provisiaDat ..apeci1lcatton . was ,used, in, IncUa or .. publislu,!d. in . 
')';:;~ '0. kl4!lIewber .... ant Jime ,after. tbe date ot ~ ilin, o~ that 
j.·ip8(dftutloD . 
..• _.(,2). ~ ...... CQJQplete .apecfftcaUoD. is flIed. in ~~C8 of • 
COllventioll ,application, ihen notwithstanding anything contained 
in this Act, the.CQDtfoller shall notrefUS8 to grant the.pateQt, and 
the patent shall not be revoked or invalidated, by reason only that 
10 .. ~1 m.Uer. ~osed in ~y application. fOf p~tectlon ~.a CODven-
.Uop ~ntrY,.,upo~hlcb ,the convention .application .. foundedJlVu 
•. ~, Qt .. Tz)di~ Qr.,pq:b.Ushed. ~ .India or elsewhere at ~Y,tfme dter 
_ .:lhe~ 4a~ Qt. ~ .~"'ppJqtiOD. fQr pmtection. 
, ,J!;.'~I:8JlyWn,. coatalDed in·tJrls. Act, ,.the.Control- KOID" 
1 1,.·leJlt4la1lDOt IretwIe: to,accept a complete speciftcatioa,.ft'r ·.Patent :=:s. 
;~er '-Jl'8Bt·apateDt, and·. pateut,.an n~t be·rewlred or·fnvalichlCed .taDc.. 
... .,~t1'UlOl1 onl~ of ~-any circumstances which, by virtu .. of .~U()ll are 0DlJ 
'<2' •. _iMet:fon~30 .,··aectiOD 31 or. ,section' 32, do- Dot . constitute..- aD u del-
anticipation of the Invention claimed in the apecUIc:at1on. crlbecl in RC-
a.. ..... _. 
PaovlSIon 1'0. SJl'.CRBCT or CJ:RTAD' iH\iU'I'IOlfB 
tIaaI. ao-it' " . -' IiDd'It. 
31.,. (1) 'Where; IB.reapect ofj an application .made-~before or after Secreq 
.'1cth .. ..eemJlleDCement· ot. thfa.: Act for·a patent, it appears to the Con- directiODI 
troller that the invention is one of a class notified to him. by the to~UD' &liven-as Central Government as relevant for defence purposes, or, where UODI reI .. 
r otbeIiwisethe Ulvention appears. to him. to be so. relev8D~ he may nnt for 
"&N~ cUre~tUm&. for. p1!Qh1biting· or . restricting thepublication..~ of deface 
f" ·lafeImaUoD.:!1ri~ ft!II}Ject to themvention or the communication' of pazpa •• 
-ri _~ Jaf~~ to: any "'.PenQQ QI' c:1aat of..; p8I'SOns, ·apeclfted, in'-\the 
" ~"directions. . . . . 
(2) Where the Controller gives any such directions as are refer 
-(r-.:l. to·in~su1HeetiOll (1), he shall give notice of the application and 
,1-~tbe,directioD& to· the Central Government, and the Central Gov-
;;"umrient-shall,~.uponl J:eCeipt-of: . such ·:notice,·: consider whetl1m!".tbe 
~., 35 publication of the invention would. be prejUdiCial to the defence ~ of 
. ~d1a. and if upon such consideration, it appears to 't that the pub-
. ~fcirtf.on of the bivention would not so prejudice, give 'notice to the 
~.' ~~trop~ to ,that-' e1rect;~ who ~aD th~eupon revok~, th~ ~tfoDi 
:II·: .... "Ilotur the ;"8ppUcant· 8Cc:ordJD,ly. 

• 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained In sub-section 
(1), where the Central Government is of opinion that an invention In 
respect of which the Controller has not given any direetions under· . .'. 
sub-section (1) ,is relevant for defence purposes, it may at any time 
before acceptance of the complete specification notify the Controller S 
to that effect, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section "hall 
apply as if the invention were one of tile class notified by the Central 
Government, and accordingly the Controller shall give notice to the 
Central Government of the directions issue~ by him. 
SecntcJ 38. The question whether an invention in respect of which dIree- 10 
:r:tl~ tions have been.;.gWen under section 35 continues to be releyan~ ~or 
cIlcall~ re- defence purposes shall be re-eonsidered by the Central Government 
--eel. within nine months from the date of the flling of the application for 
the patent, and once at least during every subsequent year, and if, on 
such re-consideration it appears to the Central Government that the I, 
publication of the invention would no longer be prejudicial to the 
defence of India it shall forthwith give notice to the Controller accor-
dingly and the Controller shall thereupon revoke the directions pre--
viously given by him. 
37. (1) So long as any directions under section 35 are fD force 20 
In respect of an appUcation-
(a) the Controller shall not pass an order refusing to accept' 
the lame; and 
(b) notwithstanding anything contaIned in IihiS Act, no 
appeal shan lie from any order of the Controller passed in 2, 
respect thereof: 
Provided that the application may, subject to the directioDa, 
proceed up to the stage of the acceptance of the complete specifica-
tion, but the acceptance shall not be advertised nor the specification 
published, and no patent shall be granted in pursuance of the appU· 30 
c:atiOD. 
(2) Where a complete specification filed In pursuance of an appli-
cation for a patent for an invention in resped of which directionl 
have been given under section 35 is accepted during "the continuance 
ID force of the directions, then- 3, 
(a) if any use of the invention is made during·the contmu-
ance in force of the directions by ~r on. bj!half pf or. to the order 
ft.' +It. ("I..n_"".nt +". ft1"ft.vf~fnn. .. ft.f .~tlnn. 100_ 10t and 1ma 

..... _ ...... -....... ~. -... . 'II ... .... .., -.. _ . 
.shaD apply In relation to that use as If the patent hacl-been 
IJ'8Dted for the !Dventlon; and 
(b) It It appeal'! to the Central Government that the aprli~----------­
cant for the patent has suffered hardship by reason of the 
, continuance In force of the directions, the Central Govemm£nt 
may make to him such payment (if any) by way of solatJum 
as appears to the Central GOV'el'Dment to be reasonable having 
regard to the novelty and utiUty of the Invention and the pur-
Pose for which it Is designee!, and to any other relevant circum-
10 stances. 
(3) Where a patent Is granted m pursuaiia!=-nf an applatfoD In 
respect of which directions have been given under section S5~ DO 
renewal fee shall be payable In respect of any period during which 
those cIlrectloDs were In force. 
I' 38. When any direction given under section 35 Is revoked by the ~oc. 
Controller, then, notwithstanding any provision of this Act specify- :::, 
Ing the time within which any step should be taken or any act done direc-
in connection with an application for the patent, the Controller :nay, tions 
subject to such conditions, If any, as he thinks At to impose, extend and men-
20 the time for doing anythin$f required or authoris~to be done by or lion of 
under this Act In connection with the appUcatlon, .whether or Dot tim .. 
that time has previously expired. 
31. (1) No person resident In India shaD. except under the autho- Resldentl 
rity of a written permit granted by or on behalf of the Controller, Dot:o t 
2S make or cause to be made any application outside India for the grant ::re!tI or 
of a patent for an invention unless- outside 
IndiawiUl-
(a) an application for a patent for th'e same invention has out priGI' 
been made In India, not less than eight weeks before the applica- ~e~ 
tion outside India; and OIL 
30 (b) either DO diw!etlons have been ~_n u:nder sub-sectlon 
(I) of section 35 in relation to the application in India. or aU 
such directions haft been revoked. 
(Z) The C.ontroller shall Dot grant writt~ permlssinn to any per-
IOD to make any appUcatlon outside India without the prior eaD-
3S sent of the Central Government. 
(3) This seetioD shall not apply III relation to an invention for 
whleh an appUeation for protection has flrst been med In a country 
outalde India by a person resident outaide India. 

.... 
LlabW9 40: Wtthoat' prejudfee to 'thef prevliioa ,CftJ,1lta!Dect fa ~Cbapter xx. 
for COIl- If in respect of an application for a -,.tent, any per(q)n 'Ot!Jftbvenes 
:::- . any direction as to secrecy given. ,by. the Controller under. section 35- -
IeCUon 31 or makes or causes to. be made an application for the gr~t of. a patent 
or .ec:tlon outside India in contravention of .• ec:tion. 39. the applicatlon,f9f' patent S 
18.· . under this Act shall be deemed to have been abandon1!d and the 
patent granted. if any, shall be liable to,be..revoked under ae~on M. 
l'ina!lty 41. All orders of the Controller gtvtng directions as tQ secreey u 
of order. well as all orders of the Central' Government under this Chapter 
:r c:n:a1- shall be final and shall not be called in question in any cdurt on aDy 10 
Central ground whatsoever. 
009em.. 
ment. 
Savinp 0. Nothing in this Act shall be held fa) ,~ ilttt!di8IJaIum. by 
respect- the Controller of information concerning an application for 4l patent 
m. dis- or -a speciftcation filed in pursuancetbereof t~ ·theo Ccmtral C!overn. 
:!:m-m.ent or any department thereof,' for the ~se of 'the ~Ueatlon IS 
met. or speciftcation beingexammed for 'considering wheth.., aD' Older 
Grant 
and 
seaIiDI 
of 
_ .rPUeDt. 
'. UDder this section abould be made, ,vatfed' or't'evoked. 
'CRAPI'ER vm 
GRAlft' AND SULIN'G or PATENTS AND IIIGBTS COl'iI'iiildD wu •• 
" G. (1) Where a complete speci1lcation in pursuance of anapplJca- 20' 
tion for a patent has been accepted and either--
(a) the application has .not .. beenopposed undu·leQtioll 25 
and the time for the fllin~ of the opposition has expired; CXl" 
, (b) the application -hae"beeD'eppoSe(i and~ the epposition Iiu· 
been finally decided in favour oftM applicant; or 2S 
(c) the application has not been . refUsed by the Controller 
by virtue of any power wsted in him by this Act; 
, the patent shall, on request, made by the applicant iD~e prescrlbed· 
fonn, be granted' to the applicant or, in the case of a join.t application, 
to the applicants jointly, and the Controller-shalt cause the patent to 30 
be sealed with the seal of the patent office and the date on whlcJa 
, the p~tent is sealed mall be entered in the'Tegister. ' 
(2) Subject to the prOvisions of-sub-sectloil :(I),'mel'of the proYt .... 
sions of this Act with respect to patents of addition, a request UDder , 
this section, for the s~aHng of a patent shall be made not' later tJwi 3' 
the expiration of' a pettod of' sir months from the date ot"lclvertfle. 
ment of the ac:ceptm_ ofe·the eoiDPJ'et., lpitdeeatloJr. ., 

'( "'" 
Prn".,*d ..... 
(4)' 'Wheteilt -t'he '- exptrattoh.-of·th~ '1Sa1d- -'Six . 'months---any' 
~' -in reI8tfon· to the ;applicatidn 'for the patent is pend-
ing before the Controller or the High Court, the request may be, 
J ,- . .JUdIa~ the iP1'elCribed-period aftar the final· deaermiDatiOD 
of that proceeding; 
10 
(b) .1P1J.re,'the'_Ucant fOr ;one; of the 'applicants 'baa cUed 
befom the .uplr~tion of the time within which under the prov!-
mcma of this 8I11Hection the' request could -otherwise be made, 
the 'said req~ may.. be made at any t:ime wfttm:J twelve mon~ha. 
atter the date of the death or at such later time as the ContrQller 
...., lI18w .. l 
. 
(3) The peri~ within wbieh·tIIlder'8Ub-8ectioll, '(2)- il request b ~ 
u.-ali:Dtr. of -& patent ·may ,be made may,. kom time to time. be ex-
ISteadeel -by . the: Controller .to.BUell, IOlller period as may be speclfted 
In Imj--app1icatiGD .. made &0 ,hial, in ·that behalf, if the application Is 
made and. the. prescribed fee _paid within .that longer period: . 
. ' PrOVided that the first mentioned .period shall not be extended 
under this. aU1Hec:tiDD. by ~ore.than three months or such shorter 
20' periOCI U may be prescribed. 
. . E~-"'For.·the ~ 'Of ,this section a preceecting Ihall 
be,li:eemed,,1o be pendisg-lO:long-as the time for. any appeal therein 
(apart from any future extension of that time) has 'not expired, and 
~. proc:eeding shall be deemed to be finally determined when the time 
as for any appeal therein (apart frdm 'any -such extension)' has -expired 
wiUleut ·,the appe~. bein" . .,rought. 
" . 
"" Where at any time after a patent. has been -sealed in pursuance Amend." 
of an application under this Act. the Controller is satisfied. that the ment of 
person';to 'Whom the paMnt was 'granted. had died, 'or, in the case of patent 
3~ 'a ~bOay'c:orpOr8te-, \ hadlceased to 'exist, 'before ·the patent was sealed, Il'8Jltecl; 
tbe"eontrollermay"amend the patent by substituting for the name : ~ece:­
o(tha~'person the' 'D8lIle 'Of the person to whom the patent ought to e8Z1t~P -
haVe beeD-·grmted, . and the 'patent shall ·have effect. 'and shall be 
defImed·· ~ilw8yl' to haVe ·bad effect, -accordingly. 
3 "':G~'-I (1) SU'jeet· to· 'th~ other provisions t contamedln this Ad, Date at 
. S every' patent shaH' be "dated . as·of \ the date on which the complete pateat. 
apedlCatiOn" " .. ·.eeL··; 
'7, · .• ,(2).,~tioD~of :the .ctentulc ad~r shall be ftxed by 

Form. 
extent 
and 
e1fedof 
patat. 
Patent 
ri,hts 
not in-
. frinled 
when 
used 
for 
"'Sl-taiD 
patentees. 
• 
.. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contalned in this zection, DO pto. 
eeecUng shall be taken in respect of an infringement committed be-
fore the date of advertiaement of the acceptance of the complete 
specification. 
48. (1) Every patent shall be in the prescribed form and aball S 
have effect throughout India. 
(2) A patent shall be granted for GIDe friVenUOD only: 
Provided that it shall not be competent for any persOD In • 111ft 
or o~er proceeding to take any objection to a patent on the JroUDCi IO . 
that it has been granted for more then one invention. 
47. (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, & 
patent granted, 'whetherpefore or after the commencement of thJa 
Act. shall confer upon the patentee-
(4) where the patent Is for an article or substance, the IS 
exclusive right by himself,· his agents or licensees to make. use. 
exercise, sell or distribute such article or substance in India,' 
(b) where 0. patent Is for a process of manufacturing an 
article or substance. the exclusive right by himself. his agenta 
or licensees to use or exercise the process in India and of using 
or selling in India articles or substances made by such process 20 
and of authorising others so to do. . 
(2) The rights conferred Gn the patentee by this section shall be 
exercisable only subject to the provisions of any other law for the 
time ,being in force. 
ca. N otwithsvmding anything contained in thi3 Act,-
(4) the importation by or on behalf of the Government of 
any patented machine, apparatus or other article for the, pur-
pose merely of its own use, or 
(b) the importation by or on behalf of the Government of 
any patented medicine or"drug for the purposf;;-merely of its own 30a -
use or for distribution in any dispensary, hospital or other 
medical institution maintained by or on behalf of the Govern-
ment or any other dispensary, hospital or other medical insti-
tution which may be specified by the Central Government in 
this behalf by notification in the Official Qazette, or 3S 
(c) the m.lking of a patented machine, apparatus or other 
article or the use of a patented process or the making of an article 
by the use of the patented process by or on behalf of the Gov-
ernment for the purpose merely of its own use or ·by persona on 
its behalf who may be Ipeclally authorised fat the purpose, or 40 

s 
11 
(d) the making or use of a patented machine or apparatus 
or- either artiCle or-the-use-of a-patented process -or the,use of an 
article made by the use of the patented process, machine or 
apparatus for the purpose merely of experiment or research, in-
cluding the imparting of instructions to pupils, 
shall not be deemed to constitute an infringement of the rights con-
ferred on the patentee by this Act. 
O. (1) Where a vessel or aircraft registered in a foreign counU7 ~~~ot 
or a land vehicle owned by a person ordinarily resident in such infringed 
[0 country comes into India (including the tenitorial waters thereot) when used 
temporarily or aCCidentally only, the rights conferred by a patent on torettn 
for an 'invention shall not be deemed to be infringed by the use of v::-b. 
the invention- ~pora-
(a) in the body of the vessel or in the machinery, 18ckle, rily or 
15 apparatus or other accessories thereof, so far as the inventiOD accident-
is Used on board the vessel and for its actual needs only; or ~~~ 
(b) in the construction or working of the aircraft or land 
vehicle or of the accessories thereof; 
as the case may be. 
20 (2) This section shall not exteru1 to' vessels, aircraft or land 
vehicles owned by persons ordinarily resident in a foreign counu, 
the laws of which do not confer corresponding rights with respect 
to the use of inventions in vessels, aircraft or land vehicles owned 
by persons ordinarily resident in India while in the ports or within 
2S the territorial waters of that foreign country or otherwise within 
the jurisdiction of its courts. 
SO. (1) Where a patent is granted to two or more persons, each Rilht. 
of those persons shall, unless an agreement to the contrary is in of 
force, ,be entitled to en equal undivided share in the patent. co-owner. 
of patent.. 
30 (2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and :in 
section 51, where two or more. persons are registered as grantee or 
proprietor of a patent, then, unless an agreement to the contrary Is 
in force, each of those persons shall be entiUed, by himself or his 
agents, to mak~, use, exercise and sell the patented invention for 
3S his own .benefit Without accounting to the other person or persona. 
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in 
section 51 and to any agreement for the time being in force, a licence 
under a patent shall not be granted, and a share in a patent shall not 
be assigned, except with the consent of all persona, other than the 
40 licensor or assignor, who are registered as grantee or proprietor of 
the patent. 
1261 (B) LS-6. 

1'" 32 
Power of 
Controller 
to &ive 
directions 
to co-
owner •. 
(4) Where a patented article is sold by one of two or more per-
sons registered-as -grantee ·or proprietorofa patent,· the purchaset 
and any person claiming through him shall be entitled to deal witft 
the article in the same manner as if the article had been sold by a 
de~en~. S 
(5) Subject to the provisions contained' in this section, the rules 
of )aw applicable to the ownership and devolution of movable pro-
perty generally shall apply in relation to patents; and nothing con-
~ tained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall affect the mutual 
rights or obligations of trustees or .ot the legal representatives of a 10 
deceased. person or their rights or obUgations as such. 
(8) Nothing in this section shall affect the rights of the assignees 
of a partial interest in a 'patent created before the commencement 
at. this Act. 
51. (1) Where two or more persons are registered as grantee or IS 
proprietor of a patent, the Controller may, upon application made 
to him in the prescribed manner by any of those persons, give such 
directions in accordance with the application as to the sale or lease 
of the patent or any interest ther:ein, the gmnt of licences under the 
patent, or the exercise of any right under section 50 in relation 20 
thereto, as he thinks fit. 
(2) If any person registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent 
fails to evecute any instrument or to do any other thing required 
for the carrying out of any direction given under this section within 
.1 
fourteen days after being requested in writing so to do by any ot 2S 
the other persons so registered, the Controller may, upon application 
made to him i~ the .prescribed manner by any such other person, 
give directions empowering any person to execute that instrument 
or to do that thing in the name and on behalf of the person in default. 
(3) Before giving any directions in pursuaru:e o.f an application 30 
. under this section, the Controller shall give an opportunity to be 
heard-
(a) in the OBs~ of an application under sub-section (1), to 
the other person or persons registered as grantee or proprietor 
of the patent; 3S 
(b) in the case of an application under sub-section (2), to 
th~ person in default. 
(4) No direction shall be given under this section so as to affect 
the mutual rights or obligations of trustees or of the legal represen-
. tatives of a deceased person or of their rights or obligations as such, 40 
or which is inconsistent with the terms of .my agreement between 
co-proprietors of the patent. 

~·f~·?·~~3:~,:", .:~;I~~~ :;:.-~~ .• '.~~"t;~',f:.I':;~i~~:"::'7:.j··. '~~~.'~~~"";~.;.~,:j','" .. ;r- ~~ :._ 
" , 
rl.-.ww. - .. .;rIJl"'_~~f' 
, ,-r-'~ "1/;~·"'~~"4~.;1~::·; 
·f •.. <!.:~1 
,' .• ~ ~l') L,...". peteJit"'hUbeeD ... okecfOl1 th~ ,r0UDd tMt. GriM.;t;ti 
, patent was obtained wrongfully 1DCI'1Il eontravention of the rights of pateDtW': 
. tha petitioner 1_any.: .p8l"IOn. under orthrou,h whom be- claims, or, true ~""~ 
...... ·.petatun.foI:'levoca1:lon, the'court,~ of ....... JrIt . , •... ' 
. S"pa1leBt, ldb'ecta~the comJilete -8p!Ctftcatloa to be ameuded··by the·.- ,. 
ciusion of a claim or cliims in consequence of • fblc:UJlg that the tn-
.... ~ aOvered. bY iUch claim or claims had been obtam.d frozil' the o ....... ~ 
~petitiOnerp the court m~y, by order ~ed in the -aam,t: proceedial. b.r_~_ 
lltP,mtthe ,,nnt"~ the petitioner oi. the whole or ~part .of ,the:: IIIIL 
10 ~tion w~~ .the c~t b~ baa b8tID wrongfully obtained by . ," 
tJl!. pa~~~~~, ~ lieu of ~e Pftent so revoked or is ucl~d~, by . 
_~~iri.t~ :!",. , " :'"<J"' ~ 
{2) wm.-a aIlY·lUeh order is passe4, the Controller IhalI, on re-
R.~~ by tlJe petitioner made in the preacribed manner pat to 'be . , 
"-i ;\(.rf.."I~I·(i)·'in"e~ses Where the court permltstbe whol~ of ~ patent . S , . to be granted, a new patent bearing the same date and nUJilber 
as the patent revoked; 
~~t _~ __ ~~_-.~l!!.J.fe _E~ P':rplits a part only of the 
--,., ,patent to be grant!!Q, ~ new pat~Dt for such part bearing the .ame 
20' , ~'date' as the :p8t~; ~ked 'and niunbered "in such manner 
, ':' as may be p~bed: 
·~t. , 
Provided that the Controller nuay as a condition. of such 
.F~t rec)Pire the petitioner to flle a new ~d complete specUlea-
" tiOllJQ. the saUafactiOQ. o~the Controller detcriUng and claim t• 
,25 ,~t part of~tbe inventloD for which the. patent is to be p-aDted. 
(3)' No suit shall ,be brought 'for any infringement of a Pabmt 
gr~tecl·under:,thi8 teetioncommitted before the actual date·on which 
~uch pat:e~t .was granted. 
, I ~ ~ . , , '," • , ~.. • , 
'53. (1) SubJect to th~ provisions .of this Act, the term of every Term' 
30 patent· granted after' the commencement of this Act shall- pMtad. 
~ 
(a) . in respect of an i,nvention claiming the method -~r PI'C?-
cess, of manufacture of a substance, where the substance is .~­
.... oded for use, or is capable of. beina used, as food or as a medic~ 
or drug, be ten years fro~ ~e date of the patent; and 
3S Eb):' ,in res~ qf any other invention, be fourteen y~ fJ;'OPl 
,the date of the patent. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the PatentS ,and 'Delt-
gns Act, 1911, or in the patent granted thereunder, the term of'every 
.patent granted before the' commencement of this ·Act In reapect ·of 
~,an inv~tion claiming a substance or the method or procesi of manu-
, . J.eture,JD.~~f"w.h .. the IUbstaDce is intended for qae,' ar 

Patents 
of 
addition. 
is c,,.ble of being \lied, 81 food or as medicine or drug shall be ten 
years from the date of the patent; 
~videdthat _W'hf!re_at.~the·commencement of this Act any IUcb 
pateat:is in force by reason of ,an extension granted under the Act 
aforesaid, the patent shall cease to have effect on the expiration of 5 
the period of such extension. 
(3) A patent shall cease to have effect notwithstanding a!'lything 
therein or in this Act on the expiration of the period prescribed for 
the payment of any renewal fee, if that fee is not paid within the pres-
~ibed period or within that period as extended under this section. 10 
(4) The period prescribed for the payment of any renewal fee shall 
be extended to such period, not beilig~ore than three months longer 
than tbe prescribed period, as may be specified in a request made to 
the Controller if the request is made and the renewal fee and the 
prescribed additional fee paid before the expiration of the period IS 
so specified. 
CHAPI'ER IX 
PATB1ft'S or ADDmON 
54. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, where 
an application is made for a patent in respect of any improvement in 20 
or modification of an invention described or disclosed in the complete 
specification filed.therefor (in this AC'Lreferred to as the 'main in-
vention') and the applicant also applies or has applied for a patent 
for that invention or is the patentee in respect thereof, the Control-
ler may, if the applicant so requests, grant the patent for the improve- 2S 
ment or modification as a patent of addition. 
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, where an 
invention, being an improvement in or modification of another inven-
tion, is the subject of an independent patent and the patentee in 
respect of that patent is also the patentee in respect of the patent for 30 
the main invention, the Controller may, if the patentee so requests, 
by order, revoke the patent.for the improvement or modification and 
grant to the patentee a patent of addition in respect thereof, bearing 
the same date as the date of the paten~ so revoked. 
(3) A patent shall not be granted 85 a patent of addition' unless 3S 
the date of filing of the complete specification was the same as or 
later than the date of filing of the complete specification in respect of 
the main invention. . 
(4) A patent of addition shall not be sealed before the sealing of 
the pateut for the main invention; and if the period within which, 40 
but for the provisions of this sub-section, a request for the re::\ling 
of a patent of adc:Utlon co\1ld. be made under section 43 expires befo~ 

71b 
the period within which a request for the sealing of the patent for 
the main invention may be so made, the request for the sealing of 
~1!_~_patent_()f additio!!_ m-.-!lY_ he made at any time within the last 
mentioned period. 
S 55. (1) A patent of addition shall be granted for a term equal Termof 
to that of the patent for the main invention, or so much thereof as :;tentll 
has not expired, and shall remain in force during that term or addition. 
until the previous cesser of the patent for the main invention and 
no longer: 
10 Provided that if the patent for the main invention is revoked 
under this Act, the court, or, as the~case may be, the Controller, on 
request made to him by the patentee in the prescribed manner, may 
order that the patent of addition shall become an independent patent 
for the remainder of the term for the patent for the main in'V'ention 
IS and thereupon the patent shall continue in force as an independent 
patent accordingly. 
(2) No renewal fees shall be payable in respect of a patent of 
addition, but, if I!my such patent becomes an independent patent 
under sub-section (1), the same fees shall thereafter be payable, 
20 upon the same dates, as if the patent had been origin811y granted as 
an independent patent. 
56. (1) The grant ofa patent of addition shall not be refused,.and Validity of 
a patent granted as a patent of addition shall not be revoked or p:~~ts of 
invalidated, on the ground only that the invention claimed in the a 110D. 
25 complete specification does not involve any inventive steps having 
regard to any publication or use of-
(a) the main invention described in the complete specifica-
tion relating thereto; or 
(b) any improvement in or modification of the main inven-
30 tion described in the complete specification of a patent of addi-
tion to the patent for the main invention or of an application for 
such a pawnt of addition; 
and the validity of a patent of addition shall not be questioned on 
the ground that the invention ought to have been the subject of aD 
35 independent patent. 
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in deter-
rnining the novelty of the invention claimed in the complete sp~ci­
leation filed in pursuance of an application for a patent of addition 
regard shaH be had also to the complete specification in Which thE: 
-to matn inven~i9n is descIibed, . 

:1P' .~-. 
1'1 
36 
CHAP1'ER X 
AMENDMQrf OF SPZClnCATIONS 
Am.Dd~----I". (1) Subject to the provisions of section 59, the Controller may, 
!nent of upon application made under this section in the prescribed manner 
::::::f~~e by an applicant for a patent or by a patentee, allow the complete S 
Controller. specification to be amended subject to such conditions, if any, &S the 
Amend· 
mentof 
lpecift.ca-
tion before 
High 
Controller thinks fit: 
Provided that the Controller shall not pass any order allowing or 
refUSing an application to amend a specification under this section 
while any suit before a court for the infringement of the patent or 10 
any proceeding before the High Csn-f0r the revocation of the patent 
is pending, whether the suit or proceeding commenced before or after 
the flling of the application to amend. 
(Z) Every application for leave to amend a specification under this 
section shall state the nature of the proposed amendment, and shall IS 
give full particulars of the reasons for which the application is made. 
(3) Every application for leave to amend a specification under 
this section made after the acceptance of the complete specification 
and the nature of the proposed amendment shall be advertised in the 
prescribed manner. 20 
(4) Where an application is advertised under sub..section (3), 
any person interested mey, within the prescribed period after the 
advertisement thereof, give notice to the Controller of opposition 
thereto; and where such a notice is given within the period aforesaid, 
the Controller shall notify the person by whom the application under 2S 
this section is made and shall give to that per~on and to the oppo-· 
nent an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case. 
(5) An amendment under this section of a complete specification 
may be, or include, an amendment of the priority date of a claim. 
(6) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to 30 
the right of an applicant for a patent to amend his specification to 
comply with the directions of the Controller passed before the accept· 
ance of the cODilplete specification ane in the course of proceedings in 
opposition to the grant of a patent. 
58. (1) In any proceeding before the High Court for the revocation 3S 
of a patent, the High Court may, subject to the provisions contained 
in section 59, allow the patentee to amend his complete specification 
in such manner and subject to such tenns as to costs, advertisement 
or otherwise, as the High Court may think fit, and if in any proceed· 
ings for revocation the High Court decides that the patent is invalid, 40 
it may allow the specification to be amended under this section instead 
of revoking the patent. 

'ff 
(2) Where an application for an order under this section is made 
---to--theHigh Court, the applicant shall give notice of the application 
to the Controller, and the Controller shall be entitled to appear and 
be heard, and shall appear if 80 directed -by the High Court. 
S (3) Copies of all orders of the High Court allowing the patentee 
to amend the speciftcation shall be transmitted by the High Court to 
the Controller who shall on receipt thereof cause an entry thereof 
and reference thereto to be made in the register. 
59. (1) No amendment of a complete specification shall be made Supple-
10 except by way of disdaimer, corieclion or explaDa- men~ 
tion, and no amendment thereof shan be allowed, except provwona. 
for the purpose of correcting an obviOUS mistake, the effect of which :n:nd-
would be that the specification as amended would claim or describe ment of 
matter not in substance disclosed in the specification before the speciflca-
I S amendment, . or that any claim of the specification as amended tion. 
would not fall wholly within the scope of a claim of the specifica-
tion before the amendment. 
(2) Where after the date of advertisement of acceptance of a 
complete specification, any amendment of the specification i~ allowed 
20 by the Controller or by the High Court,-
30 
(a) the amendment shall for al'l purposes be deemed to fonn 
part of the specification; 
(b) the fact that the specification has been amended shall be 
advertised in the Oftlcial Gazette; and 
(c) the right of the applicant or patentee to make amend-
ment shall not be called in question except on the groUDd of 
fraud. 
(3) In construing the specification as amended, reference 1T1ay be 
made to the specification as originally accepted. 
- CHAPrER XI 
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS 
60. (1) Where a patent has ceased to have effect by reason of Applica-
fuilure to pay any renewal fee within the prescribed period or within tiona for 
that period as extended under sub-section (3) of section 53, and the r~~tora~n 
3S Controller is satisfied, upon application made within three years from ~at:~: 
the date on which the patent ceased to have effect, that the failure 
was unintentional and that no undue delay has occurred in the mak-
ing or prosecution of the application, he shall, by order, restore the 
patent and any patent of adrlition specified in the application which 
40 has ceased to have effect on the cesser of that patent. 

.31 
(2) An application under this section may be made by the person 
who was the patentee or by his legal representative; and where the--
patent was held by two or more persons jointly, the application may, 
with the leave of the Controller, be made by one or more of them 
without joining the othel'';. 5 
(3) An application under this section shall contain a statement, 
verified in the prescribed manner, fully setting out the circumstances 
which led to the failure to pay the prescribed fee. and the Controller 
may require from the applicant such further evidence as he may 
think necessary. 10 
Procedure 11. (1) If, after hearing the applicant UDder section 60 in cases 
for disposal where the applicant so desires or the Controller thinks fit, the Con-
ol applica- troller is satisfied that a prima facie case has been made out for an 
tiO=~on order under that sec~ion, he shall advertise the application in the 
~~ lapsed prescribed manner; and within the prescribed period any person r S 
patents. interested may give notice to the Controller of opposition thereto on 
either or both of the following grounds, that is to 18,,-
(4) that the failure to pay the renewal fee was not uninten-
tional; or 
(b) that there has been undue delay in the making of the 0 
application. 2 
(2) If notice of opposition is given within the period aforesaid. 
the Controller shall notify the applicant, and shall give to him and 
to the opponent an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case. 
(3) If no notice of opposition is given within the period aforesaid 2S 
or if in the case of opposition, the decision of the ControlJer is in 
favour of ~he applicant, the Controller shall, upon payment of any 
unpaid renewal fee and such additional fee as may be prescribed, 
make the order in accordance with the application. 
(4) The Controller may. it he thinks fit as a CGDdition of rest~ 30 
.~ the patent, require ttlat an entry shall be made in the register of any 
document or matter which, under the provisions of this Act, has to 
'Ri&hts of 
patentees 
of lapsed 
patents 
which 
have been 
restored. 
be entered in the register but which has not been so entered. 
8%. (1) Where a patent is restored, the rights of the patentee shall 
be subject to such provisions as may be prescribed and to such other c; 
provisions as the Controller thinks fit to impose for the protection or 3. 
compensation of persons who may have begun to avail themselves 
of, or have taken definite steps by contract or otherwise to avail 
themselves of, the patented, invention between the date when the 
patent ceased 'to have effect and the date of the order restoring the 
patent under this Chapter. 40 

at' 
(2) No suit or other proceeding shall be commenced or prosecuted 
in respect of an infringement of '1 patent committed between the date 
on which the patent ceased to have elfect and the-date -of the order 
restoring the patent. 
CHAPTER XII 
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF PATENTS 
63. (1) A patentee may, at any time by giving notice in the pres- Surrender 
cribed manner to the Controller, offer to surrender his patent. of patent.. 
(2) Whel!e--such an offer is made, the Controller shall advprtise the 
10 offer in the prescribed manner, and also notify every person other 
than the patentee whose name appears in the register as having an 
interest in the patent. 
(3) Any person interested may, within the prescribed period after 
such advertisement, give notice to the Controller of opposition to the 
IS surrender, and where any such notice is given the Controller shall 
notify the patentee. 
(4) If the' Controller is satisfied after hearing the patentee and 
any opponent, if desirous of being heard, that the patent may pro-
perly be surrendered, he may accept the offer and, by order, revoke 
20 the patent. --, , 
M. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, a patent'R tl ' evoca on whether granted before or after the commencement of this Act, of patents. . 
may, on the petition of any person interested or of the Central 
Government, be revoked by the High Court on any of the following 
25 grounds, that is to say-
~o 
(a) that the invention, so far as Claimed in any claim of the 
complete specification, was claimed in a valid claim of earlier 
priority date contained in the complete specification of another 
patent granted in India; 
(b) that the patent was granted on the applicafion of a 
person d5't -entitled under the provisions of thb Act to apply 
therefor: 
Provided that a patent in force at the commencement of this 
Act shall not be revoked on the ground that the applicant was 
35 the communicatee or the importer of the invention in India and 
therefore not entitled to make an application for the grant of a 
patent under this Act; 
(e) that the patent was obtained wrongfully in contraven-
tion of the rights of the petitioner or any person under or through 
40 whom he claims: 
• 

40 
(d> that the subject of any claim of .;he cClmplete sp~cift­
cation is n.ot _ an invel!tion ~!~!ll!l_--.!h~_~~~,~f th~ ~; 
<e> that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the 
complete specification is not new. having regard to what was 
known or used in India before the priority date of the claim or S 
to what was published in India or elsewhere in any CJf the 
documents referred to in section 13; 
(1) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the 
complete specification is obvious or does not involve any inven-
, .. tive step, having regard to what was known or used in India 10 
or what was published in India or elsewhere before the priority 
date of the claim; 
(g) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of 
the complete specification, is not useful; . 
(h) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and IS 
fairly describe the invention and the method by which it is to 
be performed, that is to say, that the description of the method 
or the instructions for the working of the invention as contained 
in the comnletp. specification are not by themselves suftlcient to 
enable a person in India possessing average skill in, and average 20 
-b.owledge of, the art, to which. the invention relates, to .-ork 
the invention, or that it does not disclose the best method of 
performing it which was known to the applicant for the patent 
and for which he was entitled to claim protection; 
(i) that the scope of any claim of the complete specification 2S 
is not sufficiently and clearly defined or that any claim of the 
complete specification is not fairly based on the matter disclosed 
in the specification; 
(j) that the patent was obtained on a false suggestion or 
representation; 30 
~. (k) that the subject of any claim of the complete sp~iftca-
tion is not patentable under this Act; 
(1) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the 
complete specification was secretly used in India, otherwise 
th~ as mentioned in sub-section (2), before the priority date 3S 
of the claim; 
(m) that the applicant for the patent has faUed to disclose 
to the Controller the information required by section 8 or has 
furnished information which in material particulars was false 
to his knowledge; 40 

41 
(n) that the applicant contravened any direction for secrecy 
_ passed un~~~ __ !l~tio~ __ !!?_~E ,I!lad,e an application for the .. grant of 
a patent outside India in contravention of section 39; 
(0) that leave to amend the complete specification under 
S Bection 57 or section 58 was obtained by fraud. 
10 
20 
(2) For the purposes of clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (lJ.-
(4) no account shall be taken of secret use; and 
(b) where the patent is for a process or for a product as 
made by a process described or claim*'the importation into 
India of the product made abroad by that process shan consti-
tute knowledge or use in India of the invention on the date of 
the importation. 
(3) For the purposes of clause (1) of sub-section (1), no account 
shall be taken of any use of the invention-
(a) for the purpose of reasonable trial or experiment only; 
ar : ... J ~1tif1l 
(b) by the Government or by any person authorised by the 
Government or by a Government undertaking, in consequence 
of the applicant for-the patent or any p_son from whom he 
derives title having communicated Or disclosed the invention 
directly or indirectly to the Government or person authorised 
as aforesaid or to the Government undertaking; or 
(c) by any other person, in consequence of the applicant 
fOr the patent or any person from whom he derlves title having 
communicated or disclosed the invention, and without the 
consent or acquiescence of the applicant or of any person from 
whom he derives title. 
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section 
(1)', a patent may be ri!Vpked by the High C!&urt on the petition of 
the Central Government, if the High Court is satisfied that the 
30 patentee has without reasonable cause failed to comply with the 
request of the Central Gqvernment to make, USe or exercise the 
patented invention for the p~ases of Government within the 
meaning of section 99 upon reasonable terms. 
(5) A notice of any petition for revocation of a patent under this 
35 section shall be served on all persons appearing from the register to 
be proprietors of that patent or to have shares or interests therem 
and it shall not be necessary to serve a notIce on any ochee person. 

~ 
Revocation _ IS. (1) Where at any time after acceptance of a complete ipeci-
_ of patendt --ftcation, -the. Central-Government is satisfied that an application for 
M~m- . - ment of a patent or a patent is fQl' an invention relating to atoDUc energy for 
complete which no patent can be granted under sub-section (1) of section 20 
specifica- of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, it may direct the Controller to 5 33 of 1962. 
:t:c on refuse to proceed further with the application or to revoke the 
tiona from patent, as the case may be, and thereupon the Controller, after 
Central giving nQtice to the applicant or, as the case may be, to the patentee 
Govern- and every other person -whose name has been entered in the register 
ment in as having an interest in the patent, and after giving them an oppor- 10 
~=:m, t.unity of being heard, may refuse ta .proceed further with -the 
to atomic application or may revoke the patent. 
energy. (2) In any proceedings under sub-section (1), the Controller 
Revoca-
tion of 
patent 
in public 
interest. 
Register 
of patents 
andparti-
culars to 
be entered 
therein. 
may allow the applicant for the patent or the patentee to amend the 
complete specification in such manner as he considers necessary 15 
instead of :refusing to proceed with the application or revoking the 
patent. . I ". I . _ I 
; • I _ ~ .... , l.l...M-"':~ 
68. Where the Central Government is of opinion that a patent 
or the mode in which it is exercised is mischievous to the State or . 
generally prejudiCial to the public, it may, after giving the patentee 20 
liD opportunity to be heard, make a declaration to that e1fect in the 
Officlal Gazette and. -thereupon the paten_hall be deemed to be re-
voked. . - . ' 
I ..; ..... :... _'- ~.-: ~ ---.! ___ ~J 
CHAPTER XIII 
REGISTER OF PATENTS 25 
67. (1) There shall be kept at the patent office a register ot 
patents, wherein shall be entered-
(a) the names and addresses of grantees of patents; 
(b) notifications of assignments and of transmissions of 
patents, of licences under patents, and of amendments, exten- 30 
sions, and revocations of patents; and 
(c) particulars of such other D;laUers affecting the validity 
or proprietorship of patents as may be prescribed. 
(2) No notice of any trust, whether express, implied or construc-
tive, shall be entered in the register, and the Controller shall not be 35 
affected by any such notice. 
(3) Subject to the superintendence and direction of the Central 
Government, the register shall be kept under the control and 
management of the Controller . 
. (4) For the Il'emoval of doubts, it is hereby declared that the re- 40 
girster of patents. existing at the commencement of this Act shall be 
incorporated in, and form part of, the register under this Act. 

43 
88. An assigimient of a patent or of a share in a patent, a mort- Assign _ 
__ gagef-licence _.or the creation of any other interest in a patent shall menta, 
not be valid unless the same were in writing and the agreement etc, not 
between the parties concerned is reduced to the form of a document to be 
~ embodying all the terms and conditions governing their rights and valid 
J unless it 
obligations and the application for Il'egistration of such document writin, 
is filed in the prescribed :menner with the Controller within three and re· 
months, or within such further period not exceeding three months gfstered., 
in the aggregate as the Controler on application made in the pres-
10 cribed manner allows, from the execution thereof: 
Provided that the document shaU;\vhen registered, have effect 
from the date of its execution. 
69 (1) Where any person becomes entitled by assignment, trans- Re,istra. 
mission or operation of law to a patent or to a share in a patent or tion of 
IS b~omes entitled as a mortgagee, licensee or otherwise to any other assign-
interest in u patent, he shall apply in writing in the prescribed menta, 
manner to the Controller for the registration of his title or, as the :-:;~na 
case may be, of notice of his interest in the register. etc.' 
. 
(2) vVithou~ prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) , an 
20 application for the registration of the title of any person becoming 
entitled by assignment to a patent or a ware in a patent or becom-
ing entitled by virt'ue of a mortgage, licence or other instrument to 
any other intel'est jn a patent may be made in the prescribed man-
ner by the assignor, mortgagor, licensor or other party to that in-
2S strument, as the case may be, 
(3) Where an application is made under this section for the regis-
tration of the title of any person the Controller shall, upon proof 
of title to hi.) satisfaction,-
(a) where that person is entitled to a patent or a share in 
30 a patent, register him in the register as proprietor or co-pro-
prietor of the patent, and enter in the register particulars of the 
instrument or..event by which he derives title; or 
(b) where that person is entitled to any other interest in 
the patent, enter in the register notice of his interest, with par-
3S ticulars of the instrument, if any, creating it: 
Provided that where the validity of the transaction or transmis-
sion or of the mortgage, licence or other transaction referred to in 
sub-section (1) is in dispute between the parties, the Controller may 
refuse to register the transmission, mortgage, licence or other 
40 transaction until_ the rights of the parties have been determind by 
a competent court. 

, .. 
. . 
(4) There shall be supplied to the Controller in the preseribed 
---manner for· being 1Ued in the patent _oftlce copies of all aJreementl, 
licences and other documents a1fecting the title to any patent or any 
licence thereunder authenticated in'the prescribed: manner and also 
such other documents as may be prescribed relevant to the subject- 5 
matter: 
Power of 
re,istered 
grantee or 
proprietor 
to deal 
with 
patent. 
Recti1k .... 
tion of 
l'eliater 
by Hi&h 
Court. 
Provided that in the case of licences gmnted under a patent, the 
Controller shall, if 80 requested by the patentee or lic~J take 
.tep8 for securing that the terms of the licence are not disclosed to 
any person exeept under the order of a court. 10 
(5) Except for the purposes of an application under sub-sec-
tion (1) or of an application to rectify the register, a document 
in respect of which no entry has been made in the register under 
sub-section (3) shall not be admitted by the Controller or by any 
court as evidence of the title of any person to a patent or to a share J S 
or interest therein unless the Controller or the court, for reasons to 
be recorded in writing, otherwise directs. 
70. Subject to the provisions contained in this Act relating to co-
ownership of patents and subjec~ also to any rights vested in £lny 
other person of which notice is entered in the register, the person or 20 
persons registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent shall have 
power to-1t\ssign, grant licences under~ -.or otherwise deal with, the, 
patent and to give effectual receipts for any consideration for any 
such assignment, licence or dealing: 
Provided that any equities in respect of the patent may be en- 25 
forced in like manner as in respect of any other movable property., 
11. (1) The High Court may, on the application of any persoD 
aggrieved-
(a) by the absence or omission 
entry; or 
(b) by any entry made in the 
cause; or 
from the register of any 
30 
register without sufficient 
(c) by any entry wrongly remaining on the register; or 
(d) by any error or defect in any entry in the register; 
make such order for the making, variation or deletion, of any entry 35 
therein as it may think fit. 
(2) In any proceeding under this section the High Court may 
decide any question that may be necessary or expedient to decide in 
connection with the rectification of the register. 
(3) Notice of any apprtcation to the High Court under this lection 40 
shall 'be given in the prescribed manner to the Controller who .hall 

be entitled to appear and be heard on the application, and 'hall 
____ --"appear.if_so directed_by the court .. 
43 ot 1958. 
(4) Any order of the High Court under this section rectifyin, 
the register shall direct that notice of the rectification shall be served 
5 upon the Controller in the prescribed: manner who shall upon receipt 
of such notice rectify the 1'egister accordingly. 
71. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act and aDJ ~e::ter 
rules made th~reunder, the register shall at all convenient times be for m:::~ 
open to inspection by the public; and certified copies, sealed with the tion. 
10 seal of the patent office, of any entry in the regisrer shall be given to 
'5 
any person requiring them on payment of the prescrloed fee. 
(2) The register shan be prima facie evidence of any matters 
required or authorised by or under this Act to be entered therein. 
CHAPTER XIV 
PATENT OFFICI!: AND ESTABLISHMENT 
73. (1) The Controller General of Patents, Designs a,nd Trade Controller 
Marks appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Trade and a~dOther 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, shall be the Controller of Patents for 0 cers. 
the purpoS'es of this Act. 
20 (2) The Central Government -may appoint as man,- examiners 
and other officers and with such designations as it thinks fit for the 
purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and directions 'of 
the Controller, such functions of the Controller under this Act as it 
may' from time to time authorise them to discharge. 
25 '1'- (1) For the purpose of this Act there shall be established .. Patent 
office which shall be known as the patent office. oftlce 
and ita 
(2) The head office of the patent office shall be at such place as branche.. 
'the Central Government may specify, and for the purpose of facili-
tating the registration of patents there may be established, at such 
30 other places as the Centra! Govermnent may think fit,..branc:h offices 
of the patent office. 
(3) There shall be a seal of the patent oftice. 
75. All officers and employees of the patent office shall be in- Restric-
capable, during the period for which they hold their appointments, tiolU on 
35 to acquire or take, directly or indirectly, except by inh~ritance .or employee~ 
bequest, any right or interest in any patent issued by that oftlee. o~pataent OU&ce S 
to richt or 
interelt 
inpatentl. 

t 
Ot!lcer. 18. An omcer or employee in the patent oftice sh:a1l not. except 
-and·· --wh.en required or auth.orised by this Act or under a direction in 
. employee. writing of the Central Government or the Controller or by order of not to . furnish a CQurt,-
informa-
tion, etc. (a) furnish information on a mat~r which is being or has , 
been, dealt with under this Act or under the Indian Patents and 
Designs Act, 1911; or 
(b) prepare ar assist in the preparation of a document re-
quired or permitted by or under this Act or under the Indian 
2 of !tll. 
Patents and Designs Act, 1911, to be lodged in the paten~ office; 10 I of 1911 
or 
Control!er 
to have 
certaill 
powerlof 
a civil 
court. 
Powerot 
Controller 
to correct 
clerical 
errOl'l,etlc. 
(e) conduct a search in the records of the patent office. 
CHAPTER XV 
POWERS OF CONTROLLER GENERALLY 
77. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Controller IS 
in any proceedings before him under this Act shall have the powers 
of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) lummoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
and examining him on oath;' 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any docu-
m'ent; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) issuilig commissions for the examination of witnesses 
20 
or documents; 25 
(e) awarding ~osts; 
(f) reviewing his own decision on application made 
prescribed manner; 
(g) setting aside orders passed ex parte; 
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
in the 
(2) Any order for costs awarded by the Controller in exercise of 
the powers conferred upon him under sub-section (1) shall be ~xe­
cutable as a decree of a civil court. 
78. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sections 
57 and 59 as regards amendment of complete specifications filed in 3' 
pursuance of an application for a patent and subject to the provi-
sions of section 44, the Controller may. in accordance with the 
5 of 1908. 

" 
provisions 01 this section, correct any clerical error in any patent or 
in any specification or other document filed in pursuance of such 
--application or in any application for a patent or any clerical error 
in any matter which is entered in the register. 
S (2) A correction may be made in pursuance of this section either 
upon a request in writing made by any person interested and accom-
panied by the prescribed fee, or without such a request. 
(3) Where the Controller proposes to make any such correctlaa 
as aforesaid otherwise than in pursuance of a request made under 
10 this section, he shall give notice of the proposal to the patentee or 
the applicant for the patent, as the--ease may be, and to any otheJ 
person who appears to him to be concerned, and shall give them an 
opportunity to be heard before making the correction. 
(4) Where a request is made under this section for the correction 
15 of any error in a patent or application for a patent or any document 
filed in pursuance of such an application, and it appears to the Con-
troller that the correction would materially alter the meaning or 
scope of the document to which the request relates and (lugbt not to 
be made without notice to persons affected thereby, he shall require 
20 notice of the nature of the proposed correction to be advertised in 
the prescribed manner. 
(5) Within the prescribed time afte. any such advertisement as' 
aforesaid any person interested may give notice to the Controller of 
opposition to the request, and, where such notice of opposition ia 
2S given, the Controller shall give notice thereof to the person by whom 
the request was made, and shall give to him and to the opponent 
an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case. 
79. Subject to any rules made in this behalf, in any proceediDa Evidence 
under this Act before the Controller evidenc~ shall be given by h~w to be 
30 affidavit in the absence of directions by the Controller to the con- lIven an~ 
trary, but in any case in which the Controller thinks it right so to ~~:::l~er 
do, he may take pral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, evidence in respect 
by affidavit, or roay anow any party~. be cross-examined on the thereof. 
contents of his affidavit. 
35 80. Without prejudice to any proVISion contained in this Exercise 
Act requiring the Controller to hear any party to the proceedings of discre-
thereunder or to give any such party an opportunity to be heard, the tionary b 
Controller shall give to any applicant for a patent, or for flmendment ~::::ll:r. 
of a specification (if within the prescribed time the applicant so 
40 requires) an opportunity to be heard before exercising adversely to 
the applicant any discretion vested in the Controller by or under this 
Act. 
1361 B LS-8 

-'V' 
DjlpOAl 81. Where under the provisions of this Act or the rules made there .. 
b! Eontrol- under the Controller may extend the time for doin, any act, DOtbiDI 
-rttr Of intlifsact shall be deemed to require him to give notice to or hear 
tilP:lI!~- the party interested in opposing the extension, nor shall any ap~al o .... .l.or Ii f " utenaion e rom any order of the Controller grantmg such extenSIon. 5 
oftlm •. 
CHAPTER XVI 
WORKING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCES, LICENCES OF RIGHT AND 
REVOCATION 
De4nitiolLl 
ofupatent-
eel articles" 
and 
-patentee". 
82. In this Chapter,-
(a) "patented article" includes any article made by a patent- 10 
ed process; and 
(b) "patentee" includes an exclusive licensee. 
General 83. Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in thf8 
prlneiples Act, in exercising the powers conferred by this Chapter, regard shall 
to·PPllC~~~~ be had to the following general considerations, namely,- 15 wor 
of patented (a) that patents are granted to encourage inventions and to 
iuYentions. secure that the inventions are worked in India on n commercial 
scale and to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable 
without undue delay; and 
Compul-
sory 
licences. 
(b) that they are not granted merely to enable lJatentees to 20 
enjoy a mon~poly for the importation of the patented article. 
84. (1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the 
date of the sealing of a patent, any person interested may make an 
application to the Controller alleging that the reasonable require-
ments of the ,pUblic with respect to the patented invention have not 25 
been satisfied and praying for the grant of a compulsory licence to 
work the patented invenltion. 
(2) An application under this section may be made by any person 
aotwJ.thstanding that he is already the holda' of a licence under the 
paient and no person shal'l be estopped from alleging that the reason- 30 
able req,uirements of the public with respect to the patented inven .. 
tion are not satisfied by reason of any admission made by him, whe-
ther in stlch a licence or otherwise or by reason of his having accepted 
such a licence. 
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall contain a state- 35 
ment setting out the nature of the applicant's interest together with 
'such particulars as m1ay be prescribed and the facts upon which the 
application is based. 

49 
I ."" .. 
(4) In considering the application filed under this section the Con-
troller shall take into account the matters set out in section 85. --------
6~ of 19~1. 
(5) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requirement. 
• of the public with respect to the patented invention have not beeD 
5 satisfied, may order the patentee to grant a licence upon such terms 
as he may deem fit. 
(6) Where the Controller directs the patentee to grant a licence 
he may as incidental thereto exercise the powers set out in section 93. 
(7) The decision of the Controller shall be subject to appeal to 
10 the Central Government. 
20 
85. In determining whether or not to make an order in pursuance Matter. 
of an application filed under section 84, the Controller shall 'take Into to be takeD' 
account:- into account 
(i) the nature of the invention, the :time which has elapsed in grantinJ 
since the sealing of the patent and the measures already taken by c:ompulaory 
the patentee or any licensee to make full use of the invention; l1ceneea. 
(ii) the ability of the applicant to work the invention to the 
public adwntage; 
(iii) where the invention relates to a scheduled industry 
within the meaning of the Industries (Develotynent and Regula-
tion) Act, 1951, whether the applicant would be granted per-
mission to work the invention, if a licence were granJted; 
(il1) the capacity of the applicant to undertake the risk fD 
providing capital and working the invention, if the appUcation 
were granted; 
but shall not be required to take into account matters subsequent 
to the making of the application. 
86. (1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the Endorse-
date of the sealing of a patent, the Central Government may make an ment ot 
application to the Controller for an order that the patent Day be patent 
endorsed with the words ''f;icences of right" on-'the ground that the with 
~o reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented !:rds 
invention have not been satisfied. "Licence. 
(2) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requirements of of rilh1.". 
the public with respect to the pa:tented invention have not been satta-
~5 fled, may make an order that the patent be endorsed with the worda 
- ''Licences of right". 
(3) Where a patent of addition is in force, any application made 
under this section for an endorsement either of the original patent 
or of the patent of addition shall be treated as an application for the 

1 ~' 50 
_____ ~_ndorsement of both patents, and where a patent of addition is granted 
~. in re&pect-of a patent which is already endorsed under this section, 
the paten~ of addition Bhall also be so endorsed. 
eertain 
patents 
deemed to 
beendors-
ed with the 
word'S 
''licen-
ees of 
right". 
Effect of 
endorse-
ment of 
patent 
with the 
words 
"Licences 
of right". 
(4) All endorsements of patents made under this section shall be . S 
entered in the register and published in the Ofticial Gazette and in 
such other manner as the Controller thinks desirable for bringing the 
endorsement to the notice of manufacturers. 
87. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,-
(a) every patent in force at the commencement of this Act 
in respect of inventions relating to- 10 
(i) substances used or capable of being used as food or 
as medicine or drug; 
(ii) the methods or processes for the manufacture or 
production of any such su'bstance as is referred to in sub-
clause (i); IS 
(iii) the methods or processes for the manufacture or 
production of chemical substances (including alloys, opti-
cal glass, semi-conductors and inter-metallic compounds); 
and 
(b) every pafent granted after the commencement of this 20 
Act in respect of any such invention as is referred to In sub-
clauaes (ii) and (iii) of clause (a); 
shan be deemed to be endorsed with the words "Licences of right", 
in the case of inventions referred to in clause (a), from the com-
mencement of this Act, and, in the case of inventions referred to in 2S 
clause (b), from the date of sealing of the patent. 
(2) In respect of every patent which is deemed to be endorsed 
with the words "Licences of right" under this section, the provisions 
of section 88 shall apply. 
88. (1) Where a~atent has been endorsed with the words. "Licences 30 
of right", any person who is interested in working the patented inven. 
tion in India may require the patentee to grant him a licence for the 
purpose on such terms as may be mutually a,greed upon. 
(2) If the partia are unable to agree on the terms of the licence, 
either of them may apply in the prescribed manner to the Controller 3S 
to settle the tE'nns thereof. 
(3) The Controller shall, after giving notice to the parties and 
hearing them and after making such enquiry as he may deem fit, 
decide the terms on which the licence shall be granted by the patentee. 

_,.:;J ... 
(4) The Controller may at any time before the terms of the 
licence are mutually agreed upon or decided by the Controller, on 
----application-made to him in this behalf by any person who has made 
any such requisition as is referred to in sub-section (1), permit him 
5 to work the patented invention on such terms as the Controller may, 
pending agreement between the parties or decision by the Controller, 
think fit to impose. 
(5) In respect of every patent deemed to be endorsed with the 
words "Licences of right" under sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) of 
10 clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 87, whether the patent was 
granted before or . ..after the commencement of this Act, the royality 
and other remuneration reserved to the patentee under a 
licence grnnted to any person after such commencement shall 
in no case exceed four per cent. of the net ex-factory sale price 
15 in bulk of the patented article (exclusive of taxes levied under any 
law for the time being in force and any commissions payable) 
determined in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(6) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (5), the provisions 
of sub-sections (1), (2), (4), (5) and (6) of section 93 (regarding 
20 the powers of the Controller) and of sections 94 and 95 shall apply 
to licences granted under this section as they apply to licences 
granted under section 84. 
89. (1) Where, in 'respect of a patent, a compulsory licence has Revocation 
been gRiMed or the endorsement "Licences of right" has been made of patents 
25 or is deemed to have been made, the Central Government or any per- ~y ~ 11 
son interested may, after the expiration of two years from the date to~~o~- er 
of the order granting the first compulsory licence or, as the case may working. 
be, the date of the endorsement, apply to the Controller for an order 
revoking the patent on the ground that the reasonable requirements 
30 of the public with respect to the patented invention have not been 
satisfied. 
(2) Every application under su'b-section (1) shall contain such 
particulars ·as may be prescribed and the facts upon which the appli-
• cation is based, end~"l\n the case of an application other than. by the 
3S Central' Government, shal1 also set out the nature of the appUcant's 
interest. 
(3) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requirement.t; 
of the public with respect to thep8ltented inventi(}n have not been 
satisfied, may make an order revoking the patent. 
40 90. For the purposes of sections 84, 86 and 89, the reasonable re- When 
quirements of the public shall be deemed not to have been satisfted- reasonable 
(a) if, by reason of the default of the patentee to manufacture :::~:f 
in India to an adequate extent and supply on reasonable terms the °the public 
patented article or a part of the patentpq article which is neces- deemed 
not latiJ-
led. 

52 
sary for its efficient working or if, by reason of the refusal of the 
_____ patentee to gnmt a licence or licences on reasonable terms.-
(i) an existing trade or industry or the development 
thereof or the establishment of any new trade or industry in 
India or the trade or industry of any person or classes of per- 5 
sons trading or manufacturing in India is prejudiced; or 
(ii) the demand for the patented article is not being met 
to an adequate extent or on reasonable terms from manufac-
ture in India; or 
(iii) a market for the export of the patented article 10 
mnufactured in India is not being supplied or developed or 
such market capable of being created is not being created: or 
(iv) the establishment or development of commercial 
activities in India is prejudiced; or 
(b) if, by t"eason of conditions imposed by the patentee (whe- IS 
ther before or after the commencement of this Act) upon the 
grant of licences under the patent, or upon the purchase, hire or 
use of the patented article or process, the mar.ufecture, use or 
sale of materials not protected by the patent, or the establishment 
or development of any trade or industry in India, Is prejudiced; 20 
or 
(c,-if the patented invention is not beinsg worked in India on 
a commercial scale to an adequate extent or is not being 10 
worked to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable; or 
(d) if the demand for the patented article in India is being 2' 
met to a substantial extent by importation from abroad by-
(i) the patentee or persons claiming under him; or 
(ii) persons directly or indirectly purchasing fram him; 
or . " ~---.: ...... 
(iii) other persons egainst whom the patentee is not ~u. 30 
ing or has not taken proceedings for infringement; or· 
fe) if the working of the patented inveIlltion in India on a 
commercial scale is being prevented or hindered by the importa- "-
tion from abroad of the patented article by the patentee or the 
other persons referred to in the preceding cIeuse. 3S 
Power of 91. (1) Where an application under section 84, section 86 or sec-
Controller tion 89, as the case may be, is made on the ground mentioned in clause 
to adjourn (e) of section 90 and the Controller is satisfied that the time which applica-tions for has elapsed since the sealing of the patent has for any reason been 
compulsory insufficient to enable the invention to be worked on a commercial 40 
licences, scale to an adequate extent or to enable the invention to be so work-
ed to the fullest extent that is reasonably practica}.J'~,. he may, by 

III 
order, adjourn the further hearing of the application for such period etc., m 
not exceeding twelve months in the aggregate as appears to him to certain 
--be su1Bcient for the invention to be 80 worked. caaes. 
(2) No adjournment under sub-section (1) shall be ordered unless 
5 the Controller is satisfied that the patentee has taken with prompti-
tude adequate or reasonable steps to start the working of the inven-
tion in India on a commercial scale and to an adequate extent. 
(3) In computing the period of twelve months referred to in sub-
section (1) in any case where the patentee establishes that the reason 
10 why a patented invention could not be worked or worked on a com-
mercial scale to an adequ:eUt,extent or worked to the fullest extent 
that is reasonably practicable before the date of the application 
was due to any State or Central Act or any rule or regulation made 
thereunder or any order of the Government imposed otherwise than 
I S by way of a condition for the working of the invention in India or 
for the disposal of the patented articles or of the articles made by the 
process or by the use of the patented plant, machinery or apparatus, 
the period during which such Act, rule or regulation or order of 
Government preventing the working of the invention was in force 
20 shall be excluded. 
9%. (1) Where the Controller is satisfied, upon consideration of Procedure 
an application under section 44, section 86 or section 89, that a prima for dealing 
facie case has been made out for the making of an order, he shall wit.h appli-
direct the applicant to serve copies of the application upon the ~~~:~ec-
2S patentee and any other person appearing from the register to be tiona 84, 
interested in the patent in respect of which the application is made, 88 and BI. 
and shall advertise the application in the Ofticial Gazette. 
(2) The patentee or any other person desiring to oppose the 
application may, within such time as may be prescribed or within 
30 such further time as the Controller may on application (made either 
before or after the expiration of the prescribed. time) allow, give to 
the Controller notice of opposition. 
(3) Any such notice of opposition shall contain a statement set-
ting out the grounds on which the application is opposed. 
(4) Where any such notice of opposition is duly given, the Con-
35 troller shall notify the applicant, and shall give to the applicant and 
the opponent an opportunity to be heard before deciding the case. 
93. (1) Where the Controller is satisfied on application made Powers of 
under section 84 that the manufacture, use or sale of materials not Controller 
An protected by the patent is prejudiced by reason of conditiona imposed in gr~?,~ 
~ . ~mp~o~ 
by the patentee upon the grant of lIcences under the patent, or upon JifleDCes. 

M 
the purcha3e, hire or use of the patented article or process, he may, 
subject to the provisions of that section, order the grant of licences 
_under the patent to such customers of the applicant as he thinks 11t_ 
as well as to the applicant. 
(2) Where an application under section 84 is made ·by a person 5 
being the holder of a licence under the patent, the Controller may, 
if he makes an order for the grant of a licence to the applicant, order 
the existing licence to be cancelled, or may, if he thinks fit, instead 
of making an order for the grant of a licence to the applicant, order 
the existing licence to be amended. 10 
(3) Where on an ap~ion made under section 84 of the Control-, 
ler orders the grant of a licence, he may direct that the licence shell 
operate-
(a) to deprive the patentee of any right which he may have 
as patentee to make, use, exercise or vend the invention or to 15 
grant licences under the patent; 
(b) to revoke all existing licences in respect of the inven-
tion. 
(4) Where two or more patents are held by the same patentee and 
an applicant for a compulsory licence establishes that the reasonable 20 
requirements of the public have not been satisfied with respect to 
some only of the said pateKts, then, if the Controller is satisfied that 
the applicant cannot effiCiently or 91tisfactorily work· the licence 
granted to him under those patents without infringing the other 
patents held by the patentee, he may, by order, direct the grant of a 25 
licence in respect of the other patents also to enable the licensee to 
work the patent or patents in regard to which a licence is granted 
under section 84. 
(5) Where the terms and conditions of a licence have been settled 
by the Controller, an application may be made to the Controller by 30 
the licensee for the revision of the terms on the ground that the 
terms settled have proved to be more onerous than originally ex-
pected and that in conseqttence thereof the licensee is unable to work 
the invention except at a loss: 
Provided that no such application shall be entertained,-
(a) unless the licensee has worked the ,invention on a com-
mercial scale for a period of at least twelve months, or 
(b) a second time. 
(6) The decision of the Controller shall be subject to appeal to 
the Central Government. 
35 

• 
M. The powers of the Controller upon an application made under Genera! 
section 84 3hall be exercised with a view to securing the following purpose. 
---general purposes, that is to say,- for . 
Jl'antm, 
5 
(4) tmtt patented. inventions are worked on a commercial ~omp1Hsory 
scale in India without undue delay and to the fullest extent that hcences. 
is reasonably practicable; 
(b) that the interests of any pel'BOn for the time being 
working or developing an invention in India under the protec-
tion of a patent are not unfairly prejudiced. 
lOIS. (1) In aettling the terms and conditions of a Iicetletl'!!t_4H1der Terms and 
15 
20 
section 84,· the Controller shall endeavour to secure- conditiona 
. olcom-
(i) that the royalty and other remuneration, if any, reserved pulsory 
to the patentee or other person beneficially entitled to the patent, licences. 
is reasonable, having regard to the nature of the invention, the 
expenditure incurred by the ,patentee in making the invention or 
in developing it and obtaining a patent and keeping it in force 
and other relevant factors; 
(n) that the patented invention is worked. to the fullest ex-
tent by the person to whom the licence is granted and with rea-
sonable profit to him; 
(iii) that the patented articles -are made available to .. the 
public at reasonable prices. 
(2) No licence granted by the Controller shall authorise the 
licensee to import the patented article or an article 01' substance 
2S lnade by a patented process trom abroad where such importation 
would, but for such authorisation, constitute an infringement of the 
rights of the patentee. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section l (2), the 
Central Government may, if in its opinion it fa necessary 80 to do 
30 in the public interest, direct the Controller at any time to authorise 
any licensee in respect of a patent to import the patented article or 
an article or substance made by a patented process from abroad 
(subject to such conditions as it considen necessary to impose relat-
i~ among other matters to the quantum of import, the sale price of 
35 the imported article, and the period of importation), and thereupon 
the Controller shall give effect to the directions. 
. , 
96. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the other provi- LicelUinl 
sions of this Chapter, at any time after the sealing of a patent, any of related 
person who has the right to work any other patented invention either patents. 
40 as patentee or as licensee thereof, exclusive or otherwise, may apply 
1261 (B) LS--I. 

Special 
provision 
for com-
pulsory 
licences 
On noti1lca-
tion by 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
58' 
to the Controller for the grant of a licence of the flrsi mentioned 
PJ.~~g.J_on the ground that he is prevented or hindered without such 
licence from working the other invention efficiently or to ihe best 
advantage possible.-
(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made unless the Con- 5 
troller is satisfied that the applicant is able and willing to grant, or 
proCure the grant to the patentee and his licensees if they 80 desire 
of, a licence in respect of the other invention on reasonable terms. 
(3) When the Controller is satisfied that the conditions mentioned 
in sub-section (1) have been established by the -applicant, I:le.:l!\ay 10 
make an order on such tenns as he thinks fit granting a licence under 
the first mentiqned patent and a similar order under the other patent 
if so requested by the proprietor of the first mentioned patent or his 
licensee. . -
(4) The provisions of sections 92 and 110 shall apply to licences IS 
granted under this section as they apply to licences granted under sec-
tion 84. 
(5) The decision of ,the Controller shall be subject to appeal to 
the Central Government. 
97.- (1) If the Central Government is satisfied in respect of ~y 20 
patent or class of patents in force that it is necess&Ty or expedie~ 
in the public interest that compulsory 'licences should be granted at 
any time after the sealing thereof to work the invention or inven-
tions, it may make a declaration to that effect in theoftlcial Gazette, 
and thereupon the following provisions shall have effect, that is~o 25 
say-
(i) the Controller shall on application made at any time after 
the notification by any person interested grant ~o the applicant 
a licence under the patent on such terms as he thinks fit; 
(ii) in settling the terms of a licence gI-anted under this sec- 30 
tion, the Controller shall endeavour to secure thai the articles 
manufactured under the patent shall be available to the public at 
the lowest"rices consistent with the patentees deriving a reaSC)]i-
able advantage from their patent rights. 
(2) The provisions of sections 92, 93, 94 and 95 shall apply in reo- 35 
lation to the grant of licences under this section as they Ilpply in 
relation to the grant of licences under section 84. 
(3) The decision of the Controller shall be subject to appeal to 
the Central Government. - - . 

57 
98. Any. .or~er for the grant of a licence under this Chapter shall Order 
____ ~perate as if it were a d~ granting a licence executed by _ '_the for __ 
patentee and all other _ necessary parties embodyiq the terms aDd licence 
conditions, if any, settled by the Controller. to ope-rate as 
5 CHAPTER XVII 
USE OF INVENTIONS FOR PURPoSES OF GOVERNMENT A-1'IlD ACQ UISITION OF 
INVENTIONS BY CENTRAL GoVERNMENT 
a deed 
between 
parties 
concern-
ed. 
99. (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, an invention is said to Meaning 
be used for the purposes of Government if it is made, used, exercised of use of 
10 or vended for the purposes of the Central Government, a State Gov- invention, 
ernmentor a Government undertaking or any other undertaking in for purr-. . . . poses 0 
a class or classes of mdustrles whIch the Central Government, havmg Govern-
regard to the interests of the general public may notify in this behalf ment. 
in the Official Gazette. 
15 (2) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply in the case of 
any such use of an invention as is deemed not to constitute an in-
fringement of the patentee's rights under section 48 and under which 
no royalty or other remunera~icn is payable to the patentee. 
100. (1) Notwiths~ding anything contained in this ,Act, at any Power of 
20 time after an application for a patent has been filed at the pat~t Central 
office or a patent has been granted, the Central Government and any Govern-
person authorised in writing by it, may make, use, exercise or vend ment to 
the invention for the purposes of Government in accordance with the :~f:-;.n-
provisions of this Chapter. purposes 
(2) Where an invention has, before the priority date of the rele- of Govern 
25 vant claim of the complete specification, been duly recorded in a ment. 
document, or te.;ted or tried, by or on behalf of the Government or 
a Government undertaking, otherwise than in consequence of the 
communication of the invention directly or indirectly by the patentee 
30 or by a person from whom he derives title, any use of the invention 
for the purposes of Government may be made free of any royalty or 
other remuneration to the patentee. 
(3) If and so far as the invention has not been so recorded or tried 
or tested as aforesaid, any use of the invention made by the Central 
Government or any person 6uthorised by it under sub-sectiOD (1), 
35 at any t~e after the acceptance of the complete specification in res-
pect of the patent or til consequence of. any such communJcation u 
aforesaid, shall be made upon terms as may be ~greed upon either 

before or after the use, between the Central Government or any 
person authorised under sub-section (1) and the patentee, o~, ~s mal 
in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a 
reference under section 103. 
(4) The authorisation by the Central Government in respect of an 5 
invention may be given under this section, either before or after the 
patent is granted and either before or after the acts in respect of 
which such authorisation is given or done, and may be given to any 
person, whether or not he is authorised directly or indirectly by the 
applicant or the patentee to make, use, exercise or vend- .. the inven- 10 
tion. 
(5) Where an invention has been made, used, exercised or vended 
by or with the authority of the Central Government for the purposes 
of Government under this section, then, unless it appears to the 
Government that it would be contrary to the public interest so to do, 15 
the Government shall notify the patentee as soon as practicable after 
the use has begun and furnish him with such information as to the 
extent of the making, use, exercise or vending of the invention as he 
may, from time to time, reasonably require; and where the Ule of 
the invention has been for the purposes of a Government undertaking 20 
or an undertaking in a class or claases of industries notified by the 
Central Government under section 99, the Central! Government may 
call for such information as may be necessary for this purpose from 
such undertaking. 
(6) The right to make, use, exercise and vend an invention for the 25 
purposes ot Government under sub-eection (1) shall Include the right 
to sell the goods which have been made in exercise of that right, and 
a purchaser of goods so sold, and a person claiming through him, shall 
have the power to deal with the goods as if the Central Government 
or the person authorised under sub-sect1on (1) were the patentee of 30 
the invention. 
(7) Where in .respect of a patent which has been the subject of an 
authorisation under this section, there is an exclusive licensee 8i is 
referred to in sub-sectlon (3) of section 101, or where such patent baa 
been assigned to the patentee in consideration of royalties or other 3S 
benefits detennined by reference to the use of the invention (includ-
ing payments by way of minimum royalty), the notice directed to be 
given under sub-section (5) shall also be given to such exclusive 
licensee or assignor as the. case may be, and the reference to the 
patentee in sUb-section (3) shall be deemed' to include a reference to 40 
such assignor or exclUtlive licensee. .' 

101. (1) In relation to any use of a ~tented invention, or an m- Rights ot 
ventton in respect of which an application tor a patent is pending, third 
made for the pur.poses of Government- ---parties if 
. . respect 0 (4) by the Central Government or any 1"IIIIpel~iO"!D authorised by use of 
5 the Central Government under aecticm 100; or inventiol 
(b) by the patentee or applicant tor the patent to the order for pur-
made by the Central Government, Peooses of vern-
the provisions of any licence, assignment or agreement granted or menl 
made, whether before or after the commencemeDt of this Aot, bet-
10 ween the patentee or applicant for the patent (or any person who 
derives title from him or :bom. whcm he derives title) aDd &IPJ per-
son other than the Central Government shall be of no effect 10 far 
as those provisiOl'l&-
(i) restrict or regulate the use for the purposes of Govern-
ment of the invention, or of any model, document or informa-
tion relating thereto, or 
(ii) provide for the making of payments in respect of any 
use of the invention or of the model, document or information 
relating thereto for the purposes of Government (tncluding pay-
ments by way of minimum royalty); 
and the reproduction or pUblication of any model or document in 
connection with the said use for the PW'pUSeS of Government shall 
not be deemed to be an infringement of any copyright subsisting in 
the model or document. 
25 (2) Where the patent, or the right to apply for or obtain the 
patent, has been assigned to the patentee in consideration of royal-
ties or other benefits determined by reference til the use of the in-
vention (including payments by way of minimum royalty) J then, in 
relation to any use of the invention made for the purposes of Gov-
30 emment by. the p~tentee to the order of the Central Government, 
lRIb-section (3) of section 100 shall have ef!ect as it tm.t UIIe were 
made by virtue of an authority given u.nder that section; 'lnCl any 
use of the invention. for the purposes of Government by virtue of 
sub-section (3) of that section shall have effect as if the reference 
35 to the patentee included a reference to the a~signor of the patent, 
and any sum payable by virtue of that sub-section shall be divided 
between the patentee and the assignor in such proportion as may 
be agreed upon between them or. as may in default of agreement be 
determined by the High Court on a reference under sec:tion 103 . 
. . 
40 (3) Where by virtue of sub-section (3) of section 100, payments 
are reql$'ed to be made by the Central Government or persons 
authorised under sub-Bection (1) of that section in respect of the 
use of an invention for the purposes of Government and where in 

60 
r~spect of such .Pfltent t4ere is a1:1 ex~lusive licensee ~uthorised under 
~s . licence to .use th~' lnventi9n for .the purpOS(~S of. GoverI)men~. 
such sum shall be shared by the ,patentee and s.uGh IJcel)see in '~uch-­
proportions, if a~7, as may be agreed upon betweekl them or ns may 
in default of agreement be determined by the High Court 011 a S 
reference under section 103 to be just, having regard to any expen-
diture incurred by the licensee-
(a) in developing the said invention; Of 
(b) in making payments to the patentees other than royal-
ties or other benefits determined by refell'nee to' the Use of ~h'e I 0 
invention, including paym~nts by way. vfminimum royalty in 
. I 
consideration of the licence. 
Acquisi- 102. (1) The Central Government may, if satisfied that it ta 
non of necessary that an invention which is the subject of an application 
inventions for a' patent or a patent should be acquired from the applicant or IS 
:~::tentl the patentee for a public purpose, publish a notification to that 
Central effect in the Official Gazette, and thereupon the invention or patent 
Govern- and all rights in respect of the invention or pat~nt shall, by force 
ment. of this section, stand transferred to and be vested in the Central 
Reference 
to High 
Court of 
disputes 
as to use 
for pur-
pose$ of 
Govern-
. mente 
Government. 20 
(2) Notice of the acquisition shall be giV~ll to the applicant, and, 
where a patent ha-s been granted, to the patentee and other persons, 
if any, appearing in the register as having D.Jll interest in the patent. 
(3) The Central Government shall pay to the applicant, or, as 
the case may be, the patentee and other persolls ..iippearing on the 2S 
register as having an interest in the patent such compensation as 
may be agreed upon between the Central 'Government and the ap-
plicant, or the patentee and other persons; or, as may be in default 
of agreement, be determined by the High Court on a reference 
under section 103 to be just having regard to the expenditure in- 30 
curred in conection with the invention and, in the C9Se of a 
patent, the term thereof, the period during which and the manner 
in which it has already been worked (including the profits made 
€iurin.g such period by the patentee or ~y his licensee whetlier ex-
cluSive or otherwise) and other relevant factors:' 3S 
.103. (1) &;1y dispute as to the exercise by the Central Govern-
ment or a person authorised by it of the powers conferred by 8ec-
tion 100,. or. as to terms for the use of an invention for the purposes 
of Government thereunder or as to the right of any person to 40 
receive any. part of a payment madE' in pursuance of sub-section 
(3) of that section or as to the amount of compensaticn payable for 
the asquisition of an ill:vention or a patent under section 102, mey be 

11 
referred to the High Court by either party to the dispute in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the rules of the High Court. 
(2) In any proceedings under this section to wnich the Central 
Government is a party,. the Central Government may--
• ,0 .. " . 
S (4) if the patentee is a party to the proceedings, petitlon 
by way of counter-claim for revocation of the patent on any 
ground upon which a pateM may be revoked under section 64; 
and 
(b) whether a patentee is or is not a party to the proceed-
10 ings, put ,in issue, the validity of the r::t~:cnt without petitionini 
for its revocation. ' , , 
(3) If in sud! proceedings as aforesaid allY question arises \vhe-
ther ,an invention has been recorded, tested or trIed as is Dl'entioned 
in section 100, and the disclosure of any documentregardin, the 
IS invention, or' of any evidence of the test or trial thereof. ' would, 
in the opinion of the Central Government, be prej udicial to the 
public interest, the disclosure may . be made confidentially to the 
advocate of the other party or to an indepp.r.dc~t expert mutu&l1y 
agreed upon. 
20 (4) In determining under this section any dispute between the 
Central Government and any person as to tC"rms for the use of an 
invention for the purposes of Government, the High Court shall 
have regard to any benefit or compensation which that person or 
any person from whom he derives title, may have received, or may 
2S be entitled to receive, directly or indirectly in respect of the use 
of the invention in question for the purposes of Government. 
(5) In any proceedings under this section, the High Court may 
at any time order the whole proceedings or any question or issue of 
fact arising therein to be referred to an official refree, commis-
30 si9~er or an arbitrator on such terms as th(> High Coq,r't may direct, 
and references to the High Court in the foregoing provisions of this 
section shall be construed accordingly. 
(6) Where the Invention claimed in a patent was made by a per-
son who at the time it was made was in the service of the Central 
3S Government or of a State Government or was an employee of a 
Government undertaking and the subject-matter of the invention is 
certified by the relevant Government or the principal ofBcer of the 
. Government. undertaking to be connected with the work done in the 
course of the normal duties, of the Government servant or employee 

J-urisdic-
tion. 
Power of 
court to 
make 
declara-
tion as 
to non-
infrin,e-
ment. 
of the Government undertaking, then, notwithstanding anything con-
tained in this section, any dispute of the nature referred to in sub-
section (1) relating to the invention shall be disposed of by- the ------- ----
Central Government conformably to the provisions of this section 
so far as may be applicable, but -before doing 80 the Central Govern- S 
meat aball give an opportunity to the patentee and aach other parties 
as it considers have an interest in the matter to be heard. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
St1l'1'S CONcautING DJI'ItIHGKMmT or PATDTS 
104. No suit for a declaration under section 105 or for any relief 10 
UDder 18Cti0D 106 or for infringement of a pateDt shall be maututecl 
in any court inferior to a district court having jurisdiction to try 
the suit. 
lOS. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34 of the 
Specific Relief Act, 1963, any person may institute a suit for a declara- IS n of 1963. 
tion that the use by him of any process, or the making, use or sale of 
any article by him, does Dot, or would not, constitute an infringement 
of a claim of a patent against the patentee or the holder of an 
exclusive licence under the patent, notwithstanding that no assertion 
to the contrary has been made 'by the . patentee or the licensee, if it 2. 
is shown-
(a) that the plaintiff has applied in writing to the patentee 
or exclusive licensee for a written acknowledgment to the effect 
of the declaration claimed and has furnished him with full 
particulars in writing of the process or article in question: and 2S 
(b) that the patentee or licensee has refused or neglected 
to give such aD acknowledgment. 
(2) The costs of all parties in a suit for a declaration brought by 
virtue of this section shall, unless for special reasons the court 
thinks it to order otherwise; be paid by the plaintift. . 30 
(3) The validity of a claim of the specification of a patent shall 
not be called in question in a suit for a declaration brought by 
virtue 9f this section, and accordingly the making or refusal of such 
a declaration in the case of a patent shall not be deemed to imply 
that the patent is valid or invalid. - 35 
(4) A suit for a declaration may -be brought by virtue of this 
section at any time after the date of advertisement of acceptance of 
the complete &peei1lca1iOll of a patent, and references In thls sectlOil 
to the patentee shall be construed accordingly. 

r ,. I . 
101. (1) Where any person (whether entitled to or interested in l'ower of 
a patent or an application for a patent or not) threatens any other cou~_~_--, 
person ·by circulars or advertisements or by communications, oral or :::f in 
in writing, addressed to that or any other person, with proceedings cases ot 
5 for ~gep1ent of a patent, any person aggrieved thereby may bring lI'oundless 
a suit against him praying for the following reliefs, that is to say- thr~ats of ·infrmge-
(4) a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustift- mGt pro-
able; . ceedings. 
(b) an injunction against the continuance of the threats; and 
10 ...:-=--- (c) such damages, if any, as he has sustained thereby. 
(2) Unless in s:uch suit the defendant proves that the ac~s in res-
pect of which the proceedings were threatened constitute or, if done, 
would constitute, an infringement of a patent or of rights arising from 
the publication of a complete specification in respect of a claim of 
15 the specification not shown by the plaintiff to be invalid, the court 
may grant to the plaiDtiff all or any of the reliefs prayed for. 
Expla7l4tion.-A mere notification of the existence of a patent 
does not constitute a threat of proceeding within the meaning of this 
section. 
2~I07. In any suit for infringement of a patent, every ground on ~efe~ees 
which it may be revoked under section 64 shall be available as a fm S~l1ts orm-ground for defence. fringe-
ment. 
108. The reliefs which a court may grant in any suit for in- Reliefs 
fringement include an injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as in suits 
2S the court thinks fit) and, at the option of the plaintiff, either damages fo~ in-
or an account of profits. . frin,ement. 
109. (1) The holder of an exclusive licence shall have the like right Rightof 
as the patentee to institute a suit in respect of any infringement of exclusive 
the patent committ~d after the date of the licence, and in awarding licensee 
30 damages or an account of prOfits. or grant~g a~y other relief in any t~~_ 
saCb -suit the court shall take mto conSIderatIon any loss slMered ~gs 
or likely to be suffered by the exclusive licensee as such or, as the against 
case may be, the profits earned by means of the infringement so far infringe-
as it constitutes an infringement of the rights of the exclusive ment. 
3S licensee as such. 
(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent by the holder of an 
exclusive licence under sub-section (1), the pa ten tee shall, unless he 
has joined as a plaintiff in the suit, be added as a defendant, but a 
patentee so added as defendant shall not be liable for any costs unless 
40 he enters an appearance and takes part in the proceedings. 
1261 (B) LS-IO. 

RiP' .• f 
licensee 
under 
section 
Mto 
take 
proceed-
inCa 
apinat 
intrinae-
meat. 
Beatric-
Uim on 
powerot 
court to 
Il'8Dt 
d8~ 
or 
account 
ofproftts 
tor m-
trfDce. 
JDent. 
Restric-
tionon 
power 
of court. 
f ,-
M' 
110. Any person to whom a licence has been granted UDder section 
84 shall be entitled to call upon the patentee to take. p~oceedings to 
prevent any infringement of the patent, and, if the patentee refUseS----
or neglects to do so within two months after being 80 called upon, the 
lkwlsee may institute proceedings for the iDfringemmt In ht. 0.. 5 
Dame as though he were the patentee, making the patentee • defeD· ' 
daDt; but a patentee 80 added as c:le:fendant shal1 not be liable for any 
coats unless he enters an appearance and takes part In the proceed-
ings. 
w. (1) In • su1t for iD.fringement of a patent dam... or an 10 
account of profits shall not be granted against the defendaDt who 
proves that at the date of the infringement he was not aware and had 
no reasonable grounds for believing that the patent existed. 
Explanation.-' A person shall not be deemed to have been aware 
or t(\ have had reasonable grounds for' believing that a patent exists 15 
by reason only of the application to an article of the word 'Patent', 
'Patented' or any word or words expressing or implying that a patent 
has been obtained for the article,unless the number of the patent 
aecompanies the word_ words in question. 
(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent the court may, if it 20 
thinks fit, refuse to grant any damages or an account of profits in 
respect of any infringement committed after a fallure to pay any 
renewal fee within the prescribed period and before any extension of 
that period. 
(3) Where an amendment of a specification by way of disclaimer, 25 
correction or explanation has been allowed under this Act after the 
publication of the specification, no damages or account of profits shall 
be granted in any proceeding in respect of the use of the invention 
..before the date of thii decision allowing the amendment, unless the 
court is satisfied that the specification as onginally publish~ was 30 
framed in good faith and with reasonable skill and knowledge. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the court to 
grant an injunction in any suit for infringement of a patent. 
112. If in proceedings for the infringement of a patent endorsed or 
deemed to be endorsed with the words "Licences of right" (otherwise 35 
than t>y the importation of the patentled. article from other countries) 
the infringing defendant is ready and willing to take a licence upon 
terms to be 'settled by the Controller as provided in section 88, no 

6, 
injunction shall be granted against him, and the amount (if any) to 
recoverable against him by way of damages shan not exceed double grant 
U1e ~ount which would have been recoverable aPinat him as-'licen-:-:~:~--'-' 
.. if such a 1iceDce had hem Jl"I.DteQ beb:e the earlieat IDfdnIe-certain 
S ment. . cases. 
113. (l) U in any pr~ings before a High Court for the revoca- Certiftcate 
tion of a patent under section 64 the validity of any claim of a speci- of va1id~ty 
fication is contested and that claim is found by the court to be valid, ft~:t::::ncl 
the Cou~ may certify that the validity of that claim was contested cests of 
10 in those proceedings and was upheld. ~ , subsequent 
suits tor 
(2) Where any such certificate has been granted, then, if in any =~ge­
subsequent suit before a court for infringement of that claim of the thereof. 
patent or in any subsequent proceeding for revocation of the patent 
in so far as it relates to that claim, the patentee or other person rely-
IS ing on the validity of the claim obtains a final order or judgment in 
his favour, he shall be entitled to an order for the payment 'of his 
full COBts~ charges and expenses of and incidental to any such suit 
or proceeding properly incurred so far as they concern the claim in 
respect of which the certificate was granted, unless the court trying 
20 the, suit or proceeding otheawise directs: 
Provided that the costs as'specified in this sub-section shall not 
be ordered when the party disputing the validity of the claim satisfies 
the court that he was not aware of the grant of the certificate when 
h8 raised·the dispute ·and withdrew forthwith such defence when he 
2S became aware of such a certificate. 
(;J) Nothin.l contained in this section shall 1?e ,construed as 
authorising courts hearing appeals from decrees or orders In suits 
for: infriDgement ~r petitions for revocation to pass orders for costs 
on the scale referred to tberein. " , . 
30 11-'. (1) If in proceedings for infringement of a patent it is found Relief for 
that any claim of the specification, being a claim In respect of which infringe-
infringement is alleged,' is valid, but that any other claim is' invalid, men~ ot 
the court may grant relief in respect of any valid claim which is ~::a1lT 
infringed: IPec:iftca-. . tI-. 
~ -,' '~Provide~:.that ,~ c~ .hall not gr~t rellef ex~t. by 'way of 
S injunction save in the circumstances mentioned in 81:1b-section (2). 

,"l , 66 
(2) Where the plaintiff proves that the invalid claim was framed 
In good faith and with reasonable skill and knowledge, the court shall 
gr~t relief in respect of any valid claim which- is infringedsubject----
to the discretion of the court as to costs and as to the date from 
which damages or an account of profits should be reckoned, and in S 
exercising such discretion the court may take into consideration the 
conduct of the parties in inserting such invalid claims in the specifi-
cation or permitting them to rem atn there. 
ScienWk: 115. (1) In any suit for inpinlemeat or in any proceedinl' before 
. advisers. a court under this Act, the court may at any time, and whether or Dot 10 
an appUcation has ~"lbade by any party for that purpose, appoint 
an independent scientific adviser to assist the court or to inquire and 
report upon any such question of fact or of opinion (not involviDl' a 
question or interpretation cd law) as it may formulate for the pur-
pose. IS 
(2) The remuneration of the scientific adviser shall be fixed by 
the court and shan include the costs of makinl' a report and a proper 
daily fee for any day on which the scientific adviser may be required 
to attend before the cOUllt, and such remuneration shall be defrayed 
out of moneys provided by Parliament by law for the purpose. 20 
Appeal.. 116. (1) No appeal shall lie from any decision, order or direc-
tion made or issued under this Act by the Central Government, or 
from any act or order of the Controller for the purpose of giving 2S 
e1fect to any such decision, order or direction. 
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in sub-section (1), 
an appeal shall lle to a High Court from any decfslon, order or 
dfrection of the Controller under any of the following provfalons, 
that Is to say, 30 
section 15, section 16, section 17, section 18, section 19, section 
20, section 25, section 27, section 28, section 51, section 54, 
section 57, section 60, section 61, section 63, sub-section (5) of sec-
tion 69, section 78, section 86 and section 89. 
(3) Every appe!ll under this section shall be in writing and 3S 
shall be made within three months from the date of the decllsion, 
order or. direction, as the case may be, of the Controller, or within 
IUch further time· as the High Court may in aceordance with the 
rules made by it under section 158 allow. 

117. (1) Every appeal before a High Court under section 116 Procedure 
,shall be by petition and shall be in such form and shall contain such for hear-
particulars as may be prescribed by rules made by the High-Court· ing of ---
under section 158. appeals. 
5 (2) Every such appeal shall be heard by a single Judge of the 
Hi~h Court: 
Provided that any such Judge may, if he so thinks fit, refer the 
appeal, at any stage of the proceeding to a Bench of the High Court. 
(3) Where an appeal is heard by a single Judge, a further appeal 
10 shall lie· to a Bench of the HislEf:eurt. 
CHAPI'ER XX 
PBNALTIBS 
.1 
'I .. 
118. If any person fails to comply with any direction given under Contraven-
section 35 or makes or causes to be made an application for the grant tiOD of ' :' 
15 of a patent in contravention of ~~ction 39, he shall be punishable with se~ 
imprisonment for a term which may extend· to two years, or with ~:~tin;DI 
fine, or with both: 'to certain 
dnventions. 
119. If any person makes, or causes to be made, a false entry in Falaiftca-
any registet'kept under this Act,-'Wr a writing falsely purporting to tiOI\ of . 
20 be a copy of an entry in such a register, or produces or tenders, or en:: in 
causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing ~:c. r, 
knowing the entry or writing to be f~se, he shall be punisha,ble with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both.' 
25 120. If any person falsely represents that any article sold by him Unauth~. 
is patented in India or is the subject of an application for a patent in med cl~ 
~dia, he"shall be punish~ble ,with fine which may extend to five ~:gt~~t·( 
hundred rupees. ", 
Explanation 1.-For the purposes of this section, a person shall be 
30' deemed to represenr-
35 
(a) that an article is patented in India if there is stamped, 
engraved or impressed on, or otherwise applied to, the article the 
word "patent" or "patented" or some other word expressing or im-
plying that a patent for the article has been obtained in India; 
(b) that an, article is the subject of an application for a 
. patent in India, if there are stamped, engraved or impressed on, 
or otherwise applied to, the article the words "patent applied 
for", "patent pending", or some other words implying that an 
application for a patent for the article has been made in India. 
~-

r l • 
• 
Wronaful 
ueot 
worda 
-patent 
oftlc .... 
Refusal or 
failure to 
supply 
informa~ 
tion. 
,Practice 
by non-
rejUtered 
patent 
agents. 
Offences 
by com-
paniet. 
Explanation 2.-The use of words "patent", "patented", "patent 
applied for", "patent pending" or other words expressing or imply-
ing that an article is patented or that a patent has been applied "for--
shall·be deemed to refer to a patent in force in India, or to a pending 
application for a patent in India, as the case may be, unless there is 5 
an accompanying indication that the patent has been obtained or 
applied for in any country outside India. 
121. If any person uses on his place of business or any document 
issued by him or otherwise the words "patent ofJlce" or any other 
words which would reasonably lead to the belief that his place . of 10 
business is, or is officially connected with, the patent ofBce, he ~all 
be punishable with--'tMprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine, or with both. 
122. (1) If any person refuses or fails to furnish-
(a) to the Central Government any information which he is 
required to furnish under sub-section (5) of section 100, 15 
(b) to the Controller any information or statement which he 
is required to furnish under section 146, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees. 
(2) If any person, ':being required to furnish any such informa-
tion as is referred to in sub-section (1), furnishes information or 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or has reason 
20 
to believe to be false or does not ·believe to be true, he shall be 
punishable. with imprisonment which 'may extend. to six months, 
or woith fine, or with both. . 25 
1Z3. If any person contravenes the provisions of section 129, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees in the cue of a first o1fence and two thousand rupees In the 
case of a second or subsequent offence. .. . 
lH. (1) If the pe.rso~ committing an offence under this Act is a 3 0 
company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the 
time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 35 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due di~gence tc? prevent the commission of such offence. 

• 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained. in sub-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a com-
pany and it is proved that the offence has Heen committeQ -with-the------
consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is 
S attTibutable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company, sllch director, manager, 
sec:retary or other officer shan also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
10 Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(4) "company" ~-wns any body corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
CHAPTER XXI 
PATENT AGENTS 
125. The Controller shall maintain a register to be called the regis- Register 
ter of patent agents in which Shall be entered the names and addres- of patent 
ses of all persons qualified to have their names so entered under ageD" 
20 section 126. 
3S 
126. A person shall be qualified to have his name entered in the Qua.Wlca-
register of patent agents if he fulfil~ the following conditions, tiona tor 
namely- re~ , tion u 
(a) he is a citizen of India: provided that this clause shall patent 
not apply to a person not a citizen of India who possesses the apnts._ 
qualifications specified in sub-clause (iii) of clause (c); 
(b) he has completed the age of 21 years; 
(c) he has obtained a degree in physical science or engi-
neering from any University in the territory of India or pos-
sesses such other equivalent scientific or technical qualifica-
tions as the Central Government may speciofy in this behalf, 
and, in addition,-
(i) is an advocate within the meaning of the Advocates 
Act, 196~; or 
(ii) has passed the qualifying examination prescribed 
for the purpose; or 
(iii) has been practising as a patent agent for a period 
of not less than five years before the commencement of this 
Act and has filed not less than twenty complete specifica-
tions during that .period; or 

.u.hts ot 
patent 
a,ents. 
Sub8crip-
tlonand 
veri1lc:a-
tlonof 
certaln 
documents 
by patent . 
agents. .' . 
70 
(iv) has served in the oftice of the Controller as an 
examiner of patents or in aJ:.lY _ hJgher capacity for a period 
of not less than seven years: -
Provided that he had not exercjsed the functions of • 
hearing ofBcer for a period exc'!eding twelve months In aU S 
during his tenure of 'oftice; 
(d) he has paid such ,fee as may be prescribed . 
121. Subject to the provisions contained in this Act and in any 
rules made thereunder, eveI117trt:»atent agent whose name is entered 
in the register shall be entitled- 10 
(a) to practise before the Controller; and 
(b) to prepare all documents, transact all business and dis-
charge such other functions as may be prescribed in connection 
with any proceeding before the Controller under this Act. 
128. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2) IS 
and to any rules made under this Act, all applications and com-
munications to the Controller under this Act may be signed by a 
patent agent authorised in writing in this behalf by the person 
concerned. 
(2) The following documents, namely,-
. (i) applications for patents; 
(ii) applications for the restoration of lapsed patents; 
(iii) applications for the sealing of patents after the time 
allowed for that purpose by or under sub-section (2) of section 
20 
43 has expired; 2S 
-''(iv) applications for leave .to amend; 
(v) applications for compulsory licences or for revocation; 
and 
(vi) notices of surrender of patents 
shall be' signed and verified in the manner prescribed by the person 30 
making such applications or giving such notices: 
Provided that if such person is absent from India, they may be 
signed and verified on his behalf by a patent agent authorised by him 
in writing in that behalf. 

71 
lH. (1) No person, either alone or in partnership with any other Restric-
person, shall practise, describe or hold himself -out as a patent agent,· tions on ---
.:Jr permit himself to be so described or held out, unless he is regis- practice 
tered . . as patent as a patent agent or, as the case may De, unless he 8nd all his agents. 
S partners are so registered. 
(2) No company or other body corporate sh::tH prac1:ise, describe 
itself or hold itself out as patent agents or permit itself to be so 
described or held out. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, practise as. patent 
lo';;C~,,"lit includes any of the following acts, namely:-
(a) applying for or obtaining patents in India or elsewhere; 
(b) preparing specifications or other documents for the pur-
poses of this Act or of the patent law of any other country; 
(e) giving advice other than of a scientific or technical na-
I, ture as to the validity of patents or their infringement. . 
130. (1) The Central Government may remove the name of any Removal 
perr.on from the register when it is satisfied, after giving that person tro~ 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after such further in- re~~ of 
quiry, if any, as it thinks fl.t to make- !:.nts 
and Alto-
~o (i) that his name has been entered in the register by error or ration. 
on account of misrepresentation or suppression of material fact; 
(ii) that he has been convicted of any offence and sentenced 
to a term of imprisonment or has been guilty of misconduct in I 
his professional capacity which in the opinion of the Central 
'-S Government renders him .unfit to be kept in . .the register. 
~ (2) The Central Government may, on application and on stDlicient 
cause being shown. restore to the register the name of any person 
removed therefrom. 
131. (1) Subject to any rules made in this beh!llf, the Controller Power of 
may refuse to recognise as agent in respect of any business under this cont;.?~er 
~ ~~~ 
.'\ct- ~deal 
. (a) any individual whose name has been removed from, end Wi~ 
not restored to, the register, or who is for the time being sus- :;:nts. 
pended from acting as a patent agent; 
1261 (B) LS-ll. 

r ' r 
'72 
Savings in 
respect 
of other 
persons 
authorised 
to act as 
agents. 
Notifica-
tion as to 
convention 
countries. 
(b) any person who has been convicted of an offenee under 
section 123; ------_. -----_ .. __ ........ -.... . 
(c) any person, not .being registered as a patent agent, who 
in the opinion of the Controller is engaged wholly or mainly in 
acting as agent in applying for patents in India or elsewhere in S 
the name or for the benefit of the person by whom he is employed; 
(d) any company or firm, if any person whQIll the Controller 
could refuse to recognise as agent in respect of any business under 
this Act, is acting as a director or manager of the company or is a 
partner in the firm. 10 
(2) The Controller sha1t"11!fuse to recognise as agent in respect of 
any business under this Act any person who neither resides nor has 
a place of business in India. 
132. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prohibit-
(a) the applican.t for a patent or any person, not being a 15 
patent agent, who is dulyeuthorised by the applicant from draft-
ing any specification or appearing or aoting' before the Con.trolle~; 
or 
(b) an advoc~te, not being a patent a.gent, from ,taking part 
in any proceedings under this Act otherwise than by way Of draft- 20 
ing·· any specification. 
CHAPTER XXII 
INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
133. (1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or 
arrangement with any country outside India which affords to appli- 25 
cants for patents in India or to· citizens of India similar privileges as 
are granted .to its own citizens in respect of the grant of patents end 
the protection of patent rights, the Central Government may, by noti-
fication in the Offtcial Gazette, declare such eountry to be a een~­
tion country for the purposes of this Act. 
. . 
(2) A declaration under sub-section (1) may be made for the pur .. 
poses either of all or of some only of the provisions of this Act,· and a 
coUntry in the case of which a declaration made for the purposes of 
some only of the .provisions of this Act is in force shall be deemed to 
be a conventdon country for the purposes of those provisions only. 
30 
35 
Notiftes- 134. Where any country specified by the Central Government m 
tion al to this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette does not accord to 
countrlel citizens of India the same rights in respect of the grant of pltents and 
~t.pro; the protection of patent rights as it accor~ to its own nationals, ;qo vldmg.Lor . 
reciprocity. 

S 
7J 
national of such COUIltry ~hall be entitled, either solely or jointly 
with any other person,-__ __. __ 
(a) to apply for the grant of a patent or be-regiSterecfu 
the proprietor of a patent; 
(b) to be registered as the assignee of the proprietor of a 
patent; or 
(e) to apply for a licence or hold any licence under a patent 
granted under this Act. 
135. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section tonvent1on 
10 6, where a person has made an application for a patent in resped of appliea .. 
an Invention in a convention country -(hereinafter referred to as. the tiona. 
"basic application"), and that person or the legal representative or 
assignee of that person makes an application under this Act for a 
patent within twelve months after the date on which the basic ap-
IS pUcation was made, the priority date of a claim of the complete 
specification, being a claim based on matter disclosed in the basic 
application, is the date of making of the basic application. 
ExpZanation.~ere applications have -been made for similar 
protection in respect of an invention in two or more convention 
20 countries, the period of twelve months referred to in this sub-section 
shall be reckoned from the date on which the earlier or earliest of 
the said applications was made. 
(2) Where applications for protection have been made in one or 
more convention countries in respect of two or more inventions 
2S which are coguate or of which one is a modifl-
cation of another, a single convention application may, 
subject to the provisions contained in section 10, be made in respect 
of those inventions at any time within twelve months from the date 
of the earliest of the said applications for protection: 
30 Provided that the fee payable on the making of any such appli-
cation shall be the same as if separate applications have been made 
in respect of each of the -said inventions, and the requirements of 
clause (b) of ~b-section (1) of secWon 136 shall', in the case of any 
such application, apply sepamtely to the applications for protection 
35 m respect of each of the said inventions. 
136. (1) Every convention application shall- Special 
(a) be accompanied by a complete specification; and provisions-
40 
(b) specify the date on which and the convention country relating.to 
1· ti fi te ti th be convention in which the app lca .on . or pro 0 on, or, as e case may 'appliea-
the first of such apphcabons was made; and tions. , 
(e) state that no application for protection in respect of the 
invention had been made in a convention country before that 

Multiple 
priorities. 
Supple-
mentary 
provisions 
as to eon-
vention 
applica-
tions. 
74 
date by the applicant or by any person from whom he derive8 
title. 
(2) Subject to th~_ provisions _co~tainedJnsectioD 10. a complete ___ _ 
specification filed with a convention application may include claims 
in respect of developments of, or additions to, the invention in res- S 
pect of which the application for protection was made in a convention 
country, being developments or additions in respect of which the 
applicant would be entitled under the provisions of section 6 to 
make a separate application for a patent. 
(3) A convention application shall not be post-dated under sub- 10 
section (1) of section 17 to a date later than the date on which under 
the provisions of this Act the application could have beeD'made. 
137. (1) Where two or more applications for patents in respect 
of inventions have been made in one or more convention countries 
and those inventions are so related as to constitute one invention, IS 
one application may be made by any or all of the persons referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 135 within twelve months from the 
date on which the earlier or earliest of those applications was made, 
in respect of the inventions disclosed in the specifications which 
accompanied the basic applications. 20 
(2) The priority date of a claim of the complete specification, 
being a claim based on matters disclosed in one or more of the 
basic applications, is the date on whidl that matter was flat so 
disclosed. 
(3) }t'or the purposes of this Act, a matter shall be deemed to 2S 
have been disclosed in a basic application for protection in a con-
vention country if it was claimed or disclosed (otherwise than by 
way of disclaimer or acknowledgment of a prior act) in that applica-
tion, or any documents submitted by the applicant for protection in 
support of flIl.d at the same time as that application, but no account 30 
shall be taken of any disclosure effected by any such document un-
less a copy of the document is filed at the patent office with the con-
vention application or within such period as may be prescribed after 
the filing of that application. 
138. (1) Where a convention appliCtition ~s made in accordance 3S 
with the provisions of this Chapter, the applicant shall furnish, In 
addition to the complete specification, copies of the specifications or 
corresponding documents filed or deposited by the applicant in the 
patent office of the convention country in which the basic appUca-
tion was made; certified by the official chief or head of the patent 40 
office of the convention country, or otherwise verified to the satis-
faction of the Controller, along with the application or within three 
months thereafter, or within such further p&iod as the Controller 
may on good cause allow. 

75 
(2) H any such specification or other documen\ 18 in a foreign 
language, a translation into English of the specification or document 
verified by affidavit -or otherwise --to -the-satisfaction-of -the -Control- --- -----
lET, shall be annexed to the specification or document. 
5 (3) For the purposes of this Act, the date on which an applica-
tion was made in a convention country is such date as the Control-
ler is satisfied, by certificate of the official chief or head of the 
patent omce of the convention country or otherwise, is the date on 
which the application was made in that convention country. 
10 139. Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all the prov~!o~ Other pro-
of this Act shall apply in relation to a convention application and visions of 
a patent granted in pursuance -thereof as they apply in relation to ~P~l~ to 
an ordinary application 'and a patent granted in pursuance thereof. convention 
15 
CHAPTER XXIII 
MIsCELLANEOUS 
applica-
tions. 
J 40. (1) It shall not be lawful to insert- lvoidance 
. ot certain 
(i) in any contract for or in relation to the sale' or lease of restrictive 
a patented article or an article made by a patented process;.Dr conditions. 
(ii) in a licence to manufacture or use a patented article; or 
20 (iii) in a licence to work any process protected by a patent, 
ao 
a condition the effect of which may be-
(4) to require the purchaser, lessee, or licensee to acquire 
from the vendor, lessor, or licensor, or his nominees, or to pro-
hibit him from acquiring or to restrict in any manner or to any 
extent his right to acquire from any person or to prohibit him 
from acquiring except from the vendor, lessor, or licensor or 
·his nominees, any article other than the patented article or an 
article other than that made by the patented process; or I 
(b) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using, 
or to restrict in any manner or to any extent the right of the 
purchaser, lessee or licensee, to use an article other than the 
patented article or an article other than that made by the patent-
ed process, which is not supplied by the vendor, lessor or licen-
sor or his nominee; or 
(c) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using, 
or to restrict any· member or to any extent the right of the 

-/~ r ~" 
16 
Determi-
Dation of 
certain 
contracts. 
purchaser, lessee or licensee to use any process other than the 
patented process; 
and any such condition shall be void. 
(2) A condition of the nature referred to in clause (a) or clause 
(b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall not cease to be a condition 5 
falling within that sub-section merely by reason of the fact that the 
agreement containing it has been entered into separately, whether 
before or after the contract relating to the sale, lease or licence of 
the patented article or process. 
. (3) In proceedingf~t any person for the infringement of. 10 
a patent, it shall be a deBence to prove that at the time of the in-
fringement there was in force a contract relating to the patent and 
containing a condition declared unlawful by this section: 
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply if the plaintiff is 
not a party to the contract and proves to the satisfaction of ~he 15 
court that the restrictive condition was inserted in the contract 
without his knowledge and consent, express or implied. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall-
(a) affect a condition in a contract by which a person is 
prohibited from selling goods other than those of a particular 20 
person; 
(b) validate a contract which, but for this section, would 
be invalid; 
(c) affect a condition in a contract for the lease of, or 
licence to use, a patented article, by which the lessor or licensor 25 
reserves to himself or his nominee the right to supply such new 
parts of the patented article as may be required or to put or 
keep it in repair. 
- (5) The provisions of this section shall also apply to contracts 
made before the commencement of this Act iof, and in so far as~ any 30 
restrictive conditions declared unlawful by this section continue in 
force after the expiration of three months from such commence-
ment. 
141. (1) Any contract for the sale or lease of a patented article 
or for lieence to manufacture, USe or work a patented article or 35 
process, or relating to any such sale, lease or licence, whether made 
before or after the commencement of this Act, may at any time after 
the patent or all the patents by which the articles or process was 

" protected at the time of the making of' the cont.ract bes or have 
ceased to be in .force, and notwithstanding anything to--thecontrary -------
in the contract or in any other contract, be determined by the pur-
chaser, lessee, or licensee, as the case may be, of the patent on giving 
S three months notice in writ~g to the other party. 
(2) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to 
any right of determining a contract exercisable apart from thii 
'section. 
142. (1) There shall ~d in respect of the grant of patents Fees. 
10 and applications therefor, and in respect of other matters in relation 
to the grant of patents under this Act, such fees as may be prescrib-
ed by the Central Government. 
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by 
the Controller, the Controller shall not do that act until the fee has 
IS been paid. 
(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document 
at the patent office, the document shall be deemed not to have been 
flIed at the office until the fee has been paid. 
(4) Where a principal patent is granted later than two years 
20 from the date of the application for patent, the fees which have 
become due in the meantime may be paid within a. term of three 
months from the date of the recordal of the patent in the register. 
_143. Subject to the provisions of Chapter VII, an applica~on Restric-
0_: for a patent, and any specifIcation filed in pursuance thereof, shall tions upon 
2S not, except with the consent of the applicant, be pubIi~hed by the publica_ 
Controller or be open to public inspection at any time before the tlion?t 
date of advertisement of acceptance
o 
of the application in pursuance s~ciftca-
f ti 23 tions. o sec on . 
144. The reports of examiners to the Controller under this Act lteportB 
30 shall not be open to public inspection or be published by the Con- of exa-
troller; and such reports shall not be liable to prodUction or inspec- miners 
tion in any legal proceeding unless the court certifies that tire pro- to be 
duction or inspection' is desirable in the interests of justice, and ought conftdeJ»., tiaI. to be allowed: 
3S Provided that the Conltroller may, on application made in the 
prescribed manner, by any person, disclose the result of any search 
made under section 13 in respectol any application for a patent 
wbert: Ule' complete specification has been published. 

Publication 145. The Controller shall issue periodically a publ1cation of pat-
of paten- ented inven.tiqns containing _suc~jnformation __ as _the Central Gov- ____ _ 
ted inven- emment may direct. tiona. 
Power of 
Controller 
to call for 
informa-
tionfrom 
patentees. 
148. The Controller may, at any time during the continuance of 
the patent, by notice in writing, require a .patentee or a licensee, S 
exclusive or otherwise, to furnish to him within two months from 
the date of such notice or within such further time as the Controller 
may allow, such information or such periodical statements as to the 
extent to which the patented invention has been commercially work-
ed in India as may be speci~_~n the notice. 10 
(!:viden.ce 147. (1) A certificate purporting to be signed by the Controller 
~~:=~~ia. as to any entry, matter or thing which he is authorised by this A~t 
etc. or any rules made thereunder to make or do, shall be prima fClCle 
Declara-
tion by 
infant. 
lunatic, 
etc. 
evidence of the entry having been made and of the contents thereof 
and of the matter or thing having been done or ~mitted to be done. I, 
(Z) A copy of any entry in any register or of any document kept 
in the patent office or of any patent, or an extract from any such 
register or document, purporting to be certified by the Controller 
and sealed with the seal of the patent office shall be admitted in 
evidence in all courts, and in all proceedings, without further proof 20 
or production of the original. 
(3) The Controller or any other officer of the patent otftce shall 
not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a party, be compel-
lable to produce the register or any other document in his custody, 
the contents of which can be proved by the production of a certifted 2S 
copy issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to prove the 
matters therein recorded unless by order of the court made for 
special causes. 
148. (1) If any person is, by reason of minority. lunacy. or other 
disability, incapable of making any statement or doing anything re- 30 
quired or..permitted by or undw this Act, the lawful guardian, com-
mittee or manager (if any) of the person subject to the disability, 
or if there be none, any person appointed by any court possessing 
jurisdiction in respect of his property, may make such statement or 
a statement as nearly corresponding thereto as circumstances permit, 35 
and do such thing in the name and on behalf of the person subject 
to the disa bili ty.' 
(2) An appointment may be made by the court for the purposes 
of this section upon the petition of any person acting on behalf of 
the person subject to the disability or of any other person interested 40 
in the making of the statement or the doing of the thing. 

79 
149. Any notice required or authorised to be given by or under I'!rvlce 
th's Act, and any -application -or -other -document so authorised or of DOticet, 
required to be made or filed, may be given, made or filed by post. etc., by 
post 
150. If any party by whom notice of any opposition is given under Security 
, this Act or by whom application is made to the Controller for the for costa. 
grant of a licence under a patent neither resides nor carries on 
business in India, the Controller may require him to give security 
for the costs of the proceedings, .and in defauJt of such security being 
given may treat the opposition or application as abandoned. 
10 151. (1) Every order of the High Court on a petition for revoca- ~ans;u--
tion, including orders granting certificates of validity of any claim, :~~~;s of 
shall be transmitted by the High Court to the Controller who shall courts to 
cause an entry thereof and reference thereto to be made in the ControUer. 
register. 
IS (2) Where in any suit for infringement of a patent or in any suit 
under section 106 the validity of any claim or a specification is con-
tested and that claim is found by the court to be valid or not valid, 
as the case may be, the court shall transm~t a copy of its judgment 
and decree to the Controller who shall on receipt thereof cause an 
20 entry in relation to such proceeding to be made in the prescribed 
manner in a supplemental record. 
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall elso apply 
,to the court to which appeals are preferred against decisions of the 
courts referred to in those sub-sections. 
25 152. Copies of all such specifications, drawin~s and amendments 'rranlmls-
left at the patent office as become ODen to public inspection under SiO~ of f 
the provisions of this Act, sh3ll be t~ansmitted, as soon as may be, :::c~:coa_ 
after the printed copies thereof are avaihble, to such authorities tions, etc., 
as the CentraJ Government may appoint in this behalf, and shall be and inspec-
30 open to the in-:;p~ction of any person at all re~'ionable times at places tion eot 
to be specified by those authorities and with the approval of the ther 
-Central Government. 
153. A person makin~ a r€'quest to the Contr.oUer in the prescrib- Informa-
ed manner for information relating to aTlY such matters as may be ~on reld-
35 prescribed as re~pects any patent specified in the request or as res- m:e tots 
pects any application for a patent so specified shall be entitled, sub- pa n . 
ject to the payment of the prescribed fee, to have infonnat:on sup-
plied to him accordingly. 
154. If a patent is lost or destroyed, or its non-production is ac- Lou or 
40 counted for to the satisf::tctjon of the Controller, the Controller may destruction 
at any time, on application made in the prescribed manner and on of patent. 
1261 (B) LS-12. 

Report, 
of . 
Controller 
to be 
placed 
before 
Parlia-
ment. 
Patent 
10 bind 
Govern-
ment. 
Rl,ht ot 
Govem-
mentto 
Hll or 
ule for-
feited vtl. 
cI-. 
Power of 
High 
Cnurts to 
make 
rul ... 
Power 01 
Central_ 
Govem-. 
ment to 
malte 
rul ... 
80 
payment of the prescribed fee, cause a duplicate thereof to be sealed 
and d~liY~red~tbuppUcan~.____ .. ..... ___ ._ .. __ 
155. The Central Government shall cause to be placed before 
both Houses of Parliament once a year a report respecting the exe-
cution of this Act by or under the Controller. , 
158. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a patent ... 
-~ 
shall have to all .intents the like effect as against Government as it 
has against any person. 
157. Nothing in this Act shall affect the power of the Government 
or of any person, deriving title d~rectly or indirectly from the 10 
Government to sell or use any articles forfeited under any law for 
the time being in force. 
158. The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act 
as to the conduct and procedure in respect of all proceedings before 
it under this Act.' IS . 
159. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudfce to the generality of the foregoing power, 
the Central Government may make rules to provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely:- 20 
(i) the form and manner in which any application for a 
patent, any. specifications or drawings and any other application 
or document may be filed in the patent office; 
(ii) the time within which any act or thing may be done 
under this Act, including the manner In which and the time 2S 
within which any matter may be advertised under this Act; 
(iii) the fees which may be payable under this Act and the 
manner of payment of such fep.CJ: 
(iv) the matters in respect of which the examiner moy make 
a report to the Controller; 30 

81 
(,,) the form of request for the aealinl of a patent. 
(vi) the form and manner in which and the time within 
which any notice may be gi veJi-Wiaer-UUS-Act; ----
(vii) the provisions which may be inserted in an order for 
S restoration of a paLent for the protection of persons who may 
have availed themselves of the subject-matter of the patent 
after \he patent had ceased; 
(viii) the establishment of branch offices of the patent oftice 
and the regulation generally of the business of the patent office, 
10 including its branch offices; 
20 
30 
3, 
(i.'r) the maIntenance of the register of patents and the 
matters to be entered therein; 
(x) the matters in respect of which the Controller shall 
have powers of a civil court; 
(xi) the time when and the manner in which the register 
and any other document open to inspection may be inspected 
under this Act; 
(xii) the qualifications of, and the preparation of a roll of. 
scientific advisers for the purpose of section 115; 
(xiii) the form and manner in which appeals from the 
orders decisions or directions of the Controller may be preferred 
to the Central Government, the procedure to be followed in 
connection therewith and the manner in which such appeals 
may be heard and disposed of by the Centr~ Government; 
(riv) the manner in which any compensation for acquisi-
tion by Government of an invention may be paid; 
(xu) the manner in which the register of patent agents ma), 
be maintained; the conduct of qualifying examinations for 
patent agents; and matters conaected with their practice and 
conduct, jncluding the taking of disciplinary procedings against 
patent agents for misconduct; 
(xvi) the regulation of the making, printing, publishing and 
selling of indexes to, and abridgments of, specifications and other 
documents in the patent office; and the inspection of indexes and 
abridgments and other· documents; 
(xvii) any other matter which has to be or may be prea-
c:ribed. . ;, 

Rul81 to 
be placed 
before 
Parlia-
Dent. 
Special 
provaioIll 
with 
respect 
to 
certain 
applica-
tions 
deemed 
to have 
been 
refused 
under 
Act 
20f 1911. 
(3) The power to make rules under th!s section shall be subject 
to the condition of the rules being made after previous pubhca-
tioh. - ---------------- ---
180. E~ry rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is~.'1 , 
session for a total p~riod of thirty days which may be comprised il1 
one se.i.iion or in two successive sessions, and, if before the expiry 
of the session in wh:ch it is so laid or in the session immediately 
following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shrl] 10 
therea!ter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case mJY be; so, however, that any such modification or an-
nulment shall be wi~hout prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule. 
161. (1) Where, as as result of action taken by the Controller 15 
under section 12 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1948, or under section 20 =~ 0; :::~ 
of the Atomic Energy Act. 1962. an application for a patent made 0 
be~ore the commencement o~ this Act could not be accepted within 
the tjme specified for the purpose in the Indian Patents and De~igns 
Act, 1911 (hereafter in this section referred to as the repealed 20 2 of 1911. 
Act), and, consequently, was deemed to have been refused by re3son 
of sub-section (4) of section 5 of the repealed Act, the application 
may, if the applicant, or, if he is dead his legal representative, makes 
a request in that behalf to the Controller in the prescribed manner 
within three months from the commencement of this Act. be revived 2S 
and shall be disposed of as if it were an application pending at the 
commencement of this Act to which the provisiOns of this Act apply 
by reason of sub-section (3) of section 162. 
(2) The Controller may, before proceeding to act upon any such 
request as is referred to in sub-~ection (1), refer the matter to the 30 
Central Gove:tnment for directions as to whether the invention is one 
relating to atomic energy and shall act in conformity with the direc-
tions issued by it. 
(3) Where in pursuance of any such application as is referred to 
in sub-section (1) a patent is granted, the rights of the patentee shall 3' 
be subject to such condItions as the Controller thinks fit to impose for 
the protection or compensation of persons who may have begun to 
avail themselves of, or have taken definite steps by contract or other-
wise to avall themselves of, the patented invention before the date 
of advertisement of the acceptance of the complete specUleatiOll. 40 

10 ot 1897. 
--. 
2 of 1911. 
,., 
IS] 
(4) No suit or other proceeding shall be commenced or proseeuted 
In respect of an infringement of a patent committed before the date 
of -advertisement-of -the -acceptan.ce-of the complete specification. 
162. (1) The Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911, in so far as it Repeal 
5 relates to patents is hereby repealed, that is to say, the said Act shall of Act 2 
be amended in the maner specified in the Schedule. o1fl911 in so ar 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Patents and Designs :~:.. 
Act, 1911, in so far as it r~lates to patents, the provisions of section to 
21A of that Act and of any rules made thereunder shall continue to patentl 
10 apply in relation to any "pcrl:ebt granted before the commencement and 
of this Act in pursuance of that section. lavinp. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2). the provisiOns 
of this Act shall apply to any application for a patent pending at the 
commencement of this Act and to any proceedings consequent there-
IS on and to any patent granted in pursuance thereof. 
(4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not pre-
jUcLce the general application of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with 
respect to repeals. 
163 . .In sub-section (1) of :t1eCtion 4 of the Trade and Merchandise Amend-
20 Marks Act, 1958, the words and figures "and the Controller of Patents ment of 
and Designs for the purposes of the Indian Patents and Designs Act, :9~~3 of 
1911" shall be omitted. 

THE SCHEOUIJ!: 
[See section 162] 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PATENTS AND DESIGNS ACT, 1911 
1. Long title--Omit "Inventions and". 
2. Preamble--Omit "mventlons and". 5 
3. Section I-In sub-section (1) omit "Indian Patents and". 
4. Section 2-
(a) omit clause (1); 
(b) in clause (2) omit" (as respects designs)"; 
(c) for clause (3), substitute- 10 
'(3) "Controller" means the Controller General of 
Patents, Designs and Trade Marks appointed UDcicr sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks 
Ad 1958";. 1': 43 of 1958. 
(d) in clause (5) for "trade mark as defined in section IS 
478", substitute "trade mark as defined in clause (17) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks 
A -t, 1958.",' nA,; 43 of 1958. 
(e) omit clause .... (6) ; 
(1) in clause (7), after sub~lause (e) insert- 20 
"(f) in relation to the Union territories of Dadra and 
Nagar Havel! and Goa, Daman and Diu, the fugh Court 01 
~mbay; 
(g) in relation to the Union territory of Pondicherry, 
the High Court of Madras;"; 
(g) omit clauses (8), (10) elM (11); 
(h) for clause (12), substitute-
'(12) "Patent Office" means the patent office establish-
ed under the Patents Act, 1965.' . 
.. Omit Pan L 
25 
30 

.," 
6. For Section SIB, lubstttut_ 
"51B. A registereddEiignshall have to all intents the like Deli .... 
effect as against Government as it has againSt any perSOD and to bind 
the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Patents Act, 1965, Ihall Gov-
5 apply to registered designs as they apply to patents.". ammant 
7. In sectfon 54, for "The provisions of this Act", 5 substitute "'n1e 
provision of the Patents Act, 1965". ' 
8. Omit sections 55 and 56. 
9. Section 57-For sub-section (1) I substitute-
10 (1) There shall be paid in respect of the regist,ration of de-
signs and applications therefor and in respect of other matters 
relating to designs under this Act such fees as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.". 
10. Omit section 59A. 
'" 11. Section 61-Omit sub-section' (1). 
20 
12. For section 62, substitute-
"62. Tl'ie Controller'may, on request in writing accompanied Pnw~ 
by the prescribed fee, corect any clerical error' in the repre- ~~ntrol­
sentation of a design or in the name or address .of the :pro- ler to 
prietor of any design or in any other matter which is entered correct 
upon the register of designs.". clerical 
13. Section 63-
(a) in sub-section (1), omit "to a patent or" and "patent or"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), omit "patent or" and for "pateDta 
I)r designs, as the case may be". substitute "designs,"; 
.. (c) in sub-section (3), omit "patent or" wherever that ex-
pre~sion, ocCl:1rs;' ',. . , 
(d) in sub-section (4), omit '~o a patent or". 
14. Section M-
.... 
30 (a) in sub-section (1), omit "patents or'''' and omlt- "either" 
wherever that word occurs; . 
(b) in sUb-section (5), omit clause (a). 
15. Omit section 66~ 
16. Section 67~t "for a patent, or for amendment of an 
35 appllcatiol1 Qr of a Jpecification, or". 

Recipro_ 
cal 
arrange-
ment 
with 
United 
Kingdom 
and 
other 
Common-
wealth 
countries. 
17. Section 69-1n lUb-aectlon (1), omit "to II'8nt a patent for 
an invention or". 
18. Section 71A-Omit "or from patents, speciftcations and other". 
19. Omit section 72. 
20. Omit sections 74A and 75. 
21. Section 78-
(a) in sub-section (1), omit "other"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (c), omit "opponent". 
22. Section 77-
(a) in subsection (1)-
(i) In clauses (e) and (d), omit "speciftcations,"; 
(ii) for clause (e), substitute-
U (e) providing for the inspection of documents in the 
patent office and for the manner in which they may be 
S 
10 
published;"; IS 
(iii) omit clause (eee): 
(b) omit sub-section (2A). 
23. Omit section 78. 
24. For section 78A, lubstitute--
"78A. (1) Any person who has applied for protection for any 20 
design in the United Kingdom or his legal reprefJentativ'.? or 
assignee shall, either alone or j(lintly with any other perso~. 
be entitled to claim that the registration of the said desimt under 
this Act shall be in priOrity to other applicants and shan have 
the same date as the date of the application in the United King- 2 S 
dom: 
Provided that-
(a) the application is made within six months from the 
application for protection in the United Kingdom; and 
(b) nothing in this section shall entitle the proprietor 30 
of the design to recover damages for infringements haTlOen-
ing prfor to the actual date on which the design is registerf!d 
in India 

81 
(2) The reJiltration of a design shall not be invalidated by 
__ --mason only -of the exhibition or use of, or the publication of a 
description or representation of, the design in India during the 
periodspecUled in this section as that within which the appli-
S cation may be made. 
(3) The application for the registration of a dealp. undel' 
this section must be made in the same manner as an ordinary 
application under this Act. 
(4) Where- it is made to appear to the Central Government 
10 that the legislature of any such Commonwealth country as may 
be notified by the Central Government in this behalf haa made 
satisfactory provision for the protection of designs registered 
in India, the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Ofticial Gazette, direct that the provisions of this section, with 
IS such variations or additions, if any, as may be set out in such 
notification, shall apply for the protection of designs registered 
in that Commonwealth country.". 
25. Omit the Schedule. . ! 
all (B) LS-li. 1 

STA?EIIENT OF OBJECTS Am>' -RZASONS 
The law relatin, to patents now on the statute book was enacted 
' •. 1911 :tmd ··since then· then! . have been aubstantial·chanaes in the 
politiaal aDd·economic ·.conditions Gl the country .. Although the Act 
bas been in force for a very long period, ·1thu nGt· aclUeved its 
ma:n purpose of stimulating inventions among Indians and encourag-
... *he .developm~Uldexploitation of new lnv_tiens for in~u»­
bial -propess -in this -eountry. The need for;.a·more, .eomprehensh-e 
.. '10 U to .eDlW!etAat, patent rights ure 'DOt !worked ito the dctri-
lDent ·of ·the· consumer or ,to the prejudice oltlte' trade -or the lDdus-
tr!al.development .~of the country was felt &Bearly' las 1948 ad in 
fhat year the GowrDJDant .appointed a Committee .. known· as the 
Patents :Enquiry . Committee· to review the . working ~f the patents 
.win . mma ',with :a new to ensure that the, pateat ~ 1Iecame 
more conducive -to national interests. AniDbtltim ·nport : of that 
Committe~ made in 1949 suggested the immediate amendment c£ the 
Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911, 10 as to eounteract the misuse 
or abuse of patent monopoly in India by the enactment of provisions 
for compulsory licenslag. The recommendations cantaineci.in that 
Interim report were gi,·en effect to by the Indian Patents and Designs 
(Amendment) Act, 1950. The final report of the Committee v.as 
presented to Government in 1950, and based on the final report a 
Bill further to amend the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911, was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 7th December, 1953. While the 
Bill was pending, a further examination of the law revealed that 
the Bill would need extensive amendments and consequently tt 
W8.3 not proceeded with and was allowed to lapse on the dissolution 
of the First Lok Sabha. 
2. In 1957, the Government of India requested Shri N. Raja-
gopala Ayyangar, now a retired Judge of the Supreme Court, to 
examine afresh the law of patents in India and advise the Gov-
ernment on the changes necessary. The present Bill which 11 based 
mainly on the recommendat!.oDS contained in his comprehensIve 
report, incorporates a few further changes in the light of further 
examinaCon particularly with reference to patents for food, medi-
cines and drugs. 
• 
, ... -. : .. .. 

• 
3. The Notes of Clauaes explain tn detail the various proviliona 
conta!Ded in the Bill. ..-,. ..., 
'f() 
NEW Dm.m; T. N. SINGH. 
The: 18i s.pt~, 11U. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTIcLE' it7 0.,. 
THE' CONSTITt1'P'lt')M OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 14(l)-T.M.P./64-P&D, dated the 7th S~tem;' 
ber, 1965 from 8hri T. N. Singh, Minister of Industry in the 
Ministry of InduStry and Supply to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The Pt'esid~nt having been informed of the subject matter (1f tM 
proposed; Patet'tts 'Bill, 1965, recommends consideration of the BID 
in the -Lok Sabhe under- art!cle 117 (3) 01 the Constitution of IncHa. 

Notes on clauses 
C14U1e 2.-The definition of 'invention' in the existing Act has 
been modified so as to represent more accurately the existing posi-
tion as defined by case-law. Several new definitions have also beeD 
included. For example, a definition of 'person' has been included 
in order to remove any doubt as to whether it includes the Govern-
ment. A definition of 'Government undertaking' has become neces-
sary in view of the occurrence of this expression in several places in 
the Bill. In the new definition of 'true..- •. first inventor' it is made 
clear that it does not include the first importer of the invention and 
the first communicatee from abrCGd. 
Clause 3.-ln this clause are set out the' several types of inven-
tions or alleged inventions which are regarded universally or almost 
universally as not being patentable. In view of the non-avallability 
of case-law on the subject in India, it would be advantageous to 
codify this part of the law as generally understood and applied. 
Clause 4.-For making this law self-contained, a reference to sec-
tion 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, is included under which no 
patent can be granted for inventions relating to atomic energy . .. 
Clause 5.-In the case of inventions relating to baby and invalid 
food, medicines and drugs it would not be in the interests of an under-
developed country like India to grant patents in respect of the subs-
tances themselves. But there is no such objedion in relation to the 
processes involved. This clause accordingly restricts patentability 
to the processes involved in the manufacture or production of such 
substances. 
Clause 6.-This replaces sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 'exist-
ing Act, but has been remodelled on the lines of section 34 of the 
Australian Patents Act, 1952 and section 1 of the U.K. Patents Act, 
1949, by expressly including assignees, legal representatives, etc., 
among persons entitled to apply for patents. 
Clause 7 dealing with the form of application seeks to make it 
clear that every application shall be for one invention only. 
Clause 8.-As the majority of the applicants for patents in India 
are foreign nationals and as in several cases the application in India 
is for the same or substantially the same invention as that for which 
a patent has alre·ad,y been applied for in a foreign country, this clause 

it 77-2--
seeks 'to ensure that all relevant info'rmation as respects such forejgn 
invention is made available to th'e Controller for the purpose of dis. 
posing of questions relating to novelty of invention, patentability,-
etc. 
Clause 9.-This clause replaces section 4A of the existing Act. 
The increase in the timre limit, namely, fifteen months in all in sub-
clause (1) should benefit Indian nationals to get the complete speci-
fications in proper order for being filed. 
Clause lO.-This clause dealing with contents of specifications 
corresponds to section 4 of the existing Act &-at-:has been amplified 
in the light of section 4 of the U.K. Patents Act, 1949. 
Clause H.-This clause seeks to make provision respecting the 
priority date for each claim of a complete specification and is based 
on section 5 of the U.K. Pabmts Act, 1949, and sections 44 and 45 of 
the Australian Patents Act, 1952, but its scope is enlarged in ord'er to 
provide for the various contingencies which may arise in the deter-
mination of the priority date for each such claim. 
Clauses 12 and 13.-The existing Act does not contain any spreciftc 
provision requiring the Controller to make a compulsory search for 
ascertaining the novelty of an invention before ita acceptance. These 
clauses make it obligatory for searches to be made by the patent 
office in respect of all patent applications. Anticipation by publica-
tion is not to be confined to p~bIication in India as at present and 
publication of an invention in India or any foreign country before 
the priority date claimed would constitute anticipation. Such a pro-
vision will enhance thre commercial value attached to Indian patents. 
Clause 14.-This clause is intended to make it clear that the appli-
cant should be given an opportunity of being heard before any 
objections raised by the examiner are upheld by the Controller. 
Clause 15 deals with the cases or circumstances in which an 
application for patent may be refused by the Controller. 
Clauses 16 to 20.-Apart from the power to refuse an application, 
these clauses deal with ~he powers of the Controller to pass other 
suitable orders. 
Under clause 16, where an application and the claims based 
_ .' . thereon relate to more than one invention, the Controller mlly 
'allow the applicant to amend the complete specification by 
confining it to a lIingle invention. 

.. ., 
Clause 17 deala with the powel'l of the CODtroDer tOl" the 
purpose _ of poat-c:lating applications. 
Clause, 18· deals with th~ powers of. the Controller_uLcases_ 
of anticipation. 
Clause 19 deals with the powers of the Controller in cal!' 
where an invention cannot be performed without risk of 
Infringement of. lome claim of an earlier patent. 
Clause 20 deals with cases where substitution in the names 
of appUcants becomes necessary. ' 
Cla1&ae 21.-This clause provides for the maximum rmit of t:m: 
within which an application or a complete -npecification should be 
accepted if the application is not to be regarded as ab3ndoned. As 
the subject-matter in all -these cases is the complete spl!c'fica~io'\, 
time should commence to run from the date of the complete sped !i-
cation and not from the date of the application as under section 3 (4) 
of the existing Act. It would also be n'!Cesnry to pt'ovid! frr 
further extension of time where delay takes place in thc! office of 
the Controller by reason of the investigat:ons to be m!lde by the 
examiner. Sub-clause (2) contains the necessary provisions in this 
behalf. 
Clause 22- makes provisions similar to those contained In seetloa 
!~Hl) of the U.K. Patents Act, 19(9, as respects t~eptance of com-
pletp. specification. 
Clause 23 deals with advertisement of acceptance of the eom-
plete specification and replaces section 6 of the existing Act. 
Clnuse 24.-ThiseorrespondlJ to section 7 of the exis4:fng Act 
except that the rights and orivileRes of the applicant commence not 
from the date of the acceptance of the apolication as in the exi~ting 
Act" but' from- the date of the acceptance of the complete speciftcation. 
Clause 25.-This clause purports to reta'n the existing proeerJure 
for opp,osition to the grant of pat-ents as being npcessary in the pubUc 
interest, at the same time enlarloting the grounds for opposition men· 
tioned in section 9 of the existing Act. 
Clause 26 deals with LUes of 'obtaining' which are brouJdtt. to 
light in opposition proceedings and seeks to authoris·e the Controller 
to deal suitably with the opponent's claim in such ,eases. 
Clause 27.-This clause, modelled on section 15 of the U.K. Patents 
Act. 1949. would be URful where an"icip'.ltorv pub1icatin"~ Are 
brought to the- notfeeof the Controller without the jnformant'rums 
• fonnai' oppolltioll to the- srmt, 

93 , 
,Clause -28.-This clause seeks to give recognition to the Tight of 
the first inventor to be mentione.d 1Jl the p~~nt,~_~~ __ so_~e~ire~~ 
although.he may have parted with his proprietary interest therein. 
Clauses 29 to 34 seek to affol'd guidance to the Contl'oller in 
determining what constitutes anticipation under the oJler provi-
lions of the law (for example, clause 13). 
Clauses 35 to 42.-These clauses replace in a more comprehensive 
manner section 21A of the existing Act and are intended to secure 
that inventions relevant for defence purposes which are the subject 
matter ot applications for patents are in the m,tere.)ts of national 
security kept secret Any secrecy orders passed by the Controller 
in respec~ of such inventions are to be notdied t.o the Centra! Gov-
ernment and are to be periodically reviewed. Though applications 
which are subje:t to secrecy directions may proce~d up to the stage 
of acceptance they may not be advertiaed and no patent shall be 
granted in respect thereof, It is also provided that no person resi-
dent in India shall, except with the prior permiSsion of the Control· 
ler apply for a patent outside India unlesJ an application for patent 
for the same invention has heJl made in India not less ,than eight 
weeks before the application outside India and either no secrecy 
ciirectiOQs have been made in India or such directions have been 
rev:oked. Any contravention of secrecy directions will, apart from 
any criminal liability, render the applicant ineligible to proceed with 
the appli::ation. Payment by way of solatium is also provided for 
an applicant who may suffer hardship by reason of any secrecy 
airections. 
Clause 43.-This clause . seeks to replace "~D lO of the exlItIJII 
Act in a modified form. Incidentally it removes the overall time 
limit specified in section 10 (2) ~or the sealing of a patent ,as ~g 
too shor~ and unnecessary. 
Clause 45.-This clause replaces section 11 of the existing Act and 
makes UJe date of filing of the complete specification the date of the 
patent and not the da:e of th'e application as in the existing A~t. 
[Compare s.ection 22 (1) of the U.K. Patents Act. 1949 and ,section 
67 (1) of the Australian Patents Act, 1952]. 
Clause 46 replaces .sec!ion 12 of Ule ex~sting Ai:t relating tQ the 
effact, extent and form of patent in a modified form. 
Clause 47 seeks to _ 4efiDe. i1l.cleJr ~ ~e. rights of :a patentee, 
rights whlch have at present ~o Qe determined with rE'ference to 
decided cases. In the case o~ a patent for a process it is .aught to 
b~ made clear that the. patentee has the exclusive right to the sale 
in india of articles made by the. patel1tec;l .. p~oceu. ,Sw:h'~;provJdOD 
woUld be advantaae to Indian patentee-. 

C14ure 48 is intended to clarify the rights of research workers 
wurkers and the like to use the invention in the course of research 
2bl distinguished ,from· use for couunerciaI-purposes: ·-It -aISO-seeksto--' 
provide that import of medicines or drugs or medical equipment by 
Government for its own purpose or the production of a patented 
article by Government for its own use shall not be regarded as an 
infringement of patent rights. 
Clause 49 replaces section 42 of the existing Act and at the 
aame time seeks to ensure reciprocity. 
Clause 50.-This clause which is in medifieation of section 37 of 
the existing Act, seeks to definite the rigts inter se of joint patentees 
and follows section 54 of the U.K. Patents Act, 1949. In addition to 
cases where a patent has been granted to two or more persons, this 
clause also covers cases where registered ownership in a patent has 
arisen by assignment or devolution. 
Clause 51. modelled on section 55 of the U.K. Patents Act, 1949, 
seeks to authorise the Controller to give directions to co-owners with 
respect to the exercise of their rights wherever necessary. 
Clause 52 seeks to replace section 13 (2) of the existing Act and 
provides for cases where patents have to be reyoked in favour of the 
true and first inventor. 
Clause 53 seeks to replace section 14 of the existing Act with 
suitable modifications. The term of every patent hereafter would 
be 14 years and not 16 ye·ars as hithertofore; but in the case of 
patents in the field of baby and invalid foods, medicines and drugs, 
where the process alone will hereafter be patentable, the term will 
be 10 years. The term of existing patents in this field would be 
limited. to 10 years from the date of the patent. 
Clauses 54, 55 and 56.-Modelled. on section 26 of the U.K. Patents 
Act, 1949, these clauses considerably modify section 15A of the 
existing Act dealing with the grant of patents of addition in res-
pect of improvements and modifications. 
Cl4uaea 57 to 59 deal with amendments of complete apeetftca-
t!~ns before the Controller and before the High Court and comes pond 
to sections 29. to 31 of the U.K. Patents Act, 1949. The scope of per-
missible amendments before and after acceptance of a complete 
speclflcation is dealt with in clause 59. It is sought to be made clear 
that tq.e scope of permiSSible amendments after acceptance of the 
completespecifleation 'cannot be wider or 1ariE!ll." than that of an un:'" 
emended specification. ' ..' 

, ,. 
Clauses 60 to 62 replace section 16 of the existing Act and seek 
to d~al more ~laborately with restoration in certain circumstances of 
. lapsed patents- and theproredure-to'-befollowed and the conditions 
which may be imposed in connection with such restorations. 
ClaU8e 63 deals with voluntary surrender of patents. It is now 
provided that in addition to the offer of surender being advertised 
all persons interested ill the patent should be notified and their 
opposition, H any, considered before the surrender is accepted.. 
Cl4uae 64 deals with revocation of patents and replaces secttOD 
26 of the existing Act. It j~ now proposed that proceedings for re-
vocation 'should lie only in the High CtMK:" The grounds for revoca-
tion are now amplified in the light of experience gained and prevail-
ing conditions. Under this clause it would be open to any person 
interested and also to the Central Government to apply {or revoca-
tion. 
Clause 65 is new and seeks to empower the Controller to revoke 
a patent or to have the complete specification amended where the 
invention relates to atomic energy. 
Clause 66.-This reproduces section 25 of the existing Act with 
suitable safeguards and is a useful provision for the furtherance of 
the country's national economy. 
Clause 67 seeks to provide for the maintenance of a patent 
register and the particulars to be entered therein. 
Clause 68 seeks to provide that every transaction relating to 
patents which is registrable should be entered in the register as 
soon as possible after the transaction is entered into. At present 
while patent registers furnish complete information as regards pro-
prietary interests, the same cannot be said of licences and other 
interes~ 1_ I 
Clauses 69 and 70 deal with the registration ot proprietary in-
terests in patents.and the power of regtstered grantees or proprie-
tors to deal with such patents. . 
Clause 71 seeks to provide for the rectification of registers by 
the High Court. 
Clause 72 seeks to declare that the register shall be open to 
pu.blic inspection. 
Clauses 73 to 76 deal with the establishment oC G patent office. 
Clause 75 which is new seeks to disqualify employees of the patent 
office from acquiring any interest in patents excepti by way of inherl-
1261 (B) LS-14. 

tance or bequest. Clause 76, which is also new, requires the emplo-
yees of the "Patent ofticerupon-pain·of punishment) to observe secrecy 
in respect of confidential information and documents to whichthei-
may have access in the discharge of their duties. 
CZaue, 77 to 81 deal with the general powers of the Controller 
and their exercise. The powers include a power to correct clerical 
errors in patents or in specificatiOns or in other documents or m the 
register. 
Clause 82 contains certain special definitions. For the purposes of 
Chapter XVI it has to be made clear that a -~ee includes an ex-
clusive licensee who has the sole right to grant a sub-licence. 
Clause 83 seeks to emphasize- as does clause 94 from another as-
pect that the main purpose for which a patent is granted is to have 
the invention worked in this country to its advantage. 
Clauses 84 and 85 deal with the grant of compulsory licences 
where a complaint is made that the patent has not been worked in 
such a manner as to satisfy the reasonable requirements of the pub-
lic, and. are in amplification of the provisions contained in section 22 
of the existing Act. 
Clause 86 replaces sections 23A and 23B of the existing Act. 
As in the existing Act, the right to apply for endorsement of patents 
with the words "Licences of right" is confined to the Central Govern-
ment as "persons interested" in working the invention might not 
desire that other persons besides themselves should also haye the 
right to obtain licences. 
Clause 87 is new and provides that patents in the field of drugs, 
medicines or baby and invalid foods and chemical inventions shall 
be deemed to be endorsed with the words "Licences of right". The 
royalty payable under any compulsory licence, if granted hereafter 
in respect of such substances other than chemical processes is sought 
to be regulated by clause 88. Suita·ble provisions are also being 
made to enable an applicant for a licence Jo work the invention 
pending determination of the royalty. These provisions are intend-
ed to secure the proper development of the drug and chemical in-
dustries in the country. 
Clause 89 seeks to vest a residuary poyver in the Controller to 
revoke a patent in the event of the invention not being worked. to an 
adequate extent in the country, Rotwithstanding the compulsory 
licensing provision, etc. Such a provision will also have the indirect 
eftect of inducing patentees to impart to licensees sufficient detaill 
as to the know-how for working inventions. 

CZluue 90 seeks to define what is meant by the expression ''rea-
sonable requirements of the public have not been satisfted" for the 
purposes-of-th~precedingclauses in_the _CQnt~lC1_.Qf_~n under-4eve-
loped country like India. 
Clause 91 seeks to empower the Controller to adjourn any pro-
ceeding under this Chapter for a period not exceeding 12 months so 
as to cover cases where it is sought to be shown Ilhat the time 
between the sealing of a patent and the application under this 
Chapter is not suftlcient to enable the patentee to work the inven-
tion to an adequate extent. 
Clauses 92 and 93 deal with the procedure to be followed and the 
powers of the Controller in relation t'Nhe grant of compulsory. 
Ucences. t ~ 
I 
Clause 94 seeks to formulate certain general principles for the 
guidance of the Controller in granting compulsory licences. 
Clause 95 seeks to regulate the terms and conditions which may 
be imposed in respect of compulsory licences. Except where the 
Central Government has otherw·ise directed, the import of a patented 
article cannot be permitted under the guise of a compulsory licence. 
Clause 96 is intended to prevent the abuse of patent monopolies 
for blocking purposes and to facilitate the working of related 
patents: I 
Clause 97 seeks to replace sub-section (4) of section 23CC of the 
existing Act. 
Clause 99.-For governmental purposes, the use of a patent by a 
Government undertaking is really equivalent to governmental use. 
In addition, the powers sought to be conferred by this Chapter may 
have to be invoked in ,relation to certain classes of under1aldngs in 
the private sector which may be notifted for this purpose by the 
Central Government. The expression use of invention far the pur-
poses of Government is being suitably defined to cover all such 
cases. - .,"'! 
Cla.uses 100 andtOl seek to regulate t11e use of inventions for the 
purposes of Government and the rights of third parties in relation 
thereto. The authority to authorise the use of any invention would 
be the Central Government, but the purposes for which en inven-
tion ·may be used would include the purposes of a State Govern-
ment, Government undertaking, etc. 
Clau.se 102 would be useful to enable the Central Government to 
acquire an invention in certain circumstances, as for example, where 
it would be economical to acquire the patent instead of obtaining 
compulsory licences in respect thereof. 

, 
98 
CZczUle 103.-J'urisdiction is sought to be vested In the High Court 
to decide disputes relating to the use of any invention for the pur-
poses of C:;overnment. ----.----- ..... -.. -.-
Clczuse 104.-While suits for declaration, infringements, etc., may 
be brought before the district court as under section 29 of the exllt-
ing &t, jurisdiction to hear petitions for revocation of patents 
which will have effect beyond the parties to the proceedings Is 
given only to the High Court under clause 64. 
Clause 105 is patterned on section 66 of the U.K. Patents Act, 
1949, and seeks to expressly authorise the court to grant declaratOry 
decrees as to non-infringement even where the defendant has Dot 
denied the right of. the plaintiff or has not asserted any adverse right 
in himself. . 
CZaUBe 106 seeks to replace section 36 of the existing Act and 
provides for a remedy in case of groURdless threat of legal proceed-ings. ., -" , -, ""'7"f"W --
Cla1L8e 107.-Based on section 32 (4) of the U.K. Patents Act. 
1949, this clause seeks to provide that the grounds on which a patent 
may be revoked would be available as grounds of defence to an 
action for infringement. 
Clause 108 provides for reliefs which may be granted in a suit· 
for infringement, the acts constituting infringement being deter-
mined w·ith reference to clause 47 and the terms of the patent. 
Clauaes 109 and 110 deal with the rights of exclusive licensees and 
licensees under section 84 to take proceedings against infringement. 
Clauses 111 and 112 seek to replace section 30 of the existing Act 
and restrict the power of the court to grant dramages, injunction, etc., 
in certain cases. 
Clause 113 seeks to replace section 32 of the existing Act, but the 
power to grant certificates of validity is confined to petitions ... for 
revocation. Where any such certifioate has been granted, this clause 
seeks to regulate the costs in suits for infringement. Where a ma1ter 
is taken to an appellate court by the patentee, the attack on the 
validity of the claim cannot be said to be frivolous and therefore 
sub-clause (3) does not vest any such power as to costs in the 
appellate court. 
Clause 114 modelled on section 62 of the U.K. Patents Act, 1949, 
seeks to replace section 35A of the existing Act relating to infrin~e­
ment ot partially valid specificatiom. 

Clause 115.-Section 35 of the existing Act provides for the 
hearing of suits under that Act with the aid at assessors. This clause 
-- seeks -to -set out in more precise terms the type of persons to be 
appointed, their functions, remuneration, etc. 
Clause 116 seeks to provide for appeals from orders of the Con-
troller. In this connection, it is desirable to provide expressly that 
no appeal shall lie from decisions and orders of the Central Govern-
ment on the lines of section 109(1) of the Trade and Merchandise 
Marks Act, 1958. 
Clause 117 seeks to lay down the procedure for the hearing of 
appeals. It is in modification of the provisions contained in ,ectiol!, 
23G of the existing Act and follows section 109(4) and (5) of the 
Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958. 
Clauses 118 to 124 seek to provide for the punishment of offences 
under the new law. The existing Act does not contain adequate 
Drovisions in this bebalf, the only penalty provided therein (section 
'7~) being in respect of the wrongful use of the words "patent oftlce". 
Clauses 125 to 132.-The provisions contained in sect·ions 75 and 
75 of the existing Act on the subject of agency are insutBcient to 
regulate appearances before the Controller by persons styling them-
selves as patent agents. It is desirable, as in other countries, that 
patent agents should be properly qualified to do tbeir work-a work 
which involves greet skill and responsibility. These clauses, which 
are new, therefore provide for statutory control of patent agenm. 
No person whose name is not entered in the register of patent 
agents will hereafter be permitted to describe himself as a patent 
agent, but nothing in this Chapter would compel an individual to 
resort to a patent agent for filing his application or prev~nt him 
from acting in the matter himself or through an authorised agent. 
Clauses 133 to 139 seek to replace section 78A of the existing Act 
which is confined to reciprocal arrangements between India and the 
United Kingdom and other parts of Her Britannic Majesty's domi-
nions by more comprehensive provisions. Apart from making due _ . 
provision for the mutual protection of inventions, a clause on the 
lines of section 132 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, 
has also been included (clause 134) whereby national'S of countries 
which do not accord reciprocity to our citizens wi11 be denied the 
right to apply for patents, etc., in India. 
Clause 140 based on section 57 of the U.K. Patents Act. 1949, and 
section 112 of the Austrolian Patents Act. 1952. is new. and is intend-
ed to ensure that patent rights are not made an instrument of a 
monopoly wider in scope or longer in duration than afforded under 

100 
the patents by the statute. Accordingly, conditions In contraets, 
leases or licences which tend to impose restrictions on the other 
_party_with . ..1"egard ... to the purchase of ar.mcles or use of processes 
other than the patented article or patented process are rendered 
void as being restrictions on trade injurious to the public Interest. 
This clam:;e will also apply to contracts made before the commence-
ment of this new law in so far as any such restrictions are allowed 
to continue after the expiration of three months from such com-
mencement. The period of three months would enable the parties 
to have the contracts suitably altered, if they so choose. 
Clause 141 is also new and is designed to counter attempts by 
patentees to extend the duration of their patent monopolies beyond 
the period allowed by statute. This clause will enable the patentee, 
lessee or licensee to determine a contract containing any such res-
trictions on giving three months' notice. 
Clauses 143 and 144.-These clauses while placing restrictions upon 
the publication of reports of examiners, specifications, etc., seek to 
vest a discretion in the Controller as to the publication of the result 
. of any search under clause 13. Such a provision would be of value 
to inventors who desire to know the extent of a prior invention. 
Clause 146.--This provision which is confined to information 
regarding the extent to which an invention is being commercially 
worked in India is necessary for the proper working of this law, 
apart from its statistical value. 
Clause '147.-Sub-clauses (1) and (2) are based on section 71 
and 71A of the existing Act and sub-section (3) is based on section 
116 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958. 
Clauae 151 seeks to replace section 33 of the existing Act by 
more elaborate provisions. While orders of High Courts regarding 
revooation of patents or certificates of validity of claims are to be 
entered in the register of patents, orders of other courts in suits for 
infringement, etc., are to be filed in a supplemental register as such . 
orders affect only the parties thereto. 
Clause 1S1.-This clause makes special provisions in respect of 
applications for patents which were referred from time to time to the 
Department' of Atomic Energy for directions as they had references 
to atomic energy. These applications now stand lapsed, due to no 
fault of the applicants, on the ground that the maximum period of 
acceptance prescribed under sub-section (4) of section 5 of the Indian 
. Patents and Designs Act, 1911, has expired. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to amend and consolidate the law relating to 
patents contained in the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911, with 
a view to stimulate inventions among Indians and to encouragp. the 
development and exploitation of new inventions for industrial pro-
gress in India and to ensure that patent rights are not abused, to 
the detriment of the national interestll. The Patent Office, which 
administers the Indian Patents and Designs Act, will have to keep 
a close watch over the commercial exploitation of patents and licen-
sing and other proceedings under the Act. The ~teady increase in the 
number of applications for patents year after year, the proposal for 
extensive world-wide search for novelty, the expansion of the grounds 
of opposition, grounds for the grant of compUlsory licences and the 
provisions for revocation for non-working, will involve additional 
functions on the Patent Office. 
Clause 13 of the Bill envisages compulsory search for ascertain-
ing 'novelty' of an invention and for determining 'anticipation', the 
scope of search extending to priar publication not only in India but 
elsewhere. Involving as it does much heavier work and responsi-
bility than at present, it will necessitate an appreciable augmen-
tation of the Examining and Supervisory officers of the Patent Office. 
Further, it will necessitate the setting up of a Special Abstracting 
Section at the Patent Office, Calcutta, which will engage itself on the 
collection of all fOTeign patent speCifications and other technical 
document.;, classification of the same industry-wise, preparing abs-
tracts of the same and printing or duplication of the abstracts, etc. 
Clause 74(2)/102 of the Bill provides for the establishment of 
branch offices of the Patent Office at different centres ib. the country 
in order to meet the growing requirements of the public and to 
facilitate registration of patents. To begin with, it is intended to 
have 3 branch offices of the Patent Office at Bombay, Delhi and 
Madras. This is on lines similar to the three branch offices of the 
Trade Marks Registry functioning at Calcutta, Delhi and Madras 
under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958. The branch 
offices will be concerned with receiving of applications for patents, 
preliminary examination of the applications and amendments there-
101 

IO:i 
to, taking hearings and attending to all further correspondence such 
-a& -communication -of _orders and the like, except o.f course detailed 
search for anticipation which will be conducted at the Head Offtce, 
Calcutta. 
Clause 115 of the Bill envisages the appointment of Scientific 
Advisers to assist the Court in any suit for infringement or in any 
proceeding before a Court under the Act . 
• The aforesaid measures will involve extra work and will neces-
sitat&E..employment of some additional staff. The expenditure on 
account of additional staff, together with incidental expenses on 
administration is estimated at about Rs. 4 lakhs including Rs. 20,000 
non-recurring. The actual rec:ruitment of staff will, however, be 
made as may be determined by careful work-study. 
Requirement of personnel and finance: 
1. Annual emoluments of 
officers:-
(a) Asstt. Controllers. 
(b) Examiners of 
Patents Q Designs 
2. Annual emoluments of 
sta1f:-
(a) Senior Scientific 
Assistants. 
(b) Asstt. Supdts. 
(c) U.D.Cs. 
3. Incidental expenses. 
7 
27 
10 
3 
9 
TOTAL 
"' } 
Rs. 2,57,000 
"1 
I 
~ Rs. 98,700 
I 
J 
Rs. 44,300 
Rs. 4,00,000' 
Taking the -average of the past 3 years, the annual expenditure 
of the Patent Office is of the order of Rs. 9: 5 lakhs, while the annual 
income by way of fees realised amounts to Rs. 13' 2 lakhs. It is to 
be mentioned in this context that while a general increase in the 
revenues may be expected on account of the filing of larger number 
of applications for patents year after year and also on account of 
the enhanced rates of fees for applications and for renewals, yet the 
reduction of the term of patents from 14 years to 10 years and the 

i03 
stopping of the grant of product patents in the fields of food, drugs 
and medicine, will probably offset to some extent the above. How-
ever;-on balance-if-may-be expected that the present revenue is 
likely to be maintained. Apart from that, as so pertinently pointed 
out by Shri Justice Rajagopala Ayyangar in his report on the Revi-
Bion of Patents Law "The maintenance of a Patent OfBce should be 
considered a service rendered to the public, and this is how it is 
looked upon the U.K. 1£ U.S.A. and other advanced countries and 
therefore if an increase in the cost should result in an increase in the 
efftciency of the service, the cost is alwaYs worthwhile." 
1261 (B) LS-15. 

Clause 158 authorises the High Court to make rules as to the 
'conduct of procedure in respect of proceedings before it under this 
law. . 
Clause 159 authorises the Central Government to make rules for 
csrrying out the purposes of this law. The rules are subject to the 
cQIldition of previous publication. The matters set out in that clause 
in respect of which rules may be made are matters of a procedural 
nature and are merely ancillary to the proper implementation of 
this law. 
The rule-making power sought to be conferred by the above two 
clauses is of a normal character. 
104 

EXTRACTS nOM THE INDIAN PATENTS AND DESIGNS ACT, 1911 
(2 or 1911) 
An Act to amend the law relating to the protection of inven-
tions and designs. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the law relating to the protec-
tion of inventions and designs; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
PlD'.I.ncNAKY 
--
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian 'Patents and Designs Short title, 
Act, 1911. extent and 
• • • • • 
commence. 
mente 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject DeftnitiODi. 
or context:- ' 
(1) "Advocate General" means an Advocate General appointed 
under the Constitution and in relation to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, the Advocate-General for that State: 
(2) "Article" means (as respects designs) any article of manu-
facture and any substance, artificial or natural, or partly artificial 
and partly natural: 
(3) "Controner" means the Controller of Patents and De~igDs 
appointed under this Act: 
• • • * • 
e' ::'(S~ ~igns" means 'oni, the, featureS' of 'shApe, conGgUAltlon; 
pattern or ornament applied to any article by any industrf8I proeeSs 
or, means, whether manual, mechanical or' chemical, separate or com·' 
r~ bln4!d. ,which ,in ,the flnish'ed arliale apPeal to andaAojudged solely 
by the' eye;' ·but. does not uiclude any mode or principle of construc-
tion or. anything which is in substance a mere mecbenlcal, device 
and does 'not include any trade mark as defined in section 478, or 
~ of 1860. property mark as defined in section 479 of the Indian Penal Code: 
(6) "'Distnci Court'" has the ~eaning 'assigned to that expression 
II of 1908. by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908: 
• • • • • 
lOS 
...a -
", 

ro6 
(8) "invention" means any manner of new manufacture and 
Includes an improvement and an alleged invention. 
• • • • 
.-~--------
• 
(10) "maIlufactur&" includes any art, process or· maDDer of pro-
ducing, preparing or making an article, and also any article prepared 
or produced by manufacture: 
(11) "patent" means a patent granted under the provisions of thil 
Act: 
(12) "patentee" means the person for the time bem, entered Oft 
the register of ~~ kept under this Act as the grantee or propria. 
tar of the patent: 
• • • 
PART I 
PATENTS 
• 
AppZicc:ation for and Grant of Patent 
• 
AppUca- 3. (1) An application for a patent may be made by any person 
tion. whether he is a citizen of India or not, and whether alone or jointly 
with any other person. 
_ (2) The application must be made in the prescribed form. and 
~ust be left at the Patent Of!ice in the prescribed manner. 
(3) The application must contain a declaration to the effect that 
.the. appHc:ant is in P'8sessioD of an invention,. whereof he.. or to the 
case of a joint ·application one at least of the applieaats, ·c1abas. to 
be the true and first inventor or the legal representative or psign 
of suclJ Inventor and for which he desires to· obtain a patent, and 
.must .~ acrompaDied b.y either a prmstonal. o~ complete:-speciftc:atiOD 
.~ by the pteSCribed.fee.. . 
- .... f4} Where the true and ftrst iDftutal" is ·D~· * party to the appU .. 
.. -cation, tlie applfeaf~n must contain a statement of his- "11ame~ and 
-such particulars for his identification as may b~· prescribed, and the 
,.ppncant must show that he is the legal representative or assign of 
mc!! m-.entor. 
Spedtl:.- 4. (1) A provisional speci1ication must describe the nature af the 
tlODL Invention. 
(2) A complete specification must particuIai-Iy describt: and 
ascertam the nature of the invention and the manner in which the 
I8JDe is to be performed. 

107 
(3) A specificatioD, whether provisional or complete, must com-
menee with the title, and in the case f!)f a complete apeciftcation must 
end with a distinct statement, of the-mvention-elafmed.------' --
(4) Where the Controller deems It desirable, he may require that 
lUitable drawings shall be supplied at any time befare the accept-
ance of the application, and such drawings shall be deemed to form 
part of the complete specification. 
(~) If in any particular case the Controller consic{ers that an 
application should be further supplemented by a model or sample 
of anything illustrating the invention or alleged to coDStitute an 
Invention, such model or sample as he may require shall be furnished 
before the acceptance of the application, but such model or sample 
.hall not be deemed to form part of the specification. . 
(6) The Controller may, where the application was accompanied 
by a specification purporting. to be a complete specification. if the 
applicant so requests, treat the specification as a provisional specifica-
tion and proceed with the application accordingly. 
4A. (1) If the applicant does not leave a complete specification Time 
'with his application, he may leave it at any subsequent time within for 
nine months from the date of the application: 1 leaYinl• camp ete 
speci-
Provided that the said nine months shall be extended to such flcatloD. 
period, not e'Xceeding t~n months Jrom the date of the application, 
as ~y be specified in a request made by the applicant to the. Con-
troller, if the request is made and the prescribed fee is paid within 
the period so specified. . 
(2) If the complete specification is not left withill the· -period 
allowable under sub-section (1), the applieation shall be dee~ to 
be abandoned at the expiration of ten months from the date thereof. . ...... .. . -' ~ . . . . .. 
4B. (1) An. inVention may, during-the period between ~he date Provi-
of an application for a patent therefor and the date of· seaiing a sional pro-' 
patent on that application. be used and published without prejudice tectiOD. 
to that patent, and such protection from the consequences of use and 
Dublication is. in this Act referred.to as provisional protection. . 
(2) In this section, the expression "date of an application fot a 
patent" means, as respects an application which is post-dllted or ante-
dated under this Act, the date to which the application is so post-
. dated' or ante-ciated and means. as resp~cts any other application, 
, the date on which it is actually made. 

1A-1 108 
Proceed-
in,. Upon 
applica_ 
tion, 
5, (1) The Controller'shall refer to an Examine!- every appUca~ 
tion in respect of which a complete specification has been filed and 
if satisfied on- the reparfOrUfEfExamfner that: ;.;..;,-' ----
- .. 
(a) the nature of the invention or the manner in which it is 
to be performed is not particularly described and ascertained in 
the complete specification, or 
(b) the application, specification and drawings have not 
been prepared in the prescribed manner, or 
(cl the title of the specification does not sufficiently indicate 
the subject-matter of the invention. or 
(d) .the statement of claim does not sufficiently define the 
invention, or 
(dd) where a complete specification has been left after a 
provisional specification, the invention particularly described in 
the complete specification is not substantially the same as that 
which is described in the provisional specification, or 
(e) the invention as described and claimed 'is prim.a facie 
not a manner of new manufacture or improvement, or' 
(I) the specification relates to more than one invention, or 
(g) in the case of an application claiming priority under 
section 78A, the specification describes and claims an invention 
substantially larger than or substantially different from the.inven-
tion disclosed in the. specification filed with the application made 
outside India by virtue of which priority is clai~ed, or _ 
(h) in the ease of an application for a patent of ad~ition 
under Seetion 15A, the invention described and claimed in the 
'specification is not an improvement or liiodification, of '. that 
: 'deseribed and claimed in the original specifi~ation, . . 
be may refuse to accept the application or require that the' appJica-
.. .tion, specification Ol" drawings be amended. before he proceeds.with 
.,the application; and in the latter· case the application shall, if the 
Controller so directs, bear date as from the time when the require-
ment is complied with: 
Provided that, when a specification comprises more than one 
,invention, the application shall, if the Controller or the applicant sO 
. requires, be, restricted to one invention and the other inventions may 
be made the subject~atter of fresh applications; and any such 
fresh application shall be proceeded with as a substantive application 
but the Controller may, in his discretion, direct that any such fresh 

.. 109 
appiication "made before the acceptanee of the origilial applicatioD 
shall bear the da~e _of the oI:igim~Upplication.or_.such later. date as . 
he may fix, and the fresh application shan be deemed, for the pur-
poses of this Act, to have been made on the date which it bears in 
accordance with such direction: 
Provided further that where a complete specification is left after 
a provilSional specification, the Controller may, if the applicant so 
requests, cancel the provisional specification and direct that the 
. application shall be deemed to have been made on the date on which 
the complete specification was. left, and proceed with the application 
accordingly. 
(lA) If the Controller considers, at any time before the accept-
ance of an application, that the invention claimed therein has been 
wholly or in part claimed in a specification published on or after 
the date which the patent applied for would bear if granted, apper-
taining to an application for a patent which if granted will be of 
prior date to the patent applied for, he may require that the appli-
cant's specification be amended by the insertion of a reference to 
such other specification, by way of notice to the public. 
(2) Where the Controller refuses to accept an application or 
reqUires- an amendment or the- insertion of a reference, the appli-
cant may appeal from his decision to the Central Government. 
(3) The investigations required by this section shall not be held 
in any way to guarantee the validity of any patent, and no liability 
shall be incurred by the Central Government or any officer by 
reason of, or in connection with, any such investigation, or any 
proceeding consequent thereon. 
(4) Unless an application is accepted within eighteen months 
from the date of the application, the application shall (except where 
an appeal has been lodged) be deemed to have been refused: 
Pro~ded that where, bef6re, or within three months after, the 
expiration of the said period of eighteen months, a request is made 
to the Controller for an extension of time, the application shall, on 
payment of the prescribed fee, be continued for any period so 
requested not exceeding in all three months from the expiration of 
the said period of eighteen months. 
6. On the acceptance of an application the Controller shall give Advertise-
notice .~b,ereof to the applicant and shall advertise the acceptance; ment on 
and ~e~i.pplicati9n and specifications with the drawings (if any) acceptance 
shall be open to public in.pection. :io:.PPllca-

1't( 
Mf'Ct ot 
acceptance 
of applica-
tion. 
Opposition 
to lI'ant 
of patent. 
110 
7. After the acceptance of an application and until the date of 
sealing a patent in respectthereof r 4)l' -the expiration _oLthe __ tim~J~r_ 
sealing, the applicant shall have the like privileges and rights as if 
a patent for the inven~jpn had been sealed on the date of the accept-
ance of the application: 
Provided that the applicant shall not be entitled to institute any 
proceedings for infringement until the patent has been sealed. 
8. [Inquiry be/ore sealing patent.] Rep. by the Indian Patnu 
and Desig1L8 (Amend'ment) Act, 1930 (7 of 1930), s. 4. 
9. (1) Any person may, on payment of the prescribed fee, at any 
time within four months from the date of the advertisement of the 
acceptance of an application, give notice at the Patent Office of 
opposition to the grant of the patent on any of the following grounds, 
namely:-
(a) that the applicant obtained the invention from him, or 
from a person of whom he is the legal representative or assign; 
or 
(b) that the invention has been claimed in any specification 
filed in India whiCh is or will be of prior date to the pat~t, the 
grant of which is opposed; or 
(c) that the nature of the invention or the manner in which 
it is to be performed is not sufficiently or fairly described and 
ascertained in the specifications; or 
(d) that the invention has been publicly used in any part of 
India or has been made publicly known in any part of India; or 
(e) that the complete specification describes or claims an 
invention other than that described in the provisional specifica-
tion, and that such other invention either forms the subject of 
an ~plication made by \pe opponent for a patent which if 
granted would bear a date in the interval between the date of . 
the application and the leaving of the complete specification, or 
has been made available to the public by publication in any 
document published in India in that interval; 
but on no other ground. 
(2) Where such notice is given, the Controller shall live notice 
of the opposition to the applicant, and shall, on the expiration of 
those four months, after hearing the applicant, and tbt opponent.· 
If desirous of being heard, decide on the case. ' , 

III 
(3) The decision of the Controller ahall be aubject to appeal to 
the Central Gf)ve~ent. ---------_ 
10. (1) If there Is no opposition, or, In cue of opposition. if the Grmt ad 
determination is in favour of the grant of a patent, a patent &hall, 8DaliDf ,. 
on payment of the prescribed fee, be granted,. subject to &Ueil condi- pat.:af • 
tiona (il any) as the Central Government thjnks expedient, to the 
applicant, or in the case of a joint application to the appncmu 
jomtly, and the Controller shall cause the patent to be le81ea. Wlth 
the seal of the Patent Office. 
(lA) NotWithstanding anything contained In IUb-seCtlOll (l)~ 
where-
(a) an applicant has agreed in writing that on the grant to 
him of a patent he will assign it to another party or to a joint 
applicant and refuses to proceed with the application, or 
(b) disputes arise between joint applicants u to proceeding 
with an application, 
the Controller, if he is satisfied of 'the existence of such aareement 
or, in any other case, that any joint applicant or applicants ought 
to be allowed to proceed alone, may direct that such other party 
or jOint applicant or applicants may proceed with the application 
accordingly and may grant a patent to him or them, as the case may 
be: 
Provided that-
(i) the Controller shall not give any such direction untU 
every party interested has had an opportunity of being heard by 
him, and 
(ii) . an appeal from any such direction shall lie to the Cen-
tral Government. 
(2) A patent shall be sealed as soon as maJ'.be, and not after 
the expiration of twenty-four months from the date of application: 
Provided that,-
(a) where the Controller has allowed an extension of the 
time within which an application may be accepted, a further 
extension of !our months after the said twenty-four months shall 
be aUo.ed for the sealing of the patent; 
(b) where the seeling is delayed by an appeal to the Central 
Government, or by opposition to the gran~ of the patent, or by 
any proceedings taken for obtaining a direction of the Controller 
1all (B) LS-ll. 
:. 

112 
UDder ·the provisions of'sub-section (tA) the patent ma, be 
.. aled at luch-time-'u-the"Controller may direct; --.-.. ---.- .. ----
. (c) where the patent is granted to the legal representative 
of an applicant who bas died before the expiration o~ the time 
which would otherwise be allowed for sealing the patent, -the 
patent may be sealed at any time within twelve months after 
the date of his death or at luch later time as the Controller may 
think At; 
(d) where for any reuon a patent cannot be sealed within 
the period allowed by any of the foregoitlg' provisions of this 
section, that period may, on payment of the prescribed fee and on 
compliance with the prescribed conditions, be extended to the 
extent applied for but not exceeding three months. 
Date of 11. Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Act, a patent 
,atent. shall be dated and sealed as of the date of the application: 
Meet, 
ext.entand 
form of 
pat.ent 
Fraudu-
lent 
appUra-
~onl tor 
ratents. 
Provided that no proceedings shall be taken in respect of an 
infringement committed before the advertisement of the acceptance 
of the application. 
12. (1) A patent sealed with the seal of the..Patent Oflice shall, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act, coD;fer, on the patentee 
the exclusive privilege of making, selling and using the invention 
throughout India and of authorizing others so to do. 
(2) Every patent may be in the prescribed form and shan be 
granted. for one invention only, but the specification may contain 
more than one claim; and it shall not be' competent for any person 
in a suit or other proceeding to take any objection to a patent on the 
ground that it has been granted. for more than one invention. 
13. (1), A patent granted to the true and first inventor or his 
legal representative or assign shall not be invalidated by an appli-
cation iri fraud of him, or by protection obtained thereon or by any 
use or publication of the invention subsequent to that fraudulen't 
application during the period of protection. . ........ 
. (2) Where a patent has been revoked by the High Court on 
the ground that it has been obtained in fraud of the true and first 
inventor, or where the grant of a patent has been refused by the 
Controller under section 9 on the ground stated in clause (cz) of sub-
section (1) of that section, the Controller may, on the application 
of the true inventor or his legal representative or assign made in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, grant to bim a patent 
for the whole or any part of the invePticm, aDd the patent 10 

tIl 7'1 't-. 
traDted Ihall bear the same date as the patent 10 revoked, or, III 
the cue of a patent the I1'lDt of 'which hu been refused, the lame 
date as would have been borne by the patent if it had been arantecl: 
Provided that DO suit shall be brou;htfor-anY··infrlDgement·of 
the patent ao granted committed before the actual date when such 
patent was granted. 
13A. (1) Where the ·8ame applicant has put in two or more Slnlle 
prOvisional speciftcations for inventions which are cognate or modi- pam.t -
ftcatioDS one of the other, and has obtained thereby concurrent cOlute 
provisional protection for the same, and the Controller is of opinion ~v.=­
that.the whole of such inventions are such as to constitute a single 
invention and may properly be included in one patent, he may allow 
one complete speciftcation in respect of the whole of such applica-
tions and grant a single patent thereon. 
(2) Such pate~t-ih~ll·bear th; d-;-te of-the-wllest of such appli-
cations, but in considering the validity of the same. and in deter-
mining other questions under this Act, the Court or the Controller. 
as the case may be, shall have regard to the rer-pective dates of the 
provisional speciftcations relating to the several matters claimed in 
the complete speclftcation. 
Tenn of P4tent 
14. (1) The term limited in every patent for the duration thereof !'erm of 
shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by this Act, be sixteen ,..t. 
years from its date. 
(tA) Any patent the original term of which had not expired on 
or before the 1st day of July, 1930, shall have effect as "if the term 
mentioned therein was sixteen years instead of fourteen years, and 
any license existing at that date which has been granted for the 
term of the patent shall be treated as having been granted for the 
tenn as so extended if the licensee 80 desires. 
,,:8) Where any party to a contract with the patent~ or aliy 
other person entered into before tae 1st day of January, 1930, is 
subjected to loss or liability by reason of the extension of the term 
of any patent under this section, any District Court having juris-
diction may, on application made in this behalf, determine in what 
manner and by which parties such loss or liability shall be borne. 
(2) A patent shall, notwithstanding anything therein or in this 
Act, cease if the patentee fails to pay the prescribed fees within 
the prescribed times: 

1'~-"' rr .. 
I'roVMed thatwbere the" patentee, betore, or 'within three months 
after, the expiration of the time for payment, applies to the Con-
troller for an "extension" of time, the patent shall; on payment of such· 
--~ditiOniUfee as may be prescribed; "De-Continued or revived, 88 the 
case may be, for any period so applied !or not exceeding in all three 
months from the expiration of the time for payment. 
l!Dmslon 
o. ip.rm of 
,..c. 
(3) If any proceeding is taken in respect of an in:fringement of 
the patent committed after a failure to pay any ftie within the pres-
cribed time, and before any enlargement thereof,· the Court be~ore 
which the proceeding is taken may, if it thinks fit, refuse to award 
any damages in respect of such infringement. 
15. (1) A patentee may present a petition to the Central Govern-
ment praying that his patent may be extended for a further term but 
lU'!h petition must be left at the Patent Oftlce at least six months be-
fore the time limited for the expiration of the patent and must be 
accompanied by the prescribed fee and must be advertised by the 
" patentee within the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner. 
(2) Any person may within such time as may be prescr!bed and 
on payment of the prescribed fee give notice to the Controller of 
objection to the extension. 
(3) Where a petition is presented under sub-section (1), the Central 
Government may, as it thinks fit, dispose of the petition itself or refer. 
it to a High Court for decision. 
(4) If the petition be referred to a High Court, then on the hearing 
of such petition under this section, the patente~. and any person who 
has given notice under sub-section (2) of objection, shall be made 
parties to the proceeding, and the Controller shall be entitled to ap-
pear and be heard. 
(5) The Central Government or the High Court to which a petition 
is referred shall in considering the petition have regard to the nature 
and merits of the invention in relation to the public, to the profits 
made on the patent and to all the circumstances of the case. 
(6) If it appears to the Central Gov~mment or to the High Court 
when the petition is referred to it, that the patent has not ~een suftl-
ciently remunerative, the Central Government or" the High Court, 
as the case may be, may by order extend the term of the patent for a 
turther term not exceeding flve or in exceptional cases ten y~ars or 
may order the grant of a new patent for such term not exceed!ng ten 
years as may be specified in the order and subject to any restriction, 
conditions and provisions which the Central Government or the High 
Court, as the case may be, may think fit. 

. 15A. (1) Where a patent for an Invention has been applied for or Patent!! at 
gra~lted, ar.d the appl:cant or the patentee, as the case may be, applies alfdJUolL 
--for-a.furth:r-l'atent-in-respect of any improvement in o~ modification 
of the invention, he may in his application for the further patent re-
quest that the term limited in that patent for the duration thereof 
be the same as that of the original patent or so much of that term as 
is unexpired, and, if he does so, a patent (hereinafter referred to 
as a pat~nt of addition) may be granted for such term as aforesaid. 
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided by th!S Act, a patent of 
addition shall remain in force as long as the patent for the original 
Invention remains in force .. but no longer, and in respect of a patent 
of addit~on no fees shall be payable for renewal: 
Provided that if the patent for the original invention is revoked, 
then the patent of addition shall, if the authority by which it is r~ 
voked so o]'ders, become an independent patent, and the fees payable, 
and the dates when they become payable, shall be determined by its 
date, but its duration shall not exceed the unexpired term of the 
patent fer the original invention. 
(3) The grant of a patent of addition shall be conclusive evidence 
that the invention is a proper subject for a patent of addition, and 
the validity of the patent shall not be questioned on the ground that 
the invention ought to have been the subject of an independent patent. 
16. (1) 'Where any patent has ceased owing to the failure of the Restora. 
patentee to pay any prescribed fee within the prescribed time, the tion of 
patentee may apply to the Controller in the prescribed manner for LtPtl'ledt , . pa en . 
an order for the restoratlon of the patent. 
(2) Every such application shall contain a statement of the. cir- . 
cumstances which have led to the omission of the payment of the 
prescribed fee. 
(3) If it appears from such statement that the omission was un-
intentional or unavoidable and that no undue delay has occurred in 
the malting of the application, the C.ontroller shall advertise the ap-
plication in tbe prescribed manner, and within such time as may be 
prescribed any person may give notice of opposition at the Patent 
Office. 
(4) Where such notice is given the Controller shall notify the ap-
plicant thereof. 
(5) After the expiration of the prescribed period the Controller 
shall hear the case and, subject to an appeal to the Central Govern-
ment, issu~ ~ order either restoring the patmtsubject. to any 

· conditions and restrictions deemed to be advisable or dilmissin, the 
application: 
Provided that in every order -under-this section restoring a patent 
such provisions as may be prescribed shall be inserted for the pro-
tection of persons who may have availed themselves of the subject-
matter of the patent after the patent had ceased. 
Amendment of Application OT Specijica.tion 
Amp.nd- 17. (1) An applicant or a patentee may at any time, by request 
me1i~ ot. in writing left at the Patent Office and accompanied by the prescribed 
:~~-:n fee, ~eek leave to amemihis application or specification, including. 
cation br drawmgs forming part thereof, way of disclaimer, correction or 
Controller. explanation, stating the nature of, and the reasons for, the proposed 
amendment. 
(2) If the application for a patent has not been accf'pted, the Con-
troller shall determine whether and subject to what conditions (if 
any) the amendment shall be allowed. 
(3) In any other case the request and the nature of the proposed 
amendment shall be advertised in the prescribed manner, and at any 
time within three months from its first advertisement any person 
may give notice at the Patent Oftice of opposition to the amendment. 
(4) Where such a notice is given the Controller shall give notice 
of the opposition to the person making the request, and shall hear 
and decide the case. 
(5) Where no notice of opposition is given, or the person so giving 
notice of opposition does not appear, the Controller shall determine 
whether and subject to what conditions, if any, the amendment ought 
to be allowed. 
(6) The decision of the Controller in either case shall be subject 
to an appeal to the Central Government. 
(7) No amendment shall be allowed that would make the appli-
cation or specification, as amended, claim an invention substantially 
larger than, or substantially different from, the invention claimed by 
the application or speciftcation as it stood before amendment. 
(8) Leave to amend shall be conclusive as to the right of the party 
to make the amendment allowed, except in case of fraud; and the 
amendment shan be advertised in the prescribed manner, and shall 
In all Courts and for all purposes be deemed to fonn part of the appli-
cation or spec:i1lcatioD. 

U, 
(9) This section shall Dot apply when and 10 lonl u any suit for 
-Infringementor-proceedinl before a Court for the revocation of the 
patent is pending. 
18. In any suit for infringement of a patent or proceeding before AmeIJd-
a Court for the revocation of a patent the Court may by order allow ment of 
the patentee to amend his specification by way of disclaimer, corree- 8~eeiftc.­
tion or explanation in such manner, and subject to such terms as to CtiODrtbY th, ou . costs, advertisement or otherwise, as the Court may think fit: . 
Provided that no'1Dt1&Ddment shall be so allowed that would make 
the specification, as amended, clainl an invention substantially larger 
than, or substantially different from, the invention claimed by . the 
specification as it stood before the amendment, and where an appli-
cation for such an order is made to the Court notice of the application 
shall be given to the Controller, and the Controller shan have the 
right to appear and be heard. 
19. Where an amendment of a specification by way of disclaimer, ltettrle-
correction or explanation has been allowed under this Act, no damages tiOD on 
shall be given in any suit in respect of the use of the invention before reco~ery 
the date of the decision allowing the amendment, unless the patentet: dam~'eL 
establishes to the satisfaction of the Court that his original cla:m was 
framed in good faith and with reasonable skill and knowledge. 
Register of Patents 
20. (1) There shall be kept at the Patent Office a book called the Register 
Register of Patents, wherein shall be entered the names and addresses of. 
of grantees of patents, notifications of assignments and of transmis- Pa~ents. 
sions of patents, of licenses under patents, and of amendments, ex-
tensions, and revocations of patents, and such other matters affecting 
the validity or proprietorship of patents as may be prescribed. 
(2) The register of inventions and address book existing at the 
commencement of this Act shall be incorporated with, and form part 
of, the register of patents under this Act. 
(3) The register of patents shall be prima facie evidence of any 
matters by this Act directed or authorised to be inserted therei~. 
(.4) Copies of deeds, licenses and any other documents affecting 
the proprietorship in any patent or in any license thereunder, must 
be supplied to the Controller in the prescribed manner for filing in 
the Patent Oftlce. 

' . 
itA 
Government 
. P."t 21. (l)Subjeet to the other-provisions of this sectio~, a patent shall 
to bind. have to all intents the like effect as against Government as it has 
Gowm- against any person. I 
mat 
(2) The omcers or authorities administering any department of 
the service of Government may, by themselves or by such of their 
agents, contractors or others as may be authorised in writing by them, 
at any time after the application, and after giving notice to the ap.-
plicant or patentee, make use or exercise the invention for the service 
of the Government on such terms as may, either before or after the use 
thereof, be agreed on, with the approval of the Central Government, 
between such omcers or authorities and the applicant or patentee, 
or, 'in default of agreement, as may be settled in the ma1"lner herein-
after provided. And the terms of any agreement or license con-
cluded between the applicant or patentee and any person other than 
such omcers or authorities, shall be inoperative so far as concerns 
the making, use or exercise of the invention for the service of the 
Government. 
(3) Where an invention which is the subject of any patent has, 
before the date of the patent, been duly recorded in a docq~ent by, 
or tried by or on behalf of, the officers or authorit~es administering 
any department of the service of Government (such invention not 
having been communicated directly or indirectly by the applicant or 
patentee), such officers or authorities, or such of their agents, con-
tractors, or others, as may be authorised in writing by them, may, 
after giving notice to the applicant Or patentee, make, use or exer-
cise the invention so recorded or tried for the service of the Govern-
ment free of any royalty or other payment to the applican~ or 
patentee, notwithstanding the existence of the patent. If, in ~he 
opinion of such officers or authorities, the disclosure to the applicant 
or patentee, as the case may be, of the document recording the in-
vention, or the evidence of the trial thereof, if' required, would b-~ 
_ .. detrimental to the public interest, it may be made confidentially to 
counsel on behalf 'of the applicant or patentee, or to any independent 
expert mutually agreed upon. 
(4) In the event of any dispute as to the making, use or exercise 
of an invention under this section, or the terms therefor, or as to the 
existence or scope of any record or trial as aforesaid, the matter shall 
be referred to the High Court for decision, who shall have power to 
refer the whole matter or any question or issue of fact arising there-
on to be tried before a special or official referee or an arbitrator upon 
IUCh term. as it may direct. The Court. referee or arbitrator, u the 

..... ....- - t 
II~ 
~ue may be, may, with the consent of ~ parties, take into cOUlider-
ation the vaJ.ic:Uty of the patent for the purposes only at the reference 
'and for'the determination of the issues between the applicant or 
patentee MIld such officers or authorities. The Court, referee, or 
arbit.cator, further, in settling the terms as aforesaid, .hall be entitled 
to take into consideration any benefit or compensation which the ap-
plicant or patentee, or any other person interested in the patent, 
may have received directly or indirectly from the Government or 
from such officers or authorities in respect of such patent: 
Provided that, if the inventor or patentee is a Government servant 
and the subjf(:t-matter of the invention is certified by the ,Central 
Government or State Government to be connected with work done in 
the course of such service, any such dispute shall be settled by the 
Central Government after hearing the applicant or patentee and any 
other person having an interest in the invention or patent. 
(5) Tbe right to use an invention for the services of the Govern-
ment under the provisions of this section, or any provisions for which, 
this section is substituted, shan include, and shall be deemed alwa,.. 
to have included, the power to sell any articles made in pursnaQc.e 
of such right which are no longer required for the services of the 
Government. 
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the Govern-
ment or of any person deriving title directly or indirectly from the 
Government to sell or use any articles forfeited under any law for 
the time being in force relating to customs or excise. 
ZlA. (1) The inventor of any improvement in instruments or mUDi- Assip-
tions of war may (either for or without valuable consideration) assign ment oJ 
to the Central Government all the benefit of the invention and of any patent to 
patent obtained o~ to be obtained for ~he invention; and the Central ~~tral 
Government may be a party to the assIgnment. Govern- i 
Mento I 
(2) The assignment shall effectually vest the ben,elit of the inven-
tion and patent in the Central Government, and all co~enanta and 
agreements therein contained for keeping the invention secret and 
otherwise shall be valid and effectual (notwithstanding any want of 
valuable consideration), and may be enforced accordingly by or OD. 
behalf of the Central Government. 
(3) Where any such assignment has been made, the Central G0v-
ernment may, at any time before tbepublication of the speciflcation, 
certify to the Controller ~at, in the interest of the public service, 
the particulars of the invention and of the manner in which it Is to be 
performed should be kept secret. 
1261 (B)I&-17. 

'20 
(4) It the Central Govemmeat 10 certif), me application and speci-
--t1catiODS, with the drawinp(~_ any) and any amendment of the 
speci1lcation aDd any copies of such 'dOCuments and drawings, shall, 
instead of being left in the ordinary manner at the Patent Oftice, be 
delivered to the Controllf:U" in a packet sealed by authority of the 
Central Government. 
(5) The packet shall, until the expiration of the term during which 
a patent for the invention may be in force, be kept sealed by the CoD-
troller, and shall not be opened save under the authority of an order 
of the Central Government. 
(6) The sealed packet shall be delivered at any time---d.uriDg the 
continuance of the patent to any person authorised by the Central 
Government to receive it, and shall, if returned to the Controller, be 
again kept sealed by him. 
(7) On the expiration of the term of the patent, the sealed packet 
,ball be delivered to the Central Government. 
(8) Where the Central Government certifies as aforesaid after an 
application for a patent has been left at the Patent Office but before 
the publication of the specification, the application and specif:cationa, 
with the drawings (if any), shall be forthwith placed in a packet 
sealed by authority of the Controller, and the packet shall ~be subject 
to the foregoing provisions respecting a packet sealed by aLlthority 
of the Central Government. 
(9) No proceeding by petition or otherwise shall lie for revoca-
tion of a patent granted for an :invention £n. relation to which • 
certificate has been given by the Central Government as aforesaid. 
(10) No copy of any speciflcation or other document or drawing, 
by this section required to be placed in a sealed packet, shall 1D 
any manner whatever be published or open to the inspection of the 
public, but, save as otherwise provided In this section, the provisions 
of this ~t shall apply in respect of any such invention and .patent 
as aforesaid. 
(11) The Central Government may at any time waive the benefit 
of this section with respect to any particular'invention, and the 
specifications, documents and drawings -shall be thenceforth· . kept 
and dealt with in the ordinary way. 
(12) The communication of any invention for any tmprovem~t 
in instruments or munitions of war to the Central Government or to 
any person or persons authorised by, the Central.Gov~~l!t. to ,lD-
ftStlgate the same or the merits thereof, shall not. nor shall an.ythlq 

..... " , 
121 
done far the purpoiE. of the investigation, be ~ed use or pubU· 
cation of web Inventicm 80 as to prejudice the grant or validity of any 
..JNl_t for the am •. , 
,. -
Compulsory Licences cmd RevoCCltion 
22. (1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the :=~: 
date of the sealing of a patent any person interested may apply to lIceDce. 
the Controller upon anyone or more of the grounds specified in 
sub-section (2) for a licence under the patent. 
(2) The grounds upon which an applicatton under sulMreetion (1) 
may be made are as follows, that is to 88y,-
(4) that· the patented invention, being capable of being COID"-· 
, merclaUy worked in India, has not been commercially worked 
therein or Is not being 10 worked to the fuDest extent that fJ 
reasonably practicable; 
(b) that a demand for the patented article :In India is not 
being met to an adequate extent or on reasonable terms, or is 
being met to a substantial extent by Importation of the patented 
article from other countries; 
(c) that the commercial working of the invention in India is 
being prevented or hindered by the importation of the patented 
arUcle from other countries; 
(d) that by reason of the refusal of tile patentee to grant a 
.Jicence or licences on reasonable terms-
(i) a market for the export of thf' patented article 
manufactured in India is not being supplied, or 
(ti) the worldng or e.fftclent working in India of any 
other patented invention which makes a substantial contri-
bution to the establishment or development of commerclal 
or !ndustrlal activities In India Is unfairly prejudiced; 
(e) tllat by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee 
upon the grant of licences under the patent, or upon the pur-
ehase, hire or use of the patented article er process, the manu-
facture, use or sale of materials not protected bv the patent or 
. the establishment or development of commercial or mdusbial 
activities In India Is unfairly prejudiced. 
(3) An appllcatioD under this seetiOD may be made by any per-
son notwithstanding that be Is already the holder- of a lieence under 
the patent; and no person shan be estopped from alle,dn« any of t'hp, 
matters'speclfted In su~lon (2) ~ rPn~on of any admisSIon mAde 
by him, whether fD such' a licence or ot hpnvise, or by reason of bllII 
bavJDC accepted sueh a lfeeDce. . 

Relief in 
~of 
.appll-
cation 
lIDder . 
teetlon 22; 
123 
(t) In this JeCtion . the expression "patented article" includes any 
- article made by a patented process. 
Z3.(~ere an app1icati~n is made under section 22 the Con-
troller may make an order granting any of the following reliefs, tha~ 
is to say, the Controller may-
(4) grant a licence to the applicant upon such terms as thr. 
Controller thinks fit; and may also where the circumstance;; so 
require direct that all other existing licences in respect of· the 
patent shall be revoked, or that the patentee shall forfeit Ii...,\· 
right which he may have as a patentee, to make, use, exerei~E" or 
vend the invention or to grant licences under the patenl: 
(b) revoke any existing licence held by the applicant and 
grant a new licence upon such terms as the Controller thinks 
fit, or amend any licence held by the applicant in such manner 
as the Controller may think ftt; 
(c) grant a licence under the patent to !;uch custOUl(,!'S of tht' 
applicant and on such terms as the Contrcller thinks fit, if th0 
Controller lis satisfted that the manufactu~·e. use or sale of 
materials not protected by the patent is unfairly prejl1diced by 
reason of conditions imposed by the patentee ~pon the grant of 
licences under the patent or upon the purchase, hire or use of 
the patented article or process: 
Provided that where the application is made on the ground 
that the patented invention is not being commercipUy worked 
in India or is not being worked to the fullest extent that is 
reasonably pl'8cticable and it appears to the Controller that the 
time which has elapsed since the granting of the patent has for 
any reason been insuftlclent to enable it to bE" so worked. h~ 
may, by order. adjourn the application for such pP.MOrl "c: will 
in his opinion. give- sufftcient time for thp invention to hE" ,,~ 
worked. 
(2) Except·in cases where the terms of 'a licence have been settled 
by mutual agreement and such tenns otherwise provide. any person 
to whom a licence has been granted under sub-section (1) shall be 
entitled to call upon the Patentee to take proceedings to prevent 
any infringement of the patent and if the patentee refuses or neglects 
to do so within two months after being so called upon. the licensee 
may institute proceedings for the infringement in his own name as 
though he were the patentee, making the patentee a defendant and 
a patentee so added as defendant shall not be liable for any costs 
uittesl he en~en an appearance and takes part in the proeeedinp. 

"," , .•• ~, #.. 
123 
J3A. (1) At any time after the expiration of three years from Endorse-
the date of the sealing of a patent, the Central Government may ment of 
apply to the Controller upon any one or more of the grounds specified patent on 
in -eub-section (2) of section 22 for the endorsement of the patent ~ppli;a~ 
with the words "Licences of Right". a:.~-
(2) An application under this section may also be made on the ment_ 
ground that by the refus31 of the patentee to grant a licence or 
licences on reasonable terms the establishment or development of 
commercial or industrial activitie."I in India is unfairly prejudiced 
or the development of an-industry, the control of which by the 
Union is dEclared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public 
interest,is being prevented or hindered. 
(3) Where a patent of addition is in force, any application under 
slolb-section (1) either for the endorsement of the original patent or 
the patent of addition shan be deemed to be an application for the 
endorsement of bot.h the patentR and -where any such application 
is granted or refused it ~hE'l1 be deemed to have been granted or 
refused in respect of both the patents_ 
(4) All endorsements of patentr. made under this section shall be 
entered in the Register of Patents maintained under section 20_ 
(5) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing 
in this section shall affect the right of the Central Government or 
any State Government to make an application for the grant of a 
licence in respect of any industrial undertaking or trading activity 
owned or carried on by such Government. 
DB. (1) Where the Controller has made an endorsement upon Provision· 
a patent "Licences of Right"- a& to 
patents 
(a) any per-JOn shaH at any time after such endorsement be endorsed 
entitl-eo as of right tC' a liC'ence under the patent upon snch terms "Licences 
as in default of agreement may be settled by the Controller on of Right". 
the application either of the patentee or of the person applying 
for a licence; 
(b) the Controller may, on the application cf a person 
holding a licence granted under the patent before the endorse. 
ment, order the licence to be revoked and grant a new licence 
by virtue of the ,="ndorsement upon terms to be !:Jettled in the 
aforesaicl manner; 
(c) if in proceedings fllr the infringement of the patent 
(otherwise than by the imp(lrtation of the patented article from 
other countries) the infringing defendant is ready ,and willing 

to tab a licence upon terma to be .ettled by the Controller, DO 
injunction against him shall be awarded, and the amount re-
--------'coverable-.againsUUm by way of damages, If any, shall not ex-
ceed double the amount which would have been recoverable 
against him as licensee If the licence had been. dated prior to the 
berc1Je 
of powers 
onappu.. 
ation 
under 
leCtlon 
2Z or 
.ection 
2IA. 
earliest infringement; . 
(d) the renewal fees payable in respect of a patent eo en-
dosed shall, as from the date of the endorsement, be one moiety 
only of the fees which would otherwise have been payable. 
(2) The provisions of sub-seetion (2) of section 23 shan apply to 
I any licence granted under sub-section (1): as they apply to a licence 
granted under the said section 23. 
Z3C. (1) The powers of the Controller upon an application under 
sectIon 22 or section 2:~A Fhall be exercised with a view to seeurinI 
the following general purposes, that is to say,-
(a) that inventions which can be worked on a cl)mmerclal 
scale in India and which should In the public interest be 80 
worked shall be worked therein without undue delay and to the 
fullest extent that Is reasonably practicable; 
(b) that the inventor or other person beneftclally entitled to 
a patent shall receive reasonable remuneration having regard to 
the nature of the invention; 
(c) that the Interests of any person for the time being 
working or developing an Invention In India under the protec-
tion of a patent is not unfairly prejudiced. 
(2) Subject to the proVisions of sub-section (1), the Controller 
sball, in determining whether to make an order in pursuance of lmy 
such application or not, take account of the following matten, that 
is to aay,-
(a) the nature of the invention, the time which has elapsed 
since the sealing. of the patent and the measures already taken 
by the patentee or any Ueenseeto make full use of the Invention; 
(b) the ability of any person to wham a lleenee Is to be 
granted under the order to work the Invention to the pubUe 
advantage; and . 
(e) the risks to be undertaken by that penon in providing 
capital and worldng the invention It the application fa greted; 
but shan not take nccount of matters subsequent to the making of 
the appllc:atloD. 

la, 
ZICC. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provia1oDS of thla lnventioDi 
-Act, where a patent is in force in respect of- relatlnJ to-
food or 
(4) a substance capable of being used as food, medicine, in .. medicine. 
secticide, germicide or fungicide or in the production of food, etc. 
medicine, 1Dsecticide, germicide or fungicide; or 
(b) a process for producing such a substance as aforesaid; 
~ I 
I 
(e) any invention capable of being used as or as part of • 
surgical or curative device; 
the Controller shall, on application made to him by any person 
interested, order the grant to the applicant of a licence under the 
patent on such terms as he thinks fit, unless it appears to him that 
there are good reasons for refusing the appUcation. 
(2) In setUing the terms of licences under this section the Con-
troller shall endeavour to secure that food, medicines, insecticides, 
germicides, fungicides, and surgical and curative devices shall be 
available to the public at the lowest prices consistent with the 
patentees' deriving a reasonable advantage from their patent rights. 
(3) A licence gnmted under this section shall entitle the licensee 
to make, use, exercise and vend the invention as food, medicine, 
I: insecticide, germicide or f.ungicide, or for the purposes of the produc-
tion of food, medicine, insectiCide, germicide or fungicide or as part 
of a ~gical or curative device, but for no other purposes. 
(4) Where a patent other than a patent referred to in sub-sec-
tion (1) is in force in respect of 8 substance or process for produc-
ing a substance and the Central Government is satisfied that it it ex-
·pedient or necessary in the public interest that a licence under such 
a patent should be granted, the Central Government may, by noti-
fication in the OfIicial Gazette, direct that the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (1) and suh-section (2) respecting the grant of licences and 
settling of the terms thereof, in so far as they can be made appli-
cable, shall apply to such a patent, and on the issue of such a noti-
fication the said provisions shall apply accordingly. 
Z3D. (1) Every application, under section 22, section 23A or sec- Proeedw. 
tion 23CC, shall specify the nature of the order sought by the appli- on appli-
cant and shall contain a statement setting out the nature of the cation 
applicant's interest, if any. and the facts upon which the application ::~e:n 22, 
is based. section 
(2) Where the Controller is satisfied, \q)on consideration of any 23ctjA. Or 
• 4.' ha been mad se on sUQh application, that a pnm4 Jact.e case s e out for the DCC. 
making of an order, he shall direct the applicant to serve copies of 
the application upon the patentee and any other persoDS appearing 

Supple_ 
mentary 
provisions 
with res-
pect to 
orders 
under sec-
126 
from the Register of Patents to be interested in the patent in rel:i· 
pect of whjch the application is made. 
(3) The patentee or any other person desiring to oppose the appli-
catiun may, within such time as may be prescribed or within such 
further time as the Controller may un application made either before 
or after the expiration of the prescribed time ellow, give to the Con-
troller notice of opposition. 
(4) Any such notice of opposition shall contain a statement sett-
ing out the grounds on which the application is opposed. 
(5) Where any such notice of opposition is duly given the Con-
troller shall notify the applicant, and shall give to the applicant 
and the opponent an opportunity to be heard before deciding the 
case. 
23E. (1) Any order made by the Controller under section 23, 
section 23B or section 23CC for the grant of a licence shall, without 
prejudice to any other mode of enforcement Imve effect as if it 
were a deed, executed by the patentee and all other necessary 
parties, granting a licencp. in accordance with the order. 
tion 23. (2) Notwithstanding' anything contained in this Act no order shall 
section be made in ·pursua~e of an application under section 23 ur sectidn 
23B or five - 23A or section 23B or section 23CC which would be at variance tion 23CC. with any treaty, convention, arrongement or engagement applying 
to India and any other country. 
Appeals, 23F. (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court at Calcutta from 
Procedure 
for hear .. 
lq of 
apl'eal .. 
any order of the Control\er made under section 23 or section 23A or 
under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of se~tion 23B or 
under section 23CC. 
(2) Every such appeal shall be made within three months of the 
date of the order passed by the Controller and shall be in writing. 
(3) In calculeting the said .period of three months, the time, if 
any, occupied in granting a copy of the order appealed against shall 
be excluded. 
23G. (1) When an appeal has been preferred to the High Court 
a t Calcutta under section 23F. it shall be heard by a Bench of not 
less than two Judges. 
(2) The Bench hearing the appeal may, if it thinks fit, and shall, 
on the request of the parties to the appeal. call in the aid of an 
assessor specially qualified for the purpose, and hear the appeal 
wbolly or partially with his assistance. 

127 
(3) The remuneration, if any, to be paid to an assessor undel' 
this section shalL ill every case_be_ determinecl_by~.bLHiglLCmtr,-",t ___ _ 
and be paid by it as part of the expenses of the execution of this 
Act. ·1 . 
24. A patentee may at any time, by giving notice in the prescrib- Power of 
ed manner to the Controller, offer to surrender his patent, and' t?i'!' Controller 
Controller may, if after giving notice of the offer and hearing all !=:~:r_ 
parties who desire to be heard he thinks, fit, accept the offer, and eel patent. 
thereupon make an order for the revocation of the patent. 
25. A patent shall be deemed to be revoked if the Central Gov- =0:-
er.~ment declares, by notiftcation in the Official Gazette, the patent patent 
or the mode in which it is exercised to be mischievous to the State on public 
or generally prejudicial to the public. grounds. 
Legal Proceedings 
26. (1) Revocation of a patent in whole or in part may be obtained Pf etition 
t't· ttl" 't f 'f' t b or revo. on pe 1 Ion 0 or on a coun er-c RIm In a SUI or In nngemen e- cation of 
fore a High Court on all or any of the following grounds, namely: - patent. 
(a) that the invention has been the subject of a valid prior 
grant of a patent in India; 
(b) that the true and first inventor or his legal representative 
or assign was not the applicant or one of the applicants for the 
patent; 
(c) that the patent was obtained in fr~md of the rights of 
the person applying for the revocation or of any person under 
or through whom he claims; 
(d) that the invention was not, at the date of the patent, a 
manner of new manufacture or improvement; 
(e) that the invention does not involve any inventivp step, 
having regard to what was known or used prior to thedste o~ 
the patent; , 
(f) that the invention is of no utility; 
. (g) that the complete ~ciftcation does not sufficiently and 
fairly describe and ascertain the nature of the invention and 
the manner in which the invention is to be performed. 
(h) that the complete specification does not sufticiently and 
clearly ascertain the scope of the invention claimed; 
(i) that the patent was obtained on a false suggestion or 
representation; 
1261 (B) LS-18. 

." , 128 
(;) that the primary or intended use or exercise of the in-
vention is contrary to law; ! 
(k) that the patentee has contravened, or has not complied 
with, the conditions contained in the patent; 
(1) that the complete speciftcation does not disclose the best 
method of perforDlltDce of the invention known to the applicant 
for the patent at the time when the specification was left at the 
Patent OfBce; ~ 
(m) that prior to the date of the patent, the patentee or other 
persons (not being authorities administering any departmentnf -:-
the service of Government, or the agents or contractors of, or 
any other persons authorised in that behalf by, the Central Gov-
ernment) secretly worked the invention on a commercial seale 
(and not merely by way of reasonable trial or experiment) in 
India, and thereby made direct or indirect proftts in excess of 
such amount' as the Court may in consideration of all the cir-
cumstances of the case deem reasonable; 
(ft) that the invention claimed in the complete specification 
is not the same as that contained in the provisional specification, 
and that the invention claimed, so far as it is not contained in 
the provisional speciftcation, was not new at the date when the 
complete specification was filed: 
Provided that this sub-section shall have effect in relation to the 
ground of revocation specifted-
(0 in clause (b), subject to the provisions of section 78A, 
M I 
(ii) in clause (d), subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(1) of section 13, sub-section (12) of section 21A, section 38 and 
section 40. 
(2) A petition for revocation of a patent may be presented-
(a) by the Advocate General or any person authorized by. 
him'; or 
(b) by any person aUeging- ! 
(i) that the patent was obtained in fraud of his rights, 
or of the rights of any person under or through whom he 
claims; or . , 
(ii) that he, or any person under or through whom he 
claims. was the true and first inventor of any inventfort in-
cluded in tbe claim of the patentee; Of 

.. of 1908. 
129 
(iii) that he, or any person under or through whom be 
claims an interest in.JUlY tradeJ_bu~n~ss ___ OJ.~_m~~acture, 
:--::-~---
had publicly manufactured, used or sold, within India, before 
the date of the patent, anything claimed by the patentee .. 
his invention. I . 
(3) The High Court may, irrespective of any provisions of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in this behalf, require any penon, 
other than the Advocate General or any person authorized by him, 
applying for the revocation of a patent to give security for the pay-
ment of all costs incurred or likely to be incurred by any persoD 
appearing to oppose the petition. 
27. (1) Notice of any petition for revocation of a patent under Notice of 
~ection 26 shall be served on all persons appearing from the register Proceed-
to be proprietors of that patent or to have shares or interests there- in .. to 
in, and it shall not be necessary to serve the notice on any other ::=~~ed. 
person. 
(2) The notice shall be deemed to be suffiCiently served if a copy 
thereof is sent by post in a Il"egtstered letter directed to the person 
and place for the time being stated in the register. 
28. (1) A high Court may, if it thinks fit, direct an issue for the I'rUlWll' 
trial, before itself or any other High Court, or any District Court, ilBue few 
of any question arising upon a petition to itself under section 26, :: 
and the issue shall be tried accordingly. ~ e 
(2) If the issue is directed to another High Court, the finding Courta 
shall be certified by that Court to the High Court directing thp. 
issue. 
(3) If the issue is directed to a District Court, the finding of that 
Court shall not be subject to appeal, but the evidence taken upon 
the trial shall be recorded and a copy thereof, certified by the 
Judge of the Court, shall be transmitted, together with any remarks 
which he may think fit to make thereon, to the High Court directing -. 
the issue, and the High Court may thereupon act upon the finding 
of the District Court, or dispose of the petition upon the evidence 
recorded, or direct a new trial, as the justice of the caSe may 
require. 
29. (1) A patentee may institute a suit in a District Court having Suit •• 
jurisdiction to try the suit against any person who, during the intrinp-
continuance of a patent acquired by him under this Act in respect ment of 
of an invention, makes, sells or uses the invention without hiS patents. 
license, or counterfeit. it, or imitates it: 

130 
Provided that where a counter claim for revocation of the 
patent is made by the defendant, the suit, along with the counter 
claim, shall be transferred to the-High-Court for-decision.----
(2) Every ground on which a, patent may be revoked under 
section 26 shall be available by way of defence to a suit for 
infringement. 
Bxemption 30. A patentee shall not be entitled to recover any damages in 
of innocent respect of any infringement of a patent granted after the commence-
:::~i ment of this Act from any defendant who proves that at the datft~_ 
llty for - of the infringement he was not aware, nor had reasonable means 
damages. 'of making himself aware, of the existence of the patent, and the 
marking of an article with the word "patent''. "patented", or any 
word or words expressing or implying that a patent has been 
obtained for the article, stamped, engraved, impressed on, or other-
wise applied to the article, shall not be deemed to constitute notice 
of the existence of the patent unless the word or words are accom-
panied by the year and number of the patent: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect an, proceed-
ings for an injunction. 
Order for 31. In a suit for infringement of a patent, the Court may, on 
inspection, the application of either party, make such order for an injunction, 
etc., in inspection or a:count, and impose'such terms and give such direc-
suit. tions respecting the same and the proceedings thereon, as the 
Court may see fit. 
D. In a suit for infringement of a patent the Court may certify Certi1l-cate of that the Validity of the patent came in question, and if the Court 
validity so certifies, then in any subsequent suit in that Court for infringe-
questioned ment of the same patent the plainttif, on obtaining a final erder or 
and costs judgement in his favour, shall, unless the Court trying the suit 
thereon. otherwise directs, have his full costs, charges and expens':!s of and 
Transmis-
sion of 
decrees 
and orders 
to the 
Con.. 
troller. 
incidental to the said suit properly incurred. 
33. A Court making a decree in a suit under section 29 or an 
order on a petition under section 26 shall send a copy of the decree 
or order, as the case may be, to the Controller, who shall cau.-
an entry thereof and reference thereto to be made in the register of 
patents. 

131 
- . 
M. A High Court to which a petition has been presented under Powerof 
section 26 may stay proceedings on or dismiss the peti~!oll if inJts HYr~h-:--__ 
opinion the petition would be disposed of more justly or conveniently Court 
by another High Court to stay . proceed_ 
35. (1) In a suit or proceeding for infringement or revocation of 
a patent, the Court may, if it thinks fit, and shaH on the request of 
all the parties to the proceedings, call in the aid of an assessor 
specially qualified, and try the case wholly or partially with his 
assistance. 
(2) A court exercising appellate jurisdiction in respect of such 
suit or proceeding may, if it thinks fit, call in the aid of an assessor 
as aforesaid. 
(3) The remuneration, if any, to be paid to an asseSSOl' under this 
section shall in every case be detennined by the Court and be paid 
by it as part of the expenses of the execution of this Act. 
Ings, etc. 
Hearin, 
with 
assessor. 
35A. Notwithstanding anything contained iri section 19, if the Grant of 
Court in any action for infringement of a patent finds that anyone relief in 
or more of the claims ill the specification in respect of which the re&pect1of 
infr.i.ngement is alleged are valid, it may, subject to its discretion as =: ar 
to tosts and as to the date from which damages should be reckoned . 
and to -such terms as to amendment as it may deem desirable, grant 
relief in respect of any of such claims which are infringed without 
regard to the invalidity of any other claim in the specification. In 
exercising such discretion the Court may take into consideration 
the conduct of the parties in inserting such invalid claims in the 
specification or permitting them to remain there. 
36. Where any person claiming to have an interest in a patent, Blemedy 
by circulars, advertisements or otherwise, threatens any other in ~88e of 
person with any legal proceedings or liability in respect of any fP'OUDdl::. 
alleged infringement of the patent, any person aggrieved thereby ~=~~ro .. 
may bring a suit against him in a District Court having jurisdiction ceedings. 
to try the suit, and may obtain an injunction against the conti-
nuance ·of such threats, and may recover such damage (if any) as 
he has sustained thereby, if the alleged infringement to which the 
threats related was not in fact an infringement of the patent: 
Provided that th!s section shall not apply if an action for 
infringement of the patent is commenced and prosecuted with du~ 
diligence. 

Grant of 
patents to 
two or 
more 
persons, 
Public use 
or know-
ledge of 
invention. 
J~ 
MiacellClneOUI 
37. Where,-after the-commencement....oL.this Act,.a .. patent is_ 
granted to two or more persons jointly they shall, unless otherwise 
specified in the patent, be treated for the purpose of the devolution 
of the legal interest therein as joint tenants, but, subject to any 
contract to the contrary, each of such persons shall be entitled to 
use the invention for his own profit without accounting to the 
others, but shall not be entitled to grant a licence without their 
consent, and, if any such person dies, his beneficial interest in the 
patent shall devolve on his legal representatives. 
38. The public use or knowledge of an invention in India 
before the date of the application for a patent thereon shall not 
invalidate the patent granted thereon if the knowledge has been 
obtained surreptitiously- or in fraud of the true and first inventor 
or his legal representative or assign or has been communicated to 
the public in fraud of such inventor or his legal representative or 
assign or in breach of confidence: 
Provided that such inventor or his legal representative or assign 
has not acquiesced in the public use of his invention, and that he 
applies for a patent within six months after the commencement of 
such use. 
Disconfor- 38A. A patent shall not be held to be invalid on the ground 
mit)'. that the complete specification claims a further or different invention 
to that contained in the provisional, if the invention therein 
claimed, so far as it Is not contained in the provisional, was novel 
at the' date when the complete specification was put in, and the 
applicant for the patent was the true and first inventor thereof, or 
the legal representative or assign of such inventor. 
Losaor 
destruc-
tion of 
patent. 
39. If a patent is lost or destroyed, or its non-produ-::tion is 
accounted for to the satisfaction of the Controller, the Controller 
may at any time, on payment of the prescribed fee, seal a duplicate 
thereof. 
, , 40. The exhibition of an invention at an industrial or other 
Pro~:~:~ exhibition to which the pr~visions of this section have been extend-
:tions and ed by the Central Government by notification in the Ofticial Gazette, 
readings or the publication of any description of the invention during the 
before period of the holding of the exhibition, or the use of the invention 
l~~d for the purpose of the exhibition in the place where the exhibition 
sOCieties. f h' t' th bl' t' f d . is held, or the use 0 t e lOven Ion or e pu lca Ion 0 any escrlp-
tion thereof, during or after the period of the holding of the taxhibi-
tion, by any peraon elsewhere without the privity or consent of the 

-. , 
133 
inventor or the reading of a paper by an inventor before a learned 
society, or the pubHcation of that paper in the society's transactions 
shall not prejudice the right of the Tnventor to-apply-torand obtain --_0-
a patent in respect of the invention, or the validity of any patent 
granted on the application: 
Provided that-
(a) the exhibitor exhibiting the invention or the inventor 
reading the paper or authorising the publication thereof as the 
case may be, gives to the Controller previous notice in the pres--
cribed form; and 
(b) the applicat~n -for a patent is made before or within six 
months from the date of first exhibiting the invention or of the 
reading of the· paper, as the case may be, or when it has not been 
so read, of the said publication. 
41. The trustees of the Indian Museum may at any time require Modell to 
a patentee to furnish them with a model or sample of his invention b~ ~-:r-rusllocd on payment to the patentee of the cost of the manufacture of the to Indian 
model or sample, the amount to be settled, in case of dispute, by the Museum. 
Central Government. 
42. (1) A patent shall not prevent the use of an invention for the FocellD 
purposes of the navigation of a foreign vessel within the juiisdiction vessels in 
of any Court in India, or the use of an invention in a foreign vessel Indian waters. within that jurisdiction, provided it is not used therein for or in con-
nection with the manufacture or preparation of anything intended to 
be sold in or exported from India. 
(2) This section shall not extend to vessels of any foreign State 
of which the laws do not confer corresponding rights with respect 
to the use of inventions in Indian vessels while in the ports of that 
State, or in the waters within the jurisdiction of its Courts. 
• • • 
SIB. The provisions of section 21 shall apply to registered designs ReBi8tra-
as if those provisions were re-enacted herein and in terms made tion of 
applicable to registered designs. designs to . bind the 
• • • • • • • Govern-ment. 
54. The provisions of this Act with regard to certificates of the Applic&-
validity of a patent, and to the remedy in case of groundless threats tion of 
of legal proceedings by a patentee shall apply in the case of regis- certain 
tered designs in like manner as they apply in the case of patents, provisions 
with the substitution of references to the copyright in a design for of ~e Act 
references to a patent, and of references to the proprietor of a design :te~ts to 
for references to the patentee, and of references to the designs for deaigna. 
references to the invention. 

V' . 
Patent 
OfIlee. 
omC8rs 
and 
clerks. 
134 
PART III 
GENERAL 
Patent Office and Proceedings thereat 
55. (1) The Central Government may provide for the purposes 
of this Act, an office which shall be called. and is in this Act referred 
to as, the Patent Office. . 
(2) The Patent Office shall be under the immediate control of the 
Controller of Patent~ ... and Designs, who shall act under the superin-
tendence and directfun of the Central Government. 
(3) There shall be a seal for the Patent Office. 
(4) Any act or thing directed to be done by or to the Controller 
may be done by or to any officer authorized by the Central Govern-
ment. 
56. The Central Government may appoint the Controller, and so 
many officers and clerks, with such designations and duties, as it 
thinks fit. 
Fees 
Fees. 57. (1) There shall be paid in respect of the grant of patents and 
Informa-
tion relat-
ing to 
patents. 
the registration of designs, and applications therefor, and in respect 
of other matters with relation to the patents and designs under this 
Act, such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, so 
however that the fees preSc~bed in respect of the instruments and 
matters mentioned in the Schedule shall not exceed those there 
specified. 
• • • • • • • 
59A. A person making a request to the Controller in the prescrib-
ed manner as respects any . patent specified in the request or as 
respects any application for a patent so specified, for information 
to be furnished to him by the Controller of any such matters as may 
be prescribed affecting that patent or application, shall be entitled, 
subject to the payment of the prescribed fee, to have infonnation 
supplied to him accordingly. 
• • • • • 

135 
II. (1) Where an application for a patent hu been abandoned or Prohibi-
deemed to have been refused,-theapeeUlcations-and----drawings --(if-tion-of-
any), accompanying or left in connectioD with I11ch application, shall ~ublic.­
not, save as otherwise expressely provided by this Act, at any time tion ~ 
be open to public inspection or be published by the Controller. :1 dr:;'. 
• • • • • i~, etc:., where 
applica-
tion 
abandon-
ed, etc. 
62. The Controller may, on request in writing accompanied by Power for 
the prescribed fee,- l Controller 
to correct 
(4) correct any clerical error in or in connection with an clerical .---
application lor a patent or In any patent or any specification; erron. 
(b) correct any clerical error in the representation of a 
design or in the name or address of the proprietor of any patent 
or design, or in any other matter which is entered upon the re-
gister of patents or the regl'ster of designs. -
63. (1) Where a person becomes entitled by assignment, trans- Entry ot 
nussion or other operation of law to a patent or to the copyright in aaaip-
a registered design, he may make application to the Controller to menta and 
register his title, and the Controller shall, on receipt of such applica- transmis-
tion and on proof of title to his satisfaction, register him as the ~tin . . d h re~. en. propnetor of such patent or deSIgn, an s all cause an entry to be 
made in the prescribed manner in the register of the assignment, 
transmission or other instrument affecting the title. 
(2) Where any person becomes entitled as mortgagee, licensee or 
otherwise to any interest in a patent or :registered design, he may 
make application to the Controller to register his title, and the COD-
troller, shall, on receipt of such application and on proof of title to 
his satisfaction, cause notice of the interest to be entered in the 
prescribed manner in the register of patents or designs, as the case 
may be, with particulars of the instrument, if any, creating such 
interest. 
(3) The person registered as the proprietor of a patent or design 
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and to any rights appear-
ing from the register to be vested ~n any other person, have power 
absolutely to assign, grant licences as to, or otherwise deal with, 
the patent or design and to give eftectual receipt for any cOlUlidera-
tion for any such allignment, licence or deal1n-g: 
1261 (8) ~1t. 

136 
Provided that any eqaitie. in rspect of the patent or design may 
____ --'belDE-en_forc'~Lin_Uke_Jt1anner_ .. jn __ re.peet of any oth .. moveable pro-
perty. 
(') Except in the case of en application made under section 64, 
a document or instrument in respect of which no entry has beep 
made in the register in accordance with the provisions of sub-sec· 
tiona (1) and (2) shall not be admitted in evidence in any Court in 
proof of the title to a patent or to copyright in a design or to any 
interest therein, unless the Court, far reasons to be recorded in 
" .writing, otherwise directs 
PubUca-
tion of 
patented 
lnventlons. 
If. (1) The Controller may, on the application in the prescribed 
manner of any person agrieved by the non-insertion in or omission 
from the register of patents or designs of any entry, or 
by any entry made in either such register without sufficient cause, 
or by any entry wrongly remaining on either such register, or by 
an error or defect in any entry in either such repter, make such 
order for making, expunging or varying such entry as he thinks flt 
and rectify the register accordingly. 
• • • • • 
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to empower the 
Controller-
(4) to rectify the register of patents, or to decide any ques-
tion relating to a patent, otherwise than far the purpose of cor·· 
recting a mistake of fact apparent from a reference either to the 
patent itself or to some order of a competent authority made 
under any other provision of this Act, or 
• • • • • 
ea. The Controller shall issue periodically a publication of paten-
ted Inventions containing such information as the Central Govern-
ment may direct. 
ftzercise 17. Where any discretionary power is by or under this Act given 
of dlacre. to the Controller, he shall not exercise that power adversely to the 
Honary ap.plicant for a patent, or for amendment of an application or of a 
~w:r 1~ Specification, or for registration of a design without (if 10 required 
on ro er. within the prescribed time by the appUcant) giving the appUcant 
an opportunity of beini heard. 
• • • • • 

1~7 
·18. (1) The Controller may refUHI to grant a patent for an Itefuaa1 
invention, or to "Ii!.~r a desiPL.9f which the \lie would, in hi, to pat 
opinion, be contrary to law of morality. patent, etc., In 
• • • • • eertaln 
aaHI. 
71A. Printed or written copies or extracts, purportblg to be Evldenee 
certified by the Controller and sealed with the leal of the Patent of docu· 
=i ~~~~ ~~tstr:~=:: ::: :::::: :=;.m:: ~: Elm 
shall be admItted In evidence in all Courts in India, and In all pro-
ceedings, without further proof or production of the originals: 
• • • • • 
72. Copies of all such specifications, drawings and amendments Traumia 
left at the Patent Oftlce, as become open to public inspecrtton under Il~ otot 
the provisions of this Act, shall be transmitted, as soon as may be, :a. 
after the printed copies thereof are available, to such authorities tiona, etc., 
as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf, and shnll and iDI-
be open to the inspection of any person at all reasonable times at paction 
places to be appointed hy those authorities and approved by the thereof. 
Central Government. 
• • • • • 
74A. Where· a person giving notice of any opposition under this Security 
Act or giving notice to the Court of appeal from any decision of for costs.. 
the Controller under this Act, neither resides nor carries on business 
in India, the Controller or the Court, as the case may be, may 
.L~quire such person to give security for the payment of all cosU 
incurred and likely to be incurred in the proceedings or appeal. as 
the case may be, and, in default of such security being given, may 
disallow the opposition or dismiss the appeal. 
Agency 
75. The following documents, namely,-
(1) applications for a patent, 
(2) notices of opposition, , 
(3) applications for extension of terms of a patent, 
(4) applications for the restoration of lapsed patents, 
(5) applications for leave to amend, 
(6) applications for compulsory license or revocation, and 
(7) notices of surrenders of patent, 
(8) applications for endorsement of patent with the worc!s 
"Licenses of Right". 
shall be signed and verified, in the manner prescribed, by the periOD 
ma)dn, such applicaUons or giving such notictl: 
Subscrip. 
tion and 
veri8ca_ 
lion of 
certain 
doeu· 
menta. 

ti7l I 
138 
Provided that, if such penon is absent from India. they may 
be ~ed and verifted on hi. behalf by an aaent Hlident in. Indl~ 
authorized by him in writing in that behalf. -- - - - . -
78. (1) All other applications and communications to the Controller 
under this Act may be signed by, and all attendances upon the Can· 
troller may be made by or through a legal practitioner or by or 
through an agent authorised to the satisfaction of the Controller. 
(2) The Controller may, if he sees It, require-
• • • • • ---....... -
(c) the personal signature or presence of any applicant, up· 
ponent or other person. 
Power" etc., of Central Got)emment 
77. (1) The Central Government may make such rules as it thinks 
expedient subject to the provisions of this Act-
• • • • 
(c) for making or requiring duplicates of 
drawings and other documents; 
• 
speCifications, 
(d) for securing a·nd regulating the publishing ana selling of 
copies, at such prices and in such manner as the Central 
Government thinks fit, of specifications, drawings and other 
documents; 
(e) for securing and regulating the making, printing, pub-
lishing, and selling of indexes to, and abridgments of, specifica-
tions and other documents In the Patent Office; and providing 
for the inspection of indexes and abridgments and other docu· 
ments; 
• • • • • 
(eee) for ensuring secrecy with respect to patents to which 
section 21A applies; 
• • • • • 
(2A) Nothing in sUb.section (2) shall apply in the case of rules 
made for the purpose specified in clause (ee) of sub.section (1), and 
IIIlV lUeb rules may modify any of the provisions of this Act so far 
_ IDaY be necessary for that purpose . 
• • • • • 

1'9 
Offence. 
-, 
-78.......Jf--any-person uses on his place of business, or on any docu- WroDJIu·~ 
ment issued by him, or otherwise, the words "Patent Otllce", or lIIe of 
any other words suggesting that his place of business is ofBclaDy :;:~t 
connected with, or is, the Patent Office, he shall be punishable with Oftlce", 
flne which may ext£'nd to two hundred rupees, and, in the case 
of a continuing offence, with further flne of twenty rupees for each 
day OJ!' which the offence is continued after conviction thP.l'efor. 
Reciprocal 4rr4ngements with the United Kingdom cmd other 
pan. of His Ma;eBty's dominion. 
~I 
" 
, \ 
78A. (1) Whereas His Majesty has by Order made on the 28th Reclproc: l 
~ 
day of July, 1938, declared British India to be a convention country arrar:.,e-l 
within the meaning of section 91A of the Patents and Design~, Acts, '::'~ the ~ 
1907 to 1938, any person who has applied for protection for any United, 
invention or design in the United Kingdom, or his legal repre- Kin,dom'~ 
sentative or assignee shall, either alone or jointly with any other and othe i 
p~rson, be en~itled to claim t~t ,the ~tent that may be ~anted to ~:s of ;, 
hIm under thIS Act, for the saId InventIon or the registration of the MajestY'l , .. '. 
said design under this Act, shall be In prioritY, to other apl;)l1cants dominioll 
and shall have the same date as the date of the application in the 
United Kingdom: 'I' 
Provided that-
(4) the application is made in the case of a oatent within 
twelve mont9s, and, in the case of a design, within six months 
from the application for protection in the United Kingdom; and 
(b) nothing in this section shall entitle the patentee or the 
proprietor of the design to recover damages for infrIngements 
happening prior to the actual date on which, in the case of • 
patent, his application is accepted or, in the case of a design, the 
design is registered, in India, 
(2) The patent granted for an invention or the registration of a 
design shall not be invalidated-
(4) in the case of a patent by reason only of the publicntion . 
of a description of, or use of, the invention, or 
(b) in the case of a design, by r~'a'K)n only of the exhibition 
or use of, or the publication of a description or repreaentation of, 
the design, 
in India during the period specified in this *tion as that within 
"Ncb the application may be JQJcle. 

140 
(3) The application for the .ant of a patent or the registration 
of a design under this section must De made in the same manner .. 
an Cii'dmary application unaertliiil\Cl:-
PrO-vided that, in the case of a patent,-
(4) the application shall be accompanit-d by a complete 
specification; and 
(b) if the application is not accepted within eighteen montlls 
from the date of the application for protection in the United 
Kingdom, the specificatioB shall, with the drawings (if any) 8Up-
plied therewith, be open to ~lic. inspection at the expiration 
of "that period. 
(4) WGere it is made to appear to the Central Government that 
the legislature of any other part of His Majesty's dominions bas made 
satisfactory provision for the protection of inventions or -iiesigns 
patented or registered in India, the. Central Government may. ~ 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of thls 
section, with such. variations or additions, if any, as may be set out 
in spch notification, shall apply for the protection of inventions or 
designs patented or registered in that part of His Majesty's domi-
nions. 
• • • • • 

THE ScHEDULE --- -
l (See Section s) 
FBBS 
On application for a patent accompanied by provisional speci-
fication 
On filing complete specification after provisional speclficat.io.~ _; , 
On application for a patent accompanied by complete specifica-
tion 
For sealing a patent 
Before the expiration of the 4th year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the 5th year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the 6th year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the 7th year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the 8th year from the date of the patent] 
Before the expiration of the 9th year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the lOth year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the I Ith year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the 12th year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the 13th year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the 14th year from the date of the patent 
Before the expiration of the 15th year from the date of the patent 
Provided that the fees for two or more years may ,be paid in 
advance. 
R!Il, 
10 
20 
30 
30 
So 
So 
So 
So 
100 
100 
100 
100 
ISO 
On application to extend the term of a patent SO 
In respect of each year of the extended term of a patent or of a new I So 
patent granted under section 15 
An application for registration of a design 3 
141 

LoK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend and consolidate the law relating to patents. 
(Shri T. N. Sm,h, 
Minister of Industry in the 
Ministry of Industry and Supply.) 