Bill No. 62 01 1956 
THE 
TERMINAL TAX ON RAILWAY 
PASSENGERS BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOIC SABRA) 

, of 18510. 
5 
Bill No. 62 of 195'. 
THE TERMINAL TAX ON RAILWAY PASSENGERS 
BILL, I956. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy of a terminal ta.r on passengers carried by 
railway from. or to certain places of pilgrimage or "-'here fairs, 
melas or exhibitions are held. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Terminal Tax on Railway Short title] extent aDd 
Passengers Act, 1956. commence-
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "maximum rates"· mean the rates of terminal tax 
ment. 
Definitions. 
10 specified in the Schedule; 
15 
(Ib) "mela" means a public gathering on the occassion of any 
religious festival; 
(c) "notified place" means a place of pilgrimage or a place 
where a fair, mela or exhibition is being or is likely to be held, 
which the Central Government has, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declared to be a notified place for the purposes of this 
Act; 
(d) "railway administration" has the meaning assigned to it 
in the Indi~m Railways Act, 1890. 
• 

Terminal 3. (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, there 
=:rsP's- shall be l~vied on all passengers carried by railway from or to any 
carried bit notified place a terminal tax in respect of every railway ticket 
:~~~oJ:j (whether single or return) at such rates not exceeding the maximum 
places. rates as the Central Government may, by not;fication in the Official S 
Gazette, fix; and such notification'shall specify the date with effect 
from which, and may also specify the period for which. the terminal 
tax shall be leviable: 
Provided that where no such period is specified in the notification, 
the terminal tax shall be leviable for so long as this Act is in force. 10 
(2) Subject to the maximum rates, different rates of terminal 
tax may be fixed,-
(a) in relation to different notified places; and 
(fb) in respect of short-distance passengers and long·distance 
passengers; provided that the rate in respect of short-distance IS 
passengers shall be always lower than that in respect of long-
distance passengers. 
Expzanation.-In this subt-section a passenger travelling by 
ra~lway from or to any notified pl'ace to or from a distance of not 
more than one hundred and fifty miles shall be deemed to be a 20 
short-distance passenger and any other passenger travelling by 
railway shall be deemed to be a long-distance passenger. 
TermlDal tax 4. No terminal tax sha1l be levied on any passenger travelling 
notto be . I. t t·ft d 1 to f '1 levied within by raIlway .L·rom or 0 any no I e pace . or rom any ral way 
u:utain station situated within a raddus of forty miles from that notified 2S 
tI. place or within such shorter distance 'from that place as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
Power of 5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
~=~~v- Gazette, vary from time to time in respect of railway passengers 
vary rates of generally or a class of railway passengers the rates of the terminal 30 
talt. tax levied in relation to any notified place under section 3. 
Power of 6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
eenu,,} Gov- G d' b 'f\ d ernment to azette, eclare that WIth effect from such date as may e SpeCl e 
discontinue in the notification, the terminal' tax levied in relation to any notified 
levy. place shall for reasons Specified in the notification cease to be levied 2' 
in relation to that: place. 
• 

9 of 189Q. 
3 
7. (1) The tenninal tax levied under this Act shall be collected 
by means of a surcharge on fares 'by the railway administration, and 
where it is so collected the railway administration shall have all 
the powers and remedies for the recovery thereof as though the 
5 slime were a rate or fare which the railway administration is 
empowered to levy under the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
(2) Such portion of the total proceeds of the tax attributable to 
any notified place as the Central Government may from time to time 
ascertain shall 'be deducted to meet the cost of collection of the tax. 
10 8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law where a termi-
nal tax in relation to any notified place is levied under this Act on 
passengers carried by railway, no other tenninal tax in relation to 
such place shall be levied under uy other law on such passengers. 
159. Nothing contained in this Act or in any other law shall be 
deemed to authorise the levy of a terminal tax on the following 
classes of passengers carried by l'ailway, namely:-
(a) children not over three years of age; 
(b) police officers travelling on railway warrants; and 
(c) persons travelling on military warrants. 
1 
25 C1aS8 of accommodation 
THE SCHEDULE 
MAXIMUM RATES OF TERMINAL TAX 
[See section 2 (a)] 
2 
Maximum rptes of terminal tax 
a b 
(Tn respect of every (In resPect of every 
lIinI1e ticket) return ticket) 
"------
Ros. A. P. Rs. A. P. 
Air-conditioned or first class 1 8 0 3 0 0 
30 Second Class 1 0 0 :I 0 0 
Thbd Wass 0 8 0 1 0 0 
Mode of 
recovery 
ofta:. 
No other 
terminal tIS 
on railway 
pa88CDIe1'I 
whcotcrmi-
nal tax UDder 
this 'M is 
Icvfed. 
Bscmptiona. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The terminal taxes on passengers carried by railway (including 
pilgrim taxes) now in force are those leviable under the local enact-
ments passed before tlae 1st day of April, 1937, on which date the 
Govemunent of lndia Act, 1935, came into force. That Act made 
termiMl taxes on passengers C&lTied by railway a Central subject, 
but at the same time authorised the continuance of the levy of the 
emtiBg termil'lal taxes on passengers carried by railway until pro-
mea to the contrary was made by the Central Legisl'ature. Under 
the Coostitution of India also, terminal taxes on passengers carried 
by ailway are a matter in the Union List, and under article 269 of 
the Constitution such taxes shall be levied and collected by the 
Government of India but shan 'be assigned to the States in the 
manBer proVided in clause (2) of that article. Under article 277 
of the ConstitUtion, all taxes levied by the Government of any State 
or by any municipality or other local authority or body before the 
commencement of the Constitution shall continue to be levied after 
such commencement until provision to the contrary is made by 
Parliament by law. It is under this saving provision of the Con-
stitution that the existing terminal taxes referred to above are being 
levied till the present time. Whenever, however, there has been 
any need for the levy of any fresh terminal tax or for the enhance-
ment of any of the existing terminal taxes (including pilgrim taxes), 
the practice has been to have recourse to the Ordinance-making 
powers .of the President. For example, recently the Madras Terminal 
Tax on Railway Passengers Ordinance, 1956, was promulgated to 
levy a terminal tax on railway passengers visiting Kumbakonam on 
the occasion of the Mahamakham festival. In order to obviate the 
need for the issue of an Ordinance on each such occasion for any 
fresh or increased levy, general legislation is desirable and this also 
ftnds favour with the different State Governments and various local 
bodies who have been pressing for such a general legislation for 
quite some time past. 
After having considered the recommendations of ·the Taxation 
InqUiry Commission, 1953-54, relating to the levy of terminal tax on 
passengers carried by railway, .sea and air, it has been decided. that 
legislation for the levy of terminal tax should, for the present, be 
confined to passengers carried by railway to and from· p]aces of 
4 

5 
pilgrimage, melas, fairs, exhibitions, etc. The proposed legislation 
should provide that the places of pilgrimage, melas, fairs, exhibitions, 
etc., in respect of which, the rate (not exceeding the maximum rates 
specified in the l'egislation) at which, and the period for which, the 
terminal tax may be leviable, will be notified by the Central Gov-
ernment in the Official Gazette. The terminal tax will be leviable 
in respect of every ticket whether single or return; there will be a 
free zone not exceeding a radius of forty miles, within which no tax 
will 'be leviable and different rates of tax may be fixed for long-
distance passengers and short-d.istance passengers. The Central 
Government should have the power to vary the rates of the tax or 
to discontinue the levy in respect of any place by notification in the 
Official Gazette. 
The present Bill is designed to achieve the1>bjects set forth above. 
LAL BAHADUR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th September, 1956. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the levy of a terminal tax on passengers 
carried by railway from or to certain places of pilgrimage 
or where fairs, melas or exhibitions are held. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article I 17 
and clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, 
recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction of the Bill. 
GIPND-LAD- 14SSLS-IJ-9-S6- I 770 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri La! Bahadur, 
.Minister of Railways and 
Transport.) 